{"id": "32629", "revid": "28148373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32629", "title": "Video game console", "text": "Computer system for running video games\nA video game console is an electronic device that outputs a video signal or image to display a video game that can typically be played with a game controller. These may be home consoles, which are generally placed in a permanent location connected to a television or other display devices and controlled with a separate game controller, or handheld consoles, which include their own display unit and controller functions built into the unit and which can be played anywhere. Hybrid consoles combine elements of both home and handheld consoles.\nVideo game consoles are a specialized form of home computer geared towards video game playing, designed with affordability and accessibility to the general public in mind, but lacking in raw computing power and customization. Simplicity is achieved in part through the use of game cartridges or other simplified methods of distribution, easing the effort of launching a game. However, this leads to ubiquitous proprietary formats that create competition for market share. More recent consoles have shown further confluence with home computers, making it easy for developers to release games on multiple platforms. Further, modern consoles can serve as replacements for media players with capabilities to play films and music from optical media or streaming media services.\nVideo game consoles are usually sold on a five\u2013seven-year cycle called a generation, with consoles made with similar technical capabilities or made around the same time period grouped into one generation. The industry has developed a razor and blades model: manufacturers often sell consoles at low prices, sometimes at a loss, while primarily making a profit from the licensing fees for each game sold. Planned obsolescence then draws consumers into buying the next console generation. While numerous manufacturers have come and gone in the history of the console market, there have always been two or three dominant leaders in the market, with the current market led by Sony (with their PlayStation brand), Microsoft (with their Xbox brand), and Nintendo (currently producing the Switch 2 and Switch consoles). Previous console developers include Sega, Atari, Coleco, Mattel, NEC, SNK, Magnavox, Philips and Panasonic.\nHistory.\nThe first video game consoles were produced in the early 1970s. Ralph H. Baer devised the concept of playing simple, spot-based games on a television screen in 1966, which later became the basis of the Magnavox Odyssey in 1972. Inspired by the table tennis game on the Odyssey, Nolan Bushnell, Ted Dabney, and Allan Alcorn at Atari, Inc. developed the first successful arcade game, \"Pong\", and looked to develop that into a home version, which was released in 1975. The first consoles were capable of playing only a very limited number of games built into the hardware. Programmable consoles using swappable ROM cartridges were introduced with the Fairchild Channel F in 1976, though popularized with the Atari 2600 released in 1977.\nHandheld consoles emerged from technology improvements in handheld electronic games as these shifted from mechanical to electronic/digital logic, and away from light-emitting diode (LED) indicators to liquid-crystal displays (LCD) that resembled video screens more closely. Early examples include the Microvision in 1979 and Game &amp; Watch in 1980, and the concept was fully realized by the Game Boy in 1989.\nBoth home and handheld consoles have become more advanced following global changes in technology. These technological shifts include improved electronic and computer chip manufacturing to increase computational power at lower costs and size, the introduction of 3D graphics and hardware-based graphic processors for real-time rendering, digital communications such as the Internet, wireless networking and Bluetooth, and larger and denser media formats as well as digital distribution.\nFollowing the same type of Moore's law progression, home consoles are grouped into generations; each lasting approximately five years. Consoles within each generation share similar specifications and features, such as processor word size. While no one grouping of consoles by generation is universally accepted, a breakdown of generations, showing representative consoles of each, is shown below.\nForm factor.\nHome video game console.\nHome video game consoles are meant to be connected to a television or other type of monitor, with power supplied through an outlet. This requires the unit to be used in a fixed location, typically at home in one's living room. Separate game controllers, connected through wired or wireless connections, are used to provide input to the game. Early examples include the Atari 2600, the Nintendo Entertainment System, and the Sega Genesis; newer examples include the Wii U, the PlayStation 5, and the Xbox Series X.\nMicroconsole.\nA microconsole is a home video game console that is typically powered by low-cost computing hardware, making the console lower-priced compared to other home consoles on the market. The majority of microconsoles, with a few exceptions such as the PlayStation TV and OnLive Game System, are Android-based digital media players that are bundled with gamepads and marketed as gaming devices. Such microconsoles can be connected to the television to play video games downloaded from an application store such as Google Play.\nHandheld game console.\nHandheld game consoles are devices that typically include a built-in screen and game controller in their case, and contain a rechargeable battery or battery compartment. This allows the unit to be carried around and played anywhere, in contrast to a home game console. Examples include the Game Boy, the PlayStation Portable, and the Nintendo 3DS.\nHybrid video game console.\nHybrid video game consoles are devices that combine the use as either a handheld or a home console. In addition to handheld consoles, they generally also have either a wired connection or docking station that connects the console unit to a television screen. The consoles can be used as separate controllers only and be played during wired battery charging. Handhelds include the Sega Nomad, PlayStation Portable, and Nvidia's Shield Portable and Shield Tablet, or home consoles such as the Wii U have hybrid features. With the Nintendo Switch, a console with detachable controllers called Joy-Con Set, the hybrid term became popular and is considered by some to be the first truly hybrid console.\nFunctionality.\nMost consoles are considered programmable consoles and have the means for the player to switch between different games. Traditionally, this has been done by switching a physical game cartridge or game card or by using optical media. It is now common to download games through digital distribution and store them on internal or external digital storage devices.\nDedicated console.\nSome consoles are considered dedicated consoles, in which games available for the console are \"baked\" onto the hardware, either by being programmed via the circuitry or set in the read-only flash memory of the console. Thus, the console's game library cannot be added to or changed directly by the user. The user can typically switch between games on dedicated consoles using hardware switches on the console, or through in-game menus. Dedicated consoles were common in the first generation of home consoles, such as the Magnavox Odyssey and the home console version of \"Pong\", and more recently have been used for retro style consoles such as the NES Classic Edition and Sega Genesis Mini.\nDedicated consoles were very popular in the first generation until they were gradually replaced by second generation that use ROM cartridges. The fourth generation gradually merged with optical media.\nRetro style console.\nDuring the later part of video game history, there have been specialized consoles using computing components to offer multiple games to players. Most of these plug directly into one's television, and thus are often called plug-and-play consoles. Most of them are also considered dedicated consoles since it is generally impossible to access the computing components by an average consumer, though tech-savvy consumers often have found ways to hack the console to install additional functionality, voiding the manufacturer's warranty. Plug-and-play consoles usually come with the console unit itself, one or more controllers, and the required components for power and video hookup. Many recent plug-and-play releases have been for distributing a number of retro games for a specific console platform. Examples of these include the Atari Flashback series, the NES Classic Edition, Sega Genesis Mini and also handheld retro consoles such as the Nintendo series.\nComponents.\nConsole unit.\nEarly console hardware was designed as customized printed circuit boards (PCB)s, selecting existing integrated circuit chips that performed known functions, or programmable chips like erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM) chips that could perform certain functions. \"Pong\" in both its arcade and home format, had a handful of logic and calculation chips that used the current input of the players' paddles and registers storing the ball's position to update the game's state and send it to the display device. Even with more advanced integrated circuits (IC)s of the time, designers were limited to what could be done through the electrical process rather than through programming as normally associated with video game development.\nImprovements in console hardware followed with improvements in microprocessor technology and semiconductor device fabrication. Manufacturing processes have been able to reduce the feature size on chips (typically measured in nanometers), allowing more transistors and other components to fit on a chip, and at the same time increasing the circuit speeds and the potential frequency the chip can run at, as well as reducing thermal dissipation. Chips were able to be made on larger dies, further increasing the number of features and effective processing power. Random-access memory became more practical with the higher density of transistors per chip, but to address the correct blocks of memory, processors needed to be updated to use larger word sizes and allot for larger bandwidth in chip communications. All these improvements did increase the cost of manufacturing, but at a rate far less than the gains in overall processing power, which helped to make home computers and consoles inexpensive for the consumer, all related to Moore's law of technological improvements.\nFor the consoles of the 1980s to 1990s, these improvements were evident in the marketing in the late 1980s to 1990s during the \"bit wars\", where console manufacturers had focused on their console's processor's word size as a selling point. Consoles since the 2000s are more similar to personal computers, building in memory, storage features, and networking capabilities to avoid the limitations of the past. The confluence with personal computers eased software development for both computer and console games, allowing developers to target both platforms. However, consoles differ from computers as most of the hardware components are preselected and customized between the console manufacturer and hardware component provider to assure a consistent performance target for developers. Whereas personal computer motherboards are designed with the needs for allowing consumers to add their desired selection of hardware components, the fixed set of hardware for consoles enables console manufacturers to optimize the size and design of the motherboard and hardware, often integrating key hardware components into the motherboard circuitry itself. Often, multiple components, such as the central processing unit and graphics processing unit, can be combined into a single chip, otherwise known as a system on a chip (SoC), which is a further reduction in size and cost. In addition, consoles tend to focus on components that give the unit high game performance, such as the CPU and GPU, and as a tradeoff to keep their prices in expected ranges, use less memory and storage space compared to typical personal computers.\nIn comparison to the early years of the industry, where most consoles were made directly by the company selling the console, many consoles of today are generally constructed through a value chain that includes component suppliers, such as AMD and NVidia for CPU and GPU functions, and contract manufacturers including electronics manufacturing services, factories which assemble those components into the final consoles such as Foxconn and Flextronics. Completed consoles are then usually tested, distributed, and repaired by the company itself. Microsoft and Nintendo both use this approach to their consoles, while Sony maintains all production in-house with the exception of their component suppliers.\nSome of the commons elements that can be found within console hardware include:\nThe primary PCB that all of the main chips, including the CPU, are mounted on.\nA secondary PCB that connects to the motherboard that would be used for additional functions. These may include components that can be easily replaced later without having to replace the full motherboard.\nThe main processing chip on the console that performs most of the computational workload.\nThe consoles' CPU is generally defined by its word size (such as 8-bit or 64-bit), and its clock speed or frequency in hertz. For some CPUs, the clock speed can be variable in response to software needs. In general, larger word sizes and faster clock sizes indicate better performance, but other factors will impact the actual speed.\nAnother distinguishing feature for a console's CPU is the instruction set architecture. The instruction set defines low-level machine code to be sent to the CPU to achieve specific results on the chip. Differences in the instruction set architecture of CPU of consoles of a given generation can make for difficulty in software portability. This had been used by manufacturers to keep software titles exclusive to their platform as one means to compete with others. Consoles prior to the sixth generation typically used chips that the hardware and software developers were most familiar with, but as personal computers stabilized on the x86 architecture, console manufacturers followed suit as to help easily port games between computer and console.\nNewer CPUs may also feature multiple processing cores, which are also identified in their specification. Multi-core CPUs allow for multithreading and parallel computing in modern games, such as one thread for managing the game's rendering engine, one for the game's physics engine, and another for evaluating the player's input.\nThe processing unit that performs rendering of data from the CPU to the video output of the console.\nIn the earlier console generations, this was generally limited to simple graphic processing routines, such as bitmapped graphics and manipulation of sprites, all otherwise involving integer mathematics while minimizing the amount of required memory needed to complete these routines, as memo. For example, the Atari 2600 used its own Television Interface Adaptor that handled video and audio, while the Nintendo Entertainment System used the Picture Processing Unit. For consoles, these GPUs were also designed to send the signal in the proper analog formation to a cathode ray television, NTSC (used in Japan and North America) or PAL (mostly used in Europe). These two formats differed by their refresh rates, 60 versus 50 Hertz, and consoles and games that were manufactured for PAL markets used the CPU and GPU at lower frequencies.\nThe introduction of real-time polygonal 3D graphics rendering in the early 1990s\u2014not just an innovation in video games for consoles but in arcade and personal computer games\u2014led to the development of GPUs that were capable of performing the floating-point calculations needed for real-time 3D rendering. In contrast to the CPU, modern GPUs for consoles and computers, principally made by AMD and NVidia, are highly parallel computing devices with a number of compute units/streaming multiprocessors (depending on vendor, respectively) within a single chip. Each compute unit/microprocessor contains a scheduler, a number of subprocessing units, memory caches and buffers, and dispatching and collecting units which also may be highly parallel in nature. Modern console GPUs can be run at a different frequency from the CPU, even at variable frequencies to increases its processing power at the cost of higher energy draw. The performance of GPUs in consoles can be estimated through floating-point operations per second (FLOPS) and more commonly as in teraflops (TFLOPS = 1012 FLOPS). However, particularly for consoles, this is considered a rough number as several other factors such as the CPU, memory bandwidth, and console architecture can impact the GPU's true performance.\nAdditional processors used to handle other dedicated functions on the console. Many early consoles feature an audio coprocessor for example.\nThe processor unit that, outside of the CPU and GPU, typically manages the fastest processing elements on the computer. Typically this involves communication of data between the CPU, the GPU, and the on-board RAM, and subsequently sending and receiving information with the southbridge.\nThe counterpart of the northbridge, the southbridge is the processing unit that handles slower processing components of the console, typically those of input/output (I/O) with some internal storage and other connected devices like controllers.\nThe console's BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) is the fundamental instruction set baked into a firmware chip on the console circuit board that the console uses when it is first turned on to direct operations. In older consoles, prior to the introduction of onboard storage, the BIOS effectively served as the console's operating system, while in modern consoles, the BIOS is used to direct loading of the console's operating system off internal memory.\nMemory storage that is designed for fast reading and writing, often used in consoles to store large amounts of data about a game while it is being played to avoid reading from the slower game media. RAM memory typically does not sustain itself after the console is powered off. Besides the amount of RAM available, a key measurement of performance for consoles is the RAM's bandwidth, how fast in terms of bytes per second that the RAM can be written and read from. This is data that must be transferred to and from the CPU and GPU quickly as needed without requiring these chips to need high memory caches themselves.\nNewer consoles have included internal storage devices, such as flash memory, hard disk drives (HDD) and solid-state drives (SSD), to save data persistently. Early application of internal storage was for saving game states, and more recently can be used to store the console's operating system, game patches and updates, games downloaded through the Internet, additional content for those games, and additional media such as purchased movies and music. Most consoles provide the means to manage the data on this storage while respecting the copyrights on the system. Newer consoles, such as the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X, use high-speed SSD's not only for storage but to augment the console's RAM, as the combination of their I/O speeds and the use of decompression routines build into the system software give overall read speeds that approach that of the onboard RAM.\nBesides converting AC power from a wall socket to the DC power needed by the console electronics, the power supply also helps to regulate that power in cases of power surges. Some consoles power supplies are built into the unit, so that the consumer plugs the unit directly to a wall socket, but more often, the console ships with an AC adapter, colloquially known as a \"power brick\", that converts the power outside of the unit. On handheld units the power supply will either be from a battery compartment, or optionally from a direct power connection from an AC adapter, or from a rechargeable battery pack built into the unit.\nMore advanced computing systems generate heat, and require active cooling systems to keep the hardware at safe operating temperatures. Many newer consoles are designed with cooling fans, engineered cooling fins, internal layouts, and strategically-placed vents on the casing to assure good convective heat transfer for keeping the internal components cool.\nSince the introduction of game cartridges, nearly all consoles have a cartridge port/reader or an optical drive for game media. In the latter console generations, some console revisions have offered options without a media reader as a means to reduce the console's cost and letting the consumer rely on digital distribution for game acquisition, such as with the Xbox One S All-Digital Edition or the PlayStation 5 Digital Edition.\nAll consoles are enclosed in a case to protect the electronics from damage and to constrain the air flow for cooling.\nPorts for connecting power, controllers, televisions or video monitors, external storage devices, Internet connectivity, and other features are placed in strategic locations on the console. Controller connections are typically offered on the front of the console, while power and most other connections are usually found on the back to keep cables out of the way.\nControllers.\nAll game consoles require player input through a game controller to provide a method to move the player character in a specific direction and a variation of buttons to perform other in-game actions such as jumping or interacting with the game world. Though controllers have become more featured over the years, they still provide less control over a game compared to personal computers or mobile gaming. The type of controller available to a game can fundamentally change the style of how a console game will or can be played. However, this has also inspired changes in game design to create games that accommodate for the comparatively limited controls available on consoles.\nControllers have come in a variety of styles over the history of consoles. Some common types include:\nA unit with a single knob or dial and usually one or two buttons. Turning the knob typically allows one to move an on-screen object along one axis (such as the paddle in a table tennis game), while the buttons can have additional features.\nA unit that has a long handle that can pivot freely along multiple directions along with one or more buttons. The unit senses the direction that the joystick is pushed, allowing for simultaneous movement in two directions within a game.\nA unit that contains a variety of buttons, triggers, and directional controls\u00a0\u2013 either D-pads or analog sticks or both. These have become the most common type of controller since the third generation of console hardware, with designs becoming more detailed to give a larger array of buttons and directional controls to player's while maintaining ergonomic features.\nNumerous other controller types exist, including those that support motion controls, touchscreen support on handhelds and some consoles, and specialized controllers for specific types of games, such as racing wheels for racing games, light guns for shooting games, and musical instrument controllers for rhythm games. Some newer consoles also include optional support for a mouse and keyboard devices. Some older consoles such as 1988 Sega Genesis aka Mega Drive and 1993 3DO Interactive Multiplayer, supported optional mice, both with special mice made for them, but the 3DO mouse like that console was a flop, and the mouse for the Sega had very limited game support. The Sega also supported the optional Menacer, a wireless infrared light gun, and such were at one point popular for games. It also support BatterUP, a baseball bat-shaped controller.\nA controller may be attached through a wired connection onto the console itself, or in some unique cases like the Famicom hardwired to the console, or with a wireless connection. Controllers require power, either provided by the console via the wired connection, or from batteries or a rechargeable battery pack for wireless connections. Controllers are nominally built into a handheld unit, though some newer ones allow for separate wireless controllers to also be used.\nGame media.\nWhile the first game consoles were dedicated game systems, with the games programmed into the console's hardware, the Fairchild Channel F introduced the ability to store games in a form separate from the console's internal circuitry, thus allowing the consumer to purchase new games to play on the system. Since the Channel F, nearly all game consoles have featured the ability to purchase and swap games through some form, through those forms have changes with improvements in technology.\nThe read-only memory (ROM) cartridge was introduced with the Fairchild Channel F. A ROM cartridge consist of a printed circuit board (PCB) housed inside of a plastic casing, with a connector allowing the device to interface with the console. The circuit board can contain a wide variety of components, at the minimum, the read-only memory with the software written on it. Later cartridges were able to introduce additional components onto the circuit board like coprocessors, such as Nintendo's SuperFX chip, to enhance the performance of the console. Some consoles such as the Turbografx-16 used a smart card-like technology to flatten the cartridge to a credit-card-sized system, which helped to reduce production costs, but limited additional features that could be included onto the circuitry. PCB-based cartridges waned with the introduction of optical media during the fifth generation of consoles. More recently, ROM cartridges have been based on high memory density, low cost flash memory, which allows for easier mass production of games. Sony used this approach for the PlayStation Vita, and Nintendo continues to use ROM cartridges for its 3DS and Switch products.\nOptical media, such as CD-ROM, DVD, and Blu-ray, became the primary format for retail distribution with the fifth generation. The CD-ROM format had gained popularity in the 1990s, in the midst of the fourth generation, and as a game media, CD-ROMs were cheaper and faster to produce, offered much more storage space and allowed for the potential of full-motion video. Several console manufacturers attempted to offer CD-ROM add-ons to fourth generation consoles, but these were nearly as expensive as the consoles themselves and did not fare well. Instead, the CD-ROM format became integrated into consoles of the fifth generation, with the DVD format present across most by the seventh generation and Blu-ray by the eighth. Console manufacturers have also used proprietary disc formats for copy protection as well, such as the Nintendo optical disc used on the GameCube, and Sony's Universal Media Disc on the PlayStation Portable.\nSince the seventh generation of consoles, most consoles include integrated connectivity to the Internet and both internal and external storage for the console, allowing for players to acquire new games without game media. All three of Nintendo, Sony, and Microsoft offer an integrated storefront for consumers to purchase new games and download them to their console, retaining the consumers' purchases across different consoles, and offering sales and incentives at times.\nAs Internet access speeds improved throughout the eighth generation of consoles, cloud gaming had gained further attention as a media format. Instead of downloading games, the consumer plays them directly from a cloud gaming service with inputs performed on the local console sent through the Internet to the server with the rendered graphics and audio sent back. Latency in network transmission remains a core limitation for cloud gaming at the present time.\nWhile magnetic storage, such as tape drives and floppy disks, had been popular for software distribution with early personal computers in the 1980s and 1990s, this format did not see much use in console systems. There were some attempts, such as the Bally Astrocade and APF-M1000 using tape drives, as well as the Disk System for the Nintendo Famicom, and the Nintendo 64DD for the Nintendo 64, but these had limited applications, as magnetic media was more fragile and volatile than game cartridges.\nExternal storage.\nIn addition to built-in internal storage, newer consoles often give the consumer the ability to use external storage media to save game data, downloaded games, or other media files from the console. Early iterations of external storage were achieved through the use of flash-based memory cards, first used by the Neo Geo but popularized with the PlayStation. Nintendo continues to support this approach with extending the storage capabilities of the 3DS and Switch, standardizing on the current SD card format. As consoles began incorporating the use of USB ports, support for USB external hard drives was also added, such as with the Xbox 360.\nOnline services.\nWith Internet-enabled consoles, console manufacturers offer both free and paid-subscription services that provide value-added services atop the basic functions of the console. Free services generally offer user identity services and access to a digital storefront, while paid services allow players to play online games, interact with other uses through social networking, use cloud saves for supported games, and gain access to free titles on a rotating basis. Examples of such services include the Xbox network, PlayStation Network, and Nintendo Switch Online.\nConsole add-ons.\nCertain consoles saw various add-ons or accessories that were designed to attach to the existing console to extend its functionality. The best example of this was through the various CD-ROM add-ons for consoles of the fourth generation such as the TurboGrafx CD, Atari Jaguar CD, and the Sega CD. Other examples of add-ons include the 32X for the Sega Genesis intended to allow owners of the aging console to play newer games but has several technical faults, and the Game Boy Player for the GameCube to allow it to play Game Boy games.\nAccessories.\nConsumers can often purchase a range of accessories for consoles outside of the above categories. These can include:\nWhile these can be used with Internet-connected consoles like webcams for communication with other friends as they would be used on personal computers, video camera applications on consoles are more commonly used in augmented reality/mixed reality and motion sensing games. Devices like the EyeToy for PlayStation consoles and the Kinect for Xbox consoles were center-points for a range of games to support these devices on their respective systems.\nHeadsets provide a combination of headphones and a microphone for chatting with other players without disturbing others nearby in the same room.\nSome virtual reality (VR) headsets can operate independently of consoles or use personal computers for their main processing system. As of 2020[ [update]], the only direct VR support on consoles is the PlayStation VR, though support for VR on other consoles is planned by the other manufacturers.\nFor handheld systems as well as hybrids such as the Nintendo Switch, the docking station makes it easy to insert a handheld to recharge its battery, and if supported, for connecting the handheld to a television screen.\nGame development.\nThe core development process for a console game is very similar to its counterparts and primarily differs in the high level concept due to demographics and the technical back-end. Consoles developers will usually make a development kit available to game developers which they can use to test their games on with more ease than a consumer model.\nEarly console games were commonly created by a single person and could be changed in a short amount of time due to the simplicity of the games at the time. As technology has improved, the development time, complexity and cost of console games has increased dramatically, to where the size of a team for an eighth generation game can number in the hundreds. Similarly, the programming languages used in video game development has changed over time with early games being developed primarily in assembly. As time went on developers had more choice on what they could use based on the availability on the console but some languages became more popular than others.\nIn comparison to PC and mobile games, console game developers must consider the limitations of the hardware their game is being developed for, as it is unlikely to have any major changes between the development phase and release. PC and mobile technology progresses quickly and there are many different configurations of their hardware and software. This is beneficial at the start of a console's life cycle, as the technology will be cutting edge, but as the console ages, developers are forced to work with ageing hardware until the next generation of consoles is released. Earlier consoles games could be developed to take advantage of the fixed limitations of the consoles they were developed for, such as the MegaDrive's capability of fast scrolling influencing design decisions made for \"Sonic the Hedgehog\".\nConsole development kits.\nConsole or game development kits are specialized hardware units that typically include the same components as the console and additional chips and components to allow the unit to be connected to a computer or other monitoring device for debugging purposes. A console manufacturer will make the console's dev kit available to registered developers months ahead of the console's planned launch to give developers time to prepare their games for the new system. These initial kits will usually be offered under special confidentiality clauses to protect trade secrets of the console's design, and will be sold at a high cost to the developer as part of keeping this confidentiality. Newer consoles that share features in common with personal computers may no longer use specialized dev kits, though developers are still expected to register and purchase access to software development kits from the manufacturer. For example, any consumer Xbox One can be used for game development after paying a fee to Microsoft to register one intent to do so.\nLicensing.\nSince the release of the Nintendo Famicom / Nintendo Entertainment System, most video game console manufacturers employ a strict licensing scheme that limit what games can be developed for it. Developers and their publishers must pay a fee, typically based on royalty per unit sold, back to the manufacturer. The cost varies by manufacturer but was estimated to be about US$ per unit in 2012. With additional fees, such as branding rights, this has generally worked out to be an industry-wide 30% royalty rate paid to the console manufacturer for every game sold. This is in addition to the cost of acquiring the dev kit to develop for the system.\nThe licensing fee may be collected in a few different ways. In the case of Nintendo, the company generally has controlled the production of game cartridges with its lockout chips and optical media for its systems, and thus charges the developer or publisher for each copy it makes as an upfront fee. This also allows Nintendo to review the game's content prior to release and veto games it does not believe appropriate to include on its system. This had led to over 700 unlicensed games for the NES, and numerous others on other Nintendo cartridge-based systems that had found ways to bypass the hardware lockout chips and sell without paying any royalties to Nintendo, such as by Atari in its subsidiary company Tengen. This licensing approach was similarly used by most other cartridge-based console manufacturers using lockout chip technology.\nWith optical media, where the console manufacturer may not have direct control on the production of the media, the developer or publisher typically must establish a licensing agreement to gain access to the console's proprietary storage format for the media as well as to use the console and manufacturer's logos and branding for the game's packaging, paid back through royalties on sales. In the transition to digital distribution, where now the console manufacturer runs digital storefronts for games, license fees apply to registering a game for distribution on the storefront\u00a0\u2013 again gaining access to the console's branding and logo\u00a0\u2013 with the manufacturer taking its cut of each sale as its royalty. In both cases, this still gives console manufacturers the ability to review and reject games it believes unsuitable for the system and deny licensing rights.\nWith the rise of indie game development, the major console manufacturers have all developed entry level routes for these smaller developers to be able to publish onto consoles at far lower costs and reduced royalty rates. Programs like Microsoft's ID@Xbox give developers most of the needed tools for free after validating the small development size and needs of the team.\nSimilar licensing concepts apply for third-party accessory manufacturers.\nEmulation and backward compatibility.\nConsoles, like most consumer electronic devices, have limited lifespans. There is great interest in preservation of older console hardware for archival and historical purposes, as games from older consoles, as well as arcade and personal computers, remain of interest. Computer programmers and hackers have developed emulators that can be run on personal computers or other consoles that simulate the hardware of older consoles that allow games from that console to be run. The development of software emulators of console hardware is established to be legal, but there are unanswered legal questions surrounding copyrights, including acquiring a console's firmware and copies of a game's ROM image, which laws such as the United States' Digital Millennium Copyright Act make illegal save for certain archival purposes. Even though emulation itself is legal, Nintendo is recognized to be highly protective of any attempts to emulate its systems and has taken early legal actions to shut down such projects.\nTo help support older games and console transitions, manufacturers started to support backward compatibility on consoles in the same family. Sony was the first to do this on a home console with the PlayStation 2 which was able to play original PlayStation content, and subsequently became a sought-after feature across many consoles that followed. Backward compatibility functionality has included direct support for previous console games on the newer consoles such as within the Xbox console family, the distribution of emulated games such as Nintendo's Virtual Console, or using cloud gaming services for these older games as with the PlayStation Now service.\nMarket.\nDistribution.\nConsoles may be shipped in a variety of configurations, but typically will include one base configuration that include the console, one controller, and sometimes a pack-in game. Manufacturers may offer alternate stock keeping unit (SKUs) options that include additional controllers and accessories or different pack-in games. Special console editions may feature unique cases or faceplates with art dedicated to a specific video game or series and are bundled with that game as a special incentive for its fans. Pack-in games are typically first-party games, often featuring the console's primary mascot characters.\nThe more recent console generations have also seen multiple versions of the same base console system either offered at launch or presented as a mid-generation refresh. In some cases, these simply replace some parts of the hardware with cheaper or more efficient parts, or otherwise streamline the console's design for production going forward; the PlayStation 3 underwent several such hardware refreshes during its lifetime due to technological improvements such as significant reduction of the process node size for the CPU and GPU. In these cases, the hardware revision model will be marked on packaging so that consumers can verify which version they are acquiring.\nIn other cases, the hardware changes create multiple lines within the same console family. The base console unit in all revisions share fundamental hardware, but options like internal storage space and RAM size may be different. Those systems with more storage and RAM would be marked as a higher performance variant available at a higher cost, while the original unit would remain as a budget option. For example, within the Xbox One family, Microsoft released the mid-generation Xbox One X as a higher performance console, the Xbox One S as the lower-cost base console, and a special Xbox One S All-Digital Edition revision that removed the optical drive on the basis that users could download all games digitally, offered at even a lower cost than the Xbox One S. In these cases, developers can often optimize games to work better on the higher-performance console with patches to the retail version of the game. In the case of the Nintendo 3DS, the New Nintendo 3DS, featured upgraded memory and processors, with new games that could only be run on the upgraded units and cannot be run on an older base unit. There have also been a number of \"slimmed-down\" console options with significantly reduced hardware components that significantly reduced the price they could sell the console to the consumer, but either leaving certain features off the console, such as the Wii Mini that lacked any online components compared to the Wii, or that required the consumer to purchase additional accessories and wiring if they did not already own it, such as the New-Style NES that was not bundled with the required RF hardware to connect to a television.\nPricing.\nConsoles when originally launched in the 1970s and 1980s were about US$, and with the introduction of the ROM cartridge, each game averaged about US$. Over time the launch price of base consoles units has generally risen to about US$, with the average game costing US$. Exceptionally, the period of transition from ROM cartridges to optical media in the early 1990s saw several consoles with high price points exceeding US$ and going as high as US$. Resultingly, sales of these first optical media consoles were generally poor.\nWhen adjusted for inflation, the price of consoles has generally followed a downward trend, from US$ from the early generations down to US$ for current consoles. This is typical for any computer technology, with the improvements in computing performance and capabilities outpacing the additional costs to achieve those gains. Further, within the United States, the price of consoles has generally remained consistent, being within 0.8% to 1% of the median household income, based on the United States Census data for the console's launch year.\nSince the Nintendo Entertainment System, console pricing has stabilized on the razorblade model, where the consoles are sold at little to no profit for the manufacturer, but they gain revenue from each game sold due to console licensing fees and other value-added services around the console (such as Xbox Live). Console manufacturers have even been known to take losses on the sale of consoles at the start of a console's launch with expectation to recover with revenue sharing and later price recovery on the console as they switch to less expensive components and manufacturing processes without changing the retail price. Consoles have been generally designed to have a five-year product lifetime, though manufacturers have considered their entries in the more recent generations to have longer lifetimes of seven to potentially ten years.\nCompetition.\nThe competition within the video game console market as subset of the video game industry is an area of interest to economics with its relatively modern history, its rapid growth to rival that of the film industry, and frequent changes compared to other sectors.\nEffects of unregulated competition on the market were twice seen early in the industry. The industry had its first crash in 1977 following the release of the Magnavox Odyssey, Atari's home versions of \"Pong\" and the Coleco Telstar, which led other third-party manufacturers, using inexpensive General Instruments processor chips, to make their own home consoles which flooded the market by 1977. The video game crash of 1983 was fueled by multiple factors including competition from lower-cost personal computers, but unregulated competition was also a factor, as numerous third-party game developers, attempting to follow on the success of Activision in developing third-party games for the Atari 2600 and Intellivision, flooded the market with poor quality games, and made it difficult for even quality games to sell. Nintendo implemented a lockout chip, the Checking Integrated Circuit, on releasing the Nintendo Entertainment System in Western territories, as a means to control which games were published for the console. As part of their licensing agreements, Nintendo further prevented developers from releasing the same game on a different console for a period of two years. This served as one of the first means of securing console exclusivity for games that existed beyond technical limitation of console development.\nThe Nintendo Entertainment System also brought the concept of a video game mascot as the representation of a console system as a means to sell and promote the unit, and for the NES was Mario. The use of mascots in businesses had been a tradition in Japan, and this had already proven successful in arcade games like \"Pac-Man\". Mario was used to serve as an identity for the NES as a humor-filled, playful console. Mario caught on quickly when the NES released in the West, and when the next generation of consoles arrived, other manufacturers pushed their own mascots to the forefront of their marketing, most notably Sega with the use of Sonic the Hedgehog. The Nintendo and Sega rivalry that involved their mascot's flagship games served as part of the fourth console generation's \"console wars\". Since then, manufacturers have typically positioned their mascot and other first-party games as key titles in console bundles used to drive sales of consoles at launch or at key sales periods such as near Christmas.\nAnother type of competitive edge used by console manufacturers around the same time was the notion of \"bits\" or the size of the word used by the main CPU. The TurboGrafx-16 was the first console to push on its bit-size, advertising itself as a \"16-bit\" console, though this only referred to part of its architecture while its CPU was still an 8-bit unit. Despite this, manufacturers found consumers became fixated on the notion of bits as a console selling point, and over the fourth, fifth and sixth generation, these \"bit wars\" played heavily into console advertising. The use of bits waned as CPU architectures no longer needed to increase their word size and instead had other means to improve performance such as through multicore CPUs.\nGenerally, increased console numbers gives rise to more consumer options and better competition, but the exclusivity of titles made the choice of console for consumers an \"all-or-nothing\" decision for most. Further, with the number of available consoles growing with the fifth and sixth generations, game developers became pressured to which systems to focus on, and ultimately narrowed their target choice of platforms to those that were the best-selling. This cased a contraction in the market, with major players like Sega leaving the hardware business after the Dreamcast but continuing in the software area. Effectively, each console generation was shown to have two or three dominant players.\nCompetition in the console market in the 2010s and 2020s is considered an oligopoly between three main manufacturers: Nintendo, Sony, and Microsoft. The three use a combination of first-party games exclusive to their console and negotiate exclusive agreements with third-party developers to have their games be exclusive for at least an initial period of time to drive consumers to their console. They also worked with CPU and GPU manufacturers to tune and customize hardware for computers to make it more amenable and effective for video games, leading to lower-cost hardware needed for video game consoles. Finally, console manufacturers also work with retailers to help with promotion of consoles, games, and accessories. While there is little difference in pricing on the console hardware from the manufacturer's suggested retail price for the retailer to profit from, these details with the manufacturers can secure better profits on sales of game and accessory bundles for premier product placement. These all form network effects, with each manufacturer seeking to maximize the size of their network of partners to increase their overall position in the competition.\nOf the three, Microsoft and Sony, both with their own hardware manufacturing capabilities, remain at a leading edge approach, attempting to gain a first-mover advantage over the other with adaption of new console technology. Nintendo is more reliant on its suppliers and thus instead of trying to compete feature for feature with Microsoft and Sony, had instead taken a \"blue ocean\" strategy since the Nintendo DS and Wii.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32632", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32632", "title": "Veneration of the dead", "text": "Cultural or religious practice\nThe veneration of the dead, including one's ancestors, is based on love and respect for the deceased. In some cultures, it is related to beliefs that the dead have a continued existence, and may possess the ability to influence the fortune of the living. Some groups venerate their direct, familial ancestors. Certain religious groups, in particular the Eastern Orthodox Churches, Anglican Church, and Catholic Church venerate saints as intercessors with God; the latter also believes in prayer for departed souls in Purgatory. Other religious groups, consider veneration of the dead to be idolatry and a sin.\nIn European, Asian, Oceanian, African and Afro-diasporic cultures (which includes but should be distinguished from multiple cultures and Indigenous populations in the Americas who were never influenced by the African Diaspora), the goal of ancestor veneration is to ensure the ancestors' continued well-being and positive disposition towards the living, and sometimes to ask for special favours or assistance. The social or non-religious function of ancestor veneration is to cultivate kinship values, such as filial piety, family loyalty, and continuity of the family lineage. Ancestor veneration occurs in societies with every degree of social, political, and technological complexity, and it remains an important component of various religious practices in modern times.\nOverview.\nAncestor reverence is not the same as the worship of a deity or deities. In some Afro-diasporic cultures, ancestors are seen as being able to intercede on behalf of the living, often as messengers between humans and God. As spirits who were once human themselves, they are seen as being better able to understand human needs than would a divine being. In other cultures, the purpose of ancestor veneration is not to ask for favors but to do one's filial duty. Some cultures believe that their ancestors actually need to be provided for by their descendants, and their practices include offerings of food and other provisions. Others do not believe that the ancestors are even aware of what their descendants do for them, but that the expression of filial piety is what is important.\nMost cultures with these practices do not call them \"ancestor \"worship\"\" in the sense of the reverence, love, or devotion accorded a deity or God. The phrase \"ancestor veneration\" may convey a more accurate sense of how the Chinese, other Buddhist or Confucian-influenced societies, or other African or European cultures perceive these practices. These acts may not reflect a belief that the departed ancestors have become some kind of deity, but rather show filial piety, devotion, and respect. They may aim to look after ancestors in their afterlives or seek their guidance.\nAlthough there is no generally accepted theory concerning the origins of ancestor veneration, this social phenomenon appears in some form in all human cultures documented so far. David-Barrett and Carney claim that ancestor veneration might have served a group coordination role during human evolution, and thus it was the mechanism that led to religious representation fostering group cohesion.\nWest and Southeast African cultures.\nAncestor veneration is prevalent throughout Africa, and serves as the basis of many religions. It is often augmented by a belief in a supreme being, but prayers and/or sacrifices are usually offered to the ancestors who may ascend to becoming a kind of minor deities themselves. Ancestor veneration remains among many Africans, sometimes practiced alongside the later adopted religions of Christianity (as in Nigeria among the Igbo people), and Islam (among the different Mand\u00e9 peoples and the Bamum and the Bakossi people) in much of the continent. In orthodox Serer religion, the pangool is venerated by the Serer people.\nSerer of Senegal and Gambia.\nThe Seereer people of Senegal, The Gambia and Mauritania who adhere to the tenets of A \u01adat Roog (Seereer religion) believe in the veneration of the pangool (ancient Seereer saints and/or ancestral spirits). There are various types of pangool (singular: \"fangol\"), each with its own means of veneration.\nMadagascar.\nVeneration of ancestors is prevalent throughout the island of Madagascar. Approximately half of the country's population of 20 million currently practice traditional religion, which tends to emphasize links between the living and the \"razana\" (ancestors). The veneration of ancestors has led to the widespread tradition of tomb building, as well as the highlands practice of the \"famadihana\", whereby a deceased family member's remains may be exhumed to be periodically re-wrapped in fresh silk shrouds before being replaced in the tomb. The famadihana is an occasion to celebrate the beloved ancestor's memory, reunite with family and community, and enjoy a festive atmosphere. Residents of surrounding villages are often invited to attend the party, where food and rum are typically served and a hiragasy troupe or other musical entertainment is commonly present. Veneration of ancestors is also demonstrated through adherence to \"fady\", taboos that are respected during and after the lifetime of the person who establishes them. It is widely believed that by showing respect for ancestors in these ways, they may intervene on behalf of the living. Conversely, misfortunes are often attributed to ancestors whose memory or wishes have been neglected. The sacrifice of zebu is a traditional method used to appease or honor the ancestors. Small, everyday gestures of respect include throwing the first capful of a newly opened bottle of rum into the northeast corner of the room to give the ancestors their due share.\nNorth Africa.\nIn Egypt, a form of adorcism entwined with veneration of the dead, which one academic referred to as \"ghost riders\". A ghost who came to possess a person would be honored with a dedicated grave monument or sanctuary, where locals would make offerings and swear oaths. Those who swore false oaths may be punished by the ghost in residence. This ghost was considered both powerful and something for others to fear. These ghosts are not necessarily saints (in fact, those who hold these beliefs believe very holy persons never possess others in this way, as they are always in the presence of God), but like saints, they function as intermediaries with God. In some cases these may be family shrines, which are not frequented by outsiders, but some (usually older shrines) are frequented by many. When asking for aid from one of these spirits, one may often pledge an animal sacrifice upon aid being rendered, which is also done with saints.\nAsian cultures.\nCambodia.\nDuring Pchum Ben and the Cambodian New Year people make offerings to their ancestors. Pchum Ben is a time when many Cambodians pay their respects to deceased relatives of up to seven generations. Monks chant the suttas in Pali language overnight (continuously, without sleeping) in prelude to the gates of hell opening, an event that is presumed to occur once a year, and is linked to the cosmology of King Yama originating in the Pali Canon. During this period, the gates of hell are opened and ghosts of the dead (preta) are presumed to be especially active. In order to combat this, food-offerings are made to benefit them, some of these ghosts having the opportunity to end their period of purgation, whereas others are imagined to leave hell temporarily, to then return to endure more suffering; without much explanation, relatives who are not in hell (who are in heaven or otherwise reincarnated) are also generally imagined to benefit from the ceremonies.\nChina.\nIn China, ancestor veneration (\u656c\u7956, pinyin: \"j\u00ecngz\u01d4\") and ancestor worship (\u62dc\u7956, pinyin: \"b\u00e0iz\u01d4\") seek to honour and recollect the actions of the deceased; they represent the ultimate homage to the dead. The importance of paying respect to parents (and elders) lies with the fact that all physical bodily aspects of one's being were created by one's parents, who continued to tend to one's well-being until one was on firm footing. The respect and homage to parents is to return this gracious deed to them in life and after. The \"shi\" (\u5c38; \"corpse, personator\") was a Zhou dynasty (\u00a0BCE) sacrificial representative of a dead relative. During a \"shi\" ceremony, the ancestral spirit supposedly would enter the personator, who would eat and drink sacrificial offerings and convey spiritual messages. Spiritual messages usually were conveyed in the form of poe divination, or to confirm whether the ancestors consent on the messages requested by the divinator.\nOfferings.\nIn traditional Chinese culture, sacrifices are sometimes made to altars as food for the deceased. This falls under the modes of communication with the Chinese spiritual world concepts. Some of the veneration includes visiting the deceased at their graves, and making or buying offerings for the deceased in the Spring, Autumn, and Ghost Festivals. Due to the hardships of the late 19th- and 20th-century China, when meat and poultry were difficult to come by, sumptuous feasts are still offered in some Asian countries as a practice to the spirits or ancestors. However, in the orthodox Taoist and Buddhist rituals, only vegetarian food would suffice. For those with deceased in the afterlife or hell, elaborate or even creative offerings, such as servants, refrigerators, houses, car, paper money and shoes are provided so that the deceased will be able to have these items after they have died. Often, paper versions of these objects are burned for the same purpose. Originally, real-life objects were buried with the dead. In time these goods were replaced by full size clay models which in turn were replaced by scale models, and in time today's paper offerings (including paper servants).\nIndia.\nAncestors are widely revered, honoured, and venerated in India. The spirit of a dead person is called a Pitri, which is venerated. When a person dies, the family observes a thirteen-day mourning period, generally called \"\u015br\u0101ddha\". A year thence, they observe the ritual of \"tarpana\", in which the family makes offerings to the deceased. During these rituals, the family prepares the food items that the deceased liked and offers food to the deceased. They offer this food to crows as well on certain days as it is believed that the soul comes in the form of a bird to taste it. They are also obliged to offer \"\u015br\u0101ddha\", a small feast of specific preparations, to eligible Brahmins. Only after these rituals are the family members allowed to eat. It is believed that this reminds the ancestors's spirits that they are not forgotten and are loved, so it brings them peace. On \"\u015br\u0101ddha\" days, people pray that the souls of ancestors be appeased, forget any animosity and find peace. Each year, on the particular date (as per the Hindu calendar) when the person had died, the family members repeat this ritual. This period falls just before the Navaratri or Durga Puja falling in the month of Ashvin. Mahalaya marks the end of the fortnight-long \"tarpana\" to the ancestors.\nIndian and Chinese practices of ancestor-worship are prevalent throughout Asia as a result of the large Indian and Chinese populations in countries such as Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, and elsewhere across the continent. Furthermore, the large Indian population in places such as Fiji and Guyana has resulted in these practices spreading beyond their Asian homeland.\nAssam.\nThe Ahom religion is based on ancestor-worship. The Ahoms believe that a person after his death remains as \u2018Dam\u2019 (ancestor) only for a few days and soon he becomes \u2018Phi\u2019 (God). They also believe that the soul of a person which is immortal unites with the supreme soul, possesses the qualities of a spiritual being and always blesses the family. So every Ahom family in order to worship the dead establish a pillar on the opposite side of the kitchen (Barghar) which is called \u2018Damkhuta\u2019 where they worship the dead with various offerings like homemade wine, mah-prasad, rice with various items of meat and fish. Me-Dam-Me-Phi, a ritual centred on commemorating the dead, is celebrated by the Ahom people on 31 January every year in memory of the departed. It is the manifestation of the concept of ancestor worship that the Ahoms share with other peoples originating from the Tai-Shan stock. It is a festival to show respect to the departed ancestors and remember their contribution to society. On the day of Me-Dam Me Phi worship is offered only to Chaufi and Dam Chaufi because they are regarded as gods of heaven.\nIndus Valley Civilization.\nAt Rakhigarhi, an Indus Valley civilization (IVC) site in Haryana, the lover's skeletons of a man between 35 and 40 years old and women in early 20s were found who were likely married to each other and buried together, their grave contained pots which likely carried food and water as offering to the dead.\nPaliya in Gujarat.\nThe \"Paliya\" memorial stones are associated with ancestral worship in western India. These memorials are worshipped by people of associated community or descendants of a person on special days such as death day of person, event anniversaries, festivals, auspicious days in Kartika, Shravana or Bhadrapada months of Hindu calendar. These memorials are washed with milk and water on these days. They are smeared with sindoor or kumkuma and flowers are scattered over it. The earthen lamp is lighted near it with sesame oil. Sometimes a flag is erected over it.\nTuluva culture in Tulu Nadu.\nTuluvas practice a form of ancestor worship called kule aradhane.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia ancestor worship has been a tradition of some of the indigenous people. Podom of the Toba Batak, Waruga of the Minahasans and the coffins of the Karo people (Indonesia) are a few examples of the forms the veneration takes.\nJapan.\nBefore the introduction of Buddhism to Japan, ancestor worship and funerary rites were not common, especially for non-elites. In the Heian Period, abandonment was a common method of disposing of the dead. Following the advent of Buddhism, rituals began to be performed at the gravesite after burial or cremation, due to Confucian influence, and remain common to the current day.\nMemorial services for the deceased by occur on the 7th and 49th days after death, the time it is said to take for the deceased to be reborn, as well as periodically afterwards, such as on the first and third anniversaries of the death. After the funeral, the family of the deceased receives an memorial tablet containing a posthumous name, which is then brought to the home butsudan so the deceased can be venerated.\nBased on the Buddhist sect of the family, ancestral veneration serves different functions, such as praying for the deceased to enter Amida's Pure Land or be guided by the Thirteen Buddhas through the deceased's journey through the afterlife. The sole Japanese Buddhist sect that rejects prayer for the deceased is J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b, which views petitionary memorial services as unnecessary, seeing memorial services as a time for the living to reflect on their lives rather than pray for the deceased.\nSeveral Japanese Buddhist festivals include strong elements of ancestral veneration, such as Obon (\u304a\u76c6) and Higan (\u5f7c\u5cb8). During these festivals, people return to their hometowns to honor their ancestors in accordance with Buddhist tradition.\nKorea.\nIn Korea, ancestor veneration is referred to by the generic term \"jerye\" (Korean:\u00a0; Hanja:\u00a0 or \"jesa\" (; ). Notable examples of \"jerye\" include \"Munmyo jerye\" and \"Jongmyo jerye\", which are performed periodically each year for venerated Neo-Confucian scholars and kings of ancient times, respectively. The ceremony held on the anniversary of a family member's death is called \"charye\" (\ucc28\ub840). It is still practised today.\nThe majority of Catholics, Buddhists and nonbelievers practise ancestral rites, although Protestants do not. The Catholic ban on ancestral rituals was lifted in 1939, when the Catholic Church formally recognised ancestral rites as a civil practice.\nAncestral rites are typically divided into three categories:\nMyanmar.\nAncestor worship in modern-day Myanmar is largely confined to some ethnic minority communities, but mainstream remnants of it still exist, such as worship of Bo Bo Gyi (literally \"great grandfather\"), as well as of other guardian spirits such as nats, all of which may be vestiges of historic ancestor worship.\nAncestor worship was present in the royal court in pre-colonial Burma. During the Konbaung dynasty, solid gold images of deceased kings and their consorts were worshipped three times a year by the royal family, during the Burmese New Year (\"Thingyan\"), at the beginning and at the end of Vassa. The images were stored in the treasury and worshiped at the Zetawunzaung (, \"Hall of Ancestors\"), along with a book of odes.\nSome scholars attribute the disappearance of ancestor worship to the influence of Buddhist doctrines of anicca and anatta, impermanence and rejection of a 'self'.\nPhilippines.\nThe belief in \"anito\" or ancestral spirits in Precolonial Philippines are sometimes referred to as Anitism in scholarly literature (Spanish: or ) literally means veneration of the spirits of the dead. The word anitism or ancestor worship from the Hispano-Filipino form \"anitismo\", though not in current usage, it was a precolonial Tagalog belief system, a continual invocation and adoration of the anitos, the souls or spirits of their ancestors. From its original meaning of \"ancestral spirit\".\nThe ancient Tagalogs believed in anitos, the spirits or souls of their ancestors. They honored and worshipped them in daily life especially the spirits of parents and grandparents who had died. These ancestor spirits were often represented by small idols kept in homes, sometimes made from gold and shaped like animals, such as crocodiles. Anitos were not only from the home. Some were believed to live in mountains, forests, and rice fields. These were often the souls of ancient warriors or previous inhabitants of the land. The Tagalogs believed that these spirits could protect or harm, so they treated them with respect. Unlike other nearby cultures that worshipped many gods and spirits without making idols, the Tagalogs made physical representations only for certain anitos mainly those connected to the household. Different regions and tribes had their own names for these spirits. While Tagalogs called them anito, others used names like \"nitu\", \"aitu\", or \"hantu\". This shows how widespread and deeply rooted the belief in ancestor spirits was across Southeast Asia.\nIn these animistic indigenous religions of the precolonial Philippines, ancestor spirits were one of the two major types of spirits (\"anito\") with whom shamans communicate. Ancestor spirits were known as \"umalagad\" (lit.\u2009'guardian' or 'caretaker'). They can be the spirits of actual ancestors or generalized guardian spirits of a family. Ancient Filipinos believed that upon death, the soul of a person travels (usually by boat) to a spirit world. There can be multiple locations in the spirit world, varying in different ethnic groups. Which place souls end up in depends on how they died, the age at death, or conduct of the person when they were alive. Souls reunite with deceased relatives in the underworld and lead normal lives in the underworld as they did in the material world. In some cases, the souls of evil people undergo penance and cleansing before they are granted entrance into a particular spirit realm. Souls would eventually reincarnate after a period of time in the spirit world.\nSouls in the spirit world still retain a degree of influence in the material world, and vice versa. \"Paganito\" rituals may be used to invoke good ancestor spirits for protection, intercession, or advice. Vengeful spirits of the dead can manifest as apparitions or ghosts (\"mantiw\") and cause harm to living people. \"Paganito\" can be used to appease or banish them. Ancestor spirits also figured prominently during illness or death, as they were believed to be the ones who call the soul to the underworld, guide the soul (a psychopomp), or meet the soul upon arrival.\nAncestor spirits are also known as \"kalading\" among the Cordillerans; \"tonong\" among the Maguindanao and Maranao; \"umboh\" among the Sama-Bajau; \"ninun\u00f2\" among Tagalogs; and \"nono\" among Bicolanos. Ancestor spirits are usually represented by carved figures called \"taotao\". These were carved by the community upon a person's death. Every household had a \"taotao\" stored in a shelf in the corner of the house.\nThe predominantly Roman Catholic Filipino people still hold ancestors in particular esteem\u2014though without the formality common to their neighbours\u2014despite having been Christianised since coming into contact with Spanish missionaries in 1521. In the present day, ancestor veneration is expressed in having photographs of the dead by the home altar, a common fixture in many Filipino Christian homes. Candles are often kept burning before the photographs, which are sometimes decorated with garlands of fresh sampaguita, the national flower. Ancestors, particularly dead parents, are still regarded as psychopomps, as a dying person is said to be brought to the afterlife (Tagalog: \"sund\u00f4\", \"fetch\") by the spirits of dead relatives. It is said that when the dying call out the names of deceased loved ones, they can see the spirits of those particular people waiting at the foot of the deathbed.\nFilipino Catholic and Aglipayan veneration of the dead finds its greatest expression in the Philippines is the Hallowmas season between 31 October and 2 November, variously called \"Und\u00e1s\" (based on the word for \"[the] first\", the Spanish \"andas\" or possibly \"honra\"), \"Todos los Santos\" (literally \"All Saints\"), and sometimes \"\u00c1raw ng mga Pat\u00e1y\" (lit.\u2009'Day of the Dead'), which refers to the following solemnity of All Souls' Day. Filipinos traditionally observe this day by visiting the family dead, cleaning and repairing their tombs. Common offerings are prayers, flowers, candles, and even food, while many also spend the remainder of the day and ensuing night holding reunions at the graveyard, playing games and music or singing.\nChinese Filipinos, meanwhile, have the most apparent and distinct customs related to ancestor veneration, carried over from traditional Chinese religion and most often melded with their current Catholic faith. Many still burn incense and kim at family tombs and before photos at home, while they incorporate Chinese practises into Masses held during the All Souls' Day period.\nSri Lanka.\nIn Sri Lanka, making offerings to one's ancestors is conducted on the sixth day after death as a part of traditional Sri Lankan funeral rites.\nThailand.\nIn rural northern Thailand, a religious ceremony honoring ancestral spirits known as \"Faun Phii\" (, lit. \"spirit dance\" or \"ghost dance\") takes place. It includes offerings for ancestors with spirit mediums sword fighting, spirit-possessed dancing, and spirit mediums cock fighting in a spiritual cockfight.\nVietnam.\nAncestor veneration is one of the most unifying aspects of Vietnamese culture, as practically all Vietnamese have an ancestor altar in their home or business.\nIn Vietnam, traditionally people did not celebrate birthdays (before Western influence), but the death anniversary of one's loved one was always an important occasion. Besides an essential gathering of family members for a banquet in memory of the deceased, incense sticks are burned along with hell notes, and great platters of food are made as offerings on the ancestor altar, which usually has pictures or plaques with the names of the deceased. In the case of missing persons, believed to be dead by their family, a Wind tomb is made.\nThese offerings and practices are done frequently during important traditional or religious celebrations, the starting of a new business, or even when a family member needs guidance or counsel and is a hallmark of the emphasis Vietnamese culture places on filial duty.\nA significant distinguishing feature of Vietnamese ancestor veneration is that women have traditionally been allowed to participate and co-officiate ancestral rites, unlike in Chinese Confucian doctrine, which allows only male descendants to perform such rites.\nEuropean cultures.\nCare of the dead and the loving duty toward one's ancestors (\"pietas\") were fundamental aspects of ancient Roman culture. A clear manifestation of this is Roman Republican era portrait busts which may have originated in the practice of making death masks of ancestors which were displayed in the home and during funerary rites and on the anniversary of the ancestor's death.\nIn Catholic countries in Europe (continued later with the Anglican Church in England), November 1 (All Saints' Day), became known and is still known as the day to specifically venerate those who have died, and who have been deemed official saints by the Church. November 2, (All Souls Day), or \"The Day of the Dead\", is the day when all of the faithful dead are remembered. On that day, families go to cemeteries to light candles for their dead relatives, leave them flowers, and often to picnic. They also celebrate Suffrage Masses to shorten the time that souls need to leave Purgatory and the enter in Paradise. The evening before All Saints'\u2014\"All Hallows Eve\" or \"Hallowe'en\"\u2014is unofficially the Catholic day to remember the realities of Hell, to mourn the souls lost to evil, and to remember ways to avoid Hell. It is commonly celebrated in the United States and parts of the United Kingdom in a spirit of light-hearted horror and fear, which is marked by the recounting of ghost stories, bonfires, wearing costumes, carving jack-o'-lanterns, and \"trick-or-treating\" (going door to door seeking candy).\nBrythonic Celtic cultures.\nIn Cornwall and Wales, the autumn ancestor festivals occur around November 1. In Cornwall the festival is known as \"Kalan Gwav\", and in Wales as \"Calan Gaeaf.\" Modern-day Halloween is derived from these festivals.\nGaelic Celtic cultures.\nDuring \"Samhain\", November 1 in Ireland and Scotland, the dead are thought to return to the world of the living, and offerings of food and light are left for them. On the festival day, ancient people would extinguish the hearth fires in their homes, participate in a community bonfire festival, and then carry a flame home from the communal fire and use it to light their home fires anew. This custom has continued to some extent into modern times, in both the Celtic nations and the diaspora. Lights in the window to guide the dead home are left burning all night. On the Isle of Man the festival is known as \"old Sauin\" or \"Hop-tu-Naa\".\nNorth America.\nIn the United States and Canada, flowers, wreaths, grave decorations and sometimes candles, food, small pebbles, or items the dead valued in life are put on graves year-round as a way to honor the dead. These traditions originate in the diverse cultural backgrounds of the current populations of both countries. In the United States, many people honor deceased loved ones who were in the military on Memorial Day. Days with religious and spiritual significance like Easter, Christmas, Candlemas, and All Souls' Day, Day of the Dead, or Samhain are also times when relatives and friends of the deceased may gather at the graves of their loved ones. In the Catholic Church, one's local parish church often offers prayers for the dead on their death anniversary or All Souls' Day.\nIn the United States, Memorial Day is a Federal holiday for remembering the deceased men and women who served in the nation's military, particularly those who died in war or during active service. In the 147 National Cemeteries, like Arlington and Gettysburg, it is common for volunteers to place small American flags at each grave. Memorial Day is traditionally observed on the last Monday in May, allotting for a 3-day weekend in which many memorial services and parades take place not only across the country, but in 26 American cemeteries on foreign soil (in France, Belgium, the United Kingdom, the Philippines, Panama, Italy, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, and Tunisia). It is also common practice among veterans to memorialize fallen service members on the dates of their death. This practice is also common in other countries when remembering Americans who died in battles to liberate their towns in the World Wars. One example of this is on 16 August (1944) Colonel Griffith, died of wounds from enemy action sustained in L\u00e8ves, the same day he is credited with saving Chartres Cathedral from destruction.\nIn Judaism, when a grave site is visited, a small pebble is placed on the headstone. While there is no clear answer as to why, this custom of leaving pebbles may date back to biblical days when individuals were buried under piles of stones. Today, they are left as tokens that people have been there to visit and to remember.\nAmericans of various religions and cultures may build a shrine in their home dedicated to loved ones who have died, with pictures of their ancestors, flowers and mementos. Increasingly, many roadside shrines may be seen for deceased relatives who died in car accidents or were killed on that spot, sometimes financed by the state or province as these markers serve as potent reminders to drive cautiously in hazardous areas. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., is particularly known for the leaving of offerings to the deceased; items left are collected by the National Park Service and archived.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints perform posthumous baptisms and other rituals for their dead ancestors, along with those of other families.\nNative Americans were not heavily concerned with the veneration of the dead, though they were known to bury the dead with clothes and tools as well as occasionally leave food and drink at the gravesite; Pueblo Indians supported a cult of the dead which worshipped or petitioned the dead through ritualistic dances.\nIslam.\nIslam has a complex and mixed view on the idea of grave shrines and ancestor worship. The graves of many early Islamic figures are holy sites for Muslims, including Ali, and a cemetery with many companions and early caliphs. Many other mausoleums are major architectural, political, and cultural sites, including the National Mausoleum in Pakistan and the Taj Mahal in India. However, the religious movement of Wahhabism disputes the concept of saint veneration. Followers of this movement have destroyed many gravesite shrines, including in Saudi Arabia and in territory controlled by the Islamic State.\nImam Ahmad, Al-Hakim, and others narrated about Marwan Ibn al-Hakam\u2013Umayyad governor of Medina\u2013that he once passed by the grave of the Prophet and saw a man with his cheek on the grave of the Prophet. Marwan Ibn al-Hakam asked: \"Do you know what you are doing?\" Nearing the grave, Marwan Ibn al-Hakam realized it was Abu Ayyub al-Ansariyy, one of the greatest companions of the Prophet. Abu Ayyub al-Ansariyy replied, \"Yes, I know what I am doing. I came here for the Messenger of Allah\u2014not for the stone.\" By this he meant he was seeking the blessings from the presence of the Prophet, not for the stone covering his grave. Abu Ayyub al-Ansariyy continued his response with what he heard the Messenger of Allah say: \"Do not cry over the Religion of Islam if the rulers are ruling correctly. Rather, cry over this Religion if the rulers are ruling incorrectly.\" By his response, Abu Ayyub was telling Marwan Ibn al-Hakam: \"You are not one of those rulers who are correctly ruling by the rules of Islam.\"\nSome followers of Islam are at odds with the concept of saint veneration, but this practice is retained in Turkey, particularly through Alevi Muslims.\nJudaism.\nJudaism, like Islam, has a complicated relationship to ancestor veneration/worship, grave shrines, and other related concepts. It is thought ancient Israelite religion and Pre-Israelite Cannanites practiced a form of ancestor worship in which ancestors were raised to the status of gods, and some form of similar practice was likely seen as acceptable in Israelite religion until King Josiah's reign. In Biblical literature, and in contemporary prayer, the ancestors, particularly Abraham, Moses, Aaron, Jacob/Israel, or \"the Patriarchs\" and \"the Matriarchs\", are often referred to. Stress is placed on the identity of the Jewish people as being the \"seed\", \"house\", or \"children\" of these figures.\nTwo prayers\u2014Kaddish and Yizkor\u2014are recited on behalf of the dead by Rabbinic Jews, including on anniversaries of a death. For some, the performance of prayers, especially prayers in their first year after death from their children, are thought to positively impact God's judgement of them, as well as donations and other good works done in their name. This is similar to Japanese practices and other ancestral veneration practices overall. These good deeds done in the name of the dead are reciprocated by the dead's prayers to God for the living. There are taboos and injunctions the living must follow, particularly in regard to their direct ancestors: not to use the remains of coffin wood for other purposes, to bury the dead in a proper shroud, and not to eat or drink at the beginning and/or close of Shabbat, as that is when spirits of the dead are believed to eat, drink, and bathe. One who eats during this time has stolen from the spirits, and one who drinks at the beginning of Shabbat risks ingesting contaminated bathing water.\nAshkenazi Jews commonly name children after dead relatives, and are hoped to embody those dead's positive traits. Eastern European Jews specifically transform the concept of \"zechut avot\"\u2014the merit of one's ancestors, used to explain both a belief that the dead pray on behalf of the deceased, and a prayer to God to remember the good deeds of one's ancestors and be merciful in judgement\u2014into the related idea of \"yichus ovus\", inherited ancestral status.\nIn contemporary Rabbinic Judaism, visiting the graves of tzaddikim (righteous figures akin to saints) has long remained popular, including the graves of ancestral figures like Abraham and Esther. These visits may also be accompanied by petitions of the dead, as their elevated status is thought to give them more direct access to God. Rabbinic Jews stress that they do not worship the dead, and only respect and honor them\u2014a distinction made by other cultures, including Japanese and African cultures.\nAncient cultures.\nAncestor worship was a prominent feature of many historical societies.\nAncient Egypt.\nAlthough some historians claim that ancient Egyptian society was a \"death cult\" because of its elaborate tombs and mummification rituals, it was the opposite. The philosophy that \"this world is but a vale of tears\" and that to die and be with God is a better existence than an earthly one was relatively unknown among the ancient Egyptians. This was not to say that they were unacquainted with the harshness of life; rather, their ethos included a sense of continuity between this life and the next. The Egyptian people loved the culture, customs and religion of their daily lives so much that they wanted to continue them in the next\u2014although some might hope for a better station in the Beautiful West (Egyptian afterlife).\nTombs were housing in the Hereafter and so they were carefully constructed and decorated, just as homes for the living were. Mummification was a way to preserve the corpse so the \"ka\" (soul) of the deceased could return to receive offerings of the things s/he enjoyed while alive. If mummification was not affordable, a \"ka-statue\" in the likeness of the deceased was carved for this purpose. The Blessed Dead were collectively called the \"akhu\", or \"shining ones\" (singular: \"akh\"). They were described as \"shining as gold in the belly of Nut\" (Gr. Nuit) and were indeed depicted as golden stars on the roofs of many tombs and temples.\nThe process by which a \"ka\" became an \"akh\" was not automatic upon death; it involved a 70-day journey through the \"duat\", or Otherworld, which led to judgment before Wesir (Gr. Osiris), Lord of the Dead where the \"ka\"'s heart would be weighed on a scale against the Feather of Ma\u2019at (representing Truth). However, if the \"ka\" was not properly prepared, this journey could be fraught with dangerous pitfalls and strange demons; hence some of the earliest religious texts discovered, such as the Papyrus of Ani (commonly known as The Book of the Dead) and the Pyramid Texts were actually written as guides to help the deceased successfully navigate the \"duat\".\nIf the heart was in balance with the Feather of Ma'at, the \"ka\" passed judgment and was granted access to the Beautiful West as an \"akh\" who was \"ma\u2019a heru\" (\"true of voice\") to dwell among the gods and other \"akhu\". At this point only was the \"ka\" deemed worthy to be venerated by the living through rites and offerings. Those who became lost in the \"duat\" or deliberately tried to avoid judgment became the unfortunate (and sometimes dangerous) \"mutu\", the Restless Dead. For the few whose truly evil hearts outweighed the Feather, the goddess Ammit waited patiently behind Wesir's judgment seat to consume them. She was a composite creature resembling three of the deadliest animals in Egypt: the crocodile, the hippopotamus and the lion. Being fed to Ammit was to be consigned to the Eternal Void, to be \"unmade\" as a \"ka\".\nBesides being eaten by Ammit, the worst fate a \"ka\" could suffer after physical death was to be forgotten. For this reason, ancestor veneration in ancient Egypt was an important rite of remembrance in order to keep the \"ka\" \"alive\" in this life as well as in the next. Royals, nobles and the wealthy made contracts with their local priests to perform prayers and give offerings at their tombs. In return, the priests were allowed to keep a portion of the offerings as payment for services rendered. Some tomb inscriptions even invited passers-by to speak aloud the names of the deceased within (which also helped to perpetuate their memory), and to offer water, prayers or other things if they so desired. In the private homes of the less wealthy, niches were carved into the walls for the purpose of housing images of familial \"akhu\" and to serve as altars of veneration.\nMany of these same religious beliefs and ancestor veneration practices are still carried on today in the religion of Kemetic Orthodoxy.\nAncient Israelite religion.\nIt is thought that the word Sheol (the afterlife referred to in Biblical literature) comes from the word meaning \"to inquire\". Pre-Israelite Cannanites gave their ancestors offerings of food and drink, as well as symbolic vessel offerings which, even empty, provided both in the afterlife. In light of this, \"honor thy father and mother\", is thought by some to have referenced this practice, particularly as it predates the ban of ancestor worship and necromancy by Josiah.\nAncient Rome.\nThe Romans, like many Mediterranean societies, regarded the bodies of the dead as polluting. During Rome's Classical period, the body was most often cremated, and the ashes placed in a tomb outside the city walls. Much of the month of February was devoted to purifications, propitiation, and veneration of the dead, especially at the nine-day festival of the Parentalia during which a family honored its ancestors. The family visited the cemetery and shared cake and wine, both in the form of offerings to the dead and as a meal among themselves. The Parentalia drew to a close on February 21 with the more somber Feralia, a public festival of sacrifices and offerings to the Manes, the potentially malevolent spirits of the dead who required propitiation. One of the most common inscriptional phrases on Latin epitaphs is \"Dis Manibus\", abbreviated \"D.M,\" \"for the Manes gods\", which appears even on s. The Caristia on February 22 was a celebration of the family line as it continued into the present.\nA noble Roman family displayed ancestral images (\"imagines\") in the tablinum of their home \"(domus)\". Some sources indicate these portraits were busts, while others suggest that funeral masks were also displayed. The masks, probably modeled of wax from the face of the deceased, were part of the funeral procession when an elite Roman died. Professional mourners wore the masks and regalia of the dead person's ancestors as the body was carried from the home, through the streets, and to its final resting place.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32634", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32634", "title": "Saint Veronica", "text": "Christian saint\nSaint Veronica, also known as \"Berenike\", was a widow from Jerusalem who lived in the 1st century AD, according to extra-biblical Christian traditions. Apocryphal texts relate how Veronica was moved with sympathy seeing Jesus carrying the cross to Calvary and gave him her veil so that he could wipe his forehead. Jesus accepted the offer, and when he returned the veil the image of his face was miraculously captured on it. The resulting relic became known as the Veil of Veronica.\nThe story of Veronica is celebrated in the sixth Station of the Cross in Anglican, Catholic, and Western Orthodox churches. A celebrated saint in many pious Christian countries, the 17th-century \"Acta Sanctorum\" published by the Bollandists listed her feast under July 12, but the German Jesuit scholar Joseph Braun cited her commemoration in \"Festi Marianni\" on January 13.\nBackground.\nThere is no reference to the story of Veronica and her veil in the canonical gospels. The closest is the miracle of the unnamed woman who was healed by touching the hem of Jesus\u2019s garment. The apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus gives her name as Berenik\u0113 or Beronike (). The name Veronica is a Latinisation of this ancient Macedonian name. The story was later elaborated in the 11th century by adding that Christ gave her a portrait of himself on a cloth, with which she later cured the Emperor Tiberius. The linking of this with the bearing of the cross in the Passion occurs only around 1380 in the internationally popular book \"Meditations on the Life of Christ\".\nAt some point a relic became associated with the story. Pedro Tafur, a Spanish knight visiting Rome in 1436, describes the following in the Church of St. Peter in his 1454 travel account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the right hand is a pillar as high as a small tower, and in it is the holy Veronica. When it is to be exhibited an opening is made in the roof of the church and a wooden chest or cradle is let down, in which are two clerics, and when they have descended, the chest or cradle is drawn up, and they, with the greatest reverence, take out the Veronica and show it to the people, who make concourse there upon the appointed day. It happens often that the worshipers are in danger of their lives, so many are they and so great is the press.\nHowever, he does not say specifically that he witnessed for himself this exhibition of the relic.\nSome academic sources suggest a different origin for the legend of St. Veronica: that the cloth bearing an image of Jesus's face was known in Latin as the \"vera icon\" (\"true image\"), and that this name for the relic was misinterpreted as the name of a saint. The \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" of 1913 writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe belief in the existence of authentic images of Christ is connected with the old legend of King Abgar of Edessa and the apocryphal writing known as the \"Mors Pilati\u200a\" (\"the Death of Pilate\"). To distinguish at Rome the oldest and best known of these images it was called the \"vera icon\" (true image), which in the common tongue soon became \"\"Veronica\".\"\nIt is thus designated in several medieval texts mentioned by the Bollandists (e.g. an old Missal of Augsburg has a Mass \"De S. Veronica seu Vultus Domini\" \u2013 \"Saint Veronica, or the Face of the Lord\"), and Matthew of Westminster speaks of the imprint of the image of the Savior which is called Veronica: \"Effigies Domenici vultus quae Veronica nuncupatur\" \u2013 \"effigy of the face of the Lord which is called a Veronica\". By degrees, popular imagination mistook this word for the name of a person and attached thereto several legends which vary according to the country. [\"translations in italics added\"]\nThe reference to Abgar is related to a similar legend in the Eastern Church, the Image of Edessa or Mandylion.\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" says this about the legend:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEusebius in his \"Historia Ecclesiastica\" (vii 18) tells how at Caesarea Philippi lived the woman whom Christ healed of an issue of blood (:20\u201322). Legend was not long in providing the woman of the Gospel with a name. In the West she was identified with Martha of Bethany; in the East she was called Berenike, or Beronike, the name appearing in as early a work as the \"\"Acta Pilati\",\" the most ancient form of which goes back to the fourth century. The fanciful derivation of the name Veronica from the words Vera Icon (eikon) \"true image\" dates back to the \"Otia Imperialia\" (iii 25) of Gervase of Tilbury (fl. 1211), who says: \"Est ergo Veronica pictura Domini vera\" (translated: \"The Veronica is, therefore, a true picture of the Lord.\")\nVeronica was mentioned in the reported visions of Jesus by Marie of St Peter, a Carmelite nun who lived in Tours, France, and started the devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus. In 1844, Sister Marie reported that in a vision, she saw Veronica wiping away the spit and mud from the face of Jesus with her veil on the way to Calvary. She said that sacrilegious and blasphemous acts today are adding to the spit and mud that Veronica wiped away that day. According to Marie of St Peter, in her visions, Jesus told her that he desired devotion to His Holy Face in reparation for sacrilege and blasphemy. Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ are thus compared to Veronica wiping the face of Jesus.\nThe Devotion to the Holy Face of Jesus was eventually approved by Pope Leo XIII in 1885. Veronica is commemorated on 12 July.\nOfficial patronage.\nSaint Veronica is the patron of the French mulquiniers whose representations they celebrated semi-annually (summer and winter) as in many pious Christian countries. She is also the patron saint of photographers, and laundry workers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32635", "revid": "29626342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32635", "title": "Ver\u00f0andi", "text": "Norn of the present time\nIn Norse mythology, Ver\u00f0andi (Old Norse, meaning possibly \"happening\" or \"present\"), sometimes anglicized as Verdandi or Verthandi, is one of the norns. Along with Ur\u00f0r (Old Norse \"fate\") and Skuld (possibly \"debt\" or \"future\"), Ver\u00f0andi makes up a trio of Norns that are described as deciding the fates (wyrd) of people.\nEtymology.\n\"Ver\u00f0andi\" is literally the present participle of the Old Norse verb \"ver\u00f0a\", \"to become\", and is commonly translated as \"in the making\" or \"that which is happening/becoming\"; it is related to the Dutch word \"worden\" and the German word \"werden\", both meaning \"to become\". \"Werdend\" is not a commonly used German word in modern times, but intutitively means the things that \"are becoming\", as -nd is the gerund form.\nAttestation.\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\".\nShe appears in the following verse from the \"Poetic Edda\" poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", along with Ur\u00f0r and Skuld:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32638", "revid": "44823833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32638", "title": "Valmet", "text": "Finnish company\nValmet Oyj is a Finnish developer and supplier of process technologies, automation systems and services for the pulp, paper, energy industries. Flow control serves a wider base of process industries.\nHistory.\n1999\u20132012 Valmet and Rauma merge as Metso.\nAt the end of 2009, Metso acquired Tamfelt Corporation, one of the world's leading suppliers of technical textiles.\nValmet 2020\u2013.\nAt the end of June 2020, Neles was separated from Metso. The State of Finland sold its share of 15 per cent to Valmet. In mid-July, the Swedish company Alfa Laval made an offer to buy Neles. Also Valmet started buying Neles stock. By the autumn, Valmet owned nearly 30 per cent of the stock. Alfa Laval only received the support of a third of Neles owners for its takeover bid, and withdrew from the competition in November.\nIn January 2021, Valmet reported that it would supply the mills of the Swedish company Renewcell with equipment to produce dissolving pulp from recycled clothes and textiles. In May, Valmet announced that it would deliver drying technology to Spinnova, which produces textile fiber from cellulose. Valmet equipment for the textile industry is in high demand in Europe, because the collection of discarded textiles for recycling must be organized in the EU countries by 2025. Valmet had been developing recycling technology with Renewcell for years, and the companies constructed a pilot plant and a factory in Sundsvall together. In July 2021, Valmet and Neles agreed to merge. Neles owners obtained 18.8 per cent of the merging company. The companies\u2019 synergies were considered to be substantial during the transaction. Neles was thought to help increase sales in automation systems, while its products were also to be sold to the paper industry.\nNeles merged into Valmet in April 2022, becoming Valmet's fifth business line, Flow Control. The companies had several managers and employees who knew each other from Metso days. After the merger, the company had 17,000 employees, 3,000 of whom came from Neles.\nIn February 2024, it was announced that President and CEO Pasi Laine would be retiring at the end of September 2024. Danish CEO of Mediq, Thomas Hinnerskov, was chosen by Valmet's board of directors to lead the company as the new President and CEO.\nIn October 2024, Valmet announced that is it cutting 112 jobs to improve \"profitability and competitiveness of the business operations.\". This comes after a net profit of 157 million euros in Q1-Q2 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32640", "revid": "40552684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32640", "title": "Vector calculus", "text": "Calculus of vector-valued functions\nVector calculus or vector analysis is a branch of mathematics concerned with the differentiation and integration of vector fields, primarily in three-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_1 The term \"vector calculus\" is sometimes used as a synonym for the broader subject of multivariable calculus, which spans vector calculus as well as partial differentiation and multiple integration. Vector calculus plays an important role in differential geometry and in the study of partial differential equations. It is used extensively in physics and engineering, especially in the description of electromagnetic fields, gravitational fields, and fluid flow.\nVector calculus was developed from the theory of quaternions by J. Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside near the end of the 19th century, and most of the notation and terminology was established by Gibbs and Edwin Bidwell Wilson in their 1901 book, \"Vector Analysis\", though earlier mathematicians such as Isaac Newton pioneered the field. In its standard form using the cross product, vector calculus does not generalize to higher dimensions, but the alternative approach of geometric algebra, which uses the exterior product, does (see \"\" below for more).\nBasic objects.\nScalar fields.\nA scalar field associates a scalar value to every point in a space. The scalar is a mathematical number representing a physical quantity. Examples of scalar fields in applications include the temperature distribution throughout space, the pressure distribution in a fluid, and spin-zero quantum fields (known as scalar bosons), such as the Higgs field. These fields are the subject of scalar field theory.\nVector fields.\nA vector field is an assignment of a vector to each point in a space. A vector field in the plane, for instance, can be visualized as a collection of arrows with a given magnitude and direction each attached to a point in the plane. Vector fields are often used to model, for example, the speed and direction of a moving fluid throughout space, or the strength and direction of some force, such as the magnetic or gravitational force, as it changes from point to point. This can be used, for example, to calculate work done over a line.\nVectors and pseudovectors.\nIn more advanced treatments, one further distinguishes pseudovector fields and pseudoscalar fields, which are identical to vector fields and scalar fields, except that they change sign under an orientation-reversing map: for example, the curl of a vector field is a pseudovector field, and if one reflects a vector field, the curl points in the opposite direction. This distinction is clarified and elaborated in geometric algebra, as described below.\nVector algebra.\nThe algebraic (non-differential) operations in vector calculus are referred to as \"vector algebra\", being defined for a vector space and then applied pointwise to a vector field. The basic algebraic operations consist of:\nAlso commonly used are the two triple products:\nOperators and theorems.\nDifferential operators.\nVector calculus studies various differential operators defined on scalar or vector fields, which are typically expressed in terms of the del operator (formula_2), also known as \"nabla\". The three basic vector operators are:\nAlso commonly used are the two Laplace operators:\nA quantity called the Jacobian matrix is useful for studying functions when both the domain and range of the function are multivariable, such as a change of variables during integration.\nIntegral theorems.\nThe three basic vector operators have corresponding theorems which generalize the fundamental theorem of calculus to higher dimensions:\nIn two dimensions, the divergence and curl theorems reduce to the Green's theorem:\nApplications.\nLinear approximations.\nLinear approximations are used to replace complicated functions with linear functions that are almost the same. Given a differentiable function \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\") with real values, one can approximate \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\") for (\"x\", \"y\") close to (\"a\", \"b\") by the formula\n formula_3\nThe right-hand side is the equation of the plane tangent to the graph of \"z\" = \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\") at \nOptimization.\nFor a continuously differentiable function of several real variables, a point \"P\" (that is, a set of values for the input variables, which is viewed as a point in R\"n\") is critical if all of the partial derivatives of the function are zero at \"P\", or, equivalently, if its gradient is zero. The critical values are the values of the function at the critical points.\nIf the function is smooth, or, at least twice continuously differentiable, a critical point may be either a local maximum, a local minimum or a saddle point. The different cases may be distinguished by considering the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix of second derivatives.\nBy Fermat's theorem, all local maxima and minima of a differentiable function occur at critical points. Therefore, to find the local maxima and minima, it suffices, theoretically, to compute the zeros of the gradient and the eigenvalues of the Hessian matrix at these zeros.\nGeneralizations.\nVector calculus can also be generalized to other 3-manifolds and higher-dimensional spaces.\nDifferent 3-manifolds.\nVector calculus is initially defined for Euclidean 3-space, formula_4 which has additional structure beyond simply being a 3-dimensional real vector space, namely: a norm (giving a notion of length) defined via an inner product (the dot product), which in turn gives a notion of angle, and an orientation, which gives a notion of left-handed and right-handed. These structures give rise to a volume form, and also the cross product, which is used pervasively in vector calculus.\nThe gradient and divergence require only the inner product, while the curl and the cross product also requires the handedness of the coordinate system to be taken into account.\nVector calculus can be defined on other 3-dimensional real vector spaces if they have an inner product (or more generally a symmetric nondegenerate form) and an orientation; this is less data than an isomorphism to Euclidean space, as it does not require a set of coordinates (a frame of reference), which reflects the fact that vector calculus is invariant under rotations (the special orthogonal group SO(3)).\nMore generally, vector calculus can be defined on any 3-dimensional oriented Riemannian manifold, or more generally pseudo-Riemannian manifold. This structure simply means that the tangent space at each point has an inner product (more generally, a symmetric nondegenerate form) and an orientation, or more globally that there is a symmetric nondegenerate metric tensor and an orientation, and works because vector calculus is defined in terms of tangent vectors at each point.\nOther dimensions.\nMost of the analytic results are easily understood, in a more general form, using the machinery of differential geometry, of which vector calculus forms a subset. Grad and div generalize immediately to other dimensions, as do the gradient theorem, divergence theorem, and Laplacian (yielding harmonic analysis), while curl and cross product do not generalize as directly.\nFrom a general point of view, the various fields in (3-dimensional) vector calculus are uniformly seen as being \"k\"-vector fields: scalar fields are 0-vector fields, vector fields are 1-vector fields, pseudovector fields are 2-vector fields, and pseudoscalar fields are 3-vector fields. In higher dimensions there are additional types of fields (scalar, vector, pseudovector or pseudoscalar corresponding to 0, 1, \"n\" \u2212 1 or \"n\" dimensions, which is exhaustive in dimension 3), so one cannot only work with (pseudo)scalars and (pseudo)vectors.\nIn any dimension, assuming a nondegenerate form, grad of a scalar function is a vector field, and div of a vector field is a scalar function, but only in dimension 3 or 7 (and, trivially, in dimension 0 or 1) is the curl of a vector field a vector field, and only in 3 or 7 dimensions can a cross product be defined (generalizations in other dimensionalities either require formula_5 vectors to yield 1 vector, or are alternative Lie algebras, which are more general antisymmetric bilinear products). The generalization of grad and div, and how curl may be generalized is elaborated at \"Curl \u00a7 Generalizations\"; in brief, the curl of a vector field is a bivector field, which may be interpreted as the special orthogonal Lie algebra of infinitesimal rotations; however, this cannot be identified with a vector field because the dimensions differ \u2013 there are 3 dimensions of rotations in 3 dimensions, but 6 dimensions of rotations in 4 dimensions (and more generally formula_6 dimensions of rotations in \"n\" dimensions).\nThere are two important alternative generalizations of vector calculus. The first, geometric algebra, uses \"k\"-vector fields instead of vector fields (in 3 or fewer dimensions, every \"k\"-vector field can be identified with a scalar function or vector field, but this is not true in higher dimensions). This replaces the cross product, which is specific to 3 dimensions, taking in two vector fields and giving as output a vector field, with the exterior product, which exists in all dimensions and takes in two vector fields, giving as output a bivector (2-vector) field. This product yields Clifford algebras as the algebraic structure on vector spaces (with an orientation and nondegenerate form). Geometric algebra is mostly used in generalizations of physics and other applied fields to higher dimensions.\nThe second generalization uses differential forms (\"k\"-covector fields) instead of vector fields or \"k\"-vector fields, and is widely used in mathematics, particularly in differential geometry, geometric topology, and harmonic analysis, in particular yielding Hodge theory on oriented pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. From this point of view, grad, curl, and div correspond to the exterior derivative of 0-forms, 1-forms, and 2-forms, respectively, and the key theorems of vector calculus are all special cases of the general form of Stokes' theorem.\nFrom the point of view of both of these generalizations, vector calculus implicitly identifies mathematically distinct objects, which makes the presentation simpler but the underlying mathematical structure and generalizations less clear.\nFrom the point of view of geometric algebra, vector calculus implicitly identifies \"k\"-vector fields with vector fields or scalar functions: 0-vectors and 3-vectors with scalars, 1-vectors and 2-vectors with vectors. From the point of view of differential forms, vector calculus implicitly identifies \"k\"-forms with scalar fields or vector fields: 0-forms and 3-forms with scalar fields, 1-forms and 2-forms with vector fields. Thus for example the curl naturally takes as input a vector field or 1-form, but naturally has as output a 2-vector field or 2-form (hence pseudovector field), which is then interpreted as a vector field, rather than directly taking a vector field to a vector field; this is reflected in the curl of a vector field in higher dimensions not having as output a vector field.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32641", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32641", "title": "Vince Lombardi", "text": "American football coach (1913\u20131970)\nVincent Thomas Lombardi ( ; June 11, 1913 \u2013 September 3, 1970) was an American professional football coach and executive in the National Football League (NFL). Lombardi is considered by many to be among the greatest coaches and leaders in American sports. He is best known as the head coach of the Green Bay Packers during the 1960s, where he led the team to three straight and five total NFL Championships in seven years, in addition to winning the first two Super Bowls at the conclusion of the 1966 and 1967 NFL seasons.\nLombardi began his coaching career as an assistant and later as head coach at St. Cecilia High School in Englewood, New Jersey. He was assistant coach at Fordham University where he coached with Jim Lansing. He also coached for the United States Military Academy and the New York Giants before serving as head coach and general manager for the Packers from 1959 to 1967 and the Washington Redskins from 1969 until dying from cancer during the 1970 preseason.\nLombardi never had a losing season as head coach in the NFL, compiling a regular-season winning percentage of 73.8% (96\u201334\u20136) and 90% (9\u20131) in the postseason for an overall record of 105 wins, 35 losses and 6 ties in the NFL. He was enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, and the NFL Super Bowl trophy was named in his honor.\nEarly life.\nLombardi was born on June 11, 1913, in the Sheepshead Bay neighborhood of Brooklyn to Enrico \"Harry\" Lombardi (1889\u20131971) and Matilda \"Mattie\" Izzo (1891\u20131972), both from Southern Italy. Harry's mother and father, Vincenzo and Michelina, emigrated from Salerno, Italy. Mattie's father and mother, Anthony and Loretta, emigrated from Vietri di Potenza, Basilicata. Harry had three siblings and Matilda had twelve. Vince was the oldest of five children, including Madeleine, Harold, Claire and Joe. Both the Lombardi and Izzo clans settled entirely in Sheepshead Bay.\nAnthony opened up a barber shop in Sheepshead Bay before the turn of the century. At about the time of Lombardi's birth, Harry and his brother, Eddie, opened a butcher shop in the Meatpacking District of Manhattan. Throughout the Great Depression, Harry's shop did well and his family prospered. Lombardi grew up in an ethnically diverse, middle-class neighborhood.\nChurch attendance was mandatory for the Lombardis on Sundays. Mass would be followed with an equally compulsory few hours of dinner with extended family members, friends and local clergy. Lombardi himself was an altar boy at St. Mark Catholic Church. Outside their local neighborhood, the Lombardi children were subject to the rampant ethnic discrimination that existed at the time against Italian immigrants and their descendants. As a child, Lombardi helped his father at his meat cutting business, but grew to hate it. At the age of 12 he started playing in an uncoached but organized football league in Sheepshead Bay.\nHigh school.\nLombardi graduated from the eighth grade at age 15 in 1928. He then enrolled in the Cathedral Preparatory Seminary, a division of Cathedral College of the Immaculate Conception in Brooklyn, a six-year secondary program to become a Catholic priest. At Cathedral, he played on the school's baseball and basketball teams, but his performance was hindered by his poor athleticism and eyesight. Against school rules, he continued to play football off-campus throughout his studies at Cathedral. After completing four years at Cathedral he decided not to pursue the priesthood. He enrolled at St. Francis Preparatory high school for the fall of 1932. There he became a Charter Member of Omega Gamma Delta fraternity. His performance as a fullback on the Terriers' football team earned him a position on the virtual All-City football team.\nFordham University.\nIn 1933, Lombardi received a football scholarship to Fordham University in the Bronx to play for the Fordham Rams and Coach Jim Crowley, who was one of the Four Horsemen of Notre Dame in the 1920s. During his freshman year, Lombardi proved to be an aggressive and spirited player on the football field. Prior to the beginning of his sophomore year, Lombardi was projected to start games at the tackle position. Lombardi was only 5'8\" and about 180\u00a0pounds and was classified as undersized for the position.\nIn his senior year of 1936, he was the right guard in the Seven Blocks of Granite, a nickname given by a Fordham University publicist to the Fordham University football team's offensive front line. In a game against Pitt, he suffered a severe gash inside his mouth and had several teeth knocked out. He missed most of the remainder of the game, until he was called in on defense for a successful goal-line stand that preserved a scoreless tie. The Rams were 5\u20130\u20132 before losing in the final game of the season, 7\u20136, to NYU. The loss destroyed all hopes of Fordham playing in the Rose Bowl and taught Lombardi a lesson he would never forget\u00a0\u2014 to never underestimate your opponent.\nEarly career.\nLombardi graduated from Fordham University on June 16, 1937. The nation was still plagued by the Great Depression, so there were few career opportunities for the young Lombardi and for the next two years, he showed no discernible career path or ambition. He tried to play semi-professional football with the Wilmington Clippers of the American Association and worked as a debt collector for a collection agency, but those efforts very quickly proved to be failures. With his father's strong support, he enrolled in Fordham Law School in September 1938. Although he did not fail any classes, he believed his grades were so poor that he dropped out after one semester. Later in life, he would explain to others that he was close to graduating, but his desire to start and support a family forced him to leave law school and get a job. He also joined the Brooklyn Eagles.\nCoaching career.\nSt. Cecilia High School.\nIn 1939, Lombardi wanted to marry his girlfriend, Marie Planitz, but he deferred at his father's insistence because he needed a steady job to support himself and a family; he married Marie the following year. In 1939, Lombardi accepted an assistant coaching job at St. Cecilia, a Catholic high school in Englewood, New Jersey. He was offered the position by the school's new head coach, Lombardi's former Fordham teammate, quarterback Andy Palau. Palau had just inherited the head coaching position from another Fordham teammate, Nat Pierce (left guard), who had accepted an assistant coach's job back at Fordham. In addition to coaching, Lombardi, age 26, taught Latin, chemistry, and physics for an annual salary of under $1,000.\nIn 1942, Andy Palau left St. Cecilia's for another position at Fordham, and Lombardi became the head coach at St. Cecilia's. He stayed a total of eight years, five as head coach. In 1943, St. Cecilia's was recognized as the top high school football team in the nation, in large part because of their victory over Brooklyn Prep, a Jesuit school considered one of the best teams in the eastern United States. Brooklyn Prep that season was led by senior Joe Paterno, who, like Lombardi, was to rise to legendary status in football. Lombardi won six state private school championships (NJISAA - New Jersey Independent Schools Athletic Association), and became the president of the Bergen County Coaches' Association.\nFordham.\nIn 1947, Lombardi became the coach of freshman teams in football and basketball at his alma mater, Fordham University. The following year, he was an assistant coach for the varsity football team under head coach Ed Danowski, but he was arguably the \"de facto\" head coach.\nWest Point.\nFollowing the 1948 season, Lombardi accepted an assistant coaching job at the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, a position that greatly influenced his future philosophy and system of coaching. He was offensive line coach under head coach Earl \"Colonel Red\" Blaik. \"As integral as religion was to [Lombardi's] sense of self, it was not until he reached West Point and combined his spiritual discipline with Blaik's military discipline that his coaching persona began to take its mature form.\" Blaik's emphasis on execution became a trademark of Lombardi's coaching style. Lombardi coached at West Point for five seasons, with varying results. The 1949 and 1950 seasons were successful, but the 1951 and 1952 seasons were not, due to the aftermath of a cadet cheating scandal (a violation of the Cadet Honor Code) which was uncovered in spring 1951. By order of the Superintendent, 43 of the 45 members of the varsity football team were discharged from the academy as a result of the scandal. \"Decades later, looking back on his rise, Lombardi came to regard ...\" Blaik's decision not to resign \"... as a pivotal moment in his [own] career\" \u2014 it taught him \"perseverance\". Blaik himself was and remains a highly controversial figure, in Army football and academic history. After the 1951 and 1952 seasons, not much was expected from the 1953 team as it had also lost six players due to academic misconduct. The 1953 team, however, did achieve a 7\u20131\u20131 record, as Lombardi had a bigger role than ever in coaching the team. Following these five seasons at Army, Lombardi accepted an assistant coaching position with the New York Giants.\nNew York Giants.\nAt age 41 in 1954, Lombardi began his NFL career with the New York Giants. He accepted a job that later became known as the offensive coordinator position under new head coach Jim Lee Howell. The Giants had finished the previous season under 23-year coach Steve Owen with a 3\u20139 record. By his third season in 1956, Lombardi, along with the defensive coordinator, former All-Pro cornerback turned coach Tom Landry, turned the squad into a championship team, defeating the Chicago Bears 47\u20137 for the league title. \"Howell readily acknowledged the talents of Lombardi and Landry, and joked self-deprecatingly, that his main function was to make sure the footballs had air in them.\" At points in his tenure as an assistant coach at West Point, and as an assistant coach with the Giants, Lombardi worried that he was unable to land a head coaching job due to prejudice against his Italian heritage, especially with respect to Southern colleges. Howell wrote numerous recommendations for Lombardi to aid him in obtaining a head coaching position. Lombardi applied for head coaching positions at Wake Forest, Notre Dame, and other universities and, in some cases, never received a reply. In New York, Lombardi introduced the strategy of rule blocking to the NFL. In rule blocking, the offensive lineman would block an area, and not necessarily a particular defensive player, as was the norm up to that time. The running back was then expected to run towards any hole that was created. Lombardi referred to this as \"running to daylight\".\nGreen Bay Packers.\n1959.\nThe Green Bay Packers, with six future Hall of Famers on the roster in 1958, finished at 1\u201310\u20131 under head coach Ray McLean, the worst record in Packers history. The players were dispirited, the Packers shareholders were disheartened, and the Green Bay community was enraged. The angst in Green Bay extended to the NFL as a whole, as the financial viability and the very existence of the Green Bay Packer franchise were in jeopardy. On February 2, 1959, following intense lobbying on Lombardi's behalf by Jack Vainisi, the team's personnel director, Lombardi accepted the position of head coach and general manager of the Packers. He demanded and gained full control over the football operations of the community-owned franchise, leaving no doubt of this when he told the franchise's executive committee, \"I want it understood that I am in complete command here.\"\nLombardi's assertion of \"complete command\" applied to the players as well. For his first training camp, he instituted harsh regimens and demanded absolute dedication and effort from his players. The Packers immediately improved in 1959 to 7\u20135, and rookie head coach Lombardi was named Coach of the Year. The fans appreciated what Lombardi was trying to do and responded by purchasing all the tickets for every home game during the 1960 season. Every Packers home game\u2014preseason, regular season and playoffs\u2014has been sold out ever since then.\n1960\u20131966.\nIn Lombardi's second year in 1960, Green Bay won the NFL Western Conference for the first time since 1944. This victory, along with his well-known religious convictions, led the Green Bay community to anoint Lombardi with the nickname \"The Pope\". Lombardi led the Packers to the 1960 Championship Game against the Philadelphia Eagles. Before the championship game, Lombardi met with Wellington Mara and advised him that he would not take the Giants' head coaching job, which was initially offered after the end of the 1959 season. In the final play of the game, in a drive that would have won it, the Packers were stopped a few yards from the goal line. Lombardi had suffered his first and only championship game loss. After the game, and after the press corps had left the locker room, Lombardi told his team, \"This will never happen again. You will never lose another championship.\" In later years as coach of the Packers, Lombardi made it a point to admonish his running backs that if they failed to score from one yard out, he would consider it a personal affront to him and he would seek retribution. He coached the Packers to win their next nine post-season games, a record streak not matched or broken until Bill Belichick won ten straight from 2002 to 2006 with New England. The Packers defeated the Giants for the NFL title in 1961 (37\u20130 in Green Bay) and 1962 (16\u20137 at Yankee Stadium), marking the first two of their five titles in Lombardi's seven years. After the 1962 championship victory, President John F. Kennedy called Lombardi and asked him if he would \"come back to Army and coach again\". Kennedy received Lombardi's tacit refusal of the request. His only other post-season loss occurred to the St. Louis Cardinals in the third-place Playoff Bowl after the 1964 season (officially classified as an exhibition game).\nIncluding postseason but excluding exhibition games, Lombardi compiled a 105\u201335\u20136 (.740) record as head coach, and never suffered a losing season. He led the Packers to three consecutive NFL championships\u00a0\u2014 in 1965, 1966, and 1967\u00a0\u2014 a feat accomplished only once before in the history of the league, by Curly Lambeau, co-founder of the Packers, who coached the team to their first three straight NFL Championships in 1929, 1930, and 1931. At the conclusion of the 1966 and 1967 seasons, Lombardi's Packers won the first two Super Bowls, for championships in five of seven seasons.\nPackers Sweep.\nAs coach of the Packers, Lombardi converted Notre Dame quarterback and Heisman Trophy winner Paul Hornung to a full-time halfback. Lombardi also designed a play for fullback Jim Taylor: both guards, Jerry Kramer and Fuzzy Thurston, pulled to the outside and blocked downfield while Taylor would \"run to daylight\"\u00a0\u2014 i.e., wherever the defenders weren't. This was a play that he had originally developed with the Giants for Frank Gifford. It soon became known as the Packers sweep (or Lombardi sweep), though Lombardi openly admitted it was based on an old single wing concept.\nIce Bowl.\nIn 1967, Lombardi's Packers hosted the Dallas Cowboys in Green Bay on December 31 in the NFL Championship Game, a rematch of the previous season. This became known as the \"Ice Bowl\" because of the game-time temperature. Lombardi had a heating coil underneath the field but on this day it was not functioning. Some people believe that he turned it off on purpose. With 16 seconds left in the game and down by three points, the Packers called their final time-out. It was 3rd and goal on the Dallas two-foot line. In the huddle, with the game on the line, quarterback Bart Starr asked Kramer whether he could get enough traction on the icy turf for a wedge play and Kramer responded with an unequivocal yes. Starr came over to Lombardi on the sidelines to discuss the last play and told him he wanted to run a 31 wedge, but with him keeping the ball. Lombardi, having had enough of the bitter cold, told Starr to 'Run it! And let's get the hell out of here!' Lombardi was asked by Pat Peppler what play Starr would call, to which Lombardi replied, 'Damned if I know.' Starr returned to the huddle and called a Brown right 31 Wedge, but with him keeping the ball. Kramer blocked Jethro Pugh low and Ken Bowman hit Pugh high as Starr followed them into the end zone for the Packer lead and gained victory. Shortly after the victory in Super Bowl II, Lombardi resigned as head coach of the Packers on February 1, 1968, continuing as general manager. He handed the head coaching position to Phil Bengtson, a longtime assistant, but the Packers finished at 6\u20137\u20131 in the 1968 season and were out of the four-team NFL playoffs.\nWashington Redskins.\nIn February 1969, Lombardi was let out of his contract with the Packers to become the head coach and executive vice president of the Washington Redskins. As with the Packers, Lombardi was given full control over football operations and a 5% stake in ownership. The Redskins finished the 1969 season at 7\u20135\u20132, their first winning record since 1955, but Lombardi died shortly before the start of the 1970 season. Lombardi was credited with having changed the culture and laying the foundation for Washington's success in the 1970s under George Allen.\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nIn 1934, Lombardi's roommate Jim Lawlor introduced him to his cousin's relative, Marie Planitz. When Marie announced her ardent desire to marry Lombardi, her status-conscious stockbroker father did not like the idea of his daughter marrying the son of an Italian butcher from Brooklyn. This was a prejudice Lombardi would face more than once in his life. Lombardi and Marie wed on August 31, 1940.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He seemed preoccupied with football even on their honeymoon, and cut it short to get back to Englewood\u00a0... \"I wasn't married to him more than one week\", she later related, \"when I said to myself, Marie Planitz, you've made the greatest mistake of your life.\"\nMarie's first pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. This had a terrible effect on Marie and caused her to turn to heavy drinking, a problem she would deal with throughout her life. Their son, Vincent Henry Lombardi (Vince Jr.), was born in 1942 and their daughter Susan followed five years later in 1947.\nLombardi's perfectionism, authoritarian nature and temper, required Marie to learn to defend herself when Lombardi verbally abused her. His children were not immune from his yelling. When Lombardi had not lost his temper, he would often be reticent and aloof.\nLombardi's grandson, Joe Lombardi, has served as an assistant coach in the NFL since 2006. Joe is currently the offensive coordinator for the Denver Broncos.\nWorld War II deferments.\nThough he was 28 years old when the United States entered World War II, Lombardi did not serve in the war. He obtained a series of deferments: his first was a 2-A due to his teaching occupation; in 1943, he obtained a second deferment due to parenthood (3-A); and his final deferment was labelled a 4-A (age) and given in April 1944.\nReligion.\nThe three constants throughout Lombardi's life were his Roman Catholic religion, his family, and football. His father was a daily Communicant throughout his life and his mother's favorite picture of Vince as a child was on his Confirmation. When Lombardi was 12, while serving as an altar boy on Easter Sunday, \"...\u00a0amid the color and pageantry scarlet and white vestments, golden cross, scepters, the wafers and wine, body and blood\u00a0... the inspiration came to him that he should become a priest\u00a0...\". When his mother, Mattie, got wind of it she bragged about her son's plan to her neighbors. Lombardi attended Mass on a daily basis throughout his life.\nDuring his tenure at St. Cecilia, Lombardi attended Mass every day and \"prayed for calm and control: of his temper and ... his wife's drinking\". When Lombardi became head coach of football in 1942, he led his team to Sunday Mass before each home game. At St. Cecilia, Lombardi shared an office with Father Tim Moore wherein it was not unusual for Lombardi to interrupt a conversation and request to go to Confession and for which Father Tim obliged him right in the office.\nDuring his stay at Green Bay, Lombardi once emerged from his office and appeared before his secretary, Ruth McKloskey, wearing \"...\u00a0all these priest robes on, and he had a miter with a tassel, everything\". Each day on his way to work for the Green Bay Packers, Lombardi would stop at St. Willebrord Church and \"offer a prayer in case of unexpected death: 'My God, if I am to die today, or suddenly at any time, I wish to receive this Communion as my viaticum\u00a0... '\". He regularly attended Sunday Mass at Resurrection Church in the Allouez neighborhood of Green Bay's southeast side, always sitting with his wife in the middle of the ninth pew.\nOn the morning of the dedication of Lombardi Avenue, Lombardi remarked to his 37-member entourage that he was pleased to have gotten them all up to attend morning Mass. Lombardi was a Fourth Degree in the Knights of Columbus.\nAnti-discrimination philosophy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Vince Lombardi brought him (Bobby Mitchell) into the front office (in 1969), and he started doing scouting. They wanted the black guys to only scout the black schools, and Lombardi said, \"No. Bobby's going to scout ALL the schools, not just the black ones.\"\n \u2014Brig Owens \nIn 1960, a color barrier still existed on at least one team in the NFL, but Jack Vainisi, the Scouting Director for the Packers, and Lombardi were determined \"to ignore the prejudices then prevalent in most NFL front offices in their search for the most talented players\". Lombardi explained his views by saying that he \"...\u00a0viewed his players as neither black nor white, but Packer green\".\nAmong professional football head coaches, in the midst of the civil rights movement, Lombardi's anti-discrimination views were unusual. When Lombardi joined the Packers, they only had one black player, Nate Borden. During his time as coach the team became fully integrated: by 1967 they had 13 black players, including All-Pros Willie Davis, Willie Wood, Dave Robinson, Herb Adderley and Bob Jeter.\nDuring his first training camp in Green Bay, Lombardi was notified by Packer veterans that an interracial relationship existed between one of the Packer rookies and a young woman. The next day at training camp, Lombardi\u2014who was vehemently opposed to Jim Crow discrimination and had a zero-tolerance policy towards racism\u2014responded by warning his team that if any player exhibited prejudice in any manner, that specific player would be thrown off the team.\nLombardi let it be known to all Green Bay establishments that if they did not accommodate his black and white players equally well, then that business would be off-limits to the entire team. Before the start of the 1960 regular season, he instituted a policy that the Packers would only lodge in places that accepted all his players. Lombardi also refused to assign hotel rooms to players based on their race: by 1967 the Packers were the only NFL team with such a policy.\nLombardi was a member of the all-white Oneida Golf and Riding Country Club in Green Bay, and he demanded that he should be allowed to choose a Native American caddie, even if white caddies were available. Lombardi's view on racial matters was a result of his religious faith and the ethnic prejudice that he had experienced as an Italian-American.\nWhile with the Redskins in 1969, at Lombardi's insistence and with the support of then-minority owner Jack Kent Cooke, Hall of Fame wide receiver Bobby Mitchell joined the Redskins' front office, becoming the first African American to work in an NFL front office, and eventually becoming the NFL's first African American executive, working his way up to assistant general manager in 1981.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n One Packer famously said that Lombardi \"treats us all the same \u2013 like dogs.\" To the coach, there were no gay dogs or straight dogs; there were just Packers who had one goal: to play their best and win.\n\u2014Jim Buzinski, Outsports.com co-founder\nLombardi was known to be volatile and terse with players during practices and games, and he insisted on unconditional respect for everyone in his organization. Lombardi demanded acceptance from players and coaches toward all people and was noted for his stance against homophobia. According to Lombardi biographer and Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning writer David Maraniss, if he caught a coach \"discriminating against a player thought to be gay, he'd be fired\". Richard Nicholls, the lifelong partner of Lombardi's younger brother, Hal, stated, \"Vin was always fair in how he treated everybody ... a great man who accepted people at face value for what they were, and didn't judge anybody. He just wanted you to do the job.\"\nIn Washington, Lombardi's assistant general manager David Slatterly was gay, as was PR director Joe Blair, who was described as Lombardi's \"right-hand man\". According to his son Vince Lombardi Jr., \"He saw everyone as equals, and I think having a gay brother (Hal) was a big factor in his approach ... I think my father would've felt, 'I hope I've created an atmosphere in the locker room where this would not be an issue at all. And if you do have an issue, the problem will be yours because my locker room will tolerate nothing but acceptance.'\"\nUpon his arrival in Washington, Lombardi was aware of tight end Jerry Smith's sexual orientation. \"Lombardi protected and loved Jerry,\" said former teammate Dave Kopay. Lombardi brought Smith into his office and told him that his sexual orientation would never be an issue as long as he was coaching the Redskins; Smith would be judged solely on his on-the-field performance and contribution to the team's success. Under Lombardi's leadership Smith flourished, becoming an integral part of Lombardi's offense, and was voted a First Team All-Pro for the first time in his career, which was also Lombardi's only season as the Redskins head coach.\nLombardi invited other gay players to training camp and would privately hope they would prove they could earn a spot on the team. In Lombardi's first season with the Washington Redskins, he took interest in Ray McDonald, a gay running back recruited to the team in 1967. McDonald had been handpicked by owner Edward Bennet Williams, but was a disappointment in his rookie year and spent most of the 1968 season on the bench with an injury. Lombardi told running back coach, George Dickson, 'I want you to get on McDonald and work on him and work on him \u2013 and if I hear \"one\" of you people make reference to his manhood, you'll be out of here before your ass hits the ground.'\nPolitics.\nAlthough his wife was a Republican, Lombardi was a lifelong Democrat with liberal views on civil rights: he supported John F. Kennedy in the 1960 presidential election, Robert F. Kennedy in the 1968 primaries, and was also a supporter of Wisconsin Senator Gaylord Nelson. Despite this, during the 1960s he became uncomfortable with the burgeoning youth protest movements associated with the emerging counterculture, such as the New Left and the Anti-war movement. In a speech that he first delivered in February 1967 to the American Management Association, he suggested that \"everything has been done to strengthen the rights of the individual and at the same time weaken the rights of the church, weaken the rights of the state, and weaken the rights of all authority\". Due to Lombardi's popularity, Richard Nixon once considered him as a possible running mate in the 1968 presidential election but dropped the idea upon learning about Lombardi's support for the Democratic Party.\nIllness and death.\nLombardi had suffered from digestive tract problems as early as 1967 and he had refused his doctor's request to undergo a proctoscopic exam. On June 24, 1970, Lombardi was admitted to Georgetown University Hospital and tests \"revealed anaplastic carcinoma in the rectal area of his colon, a fast-growing malignant cancer in which the cells barely resemble their normal appearance\". On July 27, Lombardi was readmitted to Georgetown and exploratory surgery found that the cancer was terminal. Lombardi and Marie received family, friends, clergy, players and former players at his hospital bedside. He received a phone call from President Nixon telling Lombardi that all of the U.S. was behind him, to which Lombardi replied that he would never give up his fight against his illness. On his deathbed, Lombardi told Father Tim that he was not afraid to die, but that he regretted he could not have accomplished more in his life. Lombardi died in Washington, D.C. at 7:12\u00a0a.m. on Thursday, September 3, 1970, surrounded by his wife, parents, both children and six grandchildren. He was 57.\nThe funeral was held on September 7 at St. Patrick's Cathedral in Manhattan. Approximately 1,500 people lined Fifth Avenue, and the avenue was closed to traffic between 39th and 50th Street. Cardinal Terence Cooke preached the homily. In attendance were team officials, coaches Tom Landry, Dick Nolan, Weeb Ewbank, Alex Webster, Norm Van Brocklin, Phil Bengtson and Bill Austin, Commissioner Pete Rozelle, past and present members of the Packers, Redskins, and Giants, broadcasters Ray Scott and Howard Cosell, former students from Saints, colleagues and players from West Point (including Red Blaik), and classmates from Fordham University, including the remaining Seven Blocks of Granite. Lombardi was interred in Mount Olivet Cemetery in Middletown Township, New Jersey; before Super Bowl XLVIII was played at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey in 2014, the cemetery's superintendent sought to have the Vince Lombardi Trophy brought to his gravesite.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1968, Lombardi starred in a half-hour motivational film titled \"Second Effort\", which has been called \"The best-selling training film of all time\".\nOn December 14, 1973, ABC aired \"Legend in Granite\" starring Ernest Borgnine as Vince. The biographical TV drama focused mostly on his first two seasons as Packers head coach (1959\u20131960).\nA service area on the New Jersey Turnpike dedicated to and named after Lombardi opened in 1974.\nThe high school in the 1979 movie \"Rock 'n' Roll High School\" is named Vince Lombardi High School.\nIn 1986, CHCH aired the TV movie \"Lombardi: I Am Not a Legend\" starring Robert Knuckle in the title role depicting Lombardi's life up until the NFL.\nIn 1996, Nike aired several commercials featuring Jerry Stiller as the ghost of Lombardi.\nIn 2005, ESPN produced \"Code Breakers\", depicting the West Point cheating scandal and its effect on the football program. Richard Zeppieri played then-Assistant Coach Lombardi.\nA play titled \"Lombardi\" opened on Broadway at the Circle in the Square Theatre in New York City in October 2010, following an out-of-town tryout at the Mahaiwe Theater in Great Barrington, Massachusetts. The production starred Dan Lauria as Lombardi and Judith Light as his wife, Marie. The play received positive reviews, as did Lauria's performance.\nNFL Films and HBO produced a film about Lombardi that debuted Saturday, December 11, 2010.\nHead coaching record.\nSource:\nCoaching tree.\nVince Lombardi worked under one head coach:\nAssistants under Vince Lombardi who became college or professional head coaches:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32642", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32642", "title": "Viz (comics)", "text": "British adult comic magazine\nViz is a British adult comic magazine founded in 1979 by Chris Donald. It parodies British comics of the post-war period, notably \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\", but with extensive profanity, toilet humour, black comedy, surreal humour and generally sexual or violent storylines. It also sends up tabloid newspapers, with mockeries of articles and letters pages. It features parody competitions and advertisements for overpriced 'limited edition' tat, as well as obsessions with half-forgotten kitsch celebrities from the 1960s to the 1980s, such as Shakin' Stevens and Rodney Bewes. Occasionally, it satirises current affairs and politicians, but it has no particular political standpoint.\nIts success in the early 1990s led to the appearance of numerous rivals copying the format \"Viz\" pioneered; none of them managed to attain its popularity. Circulation peaked at 1.2\u00a0million in the early 1990s, making it the third-most popular magazine in the UK, but ABC-audited sales have since dropped, to an average of 48,588 per issue in 2018. The 300th issue was published in October 2020.\nHistory.\nThe comic was started in Newcastle upon Tyne in December 1979 by Chris Donald, who produced the comic from his bedroom in his parents' Jesmond home with help from his brother Simon and friend Jim Brownlow. Donald himself cannot remember exactly where the name of the magazine comes from. The most he can remember is: at the time, he needed to come up with a proper name for it, and he considered the word \"Viz\" a very easy word to write/remember, as it consisted of three letters which are easily made with straight lines.\nIt came about at around the time, and in the spirit of, the punk fanzines, and used alternative methods of distribution, such as the prominent DIY record label and shop Falling A Records, which was an early champion of the comic. The first 12-page issue was produced as a fanzine for a local record label 'Anti-Pop records' run by Arthur 2 Stroke and Andy 'Pop' Inman, and went on sale for 20p (30p to students) in the Gosforth Hotel, which hosted 'Anti-Pop' punk gigs, and the run of 150 copies had sold out within hours. The second issue was published three months later in March 1980, with the next ten issues being published at irregular intervals until November 1984. Issue ten from May 1983 was the first to feature the current \"Viz\" logo. The 'best' of \"Viz Comics\" issues one to four was published in November 1983 as issue 10\u00bd. After a few years of steady sales, mostly in the North East of England, circulation had grown to around 5,000 by December 1984. This may have been boosted by the appearance in the BBC2 documentary series 'Sparks' (episode 4 'The Young Guns') which first aired in March/April 1984 and was repeated on BBC1. A further special edition was issued in May 1985 as issue 12a.\nWhat had begun as a few pages, photocopied and sold to friends, became a publishing phenomenon. To meet the demand, and to make up for Brownlow's diminishing interest in contributing, freelance artist Graham Dury was hired and worked alongside Chris Donald. \nAs the magazine's popularity grew, the bedroom became too small and production moved to a nearby Jesmond office. Donald also hired another freelance artist, Simon Thorp, whose work had impressed him. For over a decade, these four would be the nucleus of \"Viz\".\nIn 1985, a deal was signed with Virgin Books to publish the comic nationally every two months, starting with the 13th issue, dated August 1985. In 1987, the Virgin director responsible for \"Viz\", John Brown, set up his own publishing company, John Brown Publishing, to handle \"Viz\". Sales exceeded a million by the end of 1989, making \"Viz\" for a time one of the biggest-selling magazines in the country. Inevitably, a number of imitations of \"Viz\" were launched, but these never matched the original in popularity, and rarely in quality.\nSales steadily declined from the mid-1990s to around 200,000 in 2001, by which time Chris Donald had resigned as editor and passed control to an \"editorial cabinet\" comprising his brother Simon, Dury, Thorp and new recruits Davey Jones and Alex Collier. In June 2001, the comic was acquired as part of a \u00a36.4\u00a0million deal by I Feel Good (IFG), a company belonging to ex-\"Loaded\" editor James Brown, and increased in frequency to ten times a year. In 2003, it changed hands again when IFG were bought out by Dennis Publishing. Soon after, Simon Donald quit his role as co-editor, in an attempt to develop a career in television. In July 2018, Dennis Publishing were bought by Exponent, a British private equity firm.\nMuch of the non-cartoon material such as the newspaper spoofs are written by the editorial team \u2013 Graham Dury, Simon Thorp and Davey Jones \u2013 with contributions from Robin Halstead, Jason Hazeley, Joel Morris and Alex Morris, the authors of \"The Framley Examiner\", and by James MacDougall, Christina Martin and Paul Roberts.\n\"Viz\" and several Dennis Publishing titles including \"Cyclist\", \"Expert Reviews\", and \"Fortean Times\" were retained by Exponent when the company and most of its titles were sold to competitor Future plc in 2021 and by then operating as Viz Holdings Ltd, part of Broadleaf Group.\nMetropolis International acquired several titles from Broadleaf Group in December 2021, including \"Viz\".\nNotable strips.\nMany \"Viz\" characters have featured in long-running strips, becoming well known in their own right, including spin-off cartoons. Characters often have rhyming or humorous taglines, such as Roger Mellie, the Man on the Telly; Nobby's Piles; Johnny Fartpants; Buster Gonad; Sid the Sexist; Sweary Mary or Finbarr Saunders and his Double Entendres. Others are based on stereotypes of British culture, mostly via working class characters, such as Biffa Bacon, Cockney Wanker and The Fat Slags. Some are aimed upwards, parodying the upper-middle classes and elites, such as the pseudo-leftist but privileged 'Student Grant', 'Nanny No Dumps' and the hypocritical Tory MP 'Baxter Basics', named after John Major's \"Back to Basics\" speech. In addition to this, the comic also contains plenty of 'in jokes' referring to people and places in and around Newcastle upon Tyne.\nMany strips appear only once. These very often have extremely surreal or bizarre storylines, and often feature celebrities. For example: \"Paul Daniels's Jet-Ski Journey to the Centre of Elvis\", and \"Arse Farm \u2013 Young Pete and Jenny Nostradamus were spending the holidays with their Uncle Jed, who farmed arses deep in the heart of the Sussex countryside...\". The latter type often follows the style of Enid Blyton and other popular children's adventure stories of the 1950s. Several strips were single-panel, one-off puns, such as \"Daft Bugger\", which featured two bored, uninterested men engaged in the act of buggery; the buggerer then states that he has forgotten his car keys (thus making him \"daft\").\nThe one-off strips often have ludicrously alliterative and/or rhyming titles, for example: \"Reverend Milo's Lino Rhino\", \"Max's Laxative Saxophone Taxi', and \"Scottie Trotter's Tottie Alottment\". Some strips are built entirely around absurd puns, such as \"Noah's Arse\" and \"Feet and Two Reg\".\nMost of the stories take place in the fictitious town of Fulchester. Originally the setting of the British TV programme \"Crown Court\", the name was adopted by the \"Viz\" team. Billy the Fish plays for Fulchester United F.C. There is innuendo in the name: the Internet domain fuck.co.uk was at one time held by fans of \"Viz\" who claimed to be promoting the Fulchester Underwater Canoeing Klubb. A significant number of strips, most of which centre on child characters, are set in Barnton.\nOne of the most pun-based strips was \"George Bestial\", about famous footballer George Best committing bestiality. The strip was discontinued after the death of Best, but has since reappeared.\n\"Viz\" also lampoons political ideas \u2013 both left-wing ideals, in strips such as \"The Modern Parents\" (and to an extent in \"Student Grant\"), and right-wing ones such as \"Baxter Basics\", \"Major Misunderstanding\", \"Victorian Dad\" and numerous strips involving tabloid columnists Garry Bushell (\"Garry Bushell the Bear\") and Richard Littlejohn (\"Richard Littlecock\" and \"Robin Hood and Richard Littlejohn\"), portraying them as obsessed with homosexuality, political correctness and non-existent left-wing conspiracies to the exclusion of all else. Holocaust denier David Irving featured as Dick Dastardly in the \"Wacky Races\" spoof, \"Wacky Racists\".\nIn keeping with the comic's irreverent and deliberately non-conformist style, the Duke of Edinburgh was portrayed as a culturally insensitive, dim-witted xenophobe in a strip \"HRH The Duke of Edinburgh and his Jocular Larks\", about the Duke making outrageously ill-informed comments to a young Chinese victim of the collapse of a residential block.\nOccasionally, celebrities are granted the 'honour' of strips all to themselves. Billy Connolly has had more than one about him trying to ingratiate himself with the Queen and Bob Hope had a strip featuring the comedian trying to think up amusing last words to utter on his deathbed (but ending up with a torrent of swearing). The singer Elton John has also appeared frequently in recent issues as a double-dealing Del Boy-type character attempting to pull off small-time criminal scams such as tobacco smuggling, benefit fraud and cheating on fruit machines. Most recently, he was seen posing as a window cleaner and conning customers to pay him, before being mistaken for a Peeping Tom and given a thorough hiding. The strips always end with Elton being beaten at his own game by one or more of his musical contemporaries from the 1970s and 1980s. Other celebs to have been featured in their own strips include Jonathan Ross, Russell Brand, Esther Rantzen, Stephen Fry, Noel Edmonds, Jimmy Savile (as the headmaster of \"Pop School\", as \"Sir Jimmy Savile, the Owl\" and in \"Jimmy Savile's Haunted Head\"), Johnny Vaughan, Adam Ant, Jimmy Hill, Noddy Holder, Boy George, Freddie Garrity, Steve McFadden, Morrissey (constantly finding daffodils stuck into the seat of his trousers, parodying his appearances on \"Top of the Pops\"), Busted, Eminem, Big Daddy, Danny Baker and plenty more.\nIn 2002, British comedian Johnny Vegas sold the exclusive rights to his wedding photographs to Viz for \u00a31, in a flippant dig at celebrity couples who sold the rights to their wedding photos to glossy magazines such as \"OK!\" for anything up to (and over) \u00a31\u00a0million.\nSerial killers Fred West and Harold Shipman have also featured in a strip as rival neighbours trying to kill the old woman next door and foiling each other's plans (\"Harold and Fred \u2013 they make ladies dead!\").\nOther content.\nSpoof news stories.\nThe comic also prints regular satirical pastiches of typical tabloid and local media news stories. One issue featured a small write-up of a wedding. However, in true \"Viz\" style, the wedding featured a lecherous groom marrying his pregnant (and significantly underaged) girlfriend, eyeing up her younger sister while being called a \"cradle-snatching cunt\" by her father (with the resulting fight prompting the bride's mother to cry out \"less it, for fuck's sake\" before the police arrived). Another such story revolved around a man who won an inconsequential amount of money on the pools, and began living an inordinately lavish lifestyle (\"I bought the wife a new cover for her ironing board\" being one such example of his largesse), which collapsed when the money inevitably ran out, much to his chagrin (\"I wish I'd never set eyes on the money\").\nOther stories include ludicrous \"kiss and tell\" and similar stories by people who are portrayed as mentally disturbed, often with highly bizarre elements; examples include allegations by a man who claimed that, on holiday touring in his caravan, he found a campsite run by Elvis Presley who, when plied with drink, admitted to the Kennedy assassination; another from a retired toilet attendant who described the nature of faeces from various little-known celebrities and an elderly woman who blames anti-social behaviour in her area on bored Newsnight presenters, as well as a mental home patient who claimed to have had sex with a number of children's TV puppets. Another regular feature is a column by 'Tony Parsehole', a parody of columnist Tony Parsons who frequently writes obituaries about recently deceased celebrities filled entirely with metaphor and empty sentiment which stops abruptly once the required word count is reached (with a note that the invoice is included).\nAdditionally, there are often stories revolving around celebrities, some in the \"tell-all\" vein (such as a customs agent who claimed he found drugs in Pamela Anderson's \"plastic tits\"). If one of a select band of frequently referenced stars is mentioned during these stories, they will be named humorously. Among others, Lemmy Kilmister will invariably be referred to as \"Lemmy out of Mot\u00f6rhead\", Bono as \"Bonio\" and Sting as \"Sting (real name Gordon Sting)\", mixing the singer's birth and stage names. One particularly memorable piece of tabloid-esque wordplay parody, involving a fictional plot to assassinate Paul McCartney by a disgruntled former roadie, read 'Top Pop Mop-Top Pot Shot Plot Flops', or with a gonad-focused violent encounter with a deranged Mr. T and a 1970s playground toy, 'Crackers Baracus turns Macca's knackers into clackers'.\nPhotos in \"Viz\" news stories are often crudely edited and altered, much to the detriment of the subjects involved (teeth blacked out, facial features shrunken/enlarged, and so on). In the case of the aforementioned Lemmy, for one photo the editors simply took a picture of a man wearing a baseball cap and drew a crude approximation of Lemmy's facial hair and warts on his face (as well as writing \"Mot\u00f6rhead\" on the cap). Photos will frequently be captioned only with the name of the subject and a comma followed by \"yesterday\", e.g. \"A train, yesterday\".\nFollowing the format common in tabloid newspapers, paragraphs within written articles include 'cross heads' which, in normal journalism, serve to indicate the theme of the following sections. In \"Viz\" however, while these words often start out being relevant to the story, they quickly stray for comedic value and therefore have little or no relevance to the following text. The words will often follow a theme, such as TV cops' names or types of curry, and will sometimes spell out a sentence, rarely relevant, if read separately from the story.\nLetterbocks.\nThis section features letters both written by the editors and sent in by readers often with ridiculous names, usually in the form of obviously fictitious anecdotes (one reader claimed that by defecating on the high seas, he was able to expel a single unbroken \"monster\" turd; however, nobody wanted to grant him research funds for further attempts) or various observations, such as the \"children say the funniest things\" type (one issue featured numerous variations of a reader's young son making a reference to masturbation during bathtime, such as \"playing with [his] pork sword\"; in this case, when the reader entered the bathroom, she discovered her son had indeed fashioned a sword out of pork sausages). Since Viz claims to offer \u00a35 for the best letter published in a particular issue, many letters end with the inquiry, \"Do I win \u00a35?\"\nMany make observations about celebrities (especially those who have recently died; one letter printed after the deaths of Gianni Versace and Princess Diana remarked on both their violent deaths and friendship with Elton John, stating \"I tell you what. If I was George Michael right about now, I'd be shitting myself\") or current events (a 2000 issue remarked \"The Government spent \u00a3850\u00a0million on the Millennium Bug, and the only thing that crashes is Q [Desmond Llewelyn] out of the Bond films\").\nMost employ deliberate misunderstandings for comic effect (e.g. \"These so-called speed bumps are a joke. If anything they slow you down\" or \"I went to one of these so called Gentlemen's clubs and was shocked to see it was full of Women. To make matters worse many of them were wearing very little clothing\", or the letter whose writer mentioned seeing a TV listing for the film \"The Greatest Story Ever Told\" and stating their doubt that it would top the story told by their friend about a night spent \"with a couple of strippers, a bottle of tequila, and some cocaine\"). Often letters feature simple yet absurd statements (\"I'm heading off to the pub in a few minutes and wondered if any of your readers fancied joining me for a pint\" or \"They say size doesn't matter \u2013 if that's true, why can't I get these shoes on?\"), or improbable situations such as a letter writer responding directly to the letter that preceded theirs in the very same column and issue.\nA bizarre series of letters from a J Cursiter of Bristol recounted his hobby of watching passers-by from \"a series of cunningly-disguised hides\". It is unclear whether Cursiter is a reader of the comic or a creation of the editors.\nOften letters are printed that criticise Viz, accusing it of \"not being as funny as it used to be\", condemning it as being offensive or of complaining about the frequent price rises. These are often published and sometimes even framed in a small section titled \"Why I Love My Viz!\", blatantly mocking \"The Sun\" newspaper's habit of printing (positive) comments in little frames titled \"Why I Love My Sun!\"\nThere are often invitations for readers to submit pictures, such as the request for examples of \"Insincere Smiles\", whereby people sent in pictures cut from newspapers and brochures of celebrities and politicians caught smiling in a manner which looks utterly insincere and forced (Tony Blair featured at least twice). A similar series was of men who were wearing absurdly ill-fitting wigs. There's also \"Up The Arse Corner\", where photographs are submitted of people whose pose, and/or facial expression, could be misconstrued as being in the midst of an act of buggery; a notable example of this was when a letter requested a picture of \"Ghostbusters\" actor Ernie Hudson leaning over to sign autographs in front of a cardboard standee of himself, with the writer requesting the picture of \"Winston Zeddemore bumming himself\".\nLetterbocks also formerly featured correspondence from, and has brought fame to, the late Abdul Latif, Lord of Harpole, proprietor of the (real) Curry Capital restaurant (formerly the Rupali), Bigg Market. His Lordship often promoted his restaurant with spoof competitions and offers. One, genuine, offer involved getting a 20% discount on orders at his restaurant by bringing in a copy of the current Viz ad for it and pointing at his picture excitedly. In December 2006, he appeared in a seasonal broadcast to rival the Queen's Christmas message.\n\"Lame to Fame\".\nA semi-regular feature in Letterbocks is the \"Lame to Fame\" column, where writers can send in \"claims to fame\" where they explain their connection to well-known celebrities. The connections are distant or commonplace; for example: \"I once had a drink with a bloke who had caught Duran Duran's Simon Le Bon's dog after it had escaped from his big house\", and \"My sister once shagged Ringo out of The Bootleg Beatles.\"\nTop Tips.\nA long-running segment has been the \"Top Tips\", reader-submitted suggestions which are a parody of similar sections found in women's magazines offering domestic and everyday tips to make life easier. In \"Viz\", naturally, they are always absurd, impractical or ludicrous:\nSome tips are for ludicrous motives, such as \"how to convince neighbours that your house has dry rot\", while others are for ostensibly sensible motives but with ridiculous and impractical suggestions for their application:\nSome are just inexplicable:\nOthers inspire running jokes:\nA more recent trend is for sarcastic tips to be offered that are observations by the readers regarding other people's behaviour, such as a barmaid who suggests male public house customers who are \"trying to get into a barmaid's knickers\" should \"pull back your tenner just as she reaches to take it when paying for a round. It really turns us on\". In a similar vein, one reader suggested \"Old people \u2013 are you worried that people in a hurry might be able to get past you on the pavement? Why not try stumbling aimlessly from side to side? That should stop them\".\nMcDonald's.\nMcDonald's was accused of plagiarising a number of \"Viz Top Tips\" in an advertising campaign they ran in 1996. Some of the similarities are almost word-for-word:\nThe case was later settled out of court for an undisclosed sum (donated to Comic Relief); but many \"Viz\" readers believed that the comic had given permission for their use, leading to \"Top Tips\" submissions such as:\nThe magazine published them.\nAt around the same time, the following \"Top Tip\" was also published:\nIn addition, a burger bar \"McWonald's\" was used as a story setting and displayed a large W in the style of an inverted Golden Arches M. This establishment had spotty-faced teenage staff vomiting and smoking; a child customer informs his mother that he does not want to finish his burger as it \"tastes of pigeon and has cigarette butts in it\".\nIn a further attack on the company, the map of \"Cuntinental Europe\", given away free with Issue 118 and showing a large cartoon of stereotypes of the British and their neighbours over the relevant geographical areas, displayed the McDonald's logo on potentially insensitive locations, such as the Parthenon and the vicinity of the Leaning Tower of Pisa.\nSpoof advertisements and competitions.\n\"Viz\" has had many different spoof adverts for various items, such as ornaments, dolls, sheds, china plates and novelty chess sets. These poke fun at the genuine adverts for such items in magazines found in the colour supplements of Sunday newspapers. Those found in \"Viz\" are absurd, such as a breakfast plate depicting Princess Diana's face in the middle of a fried egg, \"No. 22 Shit Street\" (which was a diorama of a dilapidated council house complete with rabid dog, youthful vandals and a \"gently rusting\" washing machine in the front yard), and \"Little Ted West\", a teddy bear dressed to look like serial killer Fred West. \"Viz\" has manufactured some of these items and sold them, including a china plate depicting \"The Life of Christ...In Cats\", featuring pictures of a cat in various stages of Jesus's life, and the \"Elvis Presley Dambusters Clock Plate of Tutankhamun\", a clock featuring Elvis in the style of Tutankhamun's death mask in addition to Avro Lancaster bomber planes. Many of these adverts had a form with a tick box at the end, with outrageous binding statements in small print that invariably led the purchaser to usury, such as \"I enclose \u00a349.50 in an infinite series of escalating payments\".\nAnother staple of \"Viz\" advertisement parody are the adverts for public and government services which one would normally not expect to find advertised; for example, one ad consisted of the words \"Raped? Burgled? Run over? Why not call the police\", placed next to a picture of a grinning policeman. Another ad exhorted male readers to join the British Army, because \"all the birds are gagging for squaddies\" (with the fine print on the reply coupon indicating to the respondent that spending \"33 years hiding behind some garden wall in Belfast should just about see [him] right\" when it comes to the ladies). The 'PC Brigade' were also featured as if they were the fire brigade, stating they attended emergencies such as 'collapsed turbans' or freeing gypsies from railings while leaving British people stuck tight. They also carried the slogan 'Fueling middle England's persecution complex since 1958'.\nA long-running joke has been small adverts for bizarre sheds (\"TV Sheds\", \"Shed Bikes\", \"Shed Snakes\", etc.). Testament to the quality of these is invariably provided by a Mrs. B. of Essex.\nAdverts for loan companies have been parodied frequently since approximately 2000, usually with an absurd twist, such as ones aimed at vagrants, offering loans of between 5 and 10 pence for a cup of tea. Roger Mellie has frequently starred in such spoof advertisements, both in separate sections in \"Viz\" and also his own strip. Mellie is portrayed as someone who is willing to endorse any product whatsoever for money or gifts.\nScatological humour also featured heavily in the ads; one ad featured \"Clag-Gone\", which consisted of a stationary bicycle with no seat. Instead, the rider simply placed his naked bottom onto the \"Clag-Gone\"'s wire brush wheel, which then cleaned away \"winnits\", \"tag-nuts\" and \"dangleberries\". Another ad featured a tourist package where eggs were served in great quantities; a happy tourist was featured saying \"I'm \"egg-bound\" for Jamaica!\".\nGenuine competitions have been run by \"Viz\", with proper prizes. One of the earliest was a competition to win 'a ton of money' a pointed satire of tabloid newspapers promising huge cash prizes to boost circulation, the prize was in fact a tonne of one- and two-pence pieces, equivalent to a few hundred pounds sterling. Recently, they were giving away a plasma screen television provided by the producers of \"Freddy vs. Jason\". Viz poked fun at the movie, describing it as \"shite\" in the competition description, and described the runners-up prizes of DVDs of the film as \"frankly worthless\", which led to the producers refusing to hand over the prize, for insulting their film.\nAnother spin-off was \"Roger's Profanisaurus\", a thesaurus of (often freshly coined) rude words, phrases and sexual slang submitted by readers. It has been published as several books, the 2002 print of which has a foreword by Terry Jones. This also often features genuine regional slang. Roger's Profanisaurus has become a popular downloadable app for Apple's iPhone.\nIn November 1987, a free mini-issue of \"Viz\" was given away with issue 23 of computer magazine \"Your Sinclair\". This was done in response to \"Your Sinclair\"'s competitor, \"CRASH\", giving away a mini-copy of \"Oink!\" comic with their issue 42.\nPhoto-strips.\nOccasionally photo-strips are included. These parody the format of supernatural and true-love British comics which were popular with young girl readers in the 1970s and 1980s, such as \"Chiller\" and \"Jackie\", as well as the \"real life dilemma\" photo strips often found in the advice columns of tabloid newspapers.\nFor example, a young woman is convinced that the spirit of her dead husband has possessed the family dog, and after some soul-searching, begins a sexual relationship with the dog. A running joke in these stories is that they often feature a car accident in which one of the characters is run down. In every case, the same man is driving the car, and always responds with the same line: \"Sorry mate, I didn't see him/her!\" The locations for the photo-stories are recognisable as the suburbs of Newcastle upon Tyne where the Viz team are based.\nOn occasion, this is explicitly recognised: the one-off strip \"Whitley Baywatch\", a spoof of the popular American TV show \"Baywatch\", is based in the North East coastal resort of Whitley Bay. But other stories purporting to be set in London, or without a set location, are often also identifiably near to the Viz editorial offices in Jesmond. In \"He just loved to dance\" (no. 103), for example, Komal's Tandoori restaurant in West Jesmond is visible. In \"Four minutes to fall in love\" (no. 107), the Gateshead Millennium Bridge provides a backdrop to the d\u00e9nouement. An occasionally recurring actor in these strips is Arthur 2 Stroke, now acknowledged as the \"Guru of Viz\" by Chris Donald founder editor. Arthur, former lead singer of the band The Chart Commandos, still continues to perform with \"Big Black Bomb\" and is still considered to be an innovating force on the Newcastle music scene.\nOne such photo-strip was called \"I Believe in Father Christmas\", where an adult man believes in Father Christmas. His wife, named Virginia, attempts to convince him otherwise. He visits a department store Father Christmas, just like a child, although he asks for a CD from either Dire Straits or Phil Collins. On Christmas night, the man goes downstairs to the living room, as he hears a noise and figures Father Christmas must have come. However, he is surprised to see that an armed robber has broken into his house, who promptly shoots him and flees. His wife, in shock, tends to her husband as he is badly hurt, and he tells her he was wrong to believe in Father Christmas like some small child. However, the wife tearfully says that Father Christmas did indeed come, and left presents for them. The strip ends with the husband saying to his wife \"Yes Virginia, there is a Father Christmas\".\nIn his book \"Rude Kids: The Inside Story of Viz\", the comic's creator Chris Donald claimed that the first legal action ever taken against Viz was initiated by a man who objected to the use of a picture of his house (taken from an estate agent's catalogue) in one of these photo-strips, and that the British tabloid newspaper \"Sunday Mirror\" tried to provoke media outrage over another photo-strip which, if taken out of context, could be misconstrued as making light of the problem of illegal drugs being offered to children.\nActor Sean Bean made a one-off appearance in 1996 titled \"I've Bean to Paradise\" where the main character, unhappy with his long-term relationship, attempts to seek out for more physically attractive women by undergoing a makeover as a lookalike of the actor (played by himself) and passing himself off as the actor with references to his past screen roles.\n\"Viz\" in other media.\nSome of the characters have had their own television cartoon series on Channel 4. They are:\nVHS releases of each series went on sale during the same months of broadcast. Chris Donald revealed in his book \"Rude Kids \u2013 The Unfeasibly True Story of Viz\" that the magazine's publishers had pencilled in Student Grant as the next animated release but this never came to fruition. He went on to say that he was pleased that the project did not go ahead as he felt the quality of the previous releases was disappointing.\nIn December 2011, \"Viz\" produced three animated shorts for Channel 4's \"Comedy Blaps\" with Baby Cow, voiced by Steve Coogan, Sarah Millican, Simon Greenall and Gavin Webster.\nA one-off TV programme \"Viz \u2013 The Documentary\" was shown on Britain's Channel 4 in 1990, spoofing serious investigative TV shows like \"Panorama\" or \"Dispatches\" while telling the story of \"Viz\".\nA computer game using \"Viz\" characters was produced in 1991 by Virgin Interactive. The game sold well; however, the critical response was mostly negative.\nThe Fat Slags appeared in TV ads for Lucozade, a drink which they hate with a passion. These ads included a mixture of cartoon characters (the slags) and live actors (the men who drink Lucozade).\nA film based on The Fat Slags was produced in 2004, but was disowned by the magazine's editors who threatened to stop running the strip in response.\nA novelty single was released in 1987 for Viz, featuring its Buster Gonad character, by the band XTC, with John Otway, as \"Johnny Japes and His Jesticles\". The A-side was \"Bags of Fun With Buster\" b/w \"Scrotal Scratch Mix\".\nDuring the Gulf War of 1991, SEPECAT Jaguar GR1A bombers of the Royal Air Force featured such Viz characters as Johnny Fartpants, the Fat Slags and Buster Gonad as nose art.\nControversy.\nThe comic was reprimanded by the United Nations after featuring a strip called \"The Thieving Gypsy Bastards\". UK tabloid newspaper \"The Sun\" ran a story suggesting that the principal Roma man who initiated the complaints against Viz (\"Don't call us thieving gypsies, says thieving gypsy\") had been found guilty of handling stolen property at Preston Crown Court. He had, but in truth the man in question had been supportive of the comic in his correspondence with them and had not made any complaint against the strip. In the same issue \"Viz\" ran a short strip called \"The Nice, Honest Gypsies\", featuring a kindly Gypsy woman selling pegs door-to-door and helpfully returning forgotten change.\nThe strip \"Wanker Watson\", a parody of the children's comic character Winker Watson, led to litigation by D. C. Thomson &amp; Co. Ltd, the owners of the Winker character. This was after they had issued several warnings previously about infringement of copyright in earlier parody strips, which Viz had ignored. In retaliation, \"Viz\" featured a new character called 'D.C. Thompson The Humourless Scottish Git'. However, coinciding with DC Thomson's legal action, and unaware of it, Dandy editor Maurice Heggie published a good humoured strip in response, \"The Jocks and The Geordies\", a revival of an old strip from \"The Dandy\", in which the Geordies (clearly representing \"Viz\") competed with the Jocks (clearly representing Thomson) in a competition to design funny cartoon characters. The Geordies' miserable efforts bore sharp similarity to actual \"Viz\" characters, such as 'The Boy with Big Pants' which was a reference to Felix and his Amazing Underpants. This served to deflate the situation. (Chris Donald's book \"Rude Kids: The Inside Story of Viz\", notes the good-humoured nature of the latter stages of this episode).\nSports clothing manufacturer Kappa insisted that the comic drop the name of one of its characters, \"Kappa Slappa\", as it had no permission to use the brand name. Kappa also believed that the character in question insulted its customer base. \"Slappa\" was an obnoxious, uneducated, highly unattractive and sexually promiscuous 14-year-old living on a Tyneside council estate, always wearing a Kappa shellsuit. The characterisation was said to be more descriptive than insulting. However, after several runs of the strip, \"Viz\" agreed to change her name to \"Tasha Slappa\".\nIn his book \"Rude Kids: The Inside Story of Viz\", Chris Donald mentions that he was interviewed by police after giving the go-ahead to publish a Top Tip which could have been interpreted as an incitement to carry out a bomb plot. Donald claims that he then accidentally included the offending statement in that year's \"Viz\" annual \"The Sausage Sandwich\". It was covered with a sticker reading \"PUBLISHERS. Ensure that your editors have read the proofs of your books before printing a quarter of a million of them. J. Brown, London\".\nBibliography.\nHighlights of the comic are collected into regular annuals, invariably with innuendo-laden titles. There have also been a large number of themed collections published, which focus on a particular character or column.\nAnnuals\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*\"The Big Hard One\" (Issues 1 \u2013 12)\n*\"The Big Hard Number Two\" (Issues 13 \u2013 18)\n*\"The Big Pink Stiff One\" (Issues 19 \u2013 25)\n*\"The Dog's Bollocks\" (Issues 26 \u2013 31)\n*\"The Spunky Parts\" (Issues 32 \u2013 37)\n*\"The Sausage Sandwich\" (Issues 38 \u2013 42)\n*\"The Fish Supper\" (Issues 43 \u2013 47)\n*\"The Porky Chopper\" (Issues 48 \u2013 52)\n*\"The Pan Handle\" (Issues 53 \u2013 57)\n*\"The Big Bell End\" (Issues 58 \u2013 63)\n*\"The Turtle's Head\" (Issues 64 \u2013 69)\n*\"The Full Toss\" (Issues 70 \u2013 75)\n*\"On the Bone\" (Issues 76 \u2013 81)\n*\"The Rusty Sheriff's Badge\" (Issues 82 \u2013 87)\n*\"The Thick Repeater\" (Issues 88 \u2013 93)\n*\"The Clown's Pie\" (Issues 94 \u2013 99)\n*\"The Bag of Slugs\" (Issues 100 \u2013 105)\n*\"The Bear Trapper's Hat\" (Issues 106 \u2013 111)\n*\"The Hangman's Noose\" (Issues 112 \u2013 121)\n*\"The Butcher's Dustbin\" (Issues 122 \u2013 131)\n*\"The One String Banjo\" (Issues 132 \u2013 141)\n*\"The Pearl Necklace\" (Issues 142 \u2013 151)\n*\"The Last Turkey in the Shop\" (Issues 152 \u2013 161)\n*\"The Council Gritter\" (Issues 162 \u2013 171)\n*\"The Five Knuckle Shuffle\" (Issues 172 \u2013 181)\n*\"The Cleveland Steamer\" (Issues 182 \u2013 191)\n*\"The Billposter's Bucket\" (Issues 192 \u2013 201)\n*\"The Camel's Toe\" (Issues 202 \u2013 211)\n*\"The Dutch Oven\" (Issues 212 \u2013 221)\n*\"The Otters Pocket\" (Issues 222 \u2013 231)\n*\"The Bookie's Pencil\" (Issues 232 \u2013 241)\n*\"The Jester's Shoes\" (Issues 242 \u2013 251)\n*\"The Pieman's Wig\" (Issues 252 \u2013 261)\n*\"The Trumpeter's Lips\" (Issues 262 \u2013 271)\n*\"The Wizard's Sleeve\" (Issues 272 \u2013 281)\n*\"The Copper's Torch\" (Issues 282 \u2013 291)\n*\"The Zookeeper's Boot\" (Issues 292 - 301)\n*\"The Barber's Pole\" (Issues 302 - 311)\n*\"The Guard's Parcel\" (Issues 312 - 321)\nThemed collections\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*\"Viz Holiday Special\" (1988)\n*\"The Viz Book of Crap Jokes\" (1989)\n*\"Billy the Fish Football Yearbook\" (1990)\n*\"The Pathetic Sharks Bumper Special\" (1991)\n*\"The Viz Bumper Book of Shite for Older Boys and Girls\" (1993)\n*\"Fat Slags Diary 1993\" (1993)\n*\"Letterbocks Top Tips\" (1994)\n*\"The Viz Big Fat Slags Book\" (1994)\n*\"Letterbocks Top Tips 2\" (1995)\n*\"Sid the Sexist: The Joy of Sexism\" (1996)\n*\"The Best of Letterbocks\" (1996)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus\" (1998)\n*\"More Viz Crap Jokes\" (1999)\n*\"Old Gold Rope: The Very Best of Sid the Sexist\" (1999)\n*\"Old Gold Rope: The Very Best of The Fat Slags\" (1999)\n*\"Old Gold Rope: The Very Best of Biffa Bacon\" (1999)\n*\"Old Gold Rope: The Very Best of Roger Mellie\" (2000)\n*\"Viz Summer Special 2000\" (2000)\n*\"Viz Summer Special 2001\" (2001)\n*\"Wigwatching\" (2002)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus: The Ultimate Swearing Dictionary\" (2002)\n*\"The Sexist Book of Records\" (2002)\n*\"Roger Mellie's Ad Break\" (2003)\n*\"The Bulging Sack: The Best of Letterbocks\" (2003)\n*\"Silver Anniversary Collectors' Edition\" (2004)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus Rex\" (2005)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus IV: The Magna Farta\" (2007)\n*\"The Magna Fartlet: Viz Roger's Profanisaurus\" (2009)\n*\"The Big Hairy Almanackers 2009\" (2008)\n*\"Top of the Tips\" (2010)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus: Das Krapital\" (2010)\n*\"Anus Horribilis: A Year of stuff to read on the Thunderbox\" (2011)\n*\"Top Tips 2\" (2012)\n*\"The Fat Slags Bumper Special\" (2013)\n*\"Profanisaurus: Hail Sweary\" (2013)\n*\"The Big Viz Book of Adventure\" (2014)\n*\"The Roger Mellie Telly Times\" (2015)\n*\"Roger's Profanisaurus: War and Piss\" (2018)\nNon-fiction\n*\"25 Years of Viz: The Silver Plated Jubilee\" (William Cook, 2004)\n*\"Rude Kids: The Unfeasible Story of \"Viz\"\" (Chris Donald, 2004) (aka: \"The Inside Story of Viz: Rude Kids\") \n*\"Him Off the Viz\" (Simon Donald, 2010) \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32644", "revid": "43270384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32644", "title": "Viol", "text": "Bowed, fretted and stringed instrument \nThe viola da gamba (), or viol, or informally gamba, is a bowed and fretted string instrument that is played (i.e. \"on the leg\"). It is distinct from the later violin, or ; and it is any one of the earlier viol family of bowed, fretted, and stringed instruments with hollow wooden bodies and pegboxes where the tension on the strings can be increased or decreased to adjust the pitch of each of the strings. Although treble, tenor and bass were most commonly used, viols came in different sizes, including (high treble, developed in 18th century), treble, alto, small tenor, tenor, bass and contrabass (called ). \nThese members of the viol family are distinguished from later bowed string instruments, such as the violin family, by both appearance and orientation when played\u2014as typically the neck is oriented upwards and the rounded bottom downwards to settle on the lap or between the knees.\nThe viola da gamba uses the alto clef. Seven and occasionally eight frets made of \"stretched gut\" are tied on the fingerboard around the instrument's neck. Frets tied in this manner\u2014instead of permanently fixed as on a guitar\u2014allow for fine-tuning of the instrument. (Frets enable the performer to stop the strings more cleanly, improve consistency of intonation and lend the stopped notes a tone that better matches the open strings.) \nViols first appeared in Spain and Italy in the mid-to-late 15th century, and were most popular in the Renaissance and Baroque (1600\u20131750) periods. Early ancestors include the Arabic \"rebab\" and the medieval European vielle, but later, more directly possible ancestors include the Venetian and the 15th- and 16th-century Spanish , a six-course plucked instrument tuned like a lute (and also like a present-day viol) that (at the time) looked like, but was quite distinct from, the four-course guitar (an earlier chordophone). It should also be mentioned that the Arabic \"rebab\" originally comes from a Persian instrument called \"rub\u0101b\".\nAlthough bass viols superficially resemble cellos, viols are different in several respects from instruments of the violin family: the viol family has flat rather than curved backs, sloped rather than rounded shoulders, c holes rather than f holes, and five to seven rather than four strings. Additional differences include \"tuning strategy\"\u2014in fourths, with a third in the middle, rather than in fifths (similar to a lute)\u2014the presence of frets, and underhand rather than overhand bow grip.\nA modern player of the viol is commonly known as a \"gambist\", \"violist\" , or \"violist\" . Notably, \"violist\" is a homograph of the word commonly used since the mid-20th century to refer to a player of the viola, which can cause confusion in written/printed texts when not clear from the context.\nHistory.\nVihuelists began playing their flat-topped, originally plucked, instruments \"with a bow\" in the second half of the 15th century. Within two or three decades, this led to the evolution of an entirely new and dedicated bowed string instrument that retained many of the features of the vihuela: e.g., a flat back, sharp waist-cuts, frets, thin ribs initially, and identical tuning\u2014hence its original name, vihuela de arco; is Spanish for \"bow\". An influence on the playing posture has been credited to the example of Moorish \"rabab\" players.\nHowever, Stefano Pio (2012) argues that a re-examination of documents in light of new data indicates an origin different than the \"vihuela de arco\" from Aragon. According to Pio, the viol had its origins in Venice, and evolved independently there. He asserts it was implausible that the vihuela de arco underwent such a rapid evolution by Italian rather than Venetian instrument makers. Nonetheless, a ten-year span brought the birth and diffusion in Italy of a new family of instruments (viola da gamba, or viols). These comprised instruments of different sizes, some as large as the famous \"violoni\"\u2014as 'big as a man'\u2014mentioned by Prospero Bernardino in 1493.\nPio also notes that the fifth string of the viola da gamba is uniquely called a \"bordone\" (drone)\u2014both in the manuscript of the early 15th-century music theorist Antonius de Leno, and in the treatises of the Venetian Silvestro Ganassi dal Fontego and Giovanni Maria Lanfranco. However, it is not a drone and is played the same as the other strings. This inconsistency is justified, Pio argues, only by assuming the invention (in the latter 15th century) of a larger instrument derived from the medieval \"violetta\", which gradually added more strings to allow greater extension to the low register. The fifth string was incorporated into the neck. This was surpassed by a sixth string (\"basso\") which fixed the lower sound produced by the instrument. Pio's view was: the origin of the viola da gamba is tied to the evolution of the smaller violetta, or vielle, which was originally fitted with a fifth-string \"drone\"; and the name 'stuck' even after it ceased to perform this function.\nIan Woodfield, in his \"The Early History of the Viol\", points to evidence that the viol does start with the vihuela, but that Italian luthiers immediately began to apply their own highly developed instrument-making traditions to the early version of the instrument after it was introduced into Italy.\nConstruction.\nViols most commonly have six strings, although many 16th-century instruments had only four or five strings, and during the 17th century in France, some bass viols featured a seventh lower string. Viols were (and are) strung with gut strings of lower tension than on the members of the violin family. Gut strings produce a sonority far different from steel, generally described as softer and sweeter. Around 1660, gut or silk core strings overspun with copper wire first became available; these were then used for the lowest-pitched bass strings on viols, and many other string instruments as well. In 1664, a style of string incorporating a copper wire spun within the gut fibers, called a 'gimped' string, was introduced, mimicking the style of embroidery of the same name. \nViols are fretted like early guitars or lutes, using movable wrapped-around and tied-on gut frets. A low seventh string was supposedly added in France to the bass viol by Monsieur de Sainte-Colombe (c.\u20091640\u20131690), whose students included the French gamba virtuoso and composer Marin Marais. Also, the painting (1618) by Domenichino (1581\u20131641) shows what may be a seven-string viol.\nUnlike members of the violin family, most of which are tuned in fifths, viols are usually tuned in fourths with a major third in the middle, mirroring the tuning employed on the vihuela de mano and lute during the 16th century and similar to that of the modern six-string guitar.\nViols were first constructed much like the \"vihuela de mano\", with all surfaces, top, back, and sides made from flat slabs or pieces of joined wood, bent or curved as required. However, some viols, both early and later, had carved tops, similar to those more commonly associated with instruments of the violin family. The ribs or sides of early viols were usually quite shallow, reflecting more the construction of their plucked vihuela counterparts. Rib depth increased during the 16th century, finally coming to resemble the greater depth of the classic 17th-century pattern.\nThe flat backs of most viols have a sharply angled break or \"canted\" bend in their surface close to where the neck meets the body. This serves to taper the back (and overall body depth) at its upper end to meet the back of the neck joint flush with its heel. Traditional construction uses animal glue, and internal joints are often reinforced with strips of either linen or vellum soaked in hot animal glue\u2014a practice also employed in early plucked vihuela construction. The peg boxes of viols (which hold the tuning pegs) were typically decorated either with elaborately carved heads of animals or people or with the now-familiar spiral \"scroll\" finial.\nThe earliest vihuelas and viols, both plucked and bowed, all had sharp cuts to their waists, similar to the profile of a modern violin. This was a key and new feature\u2014first appearing in the mid-15th century\u2014and from then on, it was employed on many different types of string instruments. This feature was also key in seeing and understanding the connection between the plucked and bowed versions of early vihuelas. If one were to go searching for very early viols with smooth-curved figure-eight bodies, like those found on the only slightly later plucked vihuelas and the modern guitar, they would be out of luck. By the mid-16th century, however, \"guitar-shaped\" viols were fairly common, and a few of them survive.\nThe earliest viols had flat, glued-down bridges just like their plucked counterpart vihuelas. Soon after, however, viols adopted the wider and high-arched bridge that facilitated the bowing of single strings. The earliest of viols would also have had the ends of their fretboards flat on the deck, level with or resting upon the top or soundboard. Once the end of their fretboards was elevated above the top of the instrument's face, the entire top could vibrate freely. Early viols did not have sound posts, either (again reflecting their plucked vihuela siblings). This reduced damping again meant that their tops could vibrate more freely, contributing to the characteristic \"humming\" sound of viols; yet the absence of a sound post also resulted in a quieter and softer voice overall.\nIt is commonly believed that C-holes (a type and shape of pierced sound port visible on the top face or belly of string instruments) are a definitive feature of viols, a feature used to distinguish viols from instruments in the violin family, which typically had F-shaped holes. This generality, however, renders an incomplete picture. The earliest viols had either large, open, round, sound holes (or even round pierced rosettes like those found on lutes and vihuelas), or they had some kind of C-holes. Viols sometimes had as many as four small C-holes\u2014one placed in each corner of the bouts\u2014but more commonly, they had two. The two C-holes might be placed in the upper bouts, centrally, or in the lower bouts. In the formative years, C-holes were most often placed facing each other or turned inwards.\nIn addition to round or C-holes, however, and as early as the first quarter of the 16th century, some viols adopted S-shaped holes, again facing inward. By the mid-16th century, S-holes morphed into the classic F-shaped holes, which were then used by viols and members of the violin family alike. By the mid-to late 16th century, the viol's C-holes facing direction were reversed, becoming outward-facing. That configuration then became a standard feature of what we today call the \u201cclassic\u201d 17th-century pattern. Yet another style of sound holes found on some viols was a pair of flame-shaped Arabesques placed left and right. The lute- and vihuela-like round or oval ports or rosettes became a standard feature of German and Austrian viols and were retained to the very end. That feature was unique to viols and served as a reminder of the viol's more ancient plucked vihuela roots, the \"luteness\" of viols.\nHistorians, makers, and players generally distinguish between \"renaissance\" and \"baroque\" viols. The latter are more heavily constructed and are fitted with a bass bar and sound post, like modern stringed instruments.\nViol bows.\nThe bow is held underhand with the palm facing upward, similar to a German double bass bow grip, but away from the frog towards the balance point. The stick's curvature is generally convex as were violin bows of the period, rather than concave like a modern violin bow. The \"frog\" (which holds the bow hair and adjusts its tension) is also different from that of modern bows: whereas a violin bow frog has a \"slide\" (often made of mother of pearl), which pinches the hair and holds it flat and stationary across the frog, viol bows have an open frog that allows more movement of the hair. This facilitates a traditional playing technique where the performer uses one or two fingers of the bow hand to press the hair away from the bow stick. This dynamically increases bow hair tension to control articulation and inflection.\nDifferent versions.\nViols come in seven sizes: \"pardessus de viole\" (which is relatively rare, exclusively French and did not exist before the 18th century), treble (\"dessus\" in French), alto, tenor (in French \"taille\"), bass, great bass, and contrabass (the final two are often called violone, meaning \"large viol\"), the smaller one tuned an octave below the tenor (violone in G, sometimes called \"great bass\" or in French \"grande basse\") and the larger one tuned an octave below the bass (violone in D, or the contrabass viol). This latter instrument is not to be confused with the double bass.\nTheir tuning (see next section) alternates G and D instruments: pardessus in G, treble in D, tenor in G, bass in D (the seven-string bass was a French invention, with an added low A), small violone in G, large violone in D and the alto (between the treble and the tenor). \nThe treble has a size similar to a viola but with a deeper body; the typical bass is about the size of a cello. The pardessus and the treble were held vertically in the lap. The English made smaller basses known as division viols, and the still-smaller Lyra viol. The viola bastarda was a similar type of viol used in Italy for a virtuosic style of viol repertoire and performance. German consort basses were larger than the French instruments designed for continuo.\nThose instruments were not all equally common. The typical Elizabethan consort of viols was composed of six instruments: two basses, two tenors and two trebles, or one bass, three tenors and two trebles (see Chest of viols). Thus the bass, tenor and treble were the central members of the family as far as music written specifically for viols is concerned. Besides consort playing the bass could also be used as a solo instrument (there were also smaller basses designed especially for a virtuosic solo role, see above \"division viol\", \"lyra viol\", \"viola bastarda\"). And the bass viol could also serve as a continuo bass. The pardessus was a French 18th-century instrument that was introduced to allow ladies to play mostly violin or flute music but eventually acquired its own repertoire. The alto was a relatively rare smaller version of the tenor. The violones were rarely part of the consort of viols but functioned as the bass or contrabass of all kinds of instrumental combinations.\nTuning.\nThe standard tuning of most viols is in fourths, with a major third in the middle (like the standard Renaissance lute tuning), or in fourths, with a major third in between the 2nd and 3rd strings (like a modern guitar). The following table shows the tunings that have been adopted at least somewhat widely during the 20th and 21st-century revival of the viols. (Lyra viol tunings are not included.)\nAlternative tunings (called \"scordatura\") were often employed, particularly in the solo lyra viol style of playing, which also made use of many techniques such as chords and \"pizzicato\", not generally used in consort playing. An unusual style of pizzicato was known as a thump. Lyra viol music was also commonly written in tablature. There is a vast repertoire of this music, some by well-known composers and much by anonymous ones.\nMuch viol music predates the adoption of equal temperament tuning by musicians. The movable nature of the tied-on frets permits the viol player to make adjustments to the tempering of the instrument, and some players and consorts adopt meantone temperaments, which are more suited to Renaissance music. Several fretting schemes involve frets that are spaced unevenly to produce better-sounding chords in a limited number of keys. In some of these schemes, the two strands of the gut that form the fret are separated so that the player can finger a slightly sharper or flatter version of a note (for example G\u266f versus A\u266d) to suit different circumstances.\nTreatises.\nDescriptions and illustrations of viols are found in numerous early 16th-century musical treatises, including those authored by:\nBoth Agricola's and Gerle's works were published in various editions.\nThere were then several important treatises concerning or devoted to the viol. The first was by Silvestro Ganassi dal Fontego: \"Regola Rubertina &amp; Lettione Seconda\" (1542/3). Diego Ortiz published \"Trattado de Glosas\" (Rome, 1553), an important book of music for the viol with both examples of ornamentation and pieces called \"Recercadas\". In England, Christopher Simpson wrote the most important treatise, with the second edition being published in 1667 in parallel text (English and Latin). This has divisions at the back that are very worthwhile repertoire. A little later, in England, Thomas Mace wrote \"Musick's Monument\", which deals more with the lute but has an important section on the viol. After this, the French treatises by Machy (1685), Rousseau (1687), Danoville (1687), and Etienne Loulie (1700) show further developments in playing technique.\nPopularity.\nViols were second in popularity only to the lute (although this is disputed), and like lutes, were very often played by amateurs. Affluent homes might have a so-called \"chest of viols\", which would contain one or more instruments of each size. Gamba ensembles, called \"consorts\", were common in the 16th and 17th centuries, when they performed vocal music (consort songs or verse anthems) as well as that written specifically for instruments. Only the treble, tenor, and bass sizes were regular members of the viol consort, which consisted of three, four, five, or six instruments. Music for consorts was very popular in England in Elizabethan times, with composers such as William Byrd and John Dowland, and, during the reign of King Charles I, John Jenkins, William Lawes and Tobias Hume. The last music for viol consorts before their modern revival was probably written in the early 1680s by Henry Purcell.\nPerhaps even more common than the pure consort of viols was the mixed or broken consort (also called Morley consort). Broken consorts combined a mixture of different instruments\u2014a small band, essentially\u2014usually comprising a gathering of social amateurs and typically including such instruments as a bass viol, a lute or orpharion (a wire-strung lute, metal-fretted, flat-backed, and festoon-shaped), a cittern, a treble viol (or violin, as time progressed), sometimes an early keyboard instrument (virginal, spinet, or harpsichord), and whatever other instruments or players (or singers) might be available at the moment. The single most common and ubiquitous pairing of all was always and everywhere the lute and bass viol: for centuries, the inseparable duo.\nThe bass viola da gamba remained in use into the 18th century as a solo instrument (and to complement the harpsichord in basso continuo). It was a favorite instrument of Louis XIV and acquired associations of both courtliness and \"Frenchness\" (in contrast to the Italianate violin). Composers such as Marc-Antoine Charpentier, Fran\u00e7ois Couperin, Marin Marais, Sainte Colombe, Johann Sebastian Bach, Johannes Schenck, DuBuisson, Antoine Forqueray, Charles Doll\u00e9 and Carl Friedrich Abel wrote virtuoso music for it. Georg Philipp Telemann published his \"Twelve Fantasias for Viola da Gamba solo\" in 1735, when the instrument was already becoming out of fashion. However, viols fell out of use as concert halls grew larger and the louder and more penetrating tone of the violin family became more popular. In the 20th century, the viola da gamba and its repertoire were revived by early music enthusiasts, an early proponent being Arnold Dolmetsch.\nThe treble viol in d and the even smaller pardessus de viole in g (often with only five strings) were also popular instruments in the 18th century, especially in France. Composers like Jean-Baptiste Barri\u00e8re, Georg Phillipp Telemann and Marin Marais wrote solo- and ensemble pieces for treble or pardessus. It was also common to play music for violins or flutes or unspecified top parts on small viols.\nHistoric viols survive in relatively great number, though very few remain in original condition. They can often be found in collections of historic musical instruments at museums and universities. Here are some of the extant historic viols at The Metropolitan Museum of Art:\nModern era.\nIn the 20th and early 21st century, the viol is attracting ever more interest, particularly among amateur players and early music enthusiasts and societies, and in conservatories and music schools. This may be due to the increased availability of reasonably priced instruments from companies using more automated production techniques, coupled with the greater accessibility of early music editions and historic treatises. The viol is also regarded as a suitable instrument for adult learners; Percy Scholes wrote that the viol repertoire \"belongs to an age that demanded musicianship more often than virtuosity.\" There are now many societies for people with an interest in the viol. The first was the Viola da Gamba Society, which was established in the United Kingdom in 1948 (by Nathalie and Cecile Dolmetsch). The Viola da Gamba Society of America followed in 1962, and with over 1000 members in North America and around the world. Since then, similar societies have been organized in several other nations. In the 1970s, the now-defunct Guitar and Lute Workshop in Honolulu generated resurgent interest in the viol and traditional luthierie methods within the western United States.\nA notable youth viol group is the Gateshead Viol Ensemble. It consists of young players between the ages of 7 and 18 and is quite well known in the northeast of England. It gives young people the opportunity to learn the viol and gives concerts in the North East and abroad. Ensembles like these show that the viol is making a comeback. A living museum of historical musical instruments was created at the University of Vienna as a center for the revival of the instrument. More than 100 instruments, including approximately 50 historical violas da gamba in playable condition, are the property of this new concept of a museum: the Orpheon Foundation Museum of Historical Instruments. All the instruments of this museum are played by the Orpheon Baroque Orchestra, the Orpheon consort, or by musicians who receive an instrument for a permanent loan. The instruments can be seen during temporary exhibitions. They are studied and copied by violin makers, contributing to the extension of the general knowledge we have on the viola da gamba, its forms, and the different techniques used for its manufacture.\nThe 1991 feature film \"Tous les matins du monde\" (All the Mornings of the World) by Alain Corneau, based on the lives of Monsieur de Sainte-Colombe and Marin Marais, prominently featured these composers' music for the viola da gamba and brought viol music to new audiences. The film's bestselling soundtrack features performances by Jordi Savall, one of the best-known modern viola da gamba players. Among the foremost modern players of the viol are Alison Crum, Vittorio Ghielmi, Susanne Heinrich, Wieland Kuijken, Paolo Pandolfo, Andrea de Carlo, Hille Perl and Jonathan Dunford. Many fine modern viol consorts (ensembles) are also recording and performing, among them the groups Fretwork, the Rose Consort of Viols, Les Voix Humaines, and Phantasm. The Baltimore Consort specializes in Renaissance song (mostly English) with broken consort (including viols).\nNew compositions.\nA number of contemporary composers have written for viol, and a number of soloists and ensembles have commissioned new music for viol. Fretwork has been most active in this regard, commissioning George Benjamin, Michael Nyman, Elvis Costello, Sir John Tavener, Orlando Gough, John Woolrich, Tan Dun, Alexander Goehr, Fabrice Fitch, Andrew Keeling, Thea Musgrave, Sally Beamish, Peter Sculthorpe, Gavin Bryars, Barrington Pheloung, Simon Bainbridge, Duncan Druce, Poul Ruders, Ivan Moody, and Barry Guy; many of these compositions may be heard on their 1997 CD \"Sit Fast\". The Yukimi Kambe Viol Consort has commissioned and recorded many works by David Loeb, and the New York Consort of Viols has commissioned B\u00fclent Arel, David Loeb, Daniel Pinkham, Tison Street, Frank Russo, Seymour Barab, William Presser, and Will Ayton, many of these compositions appearing on their 1993 CD \"Illicita Cosa\".\nThe Viola da Gamba Society of America has also been a potent force fostering new compositions for the viol. Among the music publications of the Society is its New Music for Viols (NMV) a series devoted to newly written pieces. The Society sponsors the International Leo M. Traynor Composition Competition for new music for viols. The competition was first held in 1989 and has taken place every four to five years since. The competition is specifically for consort music for three to six viol that, like the repertoire of the Renaissance, is accessible to accomplished amateurs. The winning pieces are played in concert and also published by the Society. The Society's goal is to stimulate development of a contemporary literature for this remarkable early instrument and thus continue its tradition in modern society.\nThe Palazzo Strozzi in Florence commissioned composer Bruce Adolphe to create a work based on Bronzino poems, and the piece, \"Of Art and Onions: Homage to Bronzino\", features a prominent viola da gamba part. Jay Elfenbein has also written works for the Yukimi Kambe Viol Consort, Les Voix Humaines, and Elliot Z. Levine, among others. Other composers for viols include Moondog, Kevin Volans, Roy Whelden, Toyohiko Satoh, Roman Turovsky, Giorgio Pacchioni, Michael Starke, Emily Doolittle, and Jan Goorissen. Composer Henry Vega has written pieces for the Viol: \"Ssolo,\" developed at the Institute for Sonology and performed by Karin Preslmayr, as well as for Netherlands-based ensemble The Roentgen Connection in 2011 with \"Slow slower\" for recorder, viola da gamba, harpsichord and computer. The Aston Magna Music Festival has recently commissioned works including viol from composers Nico Muhly and Alex Burtzos. The Italian contemporary composer Carlotta Ferrari has written two pieces for viol: \"Le ombre segrete\" in 2015, and \"Profondissimi affetti\" in 2016, this latter being based on RPS modal harmony system.\nElectric instruments.\nSince the early 1980s, numerous instrument makers, including Eric Jensen, Francois Danger, Jan Goorissen, and Jonathan Wilson, have experimented with the design and construction of electric viols. Like other acoustic instruments to which pickups or microphones have been added, electric viols are plugged into an instrument amplifier or a PA system, which makes them sound louder. As well, given that amplifiers and PA systems are electronic components, this gives the performer the ability to change the tone and sound of the instrument by adding effects units such as reverb or changing the tone with a graphic equalizer. An equalizer can be used to shape the sound of an electric viol to suit a performance space, or to create unusual new sounds. Electric viols range from Danger's minimally electrified acoustic/electric Altra line to Eric Jensen's solid-body brace-mounted design. They have met with varying degrees of ergonomic and musical success. In the early 21st century, the Ruby Gamba, a seven-string electric viola da gamba, was developed by Ruby Instruments of Arnhem, the Netherlands. It has 21 tied nylon (adjustable) frets in keeping with the adjustable (tied gut) frets on traditional viols and has an effective playing range of more than six octaves. Electric viols have been adopted by such contemporary gambists as Paolo Pandolfo, Tina Chancey, and Tony Overwater.\nSimilar names and common confusions.\nThe viola da gamba is occasionally confused with the viola, the alto member of the modern violin family and a standard member of both the symphony orchestra and string quartet. In the 15th century, the Italian word \" was a generic term used to refer to any bowed instrument, or fiddle. The word \" existed in Italy before the vihuela, or first viol, was brought from Spain. In Italy, \"\" was first applied to \"a braccio\" precursor to the modern violin, as described by Tinctoris (\"De inventione et usu musice\", c.\u20091481\u20133), and then was later used to describe the first Italian viols as well. Depending on the context, the unmodified \"viola da braccio\" most regularly denoted either an instrument from the violin family, or specifically the viola (whose specific name was \"alto de viola da braccio\"). When Monteverdi called simply for \"viole da braccio\" in \"Orfeo\", the composer was requesting violas as well as treble and bass instruments. The full name of the viola, namely \"alto de viola da braccio\", was finally shortened to \"viola\" in some languages (e.g. English, Italian, Spanish) once viols became less common, while other languages picked some other part of the phrase to designate the instrument, e.g. \" in French and \" in German (the latter derived from the Italian \"\").\nSome other instruments have \"viola\" in their name, but are not a member of the \"viola da gamba\" family. These include the viola d'amore and the viola pomposa. Though the baryton does not have \"viola\" in its name, it is sometimes included in the viol family. Whether it is considered a member of this family is a matter of semantics. It is organologically closely related to the viola da gamba proper, but if we think of the family as the group of differently sized instruments that play together in consorts, the baryton would not be among this group. The names \"viola\" (Italy) and \"vihuela\" (Spain) were essentially synonymous and interchangeable. According to viol historian Ian Woodfield, there is little evidence that the \"vihuela de arco\" was introduced to Italy before the 1490s. The term \"viola\" was never used exclusively for viols in the 15th or 16th centuries. In 16th century Italy, both \"\"violas\",\"\u2014the early viols and violins\u2014developed somewhat simultaneously. While violins, such as those of Amati, achieved their classic form before the first half of the century, the viol's form standardized later in the century at the hands of instrument makers in England.\nViola da gamba, \"viola cum arculo\", and \"vihuela de arco\" are some (true) alternative names for viols. Both \"vihuela\" and \"viola\" were originally used in a fairly generic way, having included even early violins (\"viola da braccio\") under their umbrella. It is common enough (and justifiable) today for modern players of the viola da gamba to call their instruments \"violas\" and likewise to call themselves \"violists\". That the \"alto violin\" eventually became known simply as the \"viola\" is not without historical context, yet the ambiguity of the name tends to cause some confusion. The violin, or \"violino\", was originally the soprano \"viola da braccio\", or \"violino da braccio\". Due to the popularity of the soprano violin, the entire consort eventually took on the name \"violin family\". Some other names for viols include \"viole\" or \"violle\" (French). In Elizabethan English, the word \"gambo\" (for gamba) appears in many permutations; e.g., \"viola de gambo\", \"gambo violl\", \"viol de gambo\", or \"viole de gambo\", used by such notables as Tobias Hume, John Dowland, and William Shakespeare in \"Twelfth Night\". Viol da Gamba and Gamba also appear as string family stops on the pipe organ. These stops are sounds created by organ pipes made to imitate the sound of the viol da gamba.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32645", "revid": "47310746", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32645", "title": "Voyeurism", "text": "Sexual interest in or practice of spying on people engaged in intimate behaviors\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nVoyeurism is the sexual interest in or practice of watching other people engaged in intimate behaviors, such as undressing, sexual activity, or other actions of a private nature.\nThe term comes from the French \"voyeur\" which means \"watcher,\" derived from the verb \"voir,\" \u201cto see.\u201d A male voyeur is commonly labelled as \"Peeping Tom\" or a \"Jags\", a term which originates from the Lady Godiva legend. However, that term is usually applied to a male who observes somebody secretly and, generally, not in a public space.\nThe American Psychiatric Association has classified certain voyeuristic fantasies, urges and behaviour patterns as a paraphilia in the \"Diagnostic and Statistical Manual\" (DSM-IV) if the person has acted on these urges, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause marked distress or interpersonal difficulty. It is described as a disorder of sexual preference in the ICD-10. The DSM-IV defines voyeurism as the act of observing \"individuals, usually strangers, engaging in sexual activity, exhibitionism, or disrobing\". The diagnosis as a disorder would not be given to people who experience typical sexual arousal or amusement, simply by inadvertently seeing nudity or sexual activity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical perspectives.\nThere is relatively little academic research regarding voyeurism. When a review was published in 1976 there were only 15 available resources. Voyeurs were well-paying hole-lookers in especially Parisian brothels, a commercial innovation described as far back as 1857 but not gaining much notoriety until the 1880s, and not attracting formal medical-forensic recognition until the early 1890s. Society has accepted the use of the term voyeur as a description of anyone who views the intimate lives of others, even outside of a sexual context. This term is specifically used regarding reality television and other media which allow people to view the personal lives of others. This is a reversal from the historical perspective, moving from a term which describes a specific population in detail, to one which describes the general population vaguely.\nOne of the few historical theories on the causes of voyeurism comes from psychoanalytic theory. Psychoanalytic theory proposes that voyeurism results from a failure to accept castration anxiety and as a result of failure to identify with the father.\nPrevalence.\nVoyeurism has high prevalence rates in most studied populations. Voyeurism was once believed to only be present in a small portion of the population. This perception changed when Alfred Kinsey discovered that 30% of men prefer coitus with the lights on. This behaviour is not considered voyeurism by modern diagnostic standards, but there was little differentiation between normal and pathological behaviour at the time. Subsequent research showed that 65% of men had engaged in peeping, which suggests that this behaviour is widely spread throughout the population. Congruent with this, research found voyeurism to be the most common sexual law-breaking behaviour in both clinical and general populations.\nAn earlier study, based on 60 college men from a rural area, indicates that 54% had voyeuristic fantasies, and that 42% had tried voyeurism, concluding that young men are more easily aroused by the idea.\nIn a national study of Sweden it was found that 7.7% of the population (16% of men and 4% of women) had engaged in voyeurism at some point. It is also believed that voyeurism occurs up to 150 times more frequently than police reports indicate. This same study also indicates that there are high levels of co-occurrence between voyeurism and exhibitionism, finding that 63% of voyeurs also report exhibitionist behaviour.\nCharacteristics.\nPeople engage in voyeuristic behaviours for diverse reasons, but statistics can indicate which groups are likelier to engage in the act.\nEarly research indicated that voyeurs were more mentally healthy than other groups with paraphilias. Compared to the other groups studied, it was found that voyeurs were unlikely to be alcoholics or drug users. More recent research shows that, compared to the general population, voyeurs were moderately more likely to have psychological problems, use alcohol and drugs, and have higher sexual interest generally. This study also shows that voyeurs have a greater number of sexual partners per year, and are more likely to have had a same-sex partner than most of the populations. Both older and newer research found that voyeurs typically have a later age of first sexual intercourse. However, other research found no difference in sexual history between voyeurs and non-voyeurs. Voyeurs who are not also exhibitionists tend to be from a higher socioeconomic status than those who do show exhibitionist behaviour.\nGender differences.\nResearch shows that, like almost all paraphilias, voyeurism is more common in men than in women. However, research has found that men and women both report roughly the same likelihood that they would hypothetically engage in voyeurism. There appears to be a greater gender difference when actually presented with the opportunity to perform voyeurism. There is very little research done on voyeurism in women, so very little is known on the subject which limits the degree to which it can generalize to normal female populations.\nA 2021 study found that 36.4% of men and 63.8% of women were strongly repulsed by the idea of voyeurism. Men were more likely to be mildly or moderately aroused than women, but there was little gender difference among those who reported strong arousal. Men reported slightly higher willingness to commit voyeurism but, when risk is introduced, willingness diminishes in both sexes proportionally to the risk involved. Individual differences in sociosexuality and sexual compulsivity were found to contribute to the sex differences in voyeurism.\nContemporary perspectives.\nLovemap theory suggests that voyeurism exists because looking at naked others shifts from an ancillary sexual behaviour to a primary sexual act. This results in a displacement of sexual desire making the act of watching someone the primary means of sexual satisfaction.\nVoyeurism has also been linked with obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder (OCD). When treated by the same approach as OCD, voyeuristic behaviours significantly decrease.\nTreatment.\nProfessional treatment.\nHistorically voyeurism has been treated in a variety of ways. Psychoanalytic, group psychotherapy and shock aversion approaches have all been attempted with limited success. There is some evidence which shows that pornography can be used as a form of treatment for voyeurism. This is based on the idea that countries with pornography censorship have high amounts of voyeurism. Additionally shifting voyeurs from voyeuristic behaviour, to looking at graphic pornography, to looking at the nudes in \"Playboy\" has been successfully used as a treatment. These studies show that pornography can be used as a means of satisfying voyeuristic desires without breaking the law.\nVoyeurism has also been successfully treated with a mix of anti-psychotics and antidepressants. However the patient in this case study had a multitude of other mental health problems. Intense pharmaceutical treatment may not be required for most voyeurs.\nThere has also been success in treating voyeurism through using treatment methods for obsessive compulsive disorder. There have been multiple instances of successful treatment of voyeurism through putting patients on fluoxetine and treating their voyeuristic behaviour as a compulsion.\nCriminology.\nNon-consensual voyeurism is considered to be a form of sexual abuse. When the interest in a particular subject is obsessive, the behaviour may be described as stalking.\nThe United States FBI assert that some individuals who engage in \"nuisance\" offences (such as voyeurism) may also have a propensity for violence based on behaviours of serious sex offenders. An FBI researcher has suggested that voyeurs are likely to demonstrate some characteristics that are common, but not universal, among serious sexual offenders who invest considerable time and effort in the capturing of a victim (or image of a victim); careful, methodical planning devoted to the selection and preparation of equipment; and often meticulous attention to detail.\nLittle to no research has been done into the demographics of voyeurs.\nLegal status.\nVoyeurism is not a crime in common law. In common law countries, it is only a crime if made so by legislation.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, for example, voyeurism was not a crime when the case \"Frey v. Fedoruk et al.\" arose in 1947. In that case, in 1950, the Supreme Court of Canada held that courts could not criminalise voyeurism by classifying it as a breach of the peace and that Parliament would have to specifically outlaw it.\nA test of the lack of laws related to voyeurism came in February 2005. It became public knowledge that a website called peepingthong.com had become a depository of photos showing young women, many of them University of Victoria students, sitting down at various campus locations, such as libraries. While the act of photographing them in isolation may not have caused a commotion, each of the women revealed their thong underwear to create a whale tail.\nReaction from female members of the university community was not positive. The chairwoman of the student union, Joanna Groves, believed that perpetrator(s) committed an action that were \"a violation of someone's privacy.\" The outreach coordinator for the University of Victoria Student Society Women's Centre, Caitlin Warbeck, went as far as to call it \"sexual assault.\" The photographed individuals also appeared to be completely unaware that they were being watched.\nWhile the photos did cause a commotion, law enforcement could not do anything because the photos were snapped in public locations. University administrators were also powerless because the site was not affiliated with the institution. Campus security, however, did put up flyers in certain parts of campus where the perpetrator(s) were believed to be operating.\nOn November 1, 2005, Parliament outlawed voyeurism when section 162 was added to the Canadian \"Criminal Code\", declaring voyeurism to be a sexual offence when it violates a reasonable expectation of privacy. In the case of R\u00a0v\u00a0Jarvis, the Supreme Court of Canada held that for the purposes of that law, the expectation of privacy is not all-or-nothing; rather there are degrees of privacy, and although secondary-school pupils in the school building cannot reasonably expect as much privacy as in the bedroom, nonetheless they can expect enough privacy so that photographing them without their consent for the purpose of sexual gratification is forbidden.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn some countries voyeurism is considered to be a sex crime. In the United Kingdom, for example, non-consensual voyeurism became a criminal offence on May 1, 2004. In the English case of \"R v Turner\" (2006), the manager of a sports centre filmed four women taking showers. There was no indication that the footage had been shown to anyone else or distributed in any way. The defendant pleaded guilty. The Court of Appeal confirmed a sentence of nine months' imprisonment to reflect the seriousness of the abuse of trust and the traumatic effect on the victims.\nIn another English case in 2009, \"R v Wilkins\" (2010), a man who filmed his intercourse with five of his lovers for his own private viewing was sentenced to eight months in prison and ordered to sign onto the Sex Offender Register for ten years. In 2013, 40-year-old Mark Lancaster was found guilty of voyeurism and jailed for 16 months. He had tricked an 18-year-old student into traveling to a rented flat in Milton Keynes. There, he had filmed her with four secret cameras dressing up as a schoolgirl and posing for photographs before he had sex with her.\nIn a more recent English case in 2020, the Court of Appeal upheld the conviction of Tony Richards. Richards had sought \"to have two voyeurism charges under section 67 of the Sexual Offences Act dismissed on the grounds that he had committed no crime\". Richards had \"secretly videoed himself having sex with two women who had consented to sex in return for money but had not agreed to being captured on camera\". In an unusual step, the court allowed Emily Hunt, a person not involved in the case, to intervene on behalf of the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). Hunt had an ongoing judicial review against the CPS. The CPS had argued that Hunt's alleged attacker had not violated the law when he \"took a video lasting over one minute of her naked and unconscious\" in a hotel room -- the basis being that there should be no expectation of privacy in the bedroom. However, in terms of what is considered a private act for the purposes of voyeurism, the CPS was arguing the opposite in the Richards appeal. The Court of Appeal clarified that consenting to sex in a private place does not amount to consent to be filmed without that person's knowledge. Anyone who films or photographs another person naked, without their permission, is breaking the law under sections 67 and 68 of the Sexual Offences Act.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, criminal voyeurism statutes arise from laws and legal principles that protect private activities from unlawful intrusion. They are specific to unlawful, unconsented surreptitious surveillance, recordings, and broadcasts. They involve places and times when a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy and a reasonable supposition they are not being photographed, filmed or observed by any form of recording or broadcast device. These statutes often also criminalize the broadcast, dissemination, publication, or selling of recordings.\nVideo voyeurism is an offense in at least twelve states. The case that led to the criminalisation of video voyeurism has been made into a television movie called \"Video Voyeur\".\nSaudi Arabia.\nSaudi Arabia banned the sale of camera phones nationwide in April 2004, but reversed the ban in December 2004. Some countries, such as South Korea and Japan, require all camera phones sold in their country to make a clearly audible sound whenever a picture is being taken. In South Korea, specialty teams have been set up to regularly check places like bathrooms and change-rooms for hidden cameras known as \"molka\".\nIndia.\nIn 2013, the Indian Parliament made amendments to the Indian Penal Code, introducing voyeurism as a criminal offence. A man committing the offence of voyeurism would be liable for imprisonment of not less than one year and up to three years and a fine for the first offence. For any subsequent conviction, he would be liable for imprisonment for not less than three years and up to seven years as well as a fine.\nSingapore.\nVoyeurism is generally deemed illegal in Singapore. Those convicted of voyeurism face a maximum punishment of one year in jail and a fine -- based on insulting a woman's modesty. Recent cases in 2016 include the sentencing of church facility manager Kenneth Yeo Jia Chuan who filmed women in toilets. Yeo Jia Chuan planted pinhole cameras in a handicapped toilet at the Church of Singapore at Bukit Timah, and in the unisex toilet of the church's office at Bukit Timah Shopping Centre.\nSecret photography by law enforcement authorities is called surveillance and is not considered to be voyeurism, though it may be unlawful or regulated in some countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32647", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32647", "title": "VoIP", "text": ""}
{"id": "32648", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32648", "title": "Volatile Organic Compounds Protocol", "text": "Treaty on atmospheric pollution\nThe Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Volatile Organic Compounds or Their Transboundary Fluxes (known as the Volatile Organic Compounds Protocol or the VOC Protocol) is a protocol to the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution which aims to provide for the control and reduction of emissions of volatile organic compounds in order to reduce their transboundary fluxes so as to protect human health and the environment from adverse effects. The protocol was concluded at Geneva, Switzerland.\n\"Opened for signature\" - November 18, 1991\n\"Entered into force\" - September 29, 1997\n\"Parties\" - (24) Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Republic of Macedonia, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom\n\"Countries that have signed, but not yet ratified\" - (6) Canada, European Union, Greece, Portugal, Ukraine, United States\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32649", "revid": "43209119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32649", "title": "Vinyl record", "text": ""}
{"id": "32650", "revid": "508734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32650", "title": "Vale of Evesham", "text": ""}
{"id": "32652", "revid": "50307249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32652", "title": "Volkswagen Group", "text": "German multinational automotive manufacturing corporation\nVolkswagen AG, or Volkswagen Group, is a German multinational conglomerate automotive manufacturer headquartered in Wolfsburg, Lower Saxony, Germany. Since the late 2000s, it has been a publicly traded family business owned by Porsche SE, which in turn is half-owned but fully controlled by the Austrian-German Porsche and Pi\u00ebch family. The company also offers related services, including financing, leasing, and fleet management. In 2024, it was the world's second-largest automaker by sales. It has maintained the largest market share in Europe for over two decades. It ranked 11th in the 2024 \"Fortune\" Global 500 list of the world's largest companies. In 2024, Volkswagen Group was the largest company in the European Union and the largest car manufacturer in the world by revenue.\nThe Volkswagen Group sells passenger cars under the Audi, Bentley, Cupra, Jetta, Lamborghini, Porsche, SEAT, \u0160koda and Volkswagen brands, motorcycles under the Ducati name, light commercial vehicles under the Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brand, and heavy commercial vehicles via the marques of the listed subsidiary Traton (International Motors, MAN, Scania and Volkswagen Truck &amp; Bus). Software and techstack under CARIAD. It is divided into two primary divisions: the Automotive Division and the Financial Services Division. As of 2008, it had about 342 subsidiary companies. Volkswagen also has three joint ventures in China, FAW-Volkswagen, SAIC Volkswagen and Volkswagen Anhui. The company has operations in roughly 150 countries, and it has 100 production facilities across 27 countries.\nVolkswagen was founded in Berlin in 1937 and incorporated in Wolfsburg to manufacture the car that would become known as the Beetle. The company's production grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s. In 1965, it acquired Auto Union, which subsequently produced the first postwar Audi models. Volkswagen launched a new generation of front-wheel drive vehicles in the 1970s, including the Passat, Polo and Golf; the latter became its bestseller. Volkswagen acquired a controlling stake in SEAT in 1986, making it the first non-German marque of the company, and acquired control of \u0160koda in 1994, of Bentley, Lamborghini, and Bugatti in 1998, Scania in 2008 and of Ducati, MAN, and Porsche in 2012. The company's operations in China have grown rapidly in the 2010s, with the country becoming its largest market, though sales have declined significantly in the 2020s.\nIn 2015, Volkswagen was discovered to have used defeat devices to deceive environmental regulators about how much NOx its cars were emitting. The company was fined billions of dollars.\nVolkswagen Aktiengesellschaft is a public company and has a primary listing on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, where it is a constituent of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index, and secondary listings on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and SIX Swiss Exchange. It has been traded in the United States via American depositary receipts since 1988, currently on the OTC Marketplace. Volkswagen delisted from the London Stock Exchange in 2013. The government of Lower Saxony holds 12.7% of the company's shares, granting it, by law, 20% of the voting rights.\nHistory.\n1937 to 1945.\nVolkswagen (meaning 'People's car' in German) was founded in Berlin as the \"Gesellschaft zur Vorbereitung des Deutschen Volkswagens mbH\" ('Limited Liability Company for the preparation of the German People's Car', abbreviated to \"Gezuvor\") by the National Socialist \"Deutsche Arbeitsfront\" (German Labour Front) and incorporated in the \"Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben\", (\"\"\"City of the Strength Through Joy car at Fallersleben) on 28 May 1937. The purpose of the company was to manufacture the Volkswagen car, originally referred to as the Porsche Type 60, then the Volkswagen Type 1, and commonly called the Volkswagen Beetle. This vehicle was designed by Ferdinand Porsche's consulting firm, and the company was backed by the support of Adolf Hitler. On 16 September 1938, Gezuvor was renamed \"Volkswagenwerk GmbH\" ('Volkswagen Factory GmbH').\nShortly after the factory at Fallersleben was completed World War II started, and the plant primarily manufactured the military K\u00fcbelwagen (Porsche Type 82) and the related amphibious Schwimmwagen (Type 166), both of which were derived from the Volkswagen. Only a small number of Type 60 Volkswagens were made during this time. The Fallersleben plant also manufactured the V-1 flying bomb, making the plant a major bombing target for the Allied forces.\nSlave labour was utilised in the Volkswagen plant, e.g. from Arbeitsdorf concentration camp. The company would admit in 1998 that it used 15,000 slaves during the war effort. German historians estimated that 80% of Volkswagen's wartime workforce was slave labour. Many of the slaves were reported to have been supplied from the concentration camps upon request from plant managers. A lawsuit was filed in 1998 by survivors for restitution for the forced labour. Volkswagen would set up a voluntary restitution fund.\n1945 to 1970.\nAfter the war in Europe, in June 1945, Major Ivan Hirst of the British Army Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers (REME) took control of the bomb-shattered factory for use in repairing British Army vehicles, pending the expected disposal of the plant tooling and equipment as war reparations. However, no British car manufacturer was interested. A British report on the car said that \"the vehicle does not meet the fundamental technical requirement of a motor-car \u2026 it is quite unattractive to the average buyer \u2026 To build the car commercially would be a completely uneconomic enterprise.\" In 1948, the Ford Motor Company of USA was offered Volkswagen, but Ernest Breech, a Ford executive vice president, said he did not think either the plant or the car was \"worth a damn.\" Breech later said that he would have considered merging Ford of Germany and Volkswagen, but after the war, ownership of the company was in such dispute that nobody could possibly hope to be able to take it over. As part of the Industrial plans for Germany, large parts of German industry, including Volkswagen, were to be dismantled. Total German car production was set at a maximum of 10% of the 1936 car production numbers. The company survived by producing cars for the British Army, and in 1948 the British Government handed the company back over to the German state, and it was managed by former Opel chief Heinrich Nordhoff.\nProduction of the Type 60 Volkswagen (re-designated Type 1) started slowly after the war due to the need to rebuild the plant and because of the lack of raw materials, but production grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s. The company began introducing new models based on the Type 1, all with the same basic air-cooled, rear-engine, rear-drive platform. These included the Volkswagen Type 2 in 1950, the Volkswagen Karmann Ghia in 1955, the Volkswagen Type 3 in 1961, the Volkswagen Type 4 in 1968, and the Volkswagen Type 181 in 1969.\nIn 1960, upon the flotation of part of the German federal government's stake in the company on the German stock market, its name became \"Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft\" (usually abbreviated to \"Volkswagenwerk AG\").\nOn 1 January 1965, Volkswagenwerk acquired Auto Union GmbH from its parent company Daimler-Benz. The new subsidiary went on to produce the first post-war Audi models, the Audi F103 series, shortly afterwards.\nAnother German manufacturer, NSU Motorenwerke AG, was merged into Auto Union on 26 August 1969, creating a new company, Audi NSU Auto Union AG (later renamed AUDI AG in 1985).\n1970 to 1999.\nFrom the late 1970s to 1992, the acronym V.A.G. was used by Volkswagen AG as a brand for group-wide activities, such as distribution and leasing. Contrary to popular belief, \"V.A.G.\" had no official meaning, and was never the formal name of the Volkswagen Group.\nOn 30 September 1982, Volkswagenwerk made its first step expanding outside Germany by signing a co-operation agreement with the Spanish car manufacturer SEAT, S.A.\nTo reflect the company's increasing global diversification from its headquarters and main plant (the \"Volkswagenwerk\" in Wolfsburg), on 4 July 1985, the company name was changed again\u2014to \"Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft\" (Volkswagen AG).\nOn 18 June 1986, Volkswagen AG acquired a 51% controlling stake in SEAT, making it the first non-German subsidiary of the Volkswagen Group. On 23 December the same year, it became the Spanish company's major shareholder by increasing its share up to 75%.\nIn 1990\u2014after purchasing its entire equity\u2014Volkswagen AG took over the full ownership of SEAT, making the company a wholly owned subsidiary, and on 28 March 1991, another step to the expansion of the group's activities was made through the signing of a joint-venture partnership agreement with \u0160koda automobilov\u00e1 a.s. of Czechoslovakia, accompanied with the acquisition of a 30% stake in the Czech car manufacturer on 16 April 1991.\nOn 19 December 1994, the group began the acquisition of \u0160koda Auto by raising its share to 60.3%. Later, on 11 December 1995, it became the Czech company's largest and controlling shareholder by increasing its share up to 70%.\nThree prestige automotive marques were added to the Volkswagen portfolio in 1998: Bentley, Lamborghini, and Bugatti.\n2000 to present.\nOn 30 May 2000, after having gradually raised its equity share, Volkswagen AG took over the full ownership of \u0160koda Auto, making the company a wholly owned subsidiary.\nFrom 2002 up to 2007, the Volkswagen Group's automotive division was restructured so that two major Brand Groups with different profile would be formed, the \"Audi Brand Group\" focused on more sporty values\u00a0\u2013 consisted of Audi, SEAT and Lamborghini\u00a0\u2013 and the \"Volkswagen Brand Group\" on the field of classic values\u00a0\u2013 consisted of Volkswagen, Skoda, Bentley and Bugatti\u00a0\u2013 with each Brand Group's product vehicles and performance being respectively under the higher responsibility of Audi and Volkswagen brands.\nVolkswagen Group revealed on 24 October 2009 that it had made an offer to acquire long-time partner and German niche automotive manufacturer Wilhelm Karmann GmbH out of bankruptcy protection. In November 2009, the supervisory board of Volkswagen AG approved the acquisition of assets of Karmann, and planned to restart vehicle production at their Osnabr\u00fcck plant in 2012.\nIn December 2009, Volkswagen AG bought a 49.9% stake in Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG (more commonly known as Porsche AG) in a first step towards an 'integrated automotive group' with Porsche. The merger of Volkswagen AG and Porsche SE was scheduled to take place during the course of 2011. On 8 September 2011, it was announced that the planned merger \"cannot be implemented within the time frame provided for in the Comprehensive Agreement\". As reasons, unquantifiable legal risks, including a criminal probe into the holding's former management team were given. Both parties \"remain committed to the goal of creating an integrated automotive group with Porsche and are convinced that this will take place\".\nOn 4 July 2012 Volkswagen group announced they would wrap up the remaining half of Porsche shares for 4.46 billion euros (US$5.58 billion) on 1 August 2012 to avoid taxes of as much as 1.5 billion euros, which would have to be paid if the wrap up happened after 31 July 2014. On 1 August 2012, Volkswagen AG purchased the remaining stake in Porsche AG equaling 100% of the shares in Porsche Zwischenholding GmbH, thus making Porsche the second German wholly owned subsidiary of the group after Audi.\nVolkswagen AG completed the purchase of 19.9% of Suzuki Motor Corporation's issued shares on 15 January 2010. Suzuki invested part of the amount received from Volkswagen into 1.49% percent of Volkswagen. In 2011, Suzuki filed a lawsuit at an arbitration court in London requesting that Volkswagen return the 19.9% stake.\nOn 25 May 2010, it was announced that Volkswagen Group, through its subsidiary Lamborghini Holding S.p.A., had acquired a 90.1% stake in the Italian automotive design house Italdesign Giugiaro.\nIn less than three months, the transaction had been completed making the Italian firm a member of the Volkswagen Group. Since 2013 the Volkswagen Group has held a 89.7% stake in Traton.\nIn 2015 research showed a security flaw in the keyless ignition of Volkswagen and other carmakers' vehicles. Volkswagen spent two years trying to keep the research from the public domain.\nOn 3 August 2015, Nokia announced that it had reached a deal to sell its Here digital maps division to a consortium of three German automakers\u2014BMW, Daimler AG, and Volkswagen Group, for \u20ac2.8 billion. This was seen as an indication that the automakers were interested in automated cars.\nVolkswagen held a 19.9% non-controlling shareholding in Suzuki between 2009 and 2015. An international arbitration court ordered Volkswagen to sell the stake back to Suzuki. On 17 September 2015, Suzuki paid $3.8bn to complete the stock buy-back just hours prior to a major scandal about emissions violations engulfing Volkswagen. Suzuki had wished to buy Fiat diesel engines.\nIn 2021, Volkswagen sold their 55% stake in Bugatti to Rimac Group while transferring the remaining 45% to Porsche AG, forming a joint venture company called Bugatti Rimac.\nIn early 2024, Volkswagen Group began looking for partners among international technology corporations to create AI labs, new digital prototypes of products and functions using artificial intelligence.\nIn October 2024, Volkswagen plans to close at least three plants in Germany and cut jobs, facing challenges from delayed EV investments and a drop in Chinese sales.\nEmissions scandal, 2015.\nOn 18 September 2015, the U.S. EPA announced that Volkswagen had installed a \"defeat device\" software code in the diesel models sold in the US from 2009 to 2015. The code was intended to detect when an emissions test was being conducted, and altered emissions controls for better compliance. Off the test stand, the controls were relaxed, and emissions jumped 35 to 40 times regulatory levels according to investigators at West Virginia University and the California Air Resources Board. About 482,000 vehicles are under the recall order, a potential $18 billion ($37,500 per violation) in fines are pending, and news accounts speculate a criminal indictment for the deception is certain. The VW Group CEO, Martin Winterkorn, said he was \"deeply sorry\" and ordered an external investigation. The software code was only revealed when the EPA refused to certify VW's 2016 models for sale in the US unless the corporation provided full disclosure. On Sunday, 20 September 2015, VW Group announced it was halting the sale of its four-cylinder diesel models in the US. The US EPA press release on its Notice of Violation, and the California Air Resources Board letter dated 18 September 2015 contain significant chronological detail of the agencies interaction with VW on the issue.\nOn 22 September 2015, VW AG admitted that 11 million cars worldwide had been fitted with software intended to deceive emissions testing. The company issued a profit warning, saying it had set aside $7 billion to fix the fraud. On 23 September 2015, Martin Winterkorn announced his resignation from the CEO position after a crisis meeting of the company board. On 25 September 2015 Matthias M\u00fcller was named CEO. M\u00fcller was the head of the Porsche marque within the VW corporate umbrella.\nOn 21 April 2017, a U.S. federal judge ordered Volkswagen \"to pay a $2.8 billion criminal fine for rigging diesel-powered vehicles to cheat on government emissions tests\". The \"unprecedented\" plea deal formalized a punishment that Volkswagen AG agreed to earlier in 2017. In addition, the plea deal includes a $1.5 billion settlement for various environmental, customs and financial violations.\nOverall, Volkswagen will pay more than $30 billion in penalties and lawsuit settlements related to the scandal.\nHuge debt.\nIn its own financial report for 2023 Volkswagen Group estimated its long, medium and short term debt at 155,6 Billion Euros. It is unclear how Volkswagen group plans to pay off that massive debt considering its falling global vehicle deliveries, planned closure of at least 3 factories in Germany after it previously closed 2 factories in Russia as well as 64% drop in profit for the three months to the end of September 2024. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz criticized Volkswagen's plan to close factories in Germany. He proposed a European subsidy program for electric vehicles.\nLatest setback for Volkswagen came on 21 November 2024, when Swedish battery producer Northvolt filed for bankruptcy, Volkswagen previously invested 1.4 billion euros in their failed business. On 27 November 2024, Volkswagen announced sale of its Xinijang factory in China partly because \"demand for combustion engine vehicles is going down\".\nElectrification strategy 2025.\nIn 2016, Volkswagen Group announced a corporate \"Strategy 2025\" that focuses on electrification of its portfolio. The VW Group developed the Volkswagen Group MEB platform chassis that will be utilized in a range of various cars and light utility vehicles across several VW Group marques due to its flexibility and floor-mounted battery.\nAs of May 2018, the VW Group has committed $48 billion in car battery supplies and plans to outfit 16 factories to build electric cars by the end of 2022. According to VW Group CEO Dr. Herbert Diess, the company will offer 25 electric models and 20 plug-in hybrids by 2020.\nProduction in Xinjiang.\nVolkswagen Group came under pressure for cooperating with the Chinese government in the region of Xinjiang. In that same region, western-funded NGOs accused the Chinese government of having committed human rights abuses against the Uyghur minority group, which included mass surveillance, incarceration, and forced labor. After these accusations emerged, Volkswagen responded, \"We do not assume any of our employees are forced laborers.\" \"S\u00fcddeutsche Zeitung\" claimed that Volkswagen was operating a plant in Xinjiang at a loss in order to curry favor with the Chinese government to set up more lucrative plants in other parts of China, which Volkswagen denied, saying that the decision to set up the plant in 2012 was purely based on economics. In November 2024, Volkswagen announced it would sell the plant to Shanghai Motor Vehicle Inspection Certification.\nNew Auto.\nIn 2021, Volkswagen Group released their \"New Auto\" strategy. The strategy was based on transitioning to electric cars, and building a shared platform, battery systems, software and mobility solutions to use across all their brands. This involves creating the Scalable Systems Platform, as well as developing software under a new subsidiary CARIAD. Volkswagen Group aims by 2024 to transition to selling mostly electric cars. It aims to have six battery factories in Europe by 2030. In 2023, Volkswagen Group announced plans to cut costs by \u20ac10 billion ($11.1 billion). In February 2024, Volkswagen Group and Chinese electric vehicle manufacturer XPeng signed a technology cooperation and joint development agreement on platform and software.\nOperations.\nRooted in Europe, the Volkswagen Group operates in 153 countries. Volkswagen Passenger Cars is the Group's original marque, and the other major subsidiaries include passenger car marques such as Audi, Bentley, Lamborghini, Porsche, SEAT, and \u0160koda. Volkswagen AG also has operations in commercial vehicles, owning Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles, along with controlling stakes in truck, bus and diesel engine manufacturers Scania AB and MAN SE.\nSubsidiaries and brands.\nThe Volkswagen Group comprises the following vehicle manufacturers and their corresponding brands:\nHere are the brands operated under the Volkswagen Group:\nOther subsidiaries and shareholdings:\nThe Group also owns five defunct marques which are managed through the companies Auto Union GmbH and NSU GmbH, both of which are 100% owned by AUDI AG:\nCorporate affairs.\nBusiness trends.\nIn February 2025, Volkswagen's market capitalization was valued at US$50.5 billion. The key trends for the Volkswagen Group are (as at the financial year ending March 3):\nOwnership.\nUnder the Volkswagen Law, no shareholder in Volkswagen AG could exercise more than 20\u00a0percent of the firm's voting rights, regardless of their level of stock holding. This law was supposed to protect Volkswagen Group from takeovers. In October 2005, Porsche acquired an 18.53\u00a0percent stake in the business, and in July 2006, Porsche increased that ownership to more than 25\u00a0percent. Analysts disagreed as to whether the investment was a good fit for Porsche's strategy.\nOn 26 March 2007, after the European Union moved against the Volkswagen law, Porsche took its holding to 30.9\u00a0percent, triggering a takeover bid under German law. Porsche formally announced in a press statement that it did not intend to take over Volkswagen Group, setting its offer price at the lowest possible legal value, but intended the move to avoid a competitor taking a large stake, or to stop hedge funds dismantling Volkswagen Group, which is Porsche's most important partner.\nOn 16 September 2008, Porsche announced that the company had increased its stake in Volkswagen AG to 35\u00a0percent. By October 2008, Porsche held 42.6\u00a0percent of Volkswagen AG's ordinary shares, and held stock options on another 31.5\u00a0percent. thus, effectively holding over 74\u00a0percent; 42.6\u00a0percent actual shares, and the rest as convertible options. Volkswagen AG briefly became the world's most valuable company, as the stock price rose to over \u20ac1,000 per share as short sellers tried to cover their positions. The substantial investment in Volkswagen left Porsche with huge financial burden with its debts accumulating up to 13 billion euros by 2009. Porsche would get emergency infusion of about a billion dollars from Volkswagen. In July 2012, Volkswagen completed takeover of Porsche ending the four-year saga and formed an integrated automotive group with Porsche. Porsche AG would become the 10th brand of Volkswagen. The holding company Porsche SE was left with 31 percent of the subscribed capital of Volkswagen AG, and 50.7 percent of the voting rights in the company.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], share ownership of Volkswagen AG is distributed as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStock market listings.\nVolkswagen AG shares are primarily traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange, and are listed under the 'VOW' and 'VOW3' stock ticker symbols. First listed in August 1961, the shares were issued at a price of DM\u00a0350 per DM\u00a0100 share, Volkswagen AG shares are now separated into two different types or classes: 'ordinary shares' and 'preference shares'. The ordinary shares are now traded under the WKN\u00a0766400 and ISIN DE0007664005 listings, and the preference shares under the WKN\u00a0766403 and ISIN DE0007664039 listings.\nVolkswagen AG shares are also listed and traded on other major domestic and worldwide stock exchanges. In Germany's domestic exchanges, since 1961 these include those in Berlin, D\u00fcsseldorf, Hamburg, Hanover, Munich and Stuttgart. International exchanges include those in Basel (listed in 1967), Geneva (1967), Z\u00fcrich (1967), Luxembourg (1979), London (1988), and New York (1988).\nSince the start of trading in 1961, Volkswagen AG shares have been subjected to two stock splits\u00a0\u2013 the first was on 17 March 1969 when they were split at a ratio of 2:1, from a DM\u00a0100 share to a DM\u00a050 share. The second split occurred on 6 July 1998, the DM\u00a050 share being converted into a share of no overall nominal value, at a ratio of 1:10.\nFrom 23 December 2009, Volkswagen AG preferred shares replaced its ordinary shares in the DAX index.\nLeadership, sales and market share.\nIn 2024, Volkswagen Group's largest single country market was China with 2.93 million units delivered, followed by Germany with 1.12 million units. Divided by regions, Asia-Pacific was the second-largest market of the Volkswagen Group with 3.21 million units in 2013, followed by Western Europe with 3.14 million, and North America with 962,000 units delivered in 2024.\nThe European ranking of automakers is compiled monthly by the European Auto Manufacturers' Association ACEA. Volkswagen has held the top spot in Europe uninterrupted for more than two decades.\nThe company was again the top global automaker in 2018, for the fifth consecutive year, selling 10.083 million vehicles in the year 2018, just 7,000 more than the Renault\u2013Nissan\u2013Mitsubishi Alliance.\nCo-management.\nWith 295,178 employees in Germany and 682,724 globally, it is one of the most well organized labour represented companies in the world. The role that Works Councils and the trade union IG Metall play is unique even within Germany. VW workers have some of the strongest collective agreements. With the exception of the United States, all of its major locations are represented in the Global Works Council and local trade union bodies. VW has a strong tradition and practice of social partnership and co-determination rights globally.\nIn September 2024, in response to the threat of mass layoffs at Volkswagen, German Economy Minister Robert Habeck said that the government would consider how it could help Volkswagen. In December 2024, tens of thousands of VW workers in Germany went on strike.\nSponsorships.\nVolkswagen is heavily involved in sports sponsorship, with investments having included the 2008 Summer Olympics, the 2014 Winter Olympics, as well as the David Beckham Academy. Volkswagen AG wholly owns the Bundesliga football side VfL Wolfsburg; the company is also the shirt sponsor of League of Ireland Premier Division Sligo Rovers and top level of the Mexican football league system Liga MX team Puebla F.C.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32653", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32653", "title": "Vaccine", "text": "Pathogen-derived preparation that provides acquired immunity to an infectious disease\nA vaccine is a biological preparation that provides active acquired immunity to a particular infectious or malignant disease. The safety and effectiveness of vaccines has been widely studied and verified. A vaccine typically contains an agent that resembles a disease-causing microorganism and is often made from weakened or killed forms of the microbe, its toxins, or one of its surface proteins. The agent stimulates the immune system to recognize the agent as a threat, destroy it, and recognize further and destroy any of the microorganisms associated with that agent that it may encounter in the future.\nVaccines can be prophylactic (to prevent or alleviate the effects of a future infection by a natural or \"wild\" pathogen), or therapeutic (to fight a disease that has already occurred, such as cancer). Some vaccines offer full sterilizing immunity, in which infection is prevented.\nThe administration of vaccines is called vaccination. Vaccination is the most effective method of preventing infectious diseases; widespread immunity due to vaccination is largely responsible for the worldwide eradication of smallpox and the restriction of diseases such as polio, measles, and tetanus from much of the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that licensed vaccines are available for twenty-five different preventable infections.\nThe first recorded use of inoculation to prevent smallpox (see variolation) occurred in the 16th century in China, with the earliest hints of the practice in China coming during the 10th century. It was also the first disease for which a vaccine was produced. The folk practice of inoculation against smallpox was brought from Turkey to Britain in 1721 by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu.\nThe terms \"vaccine\" and \"vaccination\" are derived from \"Variolae vaccinae\" (smallpox of the cow), the term devised by Edward Jenner (who both developed the concept of vaccines and created the first vaccine) to denote cowpox. He used the phrase in 1798 for the long title of his \"Inquiry into the Variolae vaccinae Known as the Cow Pox\", in which he described the protective effect of cowpox against smallpox. In 1881, to honor Jenner, Louis Pasteur proposed that the terms should be extended to cover the new protective inoculations then being developed. The science of vaccine development and production is termed \"vaccinology\".\nEffectiveness.\nThere is overwhelming scientific consensus that vaccines are a very safe and effective way to fight and eradicate infectious diseases. The immune system recognizes vaccine agents as foreign, destroys them, and \"remembers\" them. When the virulent version of an agent is encountered, the body recognizes the protein coat on the agent, and thus is prepared to respond, by first neutralizing the target agent before it can enter cells, and secondly by recognizing and destroying infected cells before that agent can multiply to vast numbers.\nIn 1958, there were 763,094 cases of measles in the United States; 552 deaths resulted. After the introduction of new vaccines, the number of cases dropped to fewer than 150 per year (median of 56). In early 2008, there were 64 suspected cases of measles. Fifty-four of those infections were associated with importation from another country, although only thirteen percent were actually acquired outside the United States; 63 of the 64 individuals either had never been vaccinated against measles or were uncertain whether they had been vaccinated.\nThe measles vaccine is estimated to prevent a million deaths every year.\nVaccines led to the eradication of smallpox, one of the most contagious and deadly diseases in humans. Other diseases such as rubella, polio, measles, mumps, chickenpox, and typhoid are nowhere near as common as they were a hundred years ago thanks to widespread vaccination programs. As long as the vast majority of people are vaccinated, it is much more difficult for an outbreak of disease to occur, let alone spread. This effect is called herd immunity. Polio, which is transmitted only among humans, is targeted by an extensive eradication campaign that has seen endemic polio restricted to only parts of three countries (Afghanistan, Nigeria, and Pakistan). However, the difficulty of reaching all children, cultural misunderstandings, and disinformation have caused the anticipated eradication date to be missed several times.\nVaccines also help prevent the development of antibiotic resistance. For example, by greatly reducing the incidence of pneumonia caused by \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", vaccine programs have greatly reduced the prevalence of infections resistant to penicillin or other first-line antibiotics.\nLimitations.\nLimitations to their effectiveness, nevertheless, exist. Sometimes, protection fails for vaccine-related reasons such as failures in vaccine attenuation, vaccination regimens or administration.\nFailure may also occur for host-related reasons if the host's immune system does not respond adequately or at all. Host-related lack of response occurs in an estimated 2\u201310% of individuals, due to factors including genetics, immune status, age, health and nutritional status. One type of primary immunodeficiency disorder resulting in genetic failure is X-linked agammaglobulinemia, in which the absence of an enzyme essential for B cell development prevents the host's immune system from generating antibodies to a pathogen.\nHost\u2013pathogen interactions and responses to infection are dynamic processes involving multiple pathways in the immune system. A host does not develop antibodies instantaneously: while the body's innate immunity may be activated in as little as twelve hours, adaptive immunity can take 1\u20132 weeks to fully develop. During that time, the host can still become infected.\nOnce antibodies are produced, they may promote immunity in any of several ways, depending on the class of antibodies involved. Their success in clearing or inactivating a pathogen will depend on the amount of antibodies produced and on the extent to which those antibodies are effective at countering the strain of the pathogen involved, since different strains may be differently susceptible to a given immune reaction. \nIn some cases vaccines may result in partial immune protection (in which immunity is less than 100% effective but still reduces risk of infection) or in temporary immune protection (in which immunity wanes over time) rather than full or permanent immunity. They can still raise the reinfection threshold for the population as a whole and make a substantial impact. They can also mitigate the severity of infection, resulting in a lower mortality rate, lower morbidity, faster recovery from illness, and a wide range of other effects.\nThose who are older often display less of a response than those who are younger, a pattern known as Immunosenescence.\nAdjuvants commonly are used to boost immune response, particularly for older people whose immune response to a simple vaccine may have weakened.\nThe efficacy or performance of the vaccine is dependent on several factors:\nIf a vaccinated individual does develop the disease vaccinated against (breakthrough infection), the disease is likely to be less severe and less transmissible than in unvaccinated cases.\nImportant considerations in an effective vaccination program:\nSafety.\nVaccinations given to children, adolescents, or adults are generally safe. Adverse effects, if any, are generally mild. The rate of side effects depends on the vaccine in question. Some common side effects include fever, pain around the injection site, and muscle aches. Additionally, some individuals may be allergic to ingredients in the vaccine. The MMR vaccine is rarely associated with febrile seizures.\nHost-(\"vaccinee\")-related determinants that render a person susceptible to infection, such as genetics, health status (underlying disease, nutrition, pregnancy, sensitivities or allergies), immune competence, age, and economic impact or cultural environment can be primary or secondary factors affecting the severity of infection and response to a vaccine. Elderly (above age 60), allergen-hypersensitive, and obese people have susceptibility to compromised immunogenicity, which prevents or inhibits vaccine effectiveness, possibly requiring separate vaccine technologies for these specific populations or repetitive booster vaccinations to limit virus transmission.\nSevere side effects are extremely rare. Varicella vaccine is rarely associated with complications in immunodeficient individuals, and rotavirus vaccines are moderately associated with intussusception.\nAt least 19 countries have no-fault compensation programs to provide compensation for those with severe adverse effects of vaccination. The United States' program is known as the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act, and the United Kingdom employs the Vaccine Damage Payment.\nTypes.\nVaccines typically contain attenuated, inactivated or dead organisms or purified products derived from them. There are several types of vaccines in use. These represent different strategies used to try to reduce the risk of illness while retaining the ability to induce a beneficial immune response.\nAttenuated.\nSome vaccines contain live, attenuated microorganisms. Many of these are active viruses that have been cultivated under conditions that disable their virulent properties, or that use closely related but less dangerous organisms to produce a broad immune response. Although most attenuated vaccines are viral, some are bacterial in nature. Examples include the viral diseases yellow fever, measles, mumps, and rubella, and the bacterial disease typhoid. The live \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" vaccine developed by Calmette and Gu\u00e9rin is not made of a contagious strain but contains a virulently modified strain called \"BCG\" used to elicit an immune response to the vaccine. The live attenuated vaccine containing strain \"Yersinia pestis\" EV is used for plague immunization. Attenuated vaccines have some advantages and disadvantages. Attenuated, or live, weakened, vaccines typically provoke more durable immunological responses. Attenuated vaccines also elicit a cellular and humoral response. However, they may not be safe for use in immunocompromised individuals, and on rare occasions mutate to a virulent form and cause disease.\nInactivated.\nSome vaccines contain microorganisms that have been killed or inactivated by physical or chemical means. Examples include IPV (polio vaccine), hepatitis\u00a0A vaccine, rabies vaccine and most influenza vaccines.\nToxoid.\nToxoid vaccines are made from inactivated toxic compounds that cause illness rather than the microorganism. Examples of toxoid-based vaccines include tetanus and diphtheria. Not all toxoids are for microorganisms; for example, \"Crotalus atrox\" toxoid is used to vaccinate dogs against rattlesnake bites.\nSubunit.\nRather than introducing an inactivated or attenuated microorganism to an immune system (which would constitute a \"whole-agent\" vaccine), a subunit vaccine uses a fragment of it to create an immune response. One example is the subunit vaccine against hepatitisB, which is composed of only the surface proteins of the virus (previously extracted from the blood serum of chronically infected patients but now produced by recombination of the viral genes into yeast). Other examples include the Gardasil virus-like particle human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine, the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase subunits of the influenza virus, and edible algae vaccines. A subunit vaccine is being used for plague immunization.\nConjugate.\nCertain bacteria have a polysaccharide outer coat that is poorly immunogenic. By linking these outer coats to proteins (e.g., toxins), the immune system can be led to recognize the polysaccharide as if it were a protein antigen. This approach is used in the \"Haemophilus influenzae\" type B vaccine.\nOuter membrane vesicle.\nOuter membrane vesicles (OMVs) are naturally immunogenic and can be manipulated to produce potent vaccines. The best known OMV vaccines are those developed for serotype B meningococcal disease.\nHeterotypic.\nHeterologous vaccines also known as \"Jennerian vaccines\", are vaccines that are pathogens of other animals that either do not cause disease or cause mild disease in the organism being treated. The classic example is Jenner's use of cowpox to protect against smallpox. A current example is the use of BCG vaccine made from \"Mycobacterium bovis\" to protect against tuberculosis.\nGenetic vaccine.\nGenetic vaccines are based on the principle of uptake of a nucleic acid into cells, whereupon a protein is produced according to the nucleic acid template. This protein is usually the immunodominant antigen of the pathogen or a surface protein that enables the formation of neutralizing antibodies. The subgroup of genetic vaccines encompass viral vector vaccines, RNA vaccines and DNA vaccines.\nViral vector.\nViral vector vaccines use a safe virus to insert pathogen genes in the body to produce specific antigens, such as surface proteins, to stimulate an immune response. Viruses being researched for use as viral vectors include adenovirus, vaccinia virus, and VSV.\nRNA.\nAn mRNA vaccine (or RNA vaccine) is a novel type of vaccine which is composed of the nucleic acid RNA, packaged within a vector such as lipid nanoparticles. Among the COVID-19 vaccines are a number of RNA vaccines to combat the COVID-19 pandemic and some have been approved or have received emergency use authorization in some countries. For example, the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine and Moderna mRNA vaccine are approved for use in adults and children in the US.\nDNA.\nA DNA vaccine uses a DNA plasmid (pDNA)) that encodes for an antigenic protein originating from the pathogen upon which the vaccine will be targeted. pDNA is inexpensive, stable, and relatively safe, making it an excellent option for vaccine delivery.\nThis approach offers a number of potential advantages over traditional approaches, including the stimulation of both B- and T-cell responses, improved vaccine stability, the absence of any infectious agent and the relative ease of large-scale manufacture.\nExperimental.\nMany innovative vaccines are also in development and use.\nWhile most vaccines are created using inactivated or attenuated compounds from microorganisms, synthetic vaccines are composed mainly or wholly of synthetic peptides, carbohydrates, or antigens.\nValence.\nVaccines may be \"monovalent\" (also called \"univalent\") or \"multivalent\" (also called \"polyvalent\"). A monovalent vaccine is designed to immunize against a single antigen or single microorganism. A multivalent or polyvalent vaccine is designed to immunize against two or more strains of the same microorganism, or against two or more microorganisms. The valency of a multivalent vaccine may be denoted with a Greek or Latin prefix (e.g., \"bivalent\", \"trivalent\", or \"tetravalent/quadrivalent\"). In certain cases, a monovalent vaccine may be preferable for rapidly developing a strong immune response.\nInteractions.\nWhen two or more vaccines are mixed in the same formulation, the two vaccines can interfere. This most frequently occurs with live attenuated vaccines, where one of the vaccine components is more robust than the others and suppresses the growth and immune response to the other components.\nThis phenomenon was noted in the trivalent Sabin polio vaccine, where the relative amount of serotype2 virus in the vaccine had to be reduced to stop it from interfering with the \"take\" of the serotype1 and3 viruses in the vaccine. To accomplish this, the doses of serotypes1 and3 were increased in the vaccine in the early 1960s. It was also noted in a 2001 study to be a problem with dengue vaccines, where the DEN-3 serotype was found to predominate and suppress the response to DEN-1, -2 and -4 serotypes.\nOther contents.\nAdjuvants.\nVaccines typically contain one or more adjuvants, used to boost the immune response. Tetanus toxoid, for instance, is usually adsorbed onto alum. This presents the antigen in such a way as to produce a greater action than the simple aqueous tetanus toxoid. People who have an adverse reaction to adsorbed tetanus toxoid may be given the simple vaccine when the time comes for a booster.\nIn the preparation for the 1990 Persian Gulf campaign, the whole cell pertussis vaccine was used as an adjuvant for anthrax vaccine. This produces a more rapid immune response than giving only the anthrax vaccine, which is of some benefit if exposure might be imminent.\nPreservatives.\nVaccines may also contain preservatives to prevent contamination with bacteria or fungi. Until recent years, the preservative thiomersal (a.k.a. \"Thimerosal\" in the US and Japan) was used in many vaccines that did not contain live viruses. As of 2005, the only childhood vaccine in the U.S. that contains thiomersal in greater than trace amounts is the influenza vaccine, which is currently recommended only for children with certain risk factors. Single-dose influenza vaccines supplied in the UK do not list thiomersal in the ingredients. Preservatives may be used at various stages of the production of vaccines, and the most sophisticated methods of measurement might detect traces of them in the finished product, as they may in the environment and population as a whole.\nMany vaccines need preservatives to prevent serious adverse effects such as \"Staphylococcus\" infection, which in one 1928 incident killed 12 of 21 children inoculated with a diphtheria vaccine that lacked a preservative. Several preservatives are available, including thiomersal, phenoxyethanol, and formaldehyde. Thiomersal is more effective against bacteria, has a better shelf-life, and improves vaccine stability, potency, and safety; however, in the U.S., the European Union, and a few other affluent countries, it is no longer used as a preservative in childhood vaccines, as a precautionary measure due to its mercury content. Although controversial claims have been made that thiomersal contributes to autism, no convincing scientific evidence supports these claims. Furthermore, a 10\u201311-year study of 657,461 children found that the MMR vaccine does not cause autism and actually reduced the risk of autism by seven percent.\nExcipients.\nBeside the active vaccine itself, the following excipients and residual manufacturing compounds are present or may be present in vaccine preparations:\nNomenclature.\nVarious fairly standardized abbreviations for vaccine names have developed, although the standardization is by no means centralized or global. For example, the vaccine names used in the United States have well-established abbreviations that are also widely known and used elsewhere. An extensive list of them provided in a sortable table and freely accessible is available at a US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention web page. The page explains that \"The abbreviations [in] this table (Column 3) were standardized jointly by staff of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, ACIP Work Groups, the editor of the \"Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report\" (MMWR), the editor of \"Epidemiology and Prevention of Vaccine-Preventable Diseases\" (the Pink Book), ACIP members, and liaison organizations to the ACIP.\"\nSome examples are \"DTaP\" for diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis vaccine, \"DT\" for diphtheria and tetanus toxoids, and \"Td\" for tetanus and diphtheria toxoids. At its page on tetanus vaccination, the CDC further explains that \"Upper-case letters in these abbreviations denote full-strength doses of diphtheria (D) and tetanus (T) toxoids and pertussis (P) vaccine. Lower-case \"d\" and \"p\" denote reduced doses of diphtheria and pertussis used in the adolescent/adult-formulations. The 'a' in DTaP and Tdap stands for 'acellular', meaning that the pertussis component contains only a part of the pertussis organism.\"\nAnother list of established vaccine abbreviations is at the CDC's page called \"Vaccine Acronyms and Abbreviations\", with abbreviations used on U.S. immunization records. The United States Adopted Name system has some conventions for the word order of vaccine names, placing head nouns first and adjectives postpositively. This is why the USAN for \"OPV\" is \"poliovirus vaccine live oral\" rather than \"oral poliovirus vaccine\".\nLicensing.\nA vaccine \"licensure\" occurs after the successful conclusion of the development cycle and further the clinical trials and other programs involved through PhasesI\u2013III demonstrating safety, immunoactivity, immunogenetic safety at a given specific dose, proven effectiveness in preventing infection for target populations, and enduring preventive effect (time endurance or need for revaccination must be estimated). Because preventive vaccines are predominantly evaluated in healthy population cohorts and distributed among the general population, a high standard of safety is required. As part of a multinational licensing of a vaccine, the World Health Organization \"Expert Committee on Biological Standardization\" developed guidelines of international standards for manufacturing and quality control of vaccines, a process intended as a platform for national regulatory agencies to apply for their own licensing process. Vaccine manufacturers do not receive licensing until a complete clinical cycle of development and trials proves the vaccine is safe and has long-term effectiveness, following scientific review by a multinational or national regulatory organization, such as the European Medicines Agency (EMA) or the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).\nUpon developing countries adopting WHO guidelines for vaccine development and licensure, each country has its own responsibility to issue a national licensure, and to manage, deploy, and monitor the vaccine throughout its use in each nation. Building trust and acceptance of a licensed vaccine among the public is a task of communication by governments and healthcare personnel to ensure a vaccination campaign proceeds smoothly, saves lives, and enables economic recovery. When a vaccine is licensed, it will initially be in limited supply due to variable manufacturing, distribution, and logistical factors, requiring an allocation plan for the limited supply and which population segments should be prioritized to first receive the vaccine.\nWorld Health Organization.\nVaccines developed for multinational distribution via the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) require pre-qualification by the WHO to ensure international standards of quality, safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy for adoption by numerous countries.\nThe process requires manufacturing consistency at WHO-contracted laboratories following Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP). When UN agencies are involved in vaccine licensure, individual nations collaborate by 1) issuing marketing authorization and a national license for the vaccine, its manufacturers, and distribution partners; and 2) conducting postmarketing surveillance, including records for adverse events after the vaccination program. The WHO works with national agencies to monitor inspections of manufacturing facilities and distributors for compliance with GMP and regulatory oversight.\nSome countries choose to buy vaccines licensed by reputable national organizations, such as EMA, FDA, or national agencies in other affluent countries, but such purchases typically are more expensive and may not have distribution resources suitable to local conditions in developing countries.\nEuropean Union.\nIn the European Union (EU), vaccines for pandemic pathogens, such as seasonal influenza, are licensed EU-wide where all the member states comply (\"centralized\"), are licensed for only some member states (\"decentralized\"), or are licensed on an individual national level. Generally, all EU states follow regulatory guidance and clinical programs defined by the European Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), a scientific panel of the European Medicines Agency (EMA) responsible for vaccine licensure. The CHMP is supported by several expert groups who assess and monitor the progress of a vaccine before and after licensure and distribution.\nUnited States.\nUnder the FDA, the process of establishing evidence for vaccine clinical safety and efficacy is the same as for the approval process for prescription drugs. If successful through the stages of clinical development, the vaccine licensing process is followed by a Biologics License Application which must provide a scientific review team (from diverse disciplines, such as physicians, statisticians, microbiologists, chemists) and comprehensive documentation for the vaccine candidate having efficacy and safety throughout its development. Also during this stage, the proposed manufacturing facility is examined by expert reviewers for GMP compliance, and the label must have a compliant description to enable health care providers' definition of vaccine-specific use, including its possible risks, to communicate and deliver the vaccine to the public. After licensure, monitoring of the vaccine and its production, including periodic inspections for GMP compliance, continue as long as the manufacturer retains its license, which may include additional submissions to the FDA of tests for potency, safety, and purity for each vaccine manufacturing step.\nIndia.\nIn India, the Drugs Controller General, the head of department of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, India's national regulatory body for cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and medical devices, is responsible for the approval of licences for specified categories of drugs such as vaccines and other medicinal items, such as blood or blood products, IV fluids, and sera.\nPostmarketing surveillance.\nUntil a vaccine is in use amongst the general population, all potential adverse events from the vaccine may not be known, requiring manufacturers to conduct PhaseIV studies for postmarketing surveillance of the vaccine while it is used widely in the public. The WHO works with UN member states to implement post-licensing surveillance. The FDA relies on a Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System to monitor safety concerns about a vaccine throughout its use in the American public.\nScheduling.\nIn order to provide the best protection, children are recommended to receive vaccinations as soon as their immune systems are sufficiently developed to respond to particular vaccines, with additional \"booster\" shots often required to achieve \"full immunity\". This has led to the development of complex vaccination schedules. Global recommendations of vaccination schedule are issued by Strategic Advisory Group of Experts and will be further translated by advisory committee at the country level with considering of local factors such as disease epidemiology, acceptability of vaccination, equity in local populations, and programmatic and financial constraint. In the United States, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, which recommends schedule additions for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, recommends routine vaccination of children against hepatitis A, hepatitis B, polio, mumps, measles, rubella, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, HiB, chickenpox, rotavirus, influenza, meningococcal disease and pneumonia.\nThe large number of vaccines and boosters recommended (up to 24 injections by age two) has led to problems with achieving full compliance. To combat declining compliance rates, various notification systems have been instituted and many combination injections are now marketed (e.g., Pentavalent vaccine and MMRV vaccine), which protect against multiple diseases.\nBesides recommendations for infant vaccinations and boosters, many specific vaccines are recommended for other ages or for repeated injections throughout life\u00a0\u2013 most commonly for measles, tetanus, influenza, and pneumonia. Pregnant women are often screened for continued resistance to rubella. The human papillomavirus vaccine is recommended in the U.S. (as of 2011) and UK (as of 2009). Vaccine recommendations for the elderly concentrate on pneumonia and influenza, which are more deadly to that group. In 2006, a vaccine was introduced against shingles, a disease caused by the chickenpox virus, which usually affects the elderly.\nScheduling and dosing of a vaccination may be tailored to the level of immunocompetence of an individual and to optimize population-wide deployment of a vaccine when its supply is limited, e.g. in the setting of a pandemic.\nEconomics of development.\nOne challenge in vaccine development is economic: Many of the diseases most demanding a vaccine, including HIV, malaria and tuberculosis, exist principally in poor countries. In the United States, financial returns are usually minimal and the financial and other risks are great.\nMost vaccine development to date has relied on \"push\" funding by government, universities and non-profit organizations. Many vaccines have been highly cost effective and beneficial for public health. The number of vaccines actually administered has risen dramatically in recent decades. This increase, particularly in the number of different vaccines administered to children before entry into schools, may be due to government mandates and support, rather than economic incentive.\nPatents.\nAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), the biggest barrier to vaccine production in less developed countries has not been patents, but the substantial financial, infrastructure, and workforce requirements needed for market entry. Vaccines are complex mixtures of biological compounds, and unlike the case for prescription drugs, there are no true generic vaccines. The vaccine produced by a new facility must undergo complete clinical testing for safety and efficacy by the manufacturer. For most vaccines, specific processes in technology are patented. These can be circumvented by alternative manufacturing methods, but this required R&amp;D infrastructure and a suitably skilled workforce. In the case of a few relatively new vaccines, such as the human papillomavirus vaccine, the patents may impose an additional barrier.\nWhen increased production of vaccines was urgently needed during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, the World Trade Organization and governments around the world evaluated whether to waive intellectual property rights and patents on COVID-19 vaccines, which would \"eliminate all potential barriers to the timely access of affordable COVID-19 medical products, including vaccines and medicines, and scale up the manufacturing and supply of essential medical products\".\nProduction.\nVaccine production is fundamentally different from other kinds of manufacturing\u00a0\u2013 including regular pharmaceutical manufacturing\u00a0\u2013 in that vaccines are intended to be administered to millions of people of whom the vast majority are perfectly healthy. This fact drives an extraordinarily rigorous production process with strict compliance requirements that go far beyond what is required of other products.\nDepending upon the antigen, it can cost anywhere from US$50 to $500 million to build a vaccine production facility, which requires highly specialized equipment, clean rooms, and containment rooms. There is a global scarcity of personnel with the right combination of skills, expertise, knowledge, competence and personality to staff vaccine production lines. With the notable exceptions of Brazil, China, and India, many developing countries' educational systems are unable to provide enough qualified candidates, and vaccine makers based in such countries must hire expatriate personnel to keep production going.\nVaccine production has several stages. First, the antigen itself is generated. Viruses are grown either on primary cells such as chicken eggs (e.g., for influenza) or on continuous cell lines such as cultured human cells (e.g., for hepatitis A). Bacteria are grown in bioreactors (e.g., \"Haemophilus influenzae\" type b). Likewise, a recombinant protein derived from the viruses or bacteria can be generated in yeast, bacteria, or cell cultures.\nAfter the antigen is generated, it is isolated from the cells used to generate it. A virus may need to be inactivated, possibly with no further purification required. Recombinant proteins need many operations involving ultrafiltration and column chromatography. Finally, the vaccine is formulated by adding adjuvant, stabilizers, and preservatives as needed. The adjuvant enhances the immune response to the antigen, stabilizers increase the storage life, and preservatives allow the use of multidose vials. Combination vaccines are harder to develop and produce, because of potential incompatibilities and interactions among the antigens and other ingredients involved.\nThe final stage in vaccine manufacture before distribution is fill and finish, which is the process of filling vials with vaccines and packaging them for distribution. Although this is a conceptually simple part of the vaccine manufacture process, it is often a bottleneck in the process of distributing and administering vaccines.\nVaccine production techniques are evolving. Cultured mammalian cells are expected to become increasingly important, compared to conventional options such as chicken eggs, due to greater productivity and low incidence of problems with contamination. Recombination technology that produces genetically detoxified vaccines is expected to grow in popularity for the production of bacterial vaccines that use toxoids. Combination vaccines are expected to reduce the quantities of antigens they contain, and thereby decrease undesirable interactions, by using pathogen-associated molecular patterns.\nVaccine manufacturers.\nThe companies with the highest market share in vaccine production are Merck, Sanofi, GlaxoSmithKline, Pfizer and Novartis, with 70% of vaccine sales concentrated in the EU or US (2013). Vaccine manufacturing plants require large capital investments ($50 million up to $300 million) and may take between 4 and 6 years to construct, with the full process of vaccine development taking between 10 and 15 years. Manufacturing in developing countries is playing an increasing role in supplying these countries, specifically with regards to older vaccines and in Brazil, India and China. The manufacturers in India are the most advanced in the developing world and include the Serum Institute of India, one of the largest producers of vaccines by number of doses and an innovator in processes, recently improving efficiency of producing the measles vaccine by 10 to 20-fold, due to switching to a MRC-5 cell culture instead of chicken eggs. China's manufacturing capabilities are focused on supplying their own domestic need, with Sinopharm (CNPGC) alone providing over 85% of the doses for 14 different vaccines in China. Brazil is approaching the point of supplying its own domestic needs using technology transferred from the developed world.\nDelivery systems.\nOne of the most common methods of delivering vaccines into the human body is injection.\nThe development of new delivery systems raises the hope of vaccines that are safer and more efficient to deliver and administer. Lines of research include liposomes and \"ISCOM\" (immune stimulating complex).\nOral vaccines.\nNotable developments in vaccine delivery technologies have included oral vaccines. Early attempts to apply oral vaccines showed varying degrees of promise, beginning early in the 20th century, at a time when the very possibility of an effective oral antibacterial vaccine was controversial. By the 1930s there was increasing interest in the prophylactic value of an oral typhoid fever vaccine for example.\nAn oral polio vaccine turned out to be effective when vaccinations were administered by volunteer staff without formal training; the results also demonstrated increased ease and efficiency of administering the vaccines. Effective oral vaccines have many advantages; for example, there is no risk of blood contamination. Vaccines intended for oral administration need not be liquid, and as solids, they commonly are more stable and less prone to damage or spoilage by freezing in transport and storage. Such stability reduces the need for a \"cold chain\": the resources required to keep vaccines within a restricted temperature range from the manufacturing stage to the point of administration, which, in turn, may decrease costs of vaccines.\nMicroneedle vaccines.\nA microneedle approach, which is still in stages of development, uses \"pointed projections fabricated into arrays that can create vaccine delivery pathways through the skin\".\nDermal patch vaccines.\nAn experimental needle-free vaccine delivery system is undergoing animal testing. A stamp-size patch similar to an adhesive bandage contains about 20,000 microscopic projections per square cm. This dermal administration potentially increases the effectiveness of vaccination, while requiring less vaccine than injection.\nIn veterinary medicine.\nVaccinations of animals are used both to prevent their contracting diseases and to prevent transmission of disease to humans. Both animals kept as pets and animals raised as livestock are routinely vaccinated. In some instances, wild populations may be vaccinated. This is sometimes accomplished with vaccine-laced food spread in a disease-prone area and has been used to attempt to control rabies in raccoons.\nWhere rabies occurs, rabies vaccination of dogs may be required by law. Other canine vaccines include canine distemper, canine parvovirus, infectious canine hepatitis, adenovirus-2, leptospirosis, \"Bordetella\", canine parainfluenza virus, and Lyme disease, among others.\nCases of veterinary vaccines used in humans have been documented, whether intentional or accidental, with some cases of resultant illness, most notably with brucellosis. However, the reporting of such cases is rare and very little has been studied about the safety and results of such practices. With the advent of aerosol vaccination in veterinary clinics, human exposure to pathogens not naturally carried in humans, such as \"Bordetella bronchiseptica\", has likely increased in recent years. In some cases, most notably rabies, the parallel veterinary vaccine against a pathogen may be as much as orders of magnitude more economical than the human one.\nDIVA vaccines.\nDIVA (Differentiation of Infected from Vaccinated Animals), also known as SIVA (Segregation of Infected from Vaccinated Animals) vaccines, make it possible to differentiate between infected and vaccinated animals. DIVA vaccines carry at least one epitope less than the equivalent wild microorganism. An accompanying diagnostic test that detects the antibody against that epitope assists in identifying whether the animal has been vaccinated or not.\nThe first DIVA vaccines (formerly termed marker vaccines and since 1999 coined as DIVA vaccines) and companion diagnostic tests were developed by J. T. van Oirschot and colleagues at the Central Veterinary Institute in Lelystad, The Netherlands. They found that some existing vaccines against pseudorabies (also termed Aujeszky's disease) had deletions in their viral genome (among which was the gE gene). Monoclonal antibodies were produced against that deletion and selected to develop an ELISA that demonstrated antibodies against gE. In addition, novel genetically engineered gE-negative vaccines were constructed. Along the same lines, DIVA vaccines and companion diagnostic tests against bovine herpesvirus1 infections have been developed.\nThe DIVA strategy has been applied in various countries to successfully eradicate pseudorabies virus from those countries. Swine populations were intensively vaccinated and monitored by the companion diagnostic test and, subsequently, the infected pigs were removed from the population. Bovine herpesvirus1 DIVA vaccines are also widely used in practice. Considerable efforts are ongoing to apply the DIVA principle to a wide range of infectious diseases, such as classical swine fever, avian influenza, \"Actinobacillus pleuropneumonia\" and \"Salmonella\" infections in pigs.\nHistory.\nPrior to the introduction of vaccination with material from cases of cowpox (heterotypic immunisation), smallpox could be prevented by deliberate variolation with smallpox virus. According to historian Joseph Needham, Taoists in China as far back as the 10th century practiced a form of inoculation and passed it down through oral tradition, though Needham's claim has been criticized since the practice was not written about. The Chinese also practiced the oldest documented use of variolation, dating back to the fifteenth century. They implemented a method of \"nasal insufflation\" administered by blowing powdered smallpox material, usually scabs, up the nostrils. Various insufflation techniques have been recorded throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries within China. Two reports on the Chinese practice of inoculation were received by the Royal Society in London in 1700; one by Martin Lister who received a report by an employee of the East India Company stationed in China and another by Clopton Havers. In France, Voltaire reports that the Chinese have practiced variolation \"these hundred years\".\nMary Wortley Montagu, who had witnessed variolation in Turkey, had her four-year-old daughter variolated in the presence of physicians of the Royal Court in 1721 upon her return to England. Later on that year, Charles Maitland conducted an experimental variolation of six prisoners in Newgate Prison in London. The experiment was a success, and soon variolation was drawing attention from the royal family, who helped promote the procedure. However, in 1783, several days after Prince Octavius of Great Britain was inoculated, he died. \nIn 1796, the physician Edward Jenner took pus from the hand of a milkmaid with cowpox, scratched it into the arm of an 8-year-old boy, James Phipps, and six weeks later variolated the boy with smallpox, afterwards observing that he did not catch smallpox. Jenner extended his studies and, in 1798, reported that his vaccine was safe in children and adults, and could be transferred from arm-to-arm, which reduced reliance on uncertain supplies from infected cows. In 1804, the Spanish Balmis smallpox vaccination expedition to Spain's colonies Mexico and Philippines used the arm-to-arm transport method to get around the fact the vaccine survived for only 12 days \"in vitro\". They used cowpox. Since vaccination with cowpox was much safer than smallpox inoculation, the latter, though still widely practiced in England, was banned in 1840.\nFollowing on from Jenner's work, the second generation of vaccines was introduced in the 1880s by Louis Pasteur who developed vaccines for chicken cholera and anthrax, and from the late nineteenth century vaccines were considered a matter of national prestige. National vaccination policies were adopted and compulsory vaccination laws were passed. In 1931 Alice Miles Woodruff and Ernest Goodpasture documented that the fowlpox virus could be grown in embryonated chicken egg. Soon scientists began cultivating other viruses in eggs. Eggs were used for virus propagation in the development of a yellow fever vaccine in 1935 and an influenza vaccine in 1945. In 1959 growth media and cell culture replaced eggs as the standard method of virus propagation for vaccines.\nVaccinology flourished in the twentieth century, which saw the introduction of several successful vaccines, including those against diphtheria, measles, mumps, and rubella. Major achievements included the development of the polio vaccine in the 1950s and the eradication of smallpox during the 1960s and 1970s. Maurice Hilleman was the most prolific of the developers of the vaccines in the twentieth century. As vaccines became more common, many people began taking them for granted. However, vaccines remain elusive for many important diseases, including herpes simplex, malaria, gonorrhea, and HIV.\nGenerations of vaccines.\nFirst generation vaccines are whole-organism vaccines\u00a0\u2013 either live and weakened, or killed forms. Live, attenuated vaccines, such as smallpox and polio vaccines, are able to induce killer T-cell (TC or CTL) responses, helper T-cell (TH) responses and antibody immunity. However, attenuated forms of a pathogen can convert to a dangerous form and may cause disease in immunocompromised vaccine recipients (such as those with AIDS). While killed vaccines do not have this risk, they cannot generate specific killer T-cell responses and may not work at all for some diseases.\nSecond generation vaccines were developed to reduce the risks from live vaccines. These are subunit vaccines, consisting of specific protein antigens (such as tetanus or diphtheria toxoid) or recombinant protein components (such as the hepatitis B surface antigen). They can generate TH and antibody responses, but not killer T cell responses.\nRNA vaccines and DNA vaccines are examples of third generation vaccines. In 2016 a DNA vaccine for the Zika virus began testing at the National Institutes of Health. Separately, Inovio Pharmaceuticals and GeneOne Life Science began tests of a different DNA vaccine against Zika in Miami. Manufacturing the vaccines in volume was unsolved as of 2016. Clinical trials for DNA vaccines to prevent HIV are underway. mRNA vaccines such as BNT162b2 were developed in the year 2020 with the help of Operation Warp Speed and massively deployed to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2021, Katalin Karik\u00f3 and Drew Weissman received Columbia University's Horwitz Prize for their pioneering research in mRNA vaccine technology.\nTrends.\nSince at least 2013, scientists have been trying to develop synthetic third-generation vaccines by reconstructing the outside structure of a virus; it was hoped that this will help prevent vaccine resistance.\nPrinciples that govern the immune response can now be used in tailor-made vaccines against many noninfectious human diseases, such as cancers and autoimmune disorders. For example, the experimental vaccine CYT006-AngQb has been investigated as a possible treatment for high blood pressure. Factors that affect the trends of vaccine development include progress in translatory medicine, demographics, regulatory science, political, cultural, and social responses.\nPlants as bioreactors for vaccine production.\nThe idea of vaccine production via transgenic plants was identified as early as 2003. Plants such as tobacco, potato, tomato, and banana can have genes inserted that cause them to produce vaccines usable for humans. In 2005, bananas were developed that produce a human vaccine against hepatitis B.\nVaccine hesitancy.\nVaccine hesitancy is a delay in acceptance, or refusal of vaccines despite the availability of vaccine services. The term covers outright refusals to vaccinate, delaying vaccines, accepting vaccines but remaining uncertain about their use, or using certain vaccines but not others. There is an overwhelming scientific consensus that vaccines are generally safe and effective. Vaccine hesitancy often results in disease outbreaks and deaths from vaccine-preventable diseases. The World Health Organization therefore characterized vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten global health threats in 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32654", "revid": "49938823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32654", "title": "Veterinary medicine", "text": "Branch of medicine for non-human animals\nVeterinary medicine is the branch of medicine concerned with the prevention, management, diagnosis, and treatment of disease, disorder, and injury in non-human animals. Its scope is wide, covering all animal species, both domesticated and wild, with a wide range of conditions that can affect different species.\nVeterinary medicine is practiced both with and without professional supervision. Professional care is most often led by a veterinary physician (also known as a veterinarian, veterinary surgeon, or \"vet\"), but also by paraveterinary workers, including veterinary nurses, veterinary technicians, and veterinary assistants. Other paraprofessionals may have specialized roles, such as animal physiotherapy or dentistry, and species-relevant roles such as farriers.\nVeterinary science helps human health through the monitoring and control of zoonotic disease (infectious disease transmitted from nonhuman animals to humans), food safety, and through human applications via medical research. They also help to maintain food supply through livestock health monitoring and treatment, and mental health by keeping pets healthy and long-living. Veterinary scientists often collaborate with epidemiologists and other health or natural scientists, depending on type of work. Ethically, veterinarians are usually obliged to look after animal welfare. Veterinarians diagnose, treat, and help keep animals safe and healthy.\nHistory.\nPremodern era.\nArcheological evidence, in the form of a cow skull upon which trepanation had been performed, shows that people were performing veterinary procedures in the Neolithic (3400\u20133000 BCE). \nThe Egyptian \"Papyrus of Kahun\" (Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt) is the first extant record of veterinary medicine.\nThe \"Shalihotra Samhita\", dating from the time of Ashoka, is an early Indian veterinary treatise. The edicts of Asoka read: \"Everywhere King Piyadasi (Asoka) made two kinds of medicine (\u091a\u093f\u0915\u093f\u0924\u094d\u0938\u093e) available, medicine for people, and medicine for animals. Where no healing herbs for people and animals were available, he ordered that they be bought and planted.\"\n\"Hippiatrica\" is a Byzantine compilation of hippiatrics, dated to the fifth or sixth century AD.\nThe first attempts to organize and regulate the practice of treating animals tended to focus on horses because of their economic significance. In the Middle Ages, farriers combined their work in horseshoeing with the more general task of \"horse doctoring\".\nThe Arabic tradition of \"Bay\u1e6dara\", or \"Shiy\u0101t al-Khayl\", originates with the treatise of Ibn Akh\u012b Hiz\u0101m (fl. late ninth century).\nIn 1356, the Lord Mayor of London, Sir Henry Picard, concerned at the poor standard of care given to horses in the city, requested that all farriers operating within a 7-mile (11-km) radius of the City of London form a \"fellowship\" to regulate and improve their practices. This ultimately led to the establishment of the Worshipful Company of Farriers in 1674.\nMeanwhile, Carlo Ruini's book (\"Anatomy of the Horse\") was published in 1598. It was the first comprehensive treatise on the anatomy of a nonhuman species.\nEstablishment of profession.\nThe first veterinary school was founded in Lyon, France, in 1762 by Claude Bourgelat. According to Lupton, after observing the devastation being caused by cattle plague to the French herds, Bourgelat devoted his time to seeking out a remedy. This resulted in founding a veterinary school in Lyon in 1761, from which establishment he dispatched students to combat the disease; in a short time, the plague was stayed and the health of stock restored, through the assistance rendered to agriculture by veterinary science and art. The school received immediate international recognition in the 18th century and its pedagogical model drew on the existing fields of human medicine, natural history, and comparative anatomy.\nThe Swedish veterinary education received funding 1774, and was officially started May 8th 1775 when the king Gustaf III signed the document.\n, who had studied for Carl von Linn\u00e9 in Uppsala, and also studied in Lyon with Claude Bourgelat, was head of school and is considered father of veterinary medicine in Sweden. \nThe Odiham Agricultural Society was founded in 1783 in England to promote agriculture and industry, and played an important role in the foundation of the veterinary profession in Britain. A founding member, Thomas Burgess, began to take up the cause of animal welfare and campaign for the more humane treatment of sick animals. A 1785 society meeting resolved to \"promote the study of Farriery upon rational scientific principles.\"\nPhysician James Clark wrote a treatise entitled \"Prevention of Disease\" in which he argued for the professionalization of the veterinary trade, and the establishment of veterinary colleges. This was finally achieved in 1790, through the campaigning of Granville Penn, who persuaded Frenchman Benoit Vial de St. Bel to accept the professorship of the newly established veterinary college in London. The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons was established by royal charter in 1844. Veterinary science came of age in the late 19th century, with notable contributions from Sir John McFadyean, credited by many as having been the founder of modern veterinary research.\nIn the United States, the first schools were established in the early 19th century in Boston, New York City, and Philadelphia. In 1879, Iowa Agricultural College became the first land-grant college to establish a school of veterinary medicine.\nThe veterinary profession in the United States went through a major transition as automobiles replaced horses as the primary mode of individual transportation in the 1920s and 1930s. Urban equine veterinarians were forced to innovate, shifting their practices to focus on companion animals, namely dogs and cats.\nVeterinary workers.\nVeterinary physicians.\nVeterinary care and management are usually led by a veterinary physician (usually called a veterinarian, veterinary surgeon or \"vet\") who has received their doctor of veterinary medicine degree. This role is the equivalent of a physician or surgeon (medical doctor) in human medicine, and involves postgraduate study and qualification.\nIn many countries, the local nomenclature for a vet is a protected term, meaning that people without the prerequisite qualifications and/or registration are not able to use the title, and in many cases, the activities that may be undertaken by a vet (such as animal treatment or surgery) are restricted only to those people who are registered as vet. For instance, in the United Kingdom, as in other jurisdictions, animal treatment may be performed only by registered vets (with a few designated exceptions, such as paraveterinary workers), calling oneself a vet without being registered or performing any treatment is illegal.\nMost vets work in clinical settings, treating animals directly. They may be involved in a general practice, treating animals of all types; may be specialized in a specific group of animals such as companion animals, livestock, laboratory animals, zoo animals, or horses; or may specialize in a narrow medical discipline such as veterinary surgery, dermatology, cardiology, neurology, laboratory animal medicine, internal medicine, and more.\nAs healthcare professionals, vets face ethical decisions about the care of their patients. Current debates within the profession include the veterinary ethics of purely cosmetic procedures on animals, such as declawing of cats, docking of tails, cropping of ears, and debarking on dogs.\nA wide range of surgeries and operations is performed on various types of animals, but not all of them are carried out by vets. In a case in Iran, for instance, an eye surgeon managed to perform a successful cataract surgery on a rooster for the first time in the world.\nParaveterinary workers.\nParaveterinary workers, including veterinary nurses, veterinary technicians, and veterinary assistants, either assist vets in their work, or may work within their own scope of practice, depending on skills and qualifications, including in some cases, performing minor surgery.\nThe role of paraveterinary workers is less homogeneous globally than that of a vet, and qualification levels, and the associated skill mix, vary widely.\nAllied professions.\nA number of professions exist within the scope of veterinary medicine, but may not necessarily be performed by vets or veterinary nurses. This includes those performing roles which are also found in human medicine, such as practitioners dealing with musculoskeletal disorders, including osteopaths, chiropractors, and physiotherapists.\nSome roles are specific to animals, but which have parallels in human society, such as animal grooming and animal massage. Some roles are specific to a species or group of animals, such as farriers, who are involved in the shoeing of horses, and in many cases have a major role to play in ensuring the medical fitness of horses.\nVeterinary research.\nVeterinary research includes prevention, control, diagnosis, and treatment of diseases of animals, and basic biology, welfare, and care of animals. Veterinary research transcends species boundaries and includes the study of spontaneously occurring and experimentally induced models of both human and animal diseases and research at human-animal interfaces, such as food safety, wildlife and ecosystem health, zoonotic diseases, and public policy. By value the most important Animal Health pharmaceutical supplier worldwide is by far Zoetis (United States).\nClinical veterinary research.\nAs in medicine, randomized controlled trials also are fundamental in veterinary medicine to establish the effectiveness of a treatment. Clinical veterinary research is far behind human medical research, though, with fewer randomized controlled trials, that have a lower quality and are mostly focused on research animals. Possible improvement consists in creation of networks for inclusion of private veterinary practices in randomized controlled trials. Although the FDA approves drugs for use in humans, the FDA keeps a separate \"Green Book\", which lists drugs approved specifically for veterinary medicine (about half of which are separately approved for use in humans).https://\nNo studies exist on the effect of community animal health services on improving household wealth and the health status of low-income farmers.\nThe first recorded use of regenerative stem-cell therapy to treat lesions in a wild animal occurred in 2011 in Brazil. On that occasion, the Zoo Bras\u00edlia used stem cells to treat a maned wolf who had been run over by a car, which was later returned, fully recovered, to nature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nIntroductory textbooks and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMonographs and other speciality texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVeterinary nursing, ophthalmology, and pharmacology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRelated fields.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32658", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32658", "title": "Visegr\u00e1d Group", "text": "Cultural and political alliance in Europe\nThe Visegr\u00e1d Group (also known as the Visegr\u00e1d Four or the V4) is a cultural and political alliance of four Central European countries: the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia. The alliance aims to advance co-operation in military, economic, cultural and energy affairs. All four nations are also members of the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the Three Seas Initiative.\nThe alliance traces its origins to the summit meetings of leaders of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland, held in the Hungarian castle town of Visegr\u00e1d on 15 February 1991. Visegr\u00e1d was chosen as the location for the summits as an intentional allusion to the medieval Congress of Visegr\u00e1d between John I of Bohemia, Charles I of Hungary, and Casimir III of Poland in 1335.\nAfter the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993, the Czech Republic and Slovakia became independent members of the alliance, increasing the number of members from three to four. All four members of the Visegr\u00e1d Group joined the European Union on 1 May 2004, achieving its main goal.\nDuring the European immigration crisis in 2015, the Visegrad Group successfully blocked EU-level actions aimed at implementing the forced relocation of illegal immigrants within the member states. At that time EU Commission started infringement procedures against actions of the Hungarian and Polish national-conservative governments, claiming that they undermine democracy, media freedom, and the independence of the judiciary. The Visegrad Four became politically split due to changes in governments and diverging reactions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. Yet its role in fostering exchange among countries' public servants and civil societies (Visegrad Fund) remains crucial. If the Visegr\u00e1d Group were a single country, its land area, population, and economy would be similar to those of Metropolitan France.\nHistory.\nBackground (1335\u20131989).\nThe name of the Visegr\u00e1d Group references the place of meeting selected for the 1335 Congress of Visegr\u00e1d held by the Bohemian (Czech), Polish, and Hungarian rulers in Visegr\u00e1d. Charles I of Hungary, Casimir III of Poland, and John I of Bohemia agreed to create new commercial routes to bypass the city of Vienna (a staple port, which required goods to be offloaded and offered for sale in the city before they could be sold elsewhere) and to obtain easier access to other European markets. The recognition of Czech sovereignty over the Duchy of Silesia was also confirmed. The second Congress of Visegr\u00e1d took place in 1339 and decided that if Casimir III of Poland died without a son (as actually happened in 1370), then the son of Charles I of Hungary, Louis I of Hungary would become the King of Poland.\nFrom the 16th century, large parts of the present-day territories of the group's members became part of, or were influenced, by the Vienna-based Habsburg monarchy. This situation continued until the end of World War I and the dissolution of Habsburg-ruled Austria-Hungary in 1918. In the three years after the end of World War II in 1945 the countries became satellite states of the Soviet Union, as the Polish People's Republic, the Hungarian People's Republic and the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. In 1989, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the fall of communism in central and eastern Europe enabled Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia to adopt capitalism and democracy. In December 1991, the fall of the Soviet Union occurred, further allowing the three countries to look westward.\nEstablishment (1990s).\nThe Visegr\u00e1d Group was established on 15 February 1991 at a meeting between the President of the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic, V\u00e1clav Havel, the President of the Republic of Poland, Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa, and the Prime Minister of the Republic of Hungary, J\u00f3zsef Antall, in the Hungarian town of Visegr\u00e1d. The group was created with the aim of moving away from communism and implementing the reforms required for full membership of the Euro-Atlantic institutions, such as NATO and the EU.\nAfter the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993, the Czech Republic and Slovakia became independent members of the alliance, raising the number of members from three to four. All four members of the Visegr\u00e1d Group joined the European Union on 1 May 2004.\nContemporary history (2004\u2013present).\nWith all four Visegrad countries joining the EU in 2004, the primary goal of the group was achieved. Since then, the Visegrad Group has focused mostly on cultural cooperation through the Visegrad Fund and expert-level cooperation on topics such as infrastructure. The group became politically active and media visible during the European Migration Crisis in 2015. The Visegrad countries forcefully fought against the EU quota that aimed to distribute Syrian refugees from the overwhelmed southern EU countries across the continent. The coherence of the group decreased with the lower salience of migration in the subsequent years.\nThe full-scale invasion of Ukraine by Russia in 2022 caused a rift within the group. The Hungarian government under Viktor Orb\u00e1n and the Slovak government under Robert Fico rejected support for Ukraine and echoed Russian claims that the war had been provoked by NATO. On the other hand, the Czech government under Petr Fiala and the Polish government under Donald Tusk are among the strongest supporters of Ukraine. This rift was highlighted by the summit in Prague in 2024, where Fiala said it \"wouldn't make sense that we differ in the views of the cause of the Russian aggression against Ukraine and the ways of solving it.\" Polish Foreign Minister Rados\u0142aw Sikorski also stressed that the priority for Poland (the largest country in the group) should be collaboration within the Weimar Triangle (Poland, Germany, France) and with the US, rather than with the Visegrad Four.\nWhile some Czech politicians even called for leaving the Visegrad Four, V\u00edt Dost\u00e1l, head of the foreign policy think-tank AMO, argued that the V4 survived many governments with differing foreign policy priorities. He highlighted V4's crucial role in networking among public servants (down to the level of ministerial experts), which helps the four countries in EU negotiations - as well as networking among civil society actors.\nEconomies.\nAll four nations in the Visegr\u00e1d Group are high-income countries with a very high Human Development Index. V4 countries have experienced more or less steady economic growth for over a century. \nHistory and categorization.\nEconomic transformation from communist central-planning to democratic market-economy was one of the goals of the Visegrad cooperation and was seen as an integral part of the so-called \u201cReturn to Europe\u201d. The Visegrad countries succeeded to various levels and managed to overcome the economic slump after the 1989 revolution during the 1990s. With integration into the European Union, they chose an export-led FDI-dependent growth model. Not only due to their geographical proximity to Germany, but also due to their elite's decision to protect their industrial heritage, they became manufacturing hubs for Western European companies, foremost for the German automotive sector. This strategy differentiates Visegrad countries from other (semi)peripheral economies like the Baltic states (dependent on a debt-driven model) or Southern Europe (debt-based consumption-led model).\nIn 2009, Slovakia adopted the euro as its official currency, being the only member of the group to have done so. All four countries are eventually obliged to adopt the euro in the future and to join the Eurozone once they have satisfied the euro convergence criteria by the Treaty of Accession since they joined the EU.\nGDP (per capita).\nIf counted as a single country, the Visegr\u00e1d Group's GDP would be the 4th in the EU, 5th in Europe and 15th in the world. In terms of international trade, the V4 is not only at the forefront of Europe, but also of the world (4th in the EU, 5th in Europe and 8th in the world).\nBased on gross domestic product per capita (PPP) estimated figures for the year 2020, the most developed country in the group is the Czech Republic (US$40,858 per capita), followed by Slovakia (US$38,321 per capita), Hungary (US$35,941 per capita) and Poland (US$35,651 per capita). The average GDP (PPP) in 2019 for the entire group is estimated at US$34,865. (Source?)\nNuclear energy.\nWithin the EU, the V4 countries are pro-nuclear-power, and are seeking to expand or found (in the case of Poland) a nuclear-power industry. They have sought to counter what they see as an anti-nuclear-power bias within the EU, believing their countries would benefit from nuclear power.\nCzech Republic.\nThe economy of the Czech Republic is the group's second largest (GDP PPP of US$432.346 billion total, ranked 36th in the world).\nWithin the V4, the Czech Republic has the highest Human Development Index, Human Capital Index, nominal GDP per capita as well as GDP at purchasing power parity per capita.\nHungary.\nHungary has the group's third largest economy (total GDP of US$350.000 billion, 53rd in the world). Hungary was one of the more developed economies of the Eastern bloc. With about $18 billion in foreign direct investment (FDI) since 1989, Hungary has attracted over one-third of all FDI in central and eastern Europe, including the former Soviet Union. Of this, about $6 billion came from American companies. Now it is an industrial agricultural state. The main industries are engineering, mechanical engineering (cars, buses), chemical, electrical, textile, and food industries. The services sector accounted for 64.8% of GDP in 2017 (est.).\nThe main sectors of Hungarian industry are heavy industry (mining, metallurgy, machine and steel production), energy production, mechanical engineering, chemicals, food industry, and automobile production. The industry is leaning mainly on processing industry and (including construction) accounted for 29.32% of GDP in 2008. The leading industry is machinery, followed by the chemical industry (plastic production, pharmaceuticals), while mining, metallurgy and textile industry seemed to be losing importance in the past two decades. In spite of the significant drop in the last decade, the food industry still contributes up to 14% of total industrial production and amounts to 7\u20138% of the country's exports.\nAgriculture accounted for 4.3% of GDP in 2008 and along with the food industry occupied roughly 7.7% of the labour force.\nTourism employs nearly 150,000 people and the total income from tourism was 4 billion euros in 2008. One of Hungary's top tourist destinations is Lake Balaton, the largest freshwater lake in Central Europe, with 1.2 million visitors in 2008. The most visited region is Budapest; the Hungarian capital attracted 3.61 million visitors in 2008. Hungary was the world's 24th most visited country in 2011.\nPoland.\nPoland has the region's largest economy (GDP PPP total of US$1.353 trillion, ranked 22nd in the world). According to the United Nations and the World Bank, it is a high-income country with a high quality of life and a very high standard of living. The Polish economy is the fifth-largest in the EU and one of the fastest-growing economies in Europe, with a yearly growth rate of over 3.0% between 1991 and 2019.\nPoland was the only European Union member to have avoided a decline in GDP during the late-2000s recession, and in 2009 created the most GDP growth of all countries in the EU. The Polish economy had not entered recession nor contracted. According to Poland's Central Statistical Office, in 2011 the Polish economic growth rate was 4.3%, the best result in the entire EU. The largest component of its economy is the service sector (67.3%), followed by industry (28.1%) and agriculture (4.6%). Since increased private investment and EU funding assistance, Poland's infrastructure has developed rapidly.\nPoland's main industries are mining, machinery (cars, buses, ships), metallurgy, chemicals, electrical goods, textiles, and food processing. The high-technology and IT sectors are also growing with the help of investors such as Google, Toshiba, Dell, GE, LG, and Sharp. Poland is a producer of many electronic devices and components.\nSlovakia.\nThe smallest, but still considerably powerful V4 economy is that of Slovakia (GDP of US$209.186 billion total, 68th in the world).\nDemographics.\nThe population is 64,301,710 inhabitants, which would rank 22nd largest in the world and 4th in Europe (similar in size to France, Italy or the UK) if V4 were a single country. The most populated country in the group is Poland (38 million), followed by the Czech Republic (~11 million), Hungary (~10 million), and Slovakia (5.5 million).\nInitiatives.\nInternational Visegr\u00e1d Fund.\nThe International Visegr\u00e1d Fund (IVF) is the only institutionalized form of regional cooperation of the Visegr\u00e1d Group countries.\nThe main aim of the fund is to strengthen the ties among people and institutions in Central and Eastern Europe through giving support to regional non-governmental initiatives.\nDefence cooperation.\nVisegr\u00e1d Battlegroup.\nOn 12 May 2011, Polish Defence Minister Bogdan Klich said that Poland will lead a new EU Battlegroup of the Visegr\u00e1d Group. The decision was made at the V4 defence ministers' meeting in Levo\u010da, Slovakia, and the battlegroup became operational and was placed on standby in the first half of 2016. The ministers also agreed that the V4 militaries should hold regular exercises under the auspices of the NATO Response Force, with the first such exercise to be held in Poland in 2013. The battlegroup included members of V4 and Ukraine.\nAnother V4 EU Battlegroup was formed in the second semester of 2019 (V4 + Croatia) and another will be on standby in the first semester of 2023.\nOther cooperation areas.\nOn 14 March 2014, in response to the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine, a pact was signed for a joint military body within the European Union.\nSubsequent Action Plan defines these other cooperation areas:\n\"V4 Joint Logistics Support Group Headquarters\" (V4 JLSG HQ) was established in 2020 and will reach the full operational capability by the beginning of 2023.\nVisegr\u00e1d Patent Institute.\nCreated by an agreement signed in Bratislava on 26 February 2015, the Institute aims at operating as an International Searching Authority (ISA) and International Preliminary Examining Authorities (IPEA) under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) as from 1 July 2016.\nNeighbour relations.\nEuropean Union.\nAll members of the V4 have been member states of the European Union since the EU's enlargement in 2004, and members of the Schengen Area since 2007.\nAustria.\nAustria is the Visegr\u00e1d Group's southwestern neighbor. The Czech Republic, Slovakia and Austria launched the Slavkov format for the three countries in early 2015. The first meeting in this format took place on 29 January 2015 in Slavkov u Brna (Austerlitz) in the Czech Republic. Petr Drul\u00e1k, the deputy foreign minister of the Czech Republic, emphasized that the Austerlitz format was not a competitor, but an addition to the Visegr\u00e1d group, after proposals to enlarge the V4 with Austria and Slovenia were rejected by Hungary.\nThe leadership of the Freedom Party of Austria, the junior partner in the former Austrian coalition government, has expressed its willingness to closely cooperate with the Visegr\u00e1d Group. Former Chancellor and leader of the Austrian People's Party Sebastian Kurz wanted to act as a bridge builder between the east and the west.\nGermany.\nGermany, the Visegr\u00e1d Group's western neighbour, is a key economic partner of the group and vice versa. As of 2018, Germany's trade and investment flows with the V4 are greater than with China.\nRomania.\nOn 24 April 2015, Bulgaria, Romania and Serbia established the Craiova Group. The idea came from Victor Ponta, the then Romanian Prime Minister, who said he was inspired by the Visegr\u00e1d Group. Greece joined the group in October 2017.\nRomania has been invited to participate in the Visegr\u00e1d Group on previous occasions. However, several incidents, such as the Black March ethnic clashes, made this impossible.\nNon-EU.\nHungary, Poland, and Slovakia border Ukraine on their east. Poland additionally borders Belarus and Russia's Kaliningrad Oblast to the northeast. The Czech Republic is fully surrounded by other EU members. Hungary borders Serbia, a candidate for EU accession, in the south.\nUkraine.\nUkraine, an eastern neighbour of the V4 that is not a member of the EU, is one of largest recipients of the International Visegr\u00e1d Fund support and receives assistance from the Visegr\u00e1d Group for its aspirations to European integration. Ukraine joined the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the EU and therefore with the V4 in 2016.\nThe 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine has led to tensions within the Visegr\u00e1d Group with Hungary under Viktor Orban, opposed to harsher sanctions against Russia, while the Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Poland strongly supporting Ukraine. In November 2022, Czech Prime Minister Petr Fiala stated, \u201cThis is not the best of times for the (Visegr\u00e1d) format, and Hungary's different attitudes are significantly influencing and complicating the situation.\u201d\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32659", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32659", "title": "Varney the Vampire", "text": "1847 novel by James Malcom Rymer\nVarney the Vampire; or, the Feast of Blood is a Victorian-era serialized gothic horror story variously attributed to James Malcolm Rymer and Thomas Peckett Prest. It first appeared in 1845\u20131847 as a series of weekly cheap pamphlets of the kind then known as \"penny dreadfuls\". The author was paid by the typeset line, so when the story was published in book form in 1847, it was of epic length: the original edition ran to 876 double-columned pages and 232 chapters. Altogether it totals nearly 667,000 words.\nIt is the tale of the vampire Sir Francis Varney, and introduced many of the tropes present in vampire fiction recognizable to modern audiences. It was the first story to refer to sharpened teeth for a vampire, noting: \"With a plunge he seizes her neck in his fang-like teeth\".\nStory.\nSetting.\nThe story has a confused setting. While ostensibly set in the early eighteenth century, there are references to the Napoleonic Wars and other indicators that the story is contemporary to the time of its writing in the mid-nineteenth century. Varney's adventures also occur in various locations including London, Bath, Winchester and Naples.\nHuman characters.\nThe plot concerns the troubles that Sir Francis Varney inflicts upon the Bannerworths, a formerly wealthy family driven to ruin by their recently deceased father. Initially the Bannerworths consist of Mrs Bannerworth and her adult children Henry, George, and Flora (George is never mentioned by name after the thirty-sixth chapter). A family friend, Mr Marchdale, lives with the Bannerworths in early chapters. Later, Flora's fianc\u00e9 Charles Holland, his seafaring uncle Admiral Bell, and Bell's jovial assistant Jack Pringle also take residence with the Bannerworths.\nVarney.\nThough the earliest chapters give the standard motives of blood sustenance for Varney's actions toward the family, later ones suggest that Varney is motivated by monetary interests. The story is at times inconsistent and confusing, as if the author did not know whether to make Varney a literal vampire or simply a human who acts like one. Varney bears a strong resemblance to a portrait in Bannerworth Hall, and the implication throughout is that he is actually Marmaduke Bannerworth (or Sir Runnagate Bannerworth; the names are confused throughout the story), but that connection is never clarified. He is portrayed as loathing his condition, and at one point he turns Clara Crofton, a member of another family he terrorizes, into a vampire for revenge.\nOver the course of the book, Varney is presented with increasing sympathy as a victim of circumstances. He tries to save himself, but is unable to do so. He ultimately commits suicide by throwing himself into Mount Vesuvius, after having left a written account of his origin with a sympathetic priest. According to Varney, he was cursed with vampirism after he betrayed a royalist to Oliver Cromwell, and subsequently killed his own son accidentally in a fit of anger. He \"dies\" and is revived several times in the course of his career. This afforded the author a variety of origin stories. In one of these, a medical student named Dr. Chillingworth applies galvanism to Varney's hanged corpse and revives him. This sub-plot parallels the earlier story of \"Frankenstein\" by Mary Shelley and film adaptations which introduce electricity as Dr. Frankenstein's means of creating the monster.\nLegacy.\nScholars including A. Asbj\u00f8rn J\u00f8n have suggested that \"Varney\" was a major influence on later vampire fiction, including \"Dracula\" (1897) by Bram Stoker. Many of today's standard vampire tropes originated in \"Varney\": Varney has fangs, leaves two puncture wounds on the necks of his victims, comes through a window to attack a sleeping maiden, has hypnotic powers, and has superhuman strength. Unlike later fictional vampires, he is able to go about in daylight and has no particular fear of either crosses or garlic. He can eat and drink in human fashion as a form of disguise, but he points out that human food and drink do not agree with him. This is also the first example of the \"sympathetic vampire\", a vampire who despises his condition but is nonetheless a slave to it.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the Marvel Universe, \"Varnae\" is the name of the first vampire, created by the people of Atlantis before it sank.\nIn the thirteenth episode of the 1991 television series \"\", Varney treated Dracula (going by Alexander Lucard in the series) for blood poisoning. He was played by Sam Malkin.\nIn the sixth episode of the TV series \"Penny Dreadful\" (2014), Abraham Van Helsing gives a copy of \"Varney the Vampire\" to Victor Frankenstein, explaining that the story is more truth than fiction and that the mysterious creature the series' characters are pursuing is a vampire.\nVarney is one of the main characters in \"Strange Practice\" (2017) and its sequels by Vivian Shaw.\nThe 2017 film \"The Man Who Invented Christmas\" shows Charles Dickens reading it at the time that he was developing the supernatural elements of his novella \"A Christmas Carol\"; however, \"Varney\" was not published until 1845, and the film's action is set in 1843.\nIn 2020, the fifth season episode 'The Stakeout' of BBC anthology series \"Inside No. 9\" features PC Varney, named after the character and played by Reece Shearsmith. \nIn 2021, Varney appears as a character in \"Castlevania\" season 4, as an alter ego of Death (voiced by Malcolm McDowell), used to operate beneath notice to advance his goals.\nAuthorship.\nThe story was published by Edward Lloyd, whose policy was not to allow authors to put their name on their published work. Due to this there is disagreement over the authorship of many works published by his company. \"Varney the Vampire\" is generally considered to have been co-written by James Malcolm Rymer and Thomas Preskett Prest. However, E. F. Bleiler has argued that Rymer is most likely the author due to the differences in how he wrote dialogue compared to Prest. Louis James also considered Rymer the most likely author, citing a piece of the manuscript in his handwriting.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32660", "revid": "42407475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32660", "title": "V12 engine", "text": "Piston engine with 12 cylinders in V-configuration\nA V12 engine is a twelve-cylinder piston engine where two banks of six cylinders are arranged in a V configuration around a common crankshaft. V12 engines are more common than V10 engines. However, they are less common than V8 engines.\nThe first V12 engine was built in 1904 for use in racing boats. Due to the balanced nature of the engine and the smooth delivery of power, V12 engines were found in early luxury automobiles, boats, aircraft, and tanks. Aircraft V12 engines reached their apogee during World War II, after which they were mostly replaced by jet engines. In Formula One racing, V12 engines were common during the late 1960s and early 1990s.\nApplications of V12 engines in the 21st century have been as marine engines, in railway locomotives, as large stationary power as well as in some European sports and luxury cars.\nDesign.\nBalance and smoothness.\nEach bank of a V12 engine essentially functions as a straight-six engine, which by itself has perfect primary and secondary engine balance. A four-stroke V12 engine has even firing order at V-angles of 60, 120, or 180 degrees Many V12 engines use a V-angle of 60 degrees between the two banks of cylinders. V12 engines with other V-angles have been produced, sometimes using split crankpins to reduce the unbalanced vibrations. The drawbacks of V12 engines include extra cost, complexity, friction losses, and external size and weight, compared with engines containing fewer cylinders.\nAt any given time, three of the cylinders in a V12 engine are in their power stroke, which increases the smoothness of the power delivery by eliminating gaps between power pulses.\nA V12 engine with a 180 degree V-angle is often called a flat-twelve engine. These are also sometimes called 'boxer twelve' engines, however this terminology is incorrect for the majority of 180-degree V12 engines, since they use shared crankpins and are therefore not configured as true boxer engines.\nTheoretically, the rotating parts of a V12 racing engine could be lighter than a crossplane V8 engine of similar displacement due to the V12 engine not requiring counterweights on the crankshaft or as much inertial mass for the flywheel. In addition, the exhaust system of a V12 engine is much simpler than would be required for a crossplane V8 engine to achieve pulsed exhaust gas tuning. However, the use of V12 engines in motor racing is uncommon in the 21st century.\nSize and displacement.\nA 60-degree V12 engine is typically narrower than a 90-degree V6 or V8 engine of similar displacement. However, the V12 engine is usually longer than V6 and V8 engines. The added length often makes it difficult to fit a V12 engine into a passenger car, but the length is not typically a problem for trucks and stationary applications. Due to its narrower width, the V12 is common as locomotive, armoured tank, and marine engines. In these applications, the width of the engine is constrained by tight railway clearances or street widths, while the length of the vehicle is more flexible.\nIn twin-propeller boats, two V12 engines can be narrow enough to sit side by side, while three V12 engines are sometimes used in high-speed three-propeller configurations. Large, fast cruise ships can have six or more V12 engines. In historic piston-engine fighter and bomber aircraft, the long, narrow V12 configuration used in high-performance aircraft made them more streamlined than other engines, particularly the short, wide radial engine.\nUsage in marine vessels.\nThe first V-engine (a V-twin design) was built by Daimler in 1889, then the first V8 engine was built by Antoinette in 1903. These were followed by the first V12 engine in 1904, which was built by Putney Motor Works in London for use in racing boats. Known as the \"Craig-D\u00f6rwald\" engine after Putney's founding partners, the V12 engine was based on Putney's existing two-cylinder engine with a flathead design, a V-angle of 90 degrees and an aluminium crankcase. As in many marine engines, the camshaft could be slid longitudinally to engage a second set of cams, giving valve timing that reversed the engine's rotation to achieve astern propulsion. The engine had a displacement of a weight of and developed racing boats, but little is known of its racing achievements.\nTwo more V12s appeared in the 1909-1910 motor boat racing season. The Lamb Boat &amp; Engine Company in the United States built a engine for the company's 'Lamb IV' boat. The Orleans Motor Company built a massive flathead V12 engine with a power output quoted as \"nearly \". In 1914, Panhard built two V12 engines with four valves per cylinder, which were designed for use in racing boats.\nLarge V12 diesel engines are common in modern cruise ships, which may have up to six such engines. An example of a currently produced V12 marine engine is the \"W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4 46F\" engine, where the V12 version has a displacement of and a power output of .\nUsage in airplanes.\n1900s to 1930s.\nRenault introduced the first V12 engine for aircraft with their 90 hp model of 1912. This engine had a V-angle of 60 degrees, air cooling and an intake over exhaust (F-head) valve arrangement. The propeller was driven from the front end of the camshaft, thus spinning the propeller speed at half the speed of a typical crankshaft driven propeller, in order to improve the propeller efficiency. \nIn March 1914, a prototype version of the Sunbeam Mohawk V12 engine was unveiled in the United Kingdom, based on the 'Toodles V' motor racing engine. The production version was rated at at 2,000 rpm, making it the most powerful airplane engine in Great Britain at the outbreak of World War I. During and after World War I, various companies in the United States produced the Liberty L-12 engine. In Austria, the Austro Daimler V12 engines were used by the large flying boats of the Naval Air Force and produced up to . By the end of World War I, V12s were well established in aviation, powering some of the newest and largest fighter and bomber airplanes.\nAfter World War I, many Zeppelins used V12 engines built by Maybach and Daimler. V12 engines powered the first transatlantic crossings by the Curtiss NC flying boats (using four Liberty L-12 engines), the first non-stop transatlantic crossing in a Vickers Vimy (using two Rolls-Royce Eagle engines) and the first transatlantic crossing by an airship in the R-34 class airship (using five Sunbeam Maori engines).\n1940s to present.\nV12 engines reached their apogee during World War II with engines such as the British Rolls-Royce Merlin and Rolls-Royce Griffon, the Soviet Klimov VK-107 and Mikulin AM-38, the American Allison V-1710, and the German Daimler-Benz DB 600 and Junkers Jumo. These engines generated about at the beginning of the war and over at their ultimate evolution stage. This rapid increase in power outputs was due to technology such as multi-speed superchargers and high octane fuels, and the V12 layout was commonly adopted due to its low vibrations so that the powerful engines did not tear apart the light airframes of fighters.\nThe Allied forces used V12 engines with an \"upright\" design, while many German engines (aside from the BMW VI, which was designed prior to World War II), used an inverted engine design, which had a lower centre of gravity and improved pilot visibility for single-engined designs. The only two American-design inverted V12 engines of any type to see even limited service in World War II were the air-cooled Ranger V-770, which was used in aircraft that were only used for training purposes within the United States, such as the Fairchild AT-21 Gunner, and liquid-cooled Continental I-1430 hyper engine, which was used for experimental aircraft as XP-67, XP-49 and others.\nThe Rolls-Royce Merlin V12 engine was used in several British aircraft including the Hawker Hurricane and Supermarine Spitfire fighters, and the Avro Lancaster and de Havilland Mosquito bombers. The Hurricane and Spitfire played vital roles in the Battle of Britain. The long, narrow configuration of the V12 contributed to good aerodynamics, while its smoothness allowed its use with relatively light and fragile airframes.\nIn the United States, the Rolls-Royce Merlin engine was produced under license by Packard Motor Car Company, which was used in the P-51 Mustang fighter. This engine was also incorporated into some models of the Curtiss P-40, specifically the P-40F and P-40L. Packard Merlins powered Canadian-built Hurricane, Lancaster, and Mosquito aircraft, as well as the UK-built Spitfire Mark XVI, which was otherwise the same as the Mark IX with its British-built Merlin. The Allison V-1710 was the only liquid-cooled V12 engine designed in the United States that was used on active service during World War II. It was initially used in the P-38 Lightning, but the turbosupercharger system required bulky ductwork and had poor high-altitude performance. In 1943, a version using a more conventional mechanical supercharger began production.\nAfter World War II, V12 engines became generally obsolete in aircraft due to the introduction of turbojet and turboprop engines that had more power for their weight, and fewer complications.\nUsage in automobiles.\nIn automobiles, V12 engines are less common than engines with fewer cylinders, due to their size, complexity, and cost. They have been mostly used for expensive sports and luxury cars thanks to their power, smooth operation, and distinctive sound.\n1910s.\nOne of the earliest recorded uses of V12 engines in automobiles was in October 1913, when a custom-built racing car competed at the Brooklands circuit in the United Kingdom. The car was entered by Louis Coatalen, who was chief engineer of the Sunbeam Motor Car Company. It was named 'Toodles V' (after Coatalen's pet name for his wife) and achieved several speed records in 1913 and 1914. The V12 engine had a displacement of , an aluminum crankcase, iron cylinders with L-shaped combustion chambers, a cam-in-block valvetrain and a V-angle of 60 degrees. Each bank of the engine consisted of two cylinder blocks with three cylinders each. Valve clearance was set by grinding the relevant parts, the engine lacking any easy means of adjustment. This reflected the intention for the engine to be later used in aircraft since any adjustment method that could go wrong in flight was to be avoided. As initially built, the V12 was rated at at 2,400 rpm and weighed approximately .\nAmongst the first production cars to use a V12 engine were the 1915 Packard Twin Six, the 1915 \"National\" V12 engine and the 1917 Weidely Pathfinder; all of which were built in the United States.\n1920s to 1940s.\nDuring the late 1920s, the number of marques offering V12 engines for their passenger cars increased and peaked in the 1930s. The lack of vibration and sound, inherent smoothness, and increased power were cited as key benefits for V12 engines. Automobile petrol produced in the 1920s and 1930s had lower octane rating, leading to lower engine performance ratings, and vibration isolating engine mounts were rarely fitted to the passenger cars in the 1920s and the early 1930s. Adding more cylinders to the engine was one of several techniques for performance increase.\nEuropean passenger cars with V12 engines were:\nAmerican passenger cars with V12 engines were:\nEconomic hardships caused by the Great Depression meant that all American automakers except for Lincoln had discontinued production of V12 engines by the end of the 1930s. Lincoln themselves would cease V12 production in 1948, and no American automaker has built V12 engines since. Improvements in engine design, namely combustion chamber, piston form, fuel delivery system, and such enabled the lighter and cheaper V8 engines to surpass V12 engines in performance.\n1945 to 1960s.\nFollowing the end of the Second World War, the economic austerity and changes in taste in many European countries led to the demise of luxury automobiles with V12 engines in the 1940s and 1950s. Lincoln continued the limited production of luxury cars with V12 engines from 1946 to 1948. The American manufacturers focused on continuously improving V8 engines and their performances through the 1950s, leading to the first \"horsepower war\" in the 1960s.\nIn Italy, Enzo Ferrari, who had long admired the V12 engines of Packard, Auto Union, and his former employer Alfa Romeo, introduced his first passenger car, Ferrari 166 Inter, in 1948 and fitted it with Colombo V12 engine. Dissatisfied with the reliability and crudeness of his Ferrari 250 GT, Ferruccio Lamborghini wanted to develop his own passenger cars that were more cultured and more reliable than the cars produced by Ferrari. His first passenger car, a grand tourer, was 350 GT with DOHC engine. Both manufacturers have a long history of producing vehicles with V12 engines, which continues uninterrupted to this day.\nCadillac experimented with V12 engines in 1963 and 1964 as a potential engine option for its first-ever front-wheel-drive car, Cadillac Eldorado. However, Cadillac was unsatisfied with the performance of its V12 engine, having little advantage over the large displacement V8 that was cheaper to enlarge for more power.\n1970s to present.\nIn Europe, several manufacturers added V12 engines to their line-up, as listed below:\nIn the United States, no mass-produced V12 engines have been built since the 1940s, with U.S. manufacturers preferring to use large displacement V8 engines instead.\nJapanese manufacturers rarely produce engines with large displacements, therefore V12 engines are very rare. The sole Japanese V12 engine is the 1997\u20132016 Toyota GZ engine, a DOHC design which was used in the Second generation Toyota Century limousine.\nIn China, the 2009 Hongqi HQE limousine, powered by a DOHC V12 engine, is the sole Chinese car to be produced with a V12 engine.\nMotor racing.\nV12 engines have often been used in Formula One, particularly from the 1966 season to the 1969 season. The first V12 engine used in Formula One was in the 1964 Honda RA271 racing car, and continued through to the 1968 Honda RA301 racing car. The 1966 season saw V12 engines become popular, with new V12 engines from Ferrari, Maserati, and Weslake. Ferrari's engine debuted in the Ferrari 312 racing car and was used up to the 1975 Ferrari 312B, after which Ferrari switched to a flat-twelve engine. Maserati's engine was introduced in the Cooper T81 and was used until the 1969 Cooper T86. The Weslake V12 engine was used from 1966 to 1968 and was introduced in the Eagle Mk1 racing car. BRM produced V12 engines from the 1968 BRM P133 racing car until the 1977 BRM P207. The Matra Sports V12 engine was introduced in the 1968 \"Matra MS11\" racing car and used until the 1978 Ligier JS9. Few V12 engines were used in the following decade, with the exception of the Alfa Romeo V12 which was first used by the 1979 Brabham BT48 and then by Alfa Romeo until the 1982 Alfa Romeo 182.\nA resurgence of V12 engines in Formula One began in 1989, with the introduction of the Ferrari 640 racing car. Ferrari continued to use V12 engines until the 1995 Ferrari 412 T2 became the last Formula One car to use a V12 engine. The Lamborghini LE3512 engine was used by various teams between 1989 and 1993. The \"Honda RA122-E\" engine was first used in the 1991 McLaren MP4/6 and was raced until the 1992 McLaren MP4/7A. The \"Yamaha OX99\" engine was used in the 1990 Brabham BT59 through to the 1992 Brabham BT60. The most powerful naturally-aspirated V12 engine used in Formula One was the \"Tipo 043\", used by Ferrari in , which produced @ 15,800 rpm.\nIn prototype sports car racing, the highly successful 2006\u20132008 Audi R10 TDI used a diesel twin-turbo V12 engine. The Peugeot 908 HDi FAP, introduced in 2007, also used a diesel twin-turbo V12 engine.\nUsage in trucks.\nSeveral truck manufacturers have produced V12 diesel engines at various times. For example, the 1967\u20131982 Tatra T813, built in Czechoslovakia, used a naturally aspirated V12 diesel engine, and the 1983\u2013present Tatra T815 is available with a V12 diesel engine in both naturally aspirated and turbocharged forms. In the United States, V12 versions of the 1938\u20131995 Detroit Diesel Series 71, the 1967\u20131999 Detroit Diesel Series 149 and the 1974\u20131995 Detroit Diesel Series 92 were produced. In Japan, Isuzu produced naturally aspirated V12 diesel engines from in 1976\u20132000, for their heavy duty trucks: New Power, 810 and Giga.\nTrucks using V12 gasoline (petrol) engines are rare, however several were produced in the United States from the 1930s until the 1970s. In 1931, \"American La France\" began producing firetrucks with V12 gasoline engines based on the \"Lycoming BB motor\". In 1935, the V12 engine used by the Pierce Arrow luxury car was fitted to firetrucks built by Seagrave (with production continuing until 1970, since Seagrave purchased the equipment to manufacture the Pierce Arrow engines themselves). The 1960\u20131965 GMC Twin Six gasoline V12 engine was basically the \"GMC 351\" V6 engine, doubled, with four rocker covers and four exhaust manifolds. Peak power was only . However peak torque was .\nUsage in railway locomotives.\nMany diesel locomotives use V12 engines. Examples include the EMD 12-710 and the \"GEVO-12\" engine (used in the GE ES44AC North American locomotives).\nV12 engines used in railway locomotives include:\nUsage in armoured fighting vehicles.\nThe V12 is a common engine configuration for tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles. Some examples are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32661", "revid": "50671538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32661", "title": "V-twin engine", "text": "Piston engine with two cylinders in \"V\" configuration\nA V-twin engine, also called a V2 engine, is a two-cylinder piston engine where the cylinders are arranged in a V configuration and share a common crankshaft.\nThe V-twin is widely associated with motorcycles, primarily installed transversely, though also longitudinally. They are also used in a variety of other land, air, and marine vehicles, as well as industrial applications. The V-twin design dates back to the late 1880s.\nOrigins.\nOne of the first V-twin engines was built by Gottlieb Daimler in 1889. It was used as a stationary engine, for boats and in the Daimler Stahlradwagen (\"steel-wheeled car\"), Daimler's second car. The engine was also manufactured under licence in France by Panhard et Levassor.\nAn early V-twin engined motorcycle was produced in November 1902 by the Princeps AutoCar Company in the United Kingdom. The following year, V-twin motorcycles were produced by Eclipse Motor &amp; Cycle Co in the United Kingdom (the \"XL-ALL\" model), Glenn Curtiss in the United States, and NSU Motorenwerke in Germany.\nPeugeot, which had used Panhard-built Daimler V-twins in its first cars, began producing its own V-twin engines in the early 20th century. This Peugeot engine powered a Norton motorcycle that won the first Isle of Man TT race in 1907.\nTypical design.\nCrankshaft configuration.\nMost V-twin engines have a single crankpin, which is shared by both connecting rods. The connecting rods may sit side-by-side with offset cylinders, or have fork and blade connecting rods which avoids the twisting forces caused by having offset cylinders.\nSome notable exceptions include a 180\u00b0 crank pin offset used by the 1935 Moto Guzzi 500cc, a dual-crankpin configuration used by the 1983 Honda Shadow 750, and the 75\u00b0 crank pin offset (45\u00b0 offset in the United States) used by the 1987 Suzuki VX 800.\nV angle.\nAlthough any 'V angle' (the angle between the two banks of cylinders) between zero and 180 degrees is theoretically possible for a V-twin engine, in practice angles smaller than 40 degrees are rarely used. The most common V angle for a V-twin engine is 90 degrees, which can achieve a perfect primary balance (if the correct counterweight is used) like most Ducatis, most Moto Guzzis, the Honda RC51, Suzuki TL1000S and TL1000R. However, this arrangement results in an uneven firing order, with the second cylinder firing 270 degrees after the first cylinder, then a 450 degrees interval until the first cylinder fires again. While the uneven firing order results in greater vibration, it also produces a distinctive sound that many riders appreciate. 90 degree engines are sometimes called L-twin (like the \"L\" in TL1000R or TL1000S) rather than V-twin.\nThe alternating longer and shorter gaps between firings produce a characteristic V-twin alternating engine noise \"phutphut phutphut phutphut phutphut\".\nWhen a V angle of less than 90 degrees is used, perfect primary balance can only be achieved if offset crankpins are used. If not, balance shafts are usually required to reduce the vibration. Vehicles which use engines with V angles of less than 90 degrees include:\nVehicles which use engines with V angles of greater than 90 degrees include the 1934 Moto Guzzi 500cc (120 degrees) and the 1940\u20131948 Z\u00fcndapp KS 750 (170 degrees).\nMotorcycles.\nAs per other motor vehicles, the terms longitudinal engine and transverse engine are most often used to refer to the crankshaft orientation relative to the frame. However, some companies use the opposite terminology, stating that a \"transverse\" V-twin engine has the cylinders mounted on each side of the motorcycle (therefore with the crankshaft running in line with the frame) and that a \"longitudinal\" V-twin engine has the cylinders at the front and rear. The latter terminology is used by the Italian manufacturer Moto Guzzi.\nTo avoid such ambiguity, some people use descriptions of \"transverse crankshaft engine\", \"longitudinal crankshaft engine\", or \"transversely mounted cylinders\".\nTransverse engine.\nThe most common arrangement is to mount the engine with the crankshaft oriented transversely to the frame. The advantage of this mounting is that the width of the motorcycle can be smaller than a longitudinally-mounted V-twin. A disadvantage of this configuration for air-cooled engines is that the two cylinders receive different air-flows and cooling of the rear cylinder tends to be restricted (although the uneven cooling isn't as pronounced as a parallel-twin engine, where the inner faces of the cylinders are not exposed to any airflow). Some transverse V-twins use a single carburettor in the middle of the V-angle to feed both cylinders. While this avoids the need for two carburettors, it creates further cooling problems for the rear cylinder by placing its hot exhaust port and pipe at the back of the cylinder, where it may be exposed to less cooling airflow.\nTransverse V-twin engines have been used by Harley-Davidson, Ducati and many recent Japanese motorcycles, such as the Suzuki SV650. Some Ducati V-twin engines have been marketed as \"L-twin\" engines, due to the front cylinder being horizontal and the rear cylinder being vertical, thus forming an \"L\" shape.\nLongitudinal engine.\nA less common arrangement is to mount the engine longitudinally. An advantage of this arrangement is that both cylinder heads can protrude into the air stream, so they can each receive the same amount of cooling (for air-cooled engines). Also, the transmission being located behind the engine is easier to fit within a typical motorcycle frame and, for shaft-drive motorcycles, a 90\u00b0 bevel gear is not needed at the start of the driveshaft.\nAs per all longitudinal engines, a disadvantage is that the torque reaction will twist the motorcycle to one side (such as on sharp acceleration/deceleration or when opening the throttle in neutral) instead of shifting the weight balance between the front and rear wheels. However, many modern motorcycles reduce this effect by rotating flywheels or alternators in the opposite direction to that of the crankshaft.\nLongitudinal V-twin engines have been used by the Honda CX series and several Moto Guzzi motorcycles.\nAutomobiles.\nMost cars are powered by engines with three or more cylinders, however several small cars have been produced with V-twin engines particularly during the period from 1912 to 1920 when cyclecars were made by many companies (due to a favourable tax position). Almost all of these used proprietary engines, either adapting the larger motorcycle engines used for sidecar work (large singles or V-twins), or using engines specifically made for cyclecars such as those made by J. A. Prestwich Industries ('J.A.P.' engines) or F. E. Baker Ltd ('Precision' engines).\nIn 1912, Humber produced a light car called the Humberette with a Humber-made V-twin side-valve engine of 998cc. The engine had a directly attached clutch, 3-speed gearbox and prop shaft output to a rear differential. A water cooled version of this engine was made available in 1914, but WW1 ended Humberette production in 1915.\nFrom 1911 to 1939, various Morgan 3-wheelers three-wheeled cyclecar models were powered by V-twin engines. Production of three-wheeler models then resumed with the 2012\u2013present Morgan 3-Wheeler. Also in the United Kingdom, Birmingham Small Arms Company (BSA) produced several cars powered by their V-twin motorcycle engines. These were produced from 1921 to 1926 (four-wheel models) and 1929\u20131936 (three-wheel and four-wheel models).\nSeveral manufacturers have produced models inspired by the original Morgan three-wheeled car, such as the 1978\u2013present Triking Cyclecar (using a Moto Guzzi engine), the 2006\u2013present Ace Cycle Car (using a Harley-Davidson engine) and the 1990\u2013present JZR Trikes kit car (using engines from several manufacturers).\nMazda's first car, the 1960\u20131966 Mazda R360 rear-engined kei car, was powered by the Mazda V-twin engine. The 1961\u20131962 Mazda B360 front-engined light commercial vehicle used a version of this engine.\nIndustrial engines.\nVarious V-twin engines have been produced for industrial uses such as pressure washers, lawn and garden tractors, tillers, generators and water pumps. The engines are usually air-cooled with a 90\u00b0 V angle. Depending on the application, the engine's orientation can have either a horizontal or vertical crankshaft.\nManufacturers of commercial V-twin engines include Briggs &amp; Stratton with its Vanguard, Professional and Intek V-twin series, Honda with its V-twin series engines, Kawasaki with its FD, FH, FR, FS, and FX series, Subaru with its EH series, Tecumseh with its OV691EA and TVT691 engines, and Kohler.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32664", "revid": "48046997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32664", "title": "Virial theorem", "text": "Physics theorem\nIn mechanics, the virial theorem provides a general equation that relates the average over time of the total kinetic energy of a stable system of discrete particles, bound by a conservative force (where the work done is independent of path), with that of the total potential energy of the system. Mathematically, the theorem states that\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the total kinetic energy of the formula_3 particles, formula_4 represents the force on the formula_5th particle, which is located at position r\"k\", and angle brackets represent the average over time of the enclosed quantity. The word virial for the right-hand side of the equation derives from , the Latin word for \"force\" or \"energy\", and was given its technical definition by Rudolf Clausius in 1870.\nThe significance of the virial theorem is that it allows the average total kinetic energy to be calculated even for very complicated systems that defy an exact solution, such as those considered in statistical mechanics; this average total kinetic energy is related to the temperature of the system by the equipartition theorem. However, the virial theorem does not depend on the notion of temperature and holds even for systems that are not in thermal equilibrium. The virial theorem has been generalized in various ways, most notably to a tensor form.\nIf the force between any two particles of the system results from a potential energy formula_6 that is proportional to some power formula_7 of the interparticle distance formula_8, the virial theorem takes the simple form\nformula_9\nThus, twice the average total kinetic energy formula_10 equals formula_7 times the average total potential energy \nformula_12. Whereas formula_13 represents the potential energy between two particles of distance formula_8, formula_15 represents the total potential energy of the system, i.e., the sum of the potential energy formula_13 over all pairs of particles in the system. A common example of such a system is a star held together by its own gravity, where formula_17.\nHistory.\nIn 1870, Rudolf Clausius delivered the lecture \"On a Mechanical Theorem Applicable to Heat\" to the Association for Natural and Medical Sciences of the Lower Rhine, following a 20-year study of thermodynamics. The lecture stated that the mean vis viva of the system is equal to its virial, or that the average kinetic energy is one half of the average potential energy. The virial theorem can be obtained directly from Lagrange's identity as applied in classical gravitational dynamics, the original form of which was included in Lagrange's \"Essay on the Problem of Three Bodies\" published in 1772. Carl Jacobi's generalization of the identity to formula_3 bodies and to the present form of Laplace's identity closely resembles the classical virial theorem. However, the interpretations leading to the development of the equations were very different, since at the time of development, statistical dynamics had not yet unified the separate studies of thermodynamics and classical dynamics. The theorem was later utilized, popularized, generalized and further developed by James Clerk Maxwell, Lord Rayleigh, Henri Poincar\u00e9, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Enrico Fermi, Paul Ledoux, Richard Bader and Eugene Parker. Fritz Zwicky was the first to use the virial theorem to deduce the existence of unseen matter, which is now called dark matter. Richard Bader showed that the charge distribution of a total system can be partitioned into its kinetic and potential energies that obey the virial theorem. As another example of its many applications, the virial theorem has been used to derive the Chandrasekhar limit for the stability of white dwarf stars.\nIllustrative special case.\nConsider formula_19 particles with equal mass formula_20, acted upon by mutually attractive forces. Suppose the particles are at diametrically opposite points of a circular orbit with radius formula_8. The velocities are formula_22 and formula_23, which are normal to forces formula_24 and formula_25. The respective magnitudes are fixed at formula_26 and formula_27. The average kinetic energy of the system in an interval of time from formula_28 to formula_29 is\nformula_30\nTaking center of mass as the origin, the particles have positions formula_31 and formula_32 with fixed magnitude formula_8. The attractive forces act in opposite directions as positions, so formula_34. Applying the centripetal force formula formula_35 results in\nformula_36\nas required. Note: If the origin is displaced, then we'd obtain the same result. This is because the dot product of the displacement with equal and opposite forces formula_24, formula_38 results in net cancellation.\nStatement and derivation.\nAlthough the virial theorem depends on averaging the total kinetic and potential energies, the presentation here postpones the averaging to the last step.\nFor a collection of formula_3 point particles, the scalar moment of inertia formula_40 about the origin is\nformula_41\nwhere formula_42 and formula_43 represent the mass and position of the formula_5th particle and formula_45 is the position vector magnitude. Consider the scalar\nformula_46\nwhere formula_47 is the momentum vector of the formula_5th particle. Assuming that the masses are constant, formula_49 is one-half the time derivative of this moment of inertia:\nformula_50\nIn turn, the time derivative of formula_49 is\nformula_52\nwhere formula_42 is the mass of the formula_5th particle, formula_55 is the net force on that particle, and formula_2 is the total kinetic energy of the system according to the formula_57 velocity of each particle,\nformula_58\nConnection with the potential energy between particles.\nThe total force formula_59 on particle formula_5 is the sum of all the forces from the other particles formula_61 in the system:\nformula_62\nwhere formula_63 is the force applied by particle formula_61 on particle formula_5. Hence, the virial can be written as\nformula_66\nSince no particle acts on itself (i.e., formula_67 for formula_68), we split the sum in terms below and above this diagonal and add them together in pairs:\nformula_69\nwhere we have used Newton's third law of motion, i.e., formula_70 (equal and opposite reaction).\nIt often happens that the forces can be derived from a potential energy formula_71 that is a function only of the distance formula_72\nbetween the point particles formula_61 and formula_5. Since the force is the negative gradient of the potential energy, we have in this case\nformula_75\nwhich is equal and opposite to formula_76, the force applied by particle formula_5 on particle formula_61, as may be confirmed by explicit calculation. Hence,\nformula_79\nThus\nformula_80\nSpecial case of power-law forces.\nIn a common special case, the potential energy formula_81 between two particles is proportional to a power formula_7 of their distance formula_83:\nformula_84\nwhere the coefficient formula_85 and the exponent formula_7 are constants. In such cases, the virial is\nformula_87\nwhere\nformula_88\nis the total potential energy of the system.\nThus\nformula_89\nFor gravitating systems the exponent formula_17, giving Lagrange's identity\nformula_91\nwhich was derived by Joseph-Louis Lagrange and extended by Carl Jacobi.\nTime averaging.\nThe average of this derivative over a duration formula_92 is defined as\nformula_93\nfrom which we obtain the exact equation\nformula_94\nThe virial theorem states that if formula_95, then\nformula_96\nThere are many reasons why the average of the time derivative might vanish. One often-cited reason applies to stably bound systems, that is, to systems that hang together forever and whose parameters are finite. In this case, velocities and coordinates of the particles of the system have upper and lower limits, so that formula_97 is bounded between two extremes, formula_98 and formula_99, and the average goes to zero in the limit of infinite formula_92:\nformula_101\nEven if the average of the time derivative of formula_49 is only approximately zero, the virial theorem holds to the same degree of approximation.\nFor power-law forces with an exponent formula_7, the general equation holds:\nformula_104\nFor gravitational attraction, formula_17, and the average kinetic energy equals half of the average negative potential energy:\nformula_106\nThis general result is useful for complex gravitating systems such as planetary systems or galaxies.\nA simple application of the virial theorem concerns galaxy clusters. If a region of space is unusually full of galaxies, it is safe to assume that they have been together for a long time, and the virial theorem can be applied. Doppler effect measurements give lower bounds for their relative velocities, and the virial theorem gives a lower bound for the total mass of the cluster, including any dark matter.\nIf the ergodic hypothesis holds for the system under consideration, the averaging need not be taken over time; an ensemble average can also be taken, with equivalent results.\nIn quantum mechanics.\nAlthough originally derived for classical mechanics, the virial theorem also holds for quantum mechanics, as first shown by Vladimir Fock using the Ehrenfest theorem.\nEvaluate the commutator of the Hamiltonian\nformula_107\nwith the position operator formula_108 and the momentum operator\nformula_109\nof particle formula_7,\nformula_111\nSumming over all particles, one finds that for\nformula_112\nthe commutator is\nformula_113\nwhere formula_114 is the kinetic energy. The left-hand side of this equation is just \nformula_115, according to the Heisenberg equation of motion. The expectation value formula_116 of this time derivative vanishes in a stationary state, leading to the quantum virial theorem:\nformula_117\nPokhozhaev's identity.\nIn the field of quantum mechanics, there exists another form of the virial theorem, applicable to localized solutions to the stationary nonlinear Schr\u00f6dinger equation or Klein\u2013Gordon equation, is Pokhozhaev's identity, also known as Derrick's theorem.\nLet formula_118 be continuous and real-valued, with formula_119.\nDenote formula_120. Let\nformula_121\nbe a solution to the equation\nformula_122\nin the sense of distributions.\nThen formula_123 satisfies the relation\nformula_124\nIn special relativity.\nFor a single particle in special relativity, it is not the case that \nformula_125. Instead, it is true that formula_126, where formula_127 is the Lorentz factor\nformula_128\nand defining formula_129, we have\nformula_130\nThe last expression can be simplified to\nformula_131\nThus, under the conditions described in earlier sections (including Newton's third law of motion, \nformula_132, despite relativity), the time average for formula_3 particles with a power law potential is\nformula_134\nIn particular, the ratio of kinetic energy to potential energy is no longer fixed, but necessarily falls into an interval:\nformula_135\nwhere the more relativistic systems exhibit the larger ratios.\nExamples.\nThe virial theorem has a particularly simple form for periodic motion. It can be used to perform perturbative calculation for nonlinear oscillators.\nIt can also be used to study motion in a central potential. If the central potential is of the form formula_136, the virial theorem simplifies to formula_137. In particular, for gravitational or electrostatic (Coulomb) attraction, formula_138.\nDriven damped harmonic oscillator.\nAnalysis based on Sivardiere, 1986. For a one-dimensional oscillator with mass formula_20, position formula_140, driving force formula_141, spring constant formula_5, and damping coefficient formula_127, the equation of motion is \nformula_144\nWhen the oscillator has reached a steady state, it performs a stable oscillation formula_145, where formula_146 is the amplitude, and formula_147 is the phase angle.\nApplying the virial theorem, we have formula_148, which simplifies to formula_149, where formula_150 is the natural frequency of the oscillator.\nTo solve the two unknowns, we need another equation. In steady state, the power lost per cycle is equal to the power gained per cycle:\nformula_151\nwhich simplifies to formula_152.\nNow we have two equations that yield the solution\nformula_153\nIdeal-gas law.\nConsider a container filled with an ideal gas consisting of point masses. The only forces applied to the point masses are due to the container walls. In this case, the expression in the virial theorem equals\nformula_154\nsince, by definition, the pressure \"P\" is the average force per area exerted by the gas upon the walls, which is normal to the wall. There is a minus sign because formula_155 is the unit normal vector pointing outwards, and the force to be used is the one upon the particles by the wall.\nThen the virial theorem states that\nformula_156\nBy the divergence theorem, formula_157. \nFrom equipartition, the average total kinetic energy formula_158. Hence, formula_159, the ideal gas law.\nDark matter.\nIn 1933, Fritz Zwicky applied the virial theorem to estimate the mass of Coma Cluster, and discovered a discrepancy of mass of about 450, which he explained as due to \"dark matter\". He refined the analysis in 1937, finding a discrepancy of about 500.\nTheoretical analysis.\nHe approximated the Coma cluster as a spherical \"gas\" of formula_3 stars of roughly equal mass formula_20, which gives formula_162. The total gravitational potential energy of the cluster is formula_163, giving formula_164. Assuming the motion of the stars are all the same over a long enough time (ergodicity), formula_165.\nZwicky estimated formula_166 as the gravitational potential of a uniform ball of constant density, giving formula_167.\nSo by the virial theorem, the total mass of the cluster is\nformula_168\nData.\nZwickyformula_169 estimated that there are formula_170 galaxies in the cluster, each having observed stellar mass formula_171 (suggested by Hubble), and the cluster has radius formula_172. He also measured the radial velocities of the galaxies by doppler shifts in galactic spectra to be formula_173. Assuming equipartition of kinetic energy, formula_174.\nBy the virial theorem, the total mass of the cluster should be formula_175. However, the observed mass is formula_176, meaning the total mass is 450 times that of observed mass.\nGeneralizations.\nLord Rayleigh published a generalization of the virial theorem in 1900, which was partially reprinted in 1903. Henri Poincar\u00e9 proved and applied a form of the virial theorem in 1911 to the problem of formation of the Solar System from a proto-stellar cloud (then known as cosmogony). A variational form of the virial theorem was developed in 1945 by Ledoux. A tensor form of the virial theorem was developed by Parker, Chandrasekhar and Fermi. The following generalization of the virial theorem has been established by Pollard in 1964 for the case of the inverse square law:\nformula_177\nA \"boundary\" term otherwise must be added.\nInclusion of electromagnetic fields.\nThe virial theorem can be extended to include electric and magnetic fields. The result is\nformula_178\nwhere formula_40 is the moment of inertia, formula_49 is the momentum density of the electromagnetic field, formula_2 is the kinetic energy of the \"fluid\", formula_182 is the random \"thermal\" energy of the particles, \nformula_183 and formula_184 are the electric and magnetic energy content of the volume considered. Finally, \nformula_185 is the fluid-pressure tensor expressed in the local moving coordinate system\nformula_186\nand formula_187 is the electromagnetic stress tensor,\nformula_188\nA plasmoid is a finite configuration of magnetic fields and plasma. With the virial theorem it is easy to see that any such configuration will expand if not contained by external forces. In a finite configuration without pressure-bearing walls or magnetic coils, the surface integral will vanish. Since all the other terms on the right hand side are positive, the acceleration of the moment of inertia will also be positive. It is also easy to estimate the expansion time formula_92. If a total mass formula_190 is confined within a radius formula_191, then the moment of inertia is roughly formula_192, and the left hand side of the virial theorem is formula_193. The terms on the right hand side add up to about formula_194, where formula_195 is the larger of the plasma pressure or the magnetic pressure. Equating these two terms and solving for formula_92, we find\nformula_197\nwhere formula_198 is the speed of the ion acoustic wave (or the Alfv\u00e9n wave, if the magnetic pressure is higher than the plasma pressure). Thus the lifetime of a plasmoid is expected to be on the order of the acoustic (or Alfv\u00e9n) transit time.\nRelativistic uniform system.\nFor a physical system, when the pressure field, the electromagnetic and gravitational fields are taken into account, as well as the field of particles' acceleration, the virial theorem is written in the relativistic form as follows:\nformula_199\nwhere the value formula_200 exceeds the kinetic energy of the particles formula_2 by a factor equal to the Lorentz factor \nformula_202 of the particles at the center of the system. Under normal conditions we can assume that \nformula_203, then we can see that in the virial theorem the kinetic energy is related to the potential energy not by the coefficient formula_204, but rather by the coefficient close to 0.6. The difference from the classical case arises due to considering the pressure field and the field of particles' acceleration inside the system, while the derivative of the scalar formula_49 is not equal to zero and should be considered as the material derivative.\nAn analysis of the integral theorem of generalized virial makes it possible to find, on the basis of field theory, a formula for the root-mean-square speed of typical particles of a system without using the notion of temperature:\nformula_206\nwhere formula_207 is the speed of light, formula_208 is the acceleration field constant, formula_209 is the mass density of particles, formula_210 is the current radius.\nUnlike the virial theorem for particles, for the electromagnetic field the virial theorem is written as follows:\nformula_211\nwhere the energy formula_212 considered as the kinetic field energy associated with four-current formula_213, and\nformula_214\nsets the potential field energy found through the components of the electromagnetic tensor.\nIn astrophysics.\nThe virial theorem is frequently applied in astrophysics, especially relating the gravitational potential energy of a system to its kinetic or thermal energy. Some common virial relations are \nformula_215\nfor a mass formula_190, radius formula_191, velocity formula_26, and temperature formula_2. The constants are Newton's constant formula_49, the Boltzmann constant formula_221, and proton mass formula_222. Note that these relations are only approximate, and often the leading numerical factors (e.g. formula_223 or formula_204) are neglected entirely.\nGalaxies and cosmology (virial mass and radius).\nIn astronomy, the mass and size of a galaxy (or general overdensity) is often defined in terms of the \"virial mass\" and \"virial radius\" respectively. Because galaxies and overdensities in continuous fluids can be highly extended (even to infinity in some models, such as an isothermal sphere), it can be hard to define specific, finite measures of their mass and size. The virial theorem, and related concepts, provide an often convenient means by which to quantify these properties.\nIn galaxy dynamics, the mass of a galaxy is often inferred by measuring the rotation velocity of its gas and stars, assuming circular Keplerian orbits. Using the virial theorem, the velocity dispersion formula_225 can be used in a similar way. Taking the kinetic energy (per particle) of the system as formula_226, and the potential energy (per particle) as formula_227 we can write\nformula_228\nHere formula_191 is the radius at which the velocity dispersion is being measured, and formula_190 is the mass within that radius. The virial mass and radius are generally defined for the radius at which the velocity dispersion is a maximum, i.e.\nformula_231\nAs numerous approximations have been made, in addition to the approximate nature of these definitions, order-unity proportionality constants are often omitted (as in the above equations). These relations are thus only accurate in an order of magnitude sense, or when used self-consistently.\nAn alternate definition of the virial mass and radius is often used in cosmology where it is used to refer to the radius of a sphere, centered on a galaxy or a galaxy cluster, within which virial equilibrium holds. Since this radius is difficult to determine observationally, it is often approximated as the radius within which the average density is greater, by a specified factor, than the critical density\nformula_232\nwhere formula_233 is the Hubble parameter and formula_49 is the gravitational constant. A common choice for the factor is 200, which corresponds roughly to the typical over-density in spherical top-hat collapse (see Virial mass), in which case the virial radius is approximated as\nformula_235\nThe virial mass is then defined relative to this radius as\nformula_236\nStars.\nThe virial theorem is applicable to the cores of stars, by establishing a relation between gravitational potential energy and thermal kinetic energy (i.e. temperature). As stars on the main sequence convert hydrogen into helium in their cores, the mean molecular weight of the core increases and it must contract to maintain enough pressure to support its own weight. This contraction decreases its potential energy and, the virial theorem states, increases its thermal energy. The core temperature increases even as energy is lost, effectively a negative specific heat. This continues beyond the main sequence, unless the core becomes degenerate causing the pressure to become independent of temperature and the virial relation with formula_17 no longer holds.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32665", "revid": "49938823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32665", "title": "Voice-over", "text": "Non-diegetic speech in media\nVoice-over (also known as off-camera or off-stage commentary) is a production technique used in radio, television, filmmaking, theatre, and other media in which a descriptive or expository voice that is not part of the narrative (i.e., non-diegetic) accompanies the pictured or on-site presentation of events. The voice-over is read from a script and may be spoken by someone who appears elsewhere in the production or by a specialist voice actor. Synchronous dialogue, where the voice-over is narrating the action that is taking place at the same time, remains the most common technique in voice-overs. Asynchronous, however, is also used in cinema. It is usually prerecorded and placed over the top of a film or video and commonly used in documentaries or news reports to explain information.\nVoice-overs are used in video games and on-hold messages, as well as for announcements and information at events and tourist destinations. It may also be read live for events such as award presentations. Voice-over is added in addition to any existing dialogue and is not to be confused with voice acting or the process of replacing dialogue with a translated version, the latter of which is called dubbing or revoicing.\nHistory.\nThe voice-over industry has evolved significantly since its inception, paralleling developments in technology, entertainment, and advertising. It began in the early days of radio and has since expanded into various media including television, film, video games, and the internet.\nEarly Beginnings (1920s-1930s).\nVoice-over work began in the 1920s with the advent of radio broadcasting. The industry was primarily driven by radio dramas, comedies, and serials. Actors like Orson Welles were among the pioneers, known for their work on radio shows such as \"The Mercury Theatre on the Air.\" The most notable event of this era was the 1938 broadcast of \"The War of the Worlds,\" directed and narrated by Welles, which famously caused panic among listeners who believed the fictional story to be a real news broadcast.\nThe Golden Age of Radio and the Introduction of Television (1940s-1950s).\nThe 1940s and 1950s are often referred to as the Golden Age of Radio. Voice actors like Mel Blanc, known for his work with Warner Bros. cartoons, became household names. This era also saw the transition from radio to television. Voice-over work expanded to include off-screen narration and character voices in television shows, particularly in animations and commercials.\nThe Rise of Commercials and Dubbing (1960s-1970s).\nThe 1960s and 1970s witnessed a significant increase in the use of voice-overs in commercials. Advertisers began to realize the impact of a strong, persuasive voice in selling products. This period also saw the growth of dubbing foreign films and shows, expanding the global reach of media content.\nTechnological Advancements and the Home Video Revolution (1980s-1990s).\nWith the advent of cable television and home video in the 1980s and 1990s, the demand for voice-over artists surged. The era was marked by the rise of animated shows, video games, and the direct-to-video market. Voice actors like James Earl Jones, known for his work as the voice of Darth Vader in \"Star Wars,\" and Frank Welker, known for his work in cartoons and films, became prominent.\nThe Internet Age and the Democratization of Voice-Overs (2000s-Present).\nThe turn of the millennium brought about drastic changes with the proliferation of the internet. Platforms like YouTube and the advent of podcasting opened up new avenues for voice-over work. Home recording technology and high-speed internet made it possible for voice-over artists to work remotely, democratizing the industry. Voice-over websites and online casting services have made it easier for artists to find work and for producers to find talent.\nCareer in voice-over.\nTo become a voice actor, significant training is required. The important factors to being a voice actor are technique, genres, and work. It is recommended to hire an acting coach and voice coach to help hone skills for recording a voice-over. There are many pieces of equipment that are also required to start a career in voice-overs. A computer, professional microphone, and an editing program, along with a studio to set up in, are all requirements to develop a professional voice-over. Careers in voice-over often allow people to work at home. \nTo audition for a voice-over role, people often record a demo-reel, which is a compilation of someone's works in voice acting. A demo-reel is important to have for someone looking for a job in voice acting because many auditions ask for one. To find casting auditions, there are many online websites that can allow people to sign up for auditions. For an audition, people should study the target audience, warm up and try to arrive early so they can prepare and have the best chance at getting the role. The audition is begun with slating. Slating is a practice where the person going for the audition states their name and then says Take 1, Take 2, Take 3. After slating, the auditionee then reads the copy given to them by the casting team.\nTechniques.\nCharacter device.\nIn \"Moby Dick\" (1956), Ishmael (Richard Basehart) narrates the story, and he sometimes comments on the action in voice-over, as does Joe Gillis (William Holden) in \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1950) and Eric Erickson (William Holden) in \"The Counterfeit Traitor\" (1962); adult Pip (John Mills) in \"Great Expectations\" (1946) and Michael York in its 1974 television remake.\nVoice-over technique is likewise used to give voices and personalities to animated characters. Noteworthy and versatile voice actors include Mel Blanc, Daws Butler, Don Messick, Paul Frees, and June Foray. Charactering techniques in voice-overs are used to give personalities and voice to fictional characters. There has been some controversy with charactering techniques in voice-overs, particularly with white radio entertainers mimicking AAVE.\nIn the late 1920s, radio started to stray away from reporting exclusively on musicals and sporting events; instead, radio began to create serial talk shows as well as shows with fictional story lines. Radio became the ideal medium for voice impersonations.\nCreative device.\nIn film, the filmmaker distributes the sound of a human voice (or voices) over images shown on the screen that may or may not be related to the words that are being spoken. Consequently, voice-overs are sometimes used to create ironic counterpoint. Also, sometimes they can be random voices not directly connected to the people seen on the screen. In works of fiction, the voice-over is often by a character reflecting on his or her past, or by a person external to the story who usually has a more complete knowledge of the events in the film than the other characters.\nVoice-overs are often used to create the effect of storytelling by a character/omniscient narrator. For example, in \"The Usual Suspects\", the character of Roger \"Verbal\" Kint has voice-over segments as he is recounting details of a crime. Classic voice-overs in cinema history can be heard in \"Citizen Kane\" and \"The Naked City\".\nSometimes, voice-over can be used to aid continuity in edited versions of films, in order for the audience to gain a better understanding of what has gone on between scenes. This was done when the film \"Joan of Arc\" (1948) starring Ingrid Bergman turned out to be far from the box-office and critical hit that was expected and it was edited down from 145 minutes to 100 minutes for its second run in theaters. The edited version, which circulated for years, used narration to conceal the fact that large chunks of the film had been cut out. In the full-length version, restored in 1998 and released on DVD in 2004, the voice-over narration is heard only at the beginning of the film.\nFilm noir is especially associated with the voice-over technique. The golden age of first-person narration was during the 1940s. Film noir typically used male voice-over narration but there are a few rare female voice-overs.\nIn radio, voice-overs are an integral part of the creation of the radio program. The voice-over artist might be used to entice listeners of the station name or as characters to enhance or develop show content. During the 1980s, the British broadcasters Steve Wright and Kenny Everett used voice-over artists to create a virtual \"posse\" or studio crew who contributed to the programmes. It is believed that this principle was in play long before that time. The American radio broadcaster Howard Stern has also used voice-overs in this way.\nEducational or descriptive device.\nThe voice-over has many applications in non-fiction as well. Television news is often presented as a series of video clips of newsworthy events, with voice-over by the reporters describing the significance of the scenes being presented; these are interspersed with straight video of the news anchors describing stories for which video is not shown.\nTelevision networks such as The History Channel and the Discovery Channel make extensive use of voice-overs. On NBC, the television show \"Starting Over\" used Sylvia Villagran as the voice-over narrator to tell a story.\nLive sports broadcasts are usually shown as extensive voice-overs by sports commentators over video of the sporting event.\nGame shows formerly made extensive use of voice-overs to introduce contestants and describe available or awarded prizes, but this technique has diminished as shows have moved toward predominantly cash prizes. The most prolific have included Don Pardo, Johnny Olson, John Harlan, Jay Stewart, Gene Wood and Johnny Gilbert.\nVoice-over commentary by a leading critic, historian, or by the production personnel themselves is often a prominent feature of the release of feature films or documentaries on DVDs.\nCommercial device.\nThe commercial use of voice-over in television advertising has been popular since the beginning of radio broadcasting.\nIn the early years, before effective sound recording and mixing, announcements were produced \"live\" and at-once in a studio with the entire cast, crew and, usually, orchestra. A corporate sponsor hired a producer, who hired writers and voice actors to perform comedy or drama.\nManufacturers will often use a distinctive voice to help them with brand messaging, often retaining talent to a long-term exclusive contract.\nThe industry expanded very rapidly with the advent of television in the 1950s, and the age of highly produced serial radio shows ended. The ability to record high-quality sound on magnetic tape also created opportunities. Digital recording, thanks to the proliferation of PCs, smartphones (iOS and Android 5.0+), dedicated recording devices, free or inexpensive recording and editing software, and USB microphones of reasonable quality, and the increasing use of home studios, has revolutionized the industry.\nThe sound recording industry uses the term \"presence\" as the standard of a good quality voice-over and is used for commercial purposes in particular. The term \"presence\" measures the legitimacy of how a voice sounds, specifically one of a voice-over. Advances in technology for sound recording have helped voice-overs reach that standard. These technological advances have increasingly diminished \"the noise of the system...and thus reducing the distance perceived between the object and its representation.\"\nTranslation.\nIn some countries, such as Russia, Ukraine and Poland, voice-over provided by an artist is commonly used on television programs as a language localization technique, as an alternative to full dub localization.\nIn Bulgaria, multiple voice-over is also common, but each film (or episode) is normally voiced by three to six actors. The voice artists try to match the original voice and preserve the intonation. The main reason for the use of this type of translation is that unlike synchronized voice translation, it takes a relatively short time to produce, since there is no need to synchronize the voices with the character's lip movements, which is compensated by the quieted original audio. When there is no speaking in the film for some time, the original sound is turned up. Recently, as more films are distributed with separate voice and noises-and-music tracks, some voice-over translations in Bulgaria are produced by only turning down the voice track, in this way not affecting the other sounds. One actor always reads the translation crew's names over the show's ending credits (except for when there is dialogue over the credits).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32668", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32668", "title": "Vincenzo Bellini", "text": "Italian opera composer (1801\u20131835)\nVincenzo Salvatore Carmelo Francesco Bellini (; ; 3 November 1801 \u2013 23 September 1835) was an Italian opera composer famed for his long, graceful melodies and evocative musical settings. A central figure of the era, he was admired not only by the public but also by many composers who were influenced by his work. His songs balanced florid embellishment with a deceptively simple approach to lyric setting.\nBorn to a musical family in Sicily, he distinguished himself early and earned a scholarship to study under several noted musicians at Naples' Real Collegio di Musica. There he absorbed elements of the Neapolitan School's style and was inspired by performances of Donizetti's and Rossini's operas, among others, in more modern idioms. He wrote his first opera, \"Adelson e Salvini\" (1825), for the conservatory, and his next, \"Bianca e Fernando\" (1826), on a Teatro di San Carlo-affiliated commission for promising students. He also became close friends with his peer and first biographer, Francesco Florimo.\nBellini then went to Milan to compose for La Scala, where the success of \"Il pirata\" (1827) established his short but significant career. He wrote many celebrated operas, ascending to triumphal heights with \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\" (1830, La Fenice), \"La sonnambula\" (1831, Teatro Carcano), and more gradually \"Norma\" (1831, La Scala). He travelled abroad and wrote \"I puritani\" after a visit to London. Its successful premiere (1835, Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien) capped an illustrious international career. Bellini died at the age of 33 in Puteaux, France.\nVerdi praised Bellini's expansive melodies as unequaled, while Wagner, who was rarely complimentary, was captivated by Bellini's expressive integration of music and text. Liszt and Chopin were also admirers, though Berlioz was less enthusiastic. Most musicologists now assess Bellini positively, though some question the quality of his work. Many of his operas, including \"Pirata\", \"Capuleti\", \"Sonnambula\", \"Norma\", and \"Puritani\" are regularly performed at major opera houses throughout the world.\nCatania: early life.\nBorn in Catania, at the time part of the Kingdom of Sicily, the eldest of seven children in the family, he became a child prodigy within a highly musical family. His grandfather, Vincenzo Tobia Nicola Bellini, had studied at the conservatory in Naples and, in Catania from 1767 forward, had been an organist and teacher, as had Vincenzo's father, Rosario.\nAn anonymous twelve-page hand-written history, held in Catania's Museo Civico Belliniano, states that he could sing an aria by Valentino Fioravanti at eighteen months, that he began studying music theory at two years of age and the piano at three. By the age of five, he could apparently play \"marvelously\". The document states that Bellini's first five pieces were composed when he was just six years old and \"at seven he was taught Latin, modern languages, rhetoric, and philosophy\". Bellini's biographer Herbert Weinstock regards some of these accounts as no more than myths, not being supported from other, more reliable sources. Additionally, he makes the point in regard to Bellini's apparent knowledge of languages and philosophy: \"Bellini never became a well-educated man\".\nAnother biographer, Stelios Galatopoulos, discusses the information presented in the pr\u00e9cis and accepts some of the evidence for early compositions but expresses skepticism regarding the young Bellini's child prodigy status. He mentions that Bellini never became a \"proficient\" piano player and, when he later went to the music conservatory in Naples at an age well past that required for admission and took an examination in which his compositions were assessed, he was placed in the beginners' class.\nAfter 1816, Bellini began living with his grandfather, from whom he received his first music lessons. Soon after, the young composer began to write compositions. Among them were the nine \"Versetti da cantarsi il Venerdi Santo\", eight of which were based on texts by Metastasio.\nBy 1818, Bellini had independently completed several additional orchestral pieces and at least two settings of the Mass Ordinary: one in D Major, the other in G Major, both of which survive and have been commercially recorded.\nHe was ready for further study. For well-off students, this would include moving to Naples. While his family wasn't wealthy enough to support that lifestyle, Bellini's growing reputation could not be overlooked. His break came when Stefano Notabartolo, the duca di San Martino e Montalbo and his duchess, became the new intendente of the province of Catania. They encouraged the young man to petition the city fathers for a stipend to support his musical studies. This was successfully achieved in May 1819 with unanimous agreement for a four-year pension to allow him to study at the Real Collegio di Musica di San Sebastiano in Naples. Thus, he left Catania in July carrying letters of introduction to several powerful individuals, including Giovanni Carafa who was the \"intendente\" of the Real Collegio as well as being in charge of the city's royal theatres. The young Bellini was to live in Naples for the following eight years.\nNaples: musical education.\nThe Conservatorio di San Sebastiano (as it had been named when the original Real Collegio di Musica, established in 1806 and then renamed as such in 1808) had moved to more spacious facilities close to the church of Ges\u00f9 Novo and the building formerly occupied by the nuns of San Sabastiano, was run by the government and there, students, who wore a semi-military uniform, were obliged to live under a tight daily regimen of classes in principal subjects, in singing and instrumental coaching, plus basic education. Their days were long, going from early morning mass at 5:15\u00a0am to finally ending by 10\u00a0pm. Although beyond the normal age for admission, Bellini had submitted ten pieces of music for consideration; these clearly demonstrated his talent, although he did need to do remedial work to correct some of his faulty technique.\nThe focus of study was on the masters of the Neapolitan school and the orchestral works of Haydn and Mozart, with the emphasis put upon the Italian classical era composers such as Pergolesi and Paisiello, rather than the \"modern-day\" approaches of composers such as Rossini. The young student's first teacher was Giovanni Furno, with whom \"he studied exercises in harmony and accompaniment\"; another, from whom he learned counterpoint, was the composer of over 50 operas, Giacomo Tritto, but whom he found to be \"old fashioned and doctrinaire\". However, the artistic director of the school was the opera composer, Niccol\u00f2 Antonio Zingarelli.\nBy 1822/23, Bellini had become a member of a class which he taught: the older man appears to have recognised Bellini's potential and treated his student like a son, giving him some firm advice:\nIf your compositions \"sing\", your music will most certainly please.\u00a0... Therefore, if you train your heart to give you melody and then you set it forth as simply as possible, your success will be assured. You will become a composer. Otherwise, you will end up being a good organist in some village.\nIt was during these early years at the Collegio that Bellini met Francesco Florimo, with whom he had a lifetime of correspondence. Other fellow students\u2014who were to become opera composers\u2014included Francesco Stabile and the Ricci brothers\u2014Luigi and Federico\u2014as well as Saverio Mercadante, who, by this time, was a graduate student.\nAnother person to whom the young student/composer was introduced was Gaetano Donizetti, whose ninth opera\u2014which had been a great success in Rome\u2014was given at the Teatro di San Carlo. About 50 years later, Florimo gave an account of the meeting of the two men: \"Carlo Conti [one of Bellini's tutors] said to Bellini and me, \"Go and hear Donizetti's \"La zingara\", for which my admiration increases at every performance.\" After hearing the opera, Bellini acquired the score, convinced Conti to introduce him, and [Florimo] reports that Bellini's reaction was that he was \"a truly beautiful, big man, and his noble countenance\u2014sweet, but at the same time majestic\u2014arouses affection as well as respect.\"\nFirst Naples compositions.\nIncreasingly, Bellini did better and better in his studies: in January 1820 he passed his examinations in theory, and was successful enough to gain an annual scholarship, which meant that his stipend from Catania could be used to help his family. In the following January he was equally successful and, to fulfill his obligations to write music for Catania \u2013 a condition of his scholarship \u2013 he sent a \"Messa di Gloria\" in A Minor for soloists, choir and orchestra, which was performed the following October.\nBesides this melodious work, his output from these study years in Naples included two other settings of the Mass: a full Ordinary in E Minor and a second full Ordinary in G Minor, both of which probably date from 1823. There are two settings of the \"Salve Regina\" (one in A Major for solo soprano and organ, the other in F Minor for choir and orchestra), but these are less accomplished and may date from the first year of study after leaving Catania, 1820. His brief two-movement Oboe Concerto in E-flat from \"circa\" 1823 also survives and has been recorded by no less than the Berlin Philharmonic.\nBellini's involvement in Zingarelli's class took place over the 1822/23 school year. By January 1824, after passing examinations in which he did well, he attained the title \"primo maestrino\", requiring him to tutor younger students and allowing him a room of his own in the \"collegio\" and visits to the Teatro di San Carlo on Thursdays and Sundays, where he saw his first opera by Rossini, \"Semiramide\". While Weinstock gives an account of how he was \"clearly captivated by the music of Rossini [and] put Rossini on a pedestal\", he relates that, returning from \"Semiramide\" Bellini was unusually quiet and then \"suddenly exclaimed to his companions, 'Do you know what I think? After \"Semiramide\", it's futile for us to try and achieve anything!'\"\nBut a tougher challenge confronted the young composer: how to win the hand of young Maddalena Fumarolis, whom he had met as a guest in her home and to whom he had become a music tutor. As their affair became obvious to her parents, they were forbidden to see each other. Bellini was determined to obtain the parents' permission for them to marry, and some writers regard this as the propelling reason for his writing his first opera.\n\"Adelson e Salvini\".\nThe impetus to write this opera came about in late summer of 1824, when his \"primo maestrino\" status at the conservatory resulted in an assignment to compose an opera for presentation in the institute's \"teatrino\". This became \"Adelson e Salvini\", an \"opera semi-seria\" (half-serious) to a libretto by the Neapolitan Andrea Leone Tottola, who had written the one for Donizetti's \"La zingara\". \"Adelson\" was first given sometime between mid-January and mid-March 1825, and featured an all-male cast of fellow students. It proved to be so popular among the student body that it was performed every Sunday for a year.\nWith that achievement behind him, it is believed that the young Bellini, who had been away from home for six years, set out for Catania to visit his family. However, some sources attribute the visit to 1824, others to 1825. However, it is known that he was back in Naples by the summer or early autumn of 1825 in order to fulfil a contract to write an opera for the San Carlo or one of the other royal theatres, the Teatro Fondo.\nBeginnings of a career.\nFollowing the presentation of \"Adelson e Salvini\" and while he was in Milan, Bellini\u2014requesting help from Florimo\u2014began to make some revisions, shortening the opera to two acts in the hope that it might be given stagings by Domenico Barbaja, the Intendant at the Teatro di San Carlo since 1809. But little is known about exactly how much Bellini or Florimo contributed to the revisions, and Weinstock asserts that no performances were ever given after 1825, but in March 1829, we find Bellini writing to Florimo that \"I have written you the changes that you should make in \"Adelson\" \".\nIn the summer or early autumn of 1825, Bellini began work on what was to become his first professionally produced opera. A contract between the Conservatory and the royal theatres obliged the Conservatory\u2014when it nominated a sufficiently talented student\u2014to require that student to write a cantata or one-act opera to be presented on a gala evening in one of the theatres. After Zingarelli used his influence to secure this honour for his promising student, Bellini was able to obtain agreement that he could write a full-length opera and, furthermore, that the libretto did not have to be written by Tottola, the theatres' official dramatic poet. However, as Intendant of the San Carlo, \"Barbaja was the chief beneficiary: 'With a small investment he found among those young men the one who would lead him to large profits'\" notes Florimo.\n\"Bianca e Gernando\".\nThe young composer chose Domenico Gilardoni, a young writer who then prepared his first libretto, which he named \"Bianca e Fernando\", based on an 1820 play, \"Bianca e Fernando alla tomba di Carlo IV, Duca d'Agrigento\" and set in Sicily.\nHowever, the title \"Bianca e Fernando\" had to be changed, because Ferdinando was the name of the heir to the throne, and no form of it could be used on a royal stage. After some delays caused by King Francesco I forcing postponement, the opera\u2014now named \"Bianca e Gernando\"\u2014was given its premiere performance at the Teatro di San Carlo on 30 May 1826, Prince Ferdinando's name day.\nIt was very successful, helped by the approval of the King, who broke the custom of there being no applause at a performance attended by royalty. It was also attended by Donizetti, who enthusiastically wrote to Simon Mayr: \"It is beautiful, beautiful, beautiful, especially as it is his first opera.\" Bellini's music was highly regarded, with the \"Giornale delle Due Sicilie\" on 13 June noting that \"[several of the arias and duets] are some of the most laudable pieces of new music heard in recent times at the [San Carlo].\" However, there were reservations about Gilardoni's contribution.\nWithin nine months, in February/March 1827, Domenico Barbaja offered Bellini a commission for an opera to be presented in the autumn of 1827 at La Scala in Milan, of which between 1821 and 1832, Barbaja was also part of the management.\nNorthern Italy.\nBellini spent 1827 to 1833 mostly in Milan, never holding any official position within an opera company and living solely from the income produced from his compositions, for which he was able to ask higher than usual fees.\nUpon his arrival, he met Antonio Villa of La Scala and composer Saverio Mercadante, whose new opera, \"Il Montanaro\" was in rehearsal. The latter introduced him to Francesco and Marianna Pollini (an older couple, the husband a retired professor of piano, the wife a better-than-amateur musician), who immediately took the young man under their wing.\nIn addition, Bellini was introduced to the librettist Felice Romani, who proposed the subject of the composer's first project, \"Il pirata\", to which the young man willingly agreed especially when he realised that the story \"provided several passionate and dramatic situations.. [and]..that such Romantic characters were then an innovation on the operatic stage.\" A strong professional relationship with Romani began from that time; he became Bellini's primary creative partner, providing the libretti for six of Bellini's operas which followed, in addition to about 100 libretti written for the major composers of the day, up to and including Verdi. As has been observed, \"no other Italian opera composer of the time showed such an attachment to a single librettist\" and although Romani was known to treat composers poorly, he evidently had great respect for Bellini, even acceding to his requests for revisions. For his part, Bellini admired \"the sonorous and elegance of the poet's verses\"\nWhile in Milan, \"[Bellini] quickly gained an entr\u00e9e into higher social circles\", although he also stayed for months at a time with friends, the Cant\u00f9 and the Turina families. It was with Giuditta Turina that he began an affair in 1828 during the premiere performances of \"Bianca e Fernando\" in Genoa.\nThe four years in Northern Italy between 1827 and 1831 produced four great masterpieces, \"Il pirata\", \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\", \"La sonnambula\", and \"Norma\", along with a revival and a setback.\n\"Il pirata\" for Milan.\nThe collaboration with Romani on \"Il pirata\" began in May 1827 and, by August, the music was being written. By then, the composer was aware that he was to write music for his favourite tenor Giovanni Battista Rubini and the soprano was to be Henriette M\u00e9ric-Lalande. Both singers had starred in \"Bianca\" in the original 1826 production. The strong cast also included Antonio Tamburini, a major bass-baritone of the time. But rehearsals did not progress without some difficulties, as both Weinstock and Galatopoulos recount: it appears that Bellini found Rubini, while singing beautifully, to be lacking expressiveness: he was urged to \"throw yourself with all your soul into the character you are representing\" and to use [your] body, \"to accompany your singing with gestures\", as well as to act with [your] voice. It appears that Bellini's exhortations bore fruit, based on his own account of the audience's reactions to the first performance, as well as the reaction of the \"Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano\" of 2 December which noted that this opera \"introduced us to Rubini's dual personality as a singer and actor\". The reviewer continued to declare that this duality had never been expressed in other operas in which he had performed.\nThe premiere, given on 17 October 1827, was \"an immediate and then an increasing, success. By Sunday, December 2, when the season ended, it had been sung to fifteen full houses\". For Rubini, \"it marked the defining performance for the tenor\", and the newspaper reviews which followed all agreed with the composer's own assessment.\nAfter its Milanese debut, the opera received very successful performances in Vienna in February 1828 and also in Naples three months later. Both productions starred Rubini, Tamburini, and\u2014in the role of Imogene\u2014Rubini's wife, Adelaide Comelli-Rubini, about whom Bellini had initial misgivings, although it appears that she acquitted herself very well. By this time, Bellini had begun to achieve international fame.\n\"Bianca\" revised.\nAfter \"Il pirata\", Bellini remained in Milan with the hope of securing another commission. One came from Genoa via Bartolomeo Merelli on 13 January 1828 for a new opera for presentation on 7 April. However, without knowing which singers would be engaged, he was unwilling to commit at that time, but remained in hope of something definite from La Scala for the autumn. When no alternatives appeared, he accepted Genoa's offer in February, but it was then too late to write anything new. He immediately proposed a revival and re-working of \"Bianca e Gernando\", this time with the original title \"Bianca e Fernando\", there being no royal by the name of Fernando in the House of Savoy. Romani wrote to Florimo in Naples and told him that he had taken on the re-construction of the libretto, with the result that \"out of the whole of \"Bianca\", the only pieces entirely unchanged are the big duet and the \"romanza\"; everything else is altered, and about half of it is new\", Bellini then rearranged the music to suit the singers' voices, now knowing that the Bianca was to be Adelaide Tosi and the Fernando to be Giovanni David.\nAs Bellini reports, he had problems with Tosi wanting changes to be made to a \"cavatina\" and a \"stretta\" in one scene, but he stuck to his own opinion, proving to be correct when he reported the audience's reaction to Florimo: \"the public was very happy with the entire opera, particularly with the second act\". Overall, the first performance was even greater than it had been in Naples, and the opera was given a total of 21 times. However, critical reaction was not as positive as that of the audience: \"The second act is a long bore\" stated \"L'Eco di Milano\", although the \"Gazzetta di Genova\" was more helpful, noting \"the more we listen to the style of the music, the more we appreciate its merit\".\nAfter \"Bianca\".\nBellini remained in Genoa until 30 April and then returned to Milan, but with no specific opportunity in place. His initial opposition to Comelli-Rubini being allowed to reprise the role of Imogene in \"Il pirata\" for performances in Naples (as she had done in Vienna\u2014but successfully) was proved to be wrong, since she did sing well there and received general approval. But this issue had caused complications in his relationship with Barbaja, who controlled both theatres, and when he visited Milan in June, he offered Bellini the opportunity to choose between Naples and Milan as the venue for his next opera. For the composer, the decision hung on the availability of singers for each of the houses, especially because Rubini was contracted to sing only in Naples. However, by 16 June, he had decided on the location to be Milan, and then signed a contract to write a new opera for the Carnival season for a fee of one thousand ducati, compared to 150 ducati for his first opera.\n\"La straniera\" for Milan.\nFor \"La straniera\", Bellini received a fee which was sufficient for him to be able to make his living solely by composing music, and this new work became an even greater success than \"Il pirata\" had been. As for singers, it appears there was some doubt about the tenor, but that Henriette M\u00e9ric-Lalande, Luigi Lablache (or Tamburini), would be available. In consultation with Romani as to the subject, it was agreed that it would be based on the novel \"L'\u00e9trang\u00e8re\" (\"Il solitario\") of 1825 by Charles-Victor Pr\u00e9vot, vicomte d'Arlincourt, and planned for the premiere on the opening night of the season on 26 December.\nHowever, by 20 September, Bellini told Florimo that he did not think the performance could take place as scheduled due to Romani being ill. In addition, he was concerned about who would sing the tenor role when he had been unable to obtain Rubini's release from his Naples contract. Berardo Calvari (known as Winter) was rejected because audiences had disliked him the previous July when he appeared in both a Pacini and a Donizetti opera at La Scala. Fortunately, having received good reports of the young tenor Domenico Reina, he was able to secure his services, describing him in a letter to Florimo as \"one who will want to do himself honour; everyone tells me that his voice is beautiful, and that he has all the acting and spirit one could wish for.\"\nFollowing Romani's recovery, the delivery of the libretto arrived piecemeal, but Bellini set to work again; progress was slow. By 7 January 1829, with Romani having recovered and set off for Venice to fulfil a contract, the composer was \"almost up to the 2nd act\". Filippo Cicconetti, in his 1859 biography, gives an account of Bellini's working methods, explaining how he set texts to music, always with the words in front of him in order to see how inspired to compose he might become. When it came time to compose the final aria \"Or sei pago, ol ciel tremendo\", the librettist's words gave him no inspiration at all and, at their next meeting, Romani agreed to rewrite the text. Returning within half an hour, the second version left Bellini equally cold\u2014as did a third draft. Finally, when asked what it was that he was seeking, Bellini replied: \"I want a thought that will be at one and the same time a prayer, an imprecation, a warning, a delirium\u00a0...\". A fourth draft was quickly prepared: \"Have I entered into your spirit?\" asked the librettist\u2014and he was embraced by the young composer.\nRehearsals began in early January with the premiere planned for 14 February 1829; it was an immediate and resounding success with the \"Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano\" on 16 February declaring it to be a:\nclamorous success..[with] the poet [serving] the composer well, and the composer could not have served the singers better; all competed to render themselves pleasing to the public, and succeeded in such a way as to be applauded greatly.\nThree days later, the same publication praised the quality of the music, describing Bellini as \"a modern Orpheus\" for the beauty of his melodies. Reporting to Romani, who was still in Venice, Bellini gave an account of the success: \"the thing went as we never had imagined it. We were in seventh heaven. With [this letter] receive my gratitude more than ever\u00a0...\" Others wrote equally enthusiastic reports, with abundant praise being given to the singers as well. However, there were detractors who criticised both the opera and its composer: its new style and its restless harmonic shifts into remote keys did not please all. 45 years later it was stated that \"Bellini's style was abstruse, discontinuous, distorted, and lacking in distinction, that it alternated among the \"serio\" and the \"buffo\" and the \"semi-serio\"...\"\n\"Zaira\": a setback in Parma.\n\"Zaira\" was the opera which came into being following discussions with Barbaja in Milan in June 1828 for a second opera for La Scala. At around the same time, Bellini reported to Florimo that he had been approached by Merelli about writing an inaugural opera for the soon-to-be completed Teatro Ducale (now the Teatro Regio) in Parma which was due to open during the following year on 12 May 1829. Initially, the opera was to be \"Carlo di Borgogna\", but composer and librettist decided to tackle \"a drama so\u00a0... hallowed as Voltaire's \"Za\u00efre\"\", but this proved to be more challenging for Romani than first imagined.\nWith this opera, Bellini encountered \"the first serious setback of a hitherto brilliant career\". Several reasons have been put forward: Lippmann and McGuire note, it was because \"Bellini showed too little enthusiasm for the undertaking\". Another writer attributes it to Parma's traditional love of and favouritism towards the music of Rossini, while yet another notes that a combination of the composer being constantly seen in cafes around the city (when it was assumed that he should have been composing) and the fact that Romani had included a long explanation of the difficulties of adapting Voltaire in the printed libretto provided to all operagoers. The librettist was critical of his own work: \"the style should have been more careful, and that here and there, certain repetitions of phrases and concepts should have been edited out\". At the same time, he stated that, with music composed to those verses now in place, \"I was not permitted to go back over what already had been done; and poetry and music were finished in less than a month\". This short period of time compares to the months that, for example, it took Bellini to write \"Il pirata\".\nIn fact, Bellini arrived in Parma on 17 March, giving him 56 days before the opening, but he then learned that some of the singers would only arrive 14 days before the date of the premiere, a date that was\u2014in theory\u2014 unchangeable. In fact, it had to be changed due to the inability of Lalande to arrive in time for sufficient rehearsal. Both composer and librettist were somewhat dilatory, delaying work as much and as long as possible. Count Sanvitale's request on 17 April, asking \"to let me know the reasons why our copyists are kept idle\", did not receive much of response to satisfy the theatre's management. Eventually, both men got down to work and finished on time, although the premiere was delayed by four days.\nThe general impression given by reports in the press was that, overall, the music was weak, although some numbers and the trio were liked. However, for the most part, the singers were applauded, even if the composer received little. The opera received eight performances, followed by some poorly received ones in Florence in 1836, and then it disappeared until 1976.\nMajor achievements.\nAfter the poor response in Parma to \"Zaira\", Bellini stayed with Ferdinando and Giuditta Turina's family for a short period in May/June and then returned to Milan by the end of June and discovered that his grandfather, then 85, had died in Catania. No contract for another opera in sight, except for the possibility of working with the Teatro La Fenice in Venice. As is revealed by Herbert Weinstock, there is limited knowledge of what happened to Bellini between June 1833 and February 1834, since no letters to Florimo from that period have survived, and the only sources are those letters sent to others.\nGiovanni Pacini, another Catanese composer, was still in Milan in late June after the well-received premiere on 10 June of his opera \"Il Talismano\" at La Scala, where it went on to receive a total of 16 performances. To Bellini, he appeared to be a rival, and with his recent success, Pacini received offers to compose an opera for both Turin and Venice for the Carnival season. He accepted both offers, but the La Fenice impresario included a proviso that if he were to be unable to fulfil the Venice contract, then it would be transferred to Bellini.\nBellini then became preoccupied with staging a revival of his \"Il pirata\" during the summer season at the Teatro Canobbiana because La Scala was closed for repairs. \"Il Pirata\" was staged with the original cast and again was a triumph: it received 24 consecutive performances between 16 July and 23 August 1829, thus outnumbering Pacini's.\nDuring July and August, the composer Gioachino Rossini visited Milan on his way to Bologna. He saw the \"Il Pirata\" production and met Bellini; the two men were taken with each other, to the extent that when the younger composer was in Paris a year or two later, he developed a very strong bond with Rossini.\nA firm offer of a contract for a new opera for Venice appeared in the autumn, a contract which also included a provision that \"Il pirata\" would be given during the Carnival 1830 season. Tearing himself away from dalliances with Mrs. Turina, by mid-December Bellini was in Venice where Giuseppe Persiani's \"Constantino in Arles\" was in rehearsal with the same singers who were to perform in \"Pirata\": they were Giuditta Grisi, the tenor Lorenzo Bonfigli, and Giulio Pellegrini.\n\"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\": Venice, March 1830.\nWith rehearsals for \"Pirata\" underway in late December, Bellini was given notice by the La Fenice impresario, Alessandro Lanari, that it was doubtful whether Pacini would be present in time to stage an opera and that a contract was to be prepared with the proviso that it would only become effective on 14 January. Accepting the offer 5 January, Bellini stated that he would set Romani's libretto for \"Giulietta Capellio\", that he required 45 days between receipt of the libretto and the first performance, and that he would accept 325 napoleoni d'oro (about 8,000 lire).\nThe tentative contract deadline was extended until 20 January, but by that date Romani was in Venice, having already re-worked much of his earlier libretto which he had written for Nicola Vaccai's 1825 opera, \"Giulietta e Romeo\", the source for which was the play of the same name by Luigi Scevola which had been written in 1818. The two men set to work, but with the winter weather in Venice becoming increasingly bad, Bellini fell ill; however, he had to continue to work under great pressure within a now-limited timetable. Eventually, revisions to Romani's libretto were agreed to, a new title was given to the work, and Bellini reviewed his score of \"Zaira\" to see how some of the music could be set to the new text, but composing the part of Romeo for Grisi. He also took Giulietta's \"Oh quante volte\" and Nelly's \"romanza\" from \"Adelson e Salvini\". The Giulietta was to be sung by Rosalbina Caradori-Allan.\nAt the premiere of \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\" on 11 March 1830, success for Bellini returned. Weinstock describes the premiere as \"an unclouded and immediate success\" but it was only able to be performed eight times before the La Fenice season closed on 21 March. A local newspaper, \"I Teatri\", reported that \"all things considered, this opera by Bellini has aroused as much enthusiasm in Venice as \"La straniera\" aroused in Milan from the first evening on\".\nBy this time, Bellini knew that he had achieved a degree of fame: writing on 28 March, he stated that \"My style is now heard in the most important theatres in the world\u00a0... and with the greatest enthusiasm.\"\nBefore leaving Venice, Bellini was offered a contract to produce another new opera for La Fenice for the 1830\u201331 Carnival season, and\u2014upon his return to Milan after a reunion with Turina\u2014he also found an offer from Genoa for a new opera but proposed for the same time period, an offer he was forced to reject.\nLater that year, Bellini prepared a version of \"Capuleti\" for La Scala, which was given on 26 December, lowering Giulietta's part for the mezzo-soprano Amalia Sch\u00fctz Oldosi.\n\"La sonnambula\": Milan, March 1831.\nReturning to Milan after the \"Capuleti\" performances, little occurred until the latter part of April when changes began to appear in the management of La Scala. The organisation, \"Crivelli and Company\", which had managed both that house as well as La Fenice, was negotiating with a triumvirate consisting of Count Pompeo Litta and two businessmen, their immediate concern being the engagement of singers and composers for La Scala. In order to contract with Bellini, he had to be released from his obligation to Venice; this was achieved by Litta buying out the Venice contract. When Bellini laid out his terms for writing for Milan, Litta gave him a very favourable response: \"I shall earn almost twice as much as if I had composed for Crivelli [then the Venetian impresario]\" he noted in a letter to his uncle.\nHowever, the group led by Duke Litta failed to come to terms with the Crivelli-Lanari-Barbaja group, which continued to manage both La Scala and La Fenice. As a result, in the April\u2013May 1830 period, Bellini was able to negotiate a contract with both the Litta group\u2014which was planning performances in a smaller Milan house, the Teatro Carcano\u2014and with the Crivelli group to obtain a contract for an opera for the autumn of 1831 and another for the 1832 Carnival season. These were to become \"Norma\" for La Scala and \"Beatrice di Tenda\" for La Fenice.\nBellini then experienced the re-occurrence of an illness which had emerged in Venice due to pressure of work and the bad weather, but which consistently recurred after each opera and which would eventually cause his death. The gastro-enteric condition\u2014which he describes as \"a tremendous inflammatory gastric bilious fever\"\u2014 resulted in his being cared for by Francesco Pollini and his wife at their home because, as Bellini wrote, \"he loves me more than a son\".\nHaving recovered from his illness by the summer, Bellini went to stay near Lake Como. The need to decide on the subject for the following winter's opera became pressing, although it had already been agreed that Giuditta Pasta, who had achieved success in the Teatro Carcano in 1829 and 1830 with several major operas, would be the principal artist. That she owned a house near Como and would be staying there over the summer was the reason that Romani travelled to meet her and Bellini.\nAttempts to create \"Ernani\".\nBy 15 July, they had decided on an adaptation of Victor Hugo's play, \"Hernani\", although Weinstock speculates as to how this decision could have come about. The play's political subject matter would have been known to the group, and they would certainly know of the strict censorship then in existence in Austrian-controlled Lombardy. In addition, it was uncertain as to whether Pasta was interested in singing a trousers role, that of the protagonist, Ernani. While it seems that all three were in agreement, no further progress was made. Romani, who promised to begin the \"Ernani\" libretto immediately, went off to write one for what became Donizetti's \"Anna Bolena\" (which opened the Carcano's season in December 1830). Rather than resting, Bellini immediately set off for Bergamo to stage \"La straniera\", then went back to the mountains. But, by the end of November, nothing had been achieved in the way of writing either the libretto or the score of \"Ernani\".\nOn 3 January 1831, a letter from Bellini stated: \"...\u00a0I am no longer composing \"Ernani\" because the subject would have had to undergo some modifications at the hands of the police.\u00a0... [Romani] is now writing \"La sonnambula, ossia I Due Fidanzati Svizzeri\".\u00a0... It must go on stage on 20 February at the latest.\"\n\"La sonnambula\" replaces \"Ernani\".\nRomani's libretto for \"La sonnambula\" was based on a \"ballet-pantomime\" by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe and Jean-Pierre Aumer called \"La somnambule, ou L'arriv\u00e9e d'un nouveau seigneur\". With its pastoral setting and story, \"La sonnambula\" was to become another triumphant success during Bellini's five years in Milan.\nThe title role of Amina (the sleepwalker) with its high tessitura is renowned for its difficulty, requiring a complete command of trills and florid technique. It was written for Pasta, who has been described as a \"soprano sfogato\".\nThat music which he was beginning to use for \"Ernani\" was transferred to \"La Sonnambula\" is not in doubt, and as Weinstein comments, \"he was as ready as most other composers of his era to reuse in a new situation musical passages created for a different, earlier one\".\nThe opera's premiere performance took place on 6 March 1831, a little later than the original date, at the Teatro Carcano. Its success was partly due to the differences between Romani's earlier libretti and this one, as well as \"the accumulation of operatic experience which both [Bellini] and Romani had brought to its creation.\" Press reactions were universally positive, as was that of the Russian composer, Mikhail Glinka, who attended and wrote overwhelmingly enthusiastically:\nPasta and Rubini sang with the most evident enthusiasm to support their favourite conductor [\"sic\"]; the second act the singers themselves wept and carried the audience along with them.\nAfter its premiere, the opera was performed in London on 28 July 1831 at the King's Theatre and in New York on 13 November 1835 at the Park Theatre.\nDuring Bellini's lifetime, mezzo/contralto Maria Malibran, a daughter of Manuel Garcia and renowned Rosina, made her own version of Amina and was a notable exponent of the role.\n\"Norma\": Milan, December 1831.\nWith \"La sonnambula\" successfully behind them, Bellini and Romani began to consider the subject of the opera for which they had been contracted by the Crivelli group for a December 1831 premiere at La Scala and which would mark Giuditta Pasta's debut at that house. By the summer, they had decided upon \"Norma, ossia L'Infanticidio\" which was based on the play of the same name, \"Norma, or The Infanticide\" by Alexandre Soumet which was being performed in Paris at around that time and which Pasta would have seen.\nFor the roles of Adalgisa and Pollione, La Scala had engaged Giulia Grisi, the sister of Giuditta, and the well-known tenor Domenico Donzelli, who had made a name for himself with Rossini roles, especially that of Otello. He provided Bellini with precise details of his vocal capabilities, which were confirmed by a report that Mercadante also provided. By the end of August, it appears that Romani had completed a considerable amount of the libretto, enough at least to allow Bellini to begin work, which he certainly did in the first weeks of September, as the verses were supplied. He reported in a letter to Pasta on 1 September:\nI hope that you will find this subject to your liking. Romani believes it to be very effective, and precisely because of the all-inclusive character for you, which is that of Norma. He will manipulate the situations so that they will not resemble other subjects at all, and he will retouch, even change, the characters to produce more effect, if need be.\nPasta's vocal and dramatic ranges were extensive: that March, she had created the very different Bellini role of Amina, the Swiss village maiden, in \"La sonnambula\".\nAs the year progressed, several things appeared which began to disturb the composer. Firstly, an outbreak of cholera had occurred in Austria in July, and concern about its spread to Italy was real, to the point that, by late September, Bellini was writing to Florimo: \"I am composing the opera without any real zeal because I am almost certain that the cholera will arrive in time to close the theatres; but as soon it threatens to come near, I'll leave Milan.\"\nAbout this time he had received an offer to compose for the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples and, in return, had imposed some harsh terms, totally objecting to the English soprano Marianna Lewis, \"a donna who is below mediocrity: does not know how to sing, is a sausage on stage\u00a0...\" He continues by stressing the need for a good tenor were he to come to Naples and, in a separate letter to be forwarded by Florimo, tells Principe di Ruffano, then the superintendent of the royal theatres, that he doubts that Barbaja would even agree to the fee already offered to him by La Scala, a total of 2,400 ducati, when he would want 3,000 ducati from Naples for all the additional expenses which he would incur. In a postscript, Bellini adds an indignant objection to what he has heard about the proposed casting of \"Capuleti\" in Naples. It is clear that he regards Barbaja as an enemy.\n\"Norma\" was completed by about the end of November. Bellini then had to deal with the issue of piracy in regard to vocal reductions for piano of \"La sonnambula\" as published by Casa Ricordi. These scores were then fully orchestrated and sold to unsuspecting opera houses as full orchestral scores. This illegal action caused Bellini to publish a notice in major Italian newspapers putting such \"pirates\" on notice, but Weinstock comments that such attempts to control were not likely to succeed until Italian unification provided laws applicable to the country as a whole.\nAfter rehearsals began on 5 December, Pasta baulked at singing the \"Casta diva\" in act 1, now one of the most famous arias of the nineteenth century. She felt that it was \"ill adapted to her vocal abilities\", but Bellini was able to persuade her to keep trying for a week, after which she adapted to it and confessed her earlier error. At the opening night, the opera was received with what Weinstock describes as \"chill indifference\". To Florimo on the night of the premiere, Bellini wrote \"Fiasco! Fiasco! Solemn fiasco!\" and proceed to tell him of the indifference of the audience and how it affected him.\nIn addition, in a letter to his uncle on 28 December, Bellini tries to explain the reasons for the reactions. As other commentators have also noted, some problems were innate to the structure and content of the opera, while others were external to it. Bellini discusses the tiredness of the singers (after rehearing the entire second on the day of the premiere) as well as noting how certain numbers failed to please\u2014and failed to please the composer as well! But then he explains that most of the second act was very effective. It appears from the letter that the second evening's performance was more successful. Among the external reasons, Bellini cites the adverse reaction caused by the attitudes of both the owner of a journal (and his claque) and also of \"a very rich woman\"\u2014who Weinstock identifies as Contessa Giulia Samoyloff\u2014 who was Pacini's mistress. He also notes that on this second evening, the theatre was full.\nIn all, \"Norma\" was given 39 performances in its first season at La Scala, and reports from elsewhere, especially those from Bergamo when performances were given there in late 1832, suggested that it was becoming more and more popular. Bellini left Milan for Naples, and then Sicily, on 5 January 1832, but for the first time since 1827, it was a year in which he did not write an opera.\nNaples, Sicily, Bergamo: January to September 1832.\nBellini travelled to Naples, although he may have stopped in Rome to see Giuditta Turina and her brother Gaetano Cant\u00f9. However, the sister and brother also went to Naples, where Giuditta was finally able to meet Florimo and see the city in which Bellini had triumphed. Within six days, Bellini was in Naples where he remained for six weeks.\nDuring that time he remained busy, spending some time with Turina (who was ill for part of it), visiting the conservatory and meeting with many of the students and his old teacher, Zingarelli (to whom he had dedicated \"Norma\"), and attending a performance of \"Capuleti\" at the San Carlo with Turina and Florimo on 5 February in the presence of King Ferdinand II. The King led the applause for the composer, resulting in his being called to the stage and thus enjoying a very warm welcome from the people of Naples.\nPlanning to leave Naples by 25 February, he dealt with the invitation from Lanari at La Fenice to compose for that house by stating that he would not work for less than the sum received from the last production, and that he was also in discussions with the San Carlo. Arriving in Messina along with Florimo on the morning of 27 February, Bellini was greeted by several members of his family, including his father. They remained in Messina for two days, attending a performance of \"Il pirata\" at the Teatro della Munizione, where he was greeted with \"loud shouts of pleasure, hand-clapping, and words of praise\".\nBellini arrived in Catania on 3 March to a civic welcome. He was greeted by the city's authorities and citizens, who also feted him at a concert the following evening. This included excerpts from \"La sonnambula\" and \"Il pirata\" at the Teatro Communale, now replaced by the Teatro Massimo Bellini, which was opened in 1890 and named in Bellini's honour. After a month, Bellini and Florimo left for Palermo where, once again, there was a \"royal welcome\" and where he made the acquaintance of Filippo Santocanale and his wife. Although the weather delayed their departure for Naples, they continued to spend an enjoyable time there, but Bellini was anxious to return to Naples before Easter and to be with Giuditta Turina, who had remained in that city. They reached Naples on 25 April, where he was reunited with Turina.\nUpon his arrival, Bellini wrote to his new friend Santocanale in Palermo, telling him that he would be accepting a contract from La Fenice so the issue had resurfaced in the form of a contract from Lanari which appeared to have accepted the composer's terms. But he had forgotten how much he had demanded: writing to Giuditta Pasta's husband, Giuseppe, he asked for the letter he had written to him (in which he had revealed the terms offered) to be sent to him to await his arrival in Florence.\nWhen returning to Naples, the couple reached Rome on 30 April. There is speculation that, when there, Bellini composed a one-act opera, \"Il fu ed il sar\u00e0\" (\"The Past and the Present\") for a private performance (which was supposedly not given until 1832), but little further information\u2014nor any of the music\u2014has been forthcoming. It appears that the couple (along with Giuditta's brother) left for Florence on or around 20 May traveling by private coach and that he attended what he described as \"a quite unrecognisable\" performance of \"La sonnumbula\" at the Teatro della Pergola. In the same letter, Bellini informed his publisher that: \"I have arranged the contract with Lanari to compose the opera for Venice; there I'll have the divine Pasta, and on the same terms as the contract with La Scala for \"Norma\"\". He continues by stating that, in addition, he will receive one hundred per cent of the rental rights of the scores.\nWithin a few days, Bellini was in Milan, from there writing to his friend Santocanale in Palermo that \"I'm\u00a0... trying to find a good subject for my new opera for Venice. In August, I shall go to Bergamo for the production of my \"Norma\" with Pasta.\" From Bergamo, he wrote to Romani, excited to tell him that:\nOur \"Norma\" is decidedly a great success. If you heard how it's performed in Bergamo, you'd almost think that it was a new work\u00a0... [Pasta] even moves me. In fact, I wept [with] the emotions I felt in my soul. I wanted you near me so that I could have these emotions with you, my good advisor and collaborator, because you alone understand me. My glory is intrinsic to yours.\nAfter the successful production in Bergamo, which was favourably reviewed by the same writer from the \"Gazzetta privilegiata di Milano\" who was not enthusiastic about the original Milan production, Bellini spent a few days with Turina, and then, by mid-September, had returned to Milan anxious to meet Romani to decide on the subject for the following February's opera for La Fenice for which a contract had become official. In addition, it had been agreed that the new opera would be preceded by performances of \"Norma\" and that they would open the season.\n\"Beatrice di Tenda\": Venice 1833.\n\"Beatrice di Tenda\", with the leading role requiring a strong female character to be written for Pasta, the composer and librettist met to consider a subject. Much of the initial work fell upon Romani, who had to look at a number of possible sources, and he became irritated by the task, finally hoping that a shipment of books from Paris would reveal a suitable one. It appears that by 6 October, a subject had been agreed upon: it would be \"Cristina regina di Svenzia\" from a play by Alexandre Dumas which had appeared in Paris in 1830. However, by one month later, Bellini was writing to Pasta to state that: \"The subject has been changed, and we'll write \"Beatrice di Tenda\" [after the play of the same name by Carlo Tedaldi-Fores.] I had a hard time persuading Romani, but persuade him I did, and with good reasons. Knowing that the subject pleases you, as you told me the evening when you saw the ballet [in September 1832 in Milan when it accompanied a Mercadante opera]\u00a0... He is a man of good will, and I want him to show it also in wanting to prepare at least the first act for me swiftly.\"\nBellini's expectation that Romani's goodwill would be demonstrated promptly, turned out to be a mistake. The librettist had vastly over-committed himself: by the time that \"Cristina\" became \"Beatrice\", he had made commitments to Mercadante for an October opera; also to Carlo Coccia for an opera for La Scala on 14 February 1833; and further, to Luigi Majocchi for a Parma production on 26 February; to Mercadante for La Scala on 10 March; and to Donizetti for Florence on 17 March. Nothing happened in November; Bellini announced that he would arrive in Venice in early December, and after the 10th, he became preoccupied with rehearsals for \"Norma\". However, the lack of any verses\u2014for an opera which was supposed to be staged in the second half of February\u2014caused him to have to take action against Romani. This involved a complaint lodged with the governor of Venice who then contacted the governor of Milan, who then had his police contact Romani. The librettist finally arrived in Venice on 1 January 1833. He holed up to write Bellini's libretto, but, at the same time, Donizetti was equally incensed at delays in receiving a libretto from Romani for an opera which was to be \"Parisina\".\nWhen \"Norma\" opened on 26 December, it was a success but only because of Pasta. The Adalgisa of Anna Del Serre and the Pollione of Alberico Curioni were mediocre; Bellini feared for how \"Beatrice\" would turn out. Writing to Santocanale on 12 January, Bellini was in despair, complaining of the short time to write his opera because \"Whose fault is that? that of my usual and original poet, the God of Sloth!\" Their relationship quickly began to deteriorate: greetings including \"tu\" (the informal \"you\") gave way to \"voi\" (the formal \"you\") and they lived in different parts of Venice. However, by 14 February, Bellini was reporting that he had only \"another three pieces of the opera to do\" and that \"I hope to go onstage here on 6 March if I am able to finish the opera and prepare it.\"\nAs it turned out, Bellini was only able to prepare the opera for rehearsals by deleting sections of the libretto as well as some of the music for the finale. To create more time for Bellini to finish, at La Fenice Lanari padded the programme with older works or revivals, but that allowed only eight days for \"Beatrice\" before the scheduled end of the season. Not surprisingly, the audience greeted the opening night on 16 March with little enthusiasm, especially after Romani's plea for \"the reader's full indulgence\" appeared in the libretto, but at the following two performances there was a large crowd. For Bellini, his opera \"was not unworthy of her sisters\".\nThe break with Romani.\nThere then began what Herbert Weinstock describes in over twelve pages of text, which include the long letters written by both sides in the dispute:\nThe journalistic storm over \"Beatrice di Tenda\" was about to evolve into the bitterest, most convoluted, and\u2014at our distance from it\u2014most amusing polemic in the annals of early nineteenth-century Italian opera.\nThree days before the premiere, the Venetian daily, the \"Gazzetta privilegiata di Venezia\", had published a letter purportedly written to its editor by 'A.B.' of Fonzaso, in Weinstein's view most certainly fabricated by Tommaso Locatelli, the musically sophisticated man who edited the paper. In the letter, he complained about the delay in the production of \"Beatrice\" as the end of the season became closer.\nWeinstock assumes that it is Locatelli who replied to \"A.B.\", asserting that Bellini and Romani were trying to achieve perfection before taking the opera to London. Then a torrent of anti-\"Beatrice\" letters appeared after the first performance, followed by a pro-Bellini reply, signed \"A friend of M. Bellini\". This letter removes the blame from Bellini and lays it at the feet of Romani, outlining the timetable for the delivery of the libretto, which was contracted to be due in two parts: one in October and then the second in November. The author states that, except for a limited amount of text, nothing had been received by mid-January, and the piece continues by describing the legal proceedings taken by Bellini and the various setbacks which occurred even after Romani arrived in Venice. On 2 April, this provoked a response from Romani himself, presenting his case against Bellini based largely on the composer's inability to decide on a subject, as well as justifying all the work which he did after arriving in Venice, only to find his \"melodramma\" \"touched up in a thousand ways\", in order to make it acceptable to \"the Milords of the Thames [who] await him\", a sarcastic reference to planned trip to London. Another, a more \"venomous\" version of this letter, was sent to Milan's \"L'Eco\".\n\"Pietro Marinetti\" replied from the pro-Bellini camp in the Milan journal, \"Il Barbiere di Siviglia\" on 11 April. In \"Two Words for Signor Felice Romani\" [but which takes five pages in print], he states that it is not his intention to defend the composer but \"only to vent my displeasure given me and all sensitive people by the very sarcastic manner, full of personal rancor and hauteur, with which Signor Romani has undertaken to assail his antagonist.\" Not unexpectedly, a further \"cannonade\" (says Weinstock) appeared from Romani, published this time in \"L'Eco\" on 12 April 1833 with both an editor's preface, decrying the poor taste displayed by both sides, and a brief final response from Marinetti.\nThe relationship begins to be repaired.\nHaving been invited to write a new opera for the San Carlo for the 1834\u201335 Carnival season, but declined because of his Paris commitment, he stated that May 1835 might be possible when he knew who were to be the contracted singers. Florimo immediately began to try to persuade his friend, indicating that Malibran had been engaged for Naples in January 1835. Continuing his letter to Florimo, he states:\nwhy the Management\u00a0... doesn't make a contract with Romani; not just for one libretto, but by the year\u00a0... with the understanding that he come to live in Naples; thus he could write the libretto for me as the only poet attached to the theatre, and if they want to negotiate with him, they can commission me to arrange it; I'd like to return good for evil to that wrongheaded and very talented man\u00a0...\nFrom that statement of March 1834, it does not appear that animosity still existed on the composer's part. Through an intermediary, Bordesi (or Bordese), a mutual friend of both men, Romani initially expressed interest in re-establishing friendly relations with Bellini. Thus, Bellini wrote back to the intermediary, stating: \"Tell my dear Romani that I still love him even though he is a cruel man\", and he continues by wondering if Romani ever thinks about him, where he, Bellini, says, \"whereas I do nothing but to talk about him to the entire universe\". Then he ends with: \"Give him a kiss for me\". This was followed by a letter to Florimo in late May where Bellini wishes to know if Romani reciprocated his feelings, which\u2014it appears\u2014did happen when he writes to Romani himself (most likely expansion of the initial draft) laying out a series of concerns, but quoting back to him a part of his own letter to Bordese in which Romani states \"I have not ceased to love him [Bellini], for I recognise that the blame is not all his\".\nIn conclusion, Bellini suggests \"draw[ing] a veil over everything that happened\", stating that he cannot come to Milan at this time but, since he was planning to write the opera for Naples for 1836, he could do so in January [1835: presumably after \"I puritani\"]. He ends by saying that, if he does not hear back from Romani, he will not write to him again. Little is known about Romani's reply, but reply he did, as indicated in Bellini's letter to Florimo in October followed by a very friendly one on 7 October 1834 to the librettist (who had been engaged in Turin) and in which he states: \"It seemed impossible to exist without you\", closing with \"Write for Turin or for wherever, write for me alone: only for me, for your Bellini\".\nWithin a year of writing that letter, Bellini was dead. The two men never did meet again.\nLondon: April to August 1833.\nAfter leaving Venice on 26 March, before the barrage of letter-writing began, it is known that Bellini spent some time with Mrs. Turina in Milan and, leaving many of his personal possessions with her, appears to have planned to return there by August since he did not give up his rooms in the contrade dei Tre Monasteri.\nWith the Pasta and other members of the Italian troupe contracted for London by the impresario of the King's Theatre, Pierre-Fran\u00e7ois Laporte, Bellini and his troupe set off. On the journey, it is known that he stopped in Paris and discussed with Dr. Louis V\u00e9ron, the director of the Paris Op\u00e9ra, the possibility of writing a French opera, but his intention was to focus on that subject on his return in the coming July.\nAs Weinstock notes, when the Italians arrived in London by 27 April, Bellini was a known factor, many of his operas having already been given over the previous few years. His name is listed as an attendee in the \"Morning Chronicle\" of 29 April at a performance of Rossini's \"La Cenerentola\", along with those of Maria Malibran, Felix Mendelssohn, Niccol\u00f2 Paganini, as well as Pasta, Rubini, and other visiting Italian singers. His operas, which had been presented in London, included \"Il pirata\" (with Henriette M\u00e9ric-Lalande in April 1830) followed by \"La sonnambula\" (with Pasta) and \"La straniera\" (with Giuditta Grisi).\nIn addition\u2014and separate from Bellini's troupe at the King's Theatre\u2014Maria Malibran was about to present her London debut in \"La sonnambula\" at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane on 1 May in an English version with \"an adapted Bellini score\". It appears that Bellini had his first meeting with Malibran when attending a performance where, as he states:\nmy music was tortured, torn to shreds.\u00a0... Only when Malibran was singing did I recognise my [opera]\u00a0... but in the \"allegro\" of the final scene, and precisely at the words 'Ah! m'abbraccia'\u00a0... I was the first to shout at the top of my voice: 'Viva, viva, brava, brava,' and to clap my hands as much as I could. [When he was recognised by the audience, who became more and more enthusiastic, he was called to the stage where he embraced Malibran. He continues:] My emotion was at its climax. I thought I was in Paradise.\nAs the opera season progressed, Bellini found himself caught up in the social whirl, with invitations coming from all around him. His fame was now secure\u2014\"La sonnambula\" having established it\u2014and the premiere of \"Norma\", given on 21 June with Pasta in the title role, was a triumph according to a long letter which Giuseppe Pasta wrote about the experience and his wife's huge success. Additionally, reports in the London press were favourable, including the review which appeared in \"The Times\" of 23 June 1833. It took until late July for \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\" to be given its London premiere, and his contract was then over, after which he left for Paris by about mid-August.\nParis: August 1833 to January 1835.\nWhen he arrived in Paris in mid-August 1833, Bellini had intended to stay only about three weeks, the main aim being to continue the negotiations with the Op\u00e9ra which had begun on his way to London a few months earlier. While there was no agreement with V\u00e9ron at the Op\u00e9ra, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien made him an offer which, Bellini notes, he accepted because \"the pay was richer than what I had received in Italy up to then, though only by a little; then because of so magnificent a company; and finally so as to remain in Paris at others' expense.\"\nIn fact, \u00c9duard Robert and Carlo Severini of the \"Italien\" had written to the composer, offering a seat in their theatre during his stay in the city and telling him that Grisi, Unger, and Rubini would be singing \"Pirata\" in October and \"Capuleti\" in November. But with no definite arrangements having been made to compose for the Italian house\u2014and Bellini essentially not wishing to proceed with an offer from Turin to stage \"Norma\"\u2014he settled into a new, small apartment. He wrote to Florimo, telling him about the lodgings and that he had written to Turina not to sell any of his furniture, but to send some of it to him.\nQuickly, Bellini entered the fashionable world of the Parisian salon, most importantly that run by the Italian exile Princess Belgiojoso whom he had met in Milan and who \"was by far the most overtly political of the salonni\u00e8res\". Her salon became a meeting place for Italian revolutionaries such as Vincenzo Gioberti, Niccol\u00f2 Tommaseo, and Camillo Cavour, and it was there that he would have most likely made the acquaintance of Count Carlo Pepoli. Others that Bellini would have met included Victor Hugo, George Sand, Alexandre Dumas p\u0117re, and Heinrich Heine. Among the many musical figures were several Italian,s such as Michele Carafa and the imposing Luigi Cherubini, then in his seventies.\nIn terms of musical activity\u2014or lack thereof\u2014Bellini pleaded guilty in the letter to Florimo in March 1834: \"If you reflect for a moment that a young man in my position, in London and Paris for the first time, cannot help amusing himself immensely, you will excuse me.\" However, in January 1834, he had signed a contract to write a new opera for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien which would be presented at the end of the year. At the same time, he had been invited to write a new opera for the San Carlo in Naples for the 1834\u201335 Carnival season, but declined given the Paris commitment and stated that it might be possible to do so by May 1835, when he knew who were to be the contracted singers. Florimo immediately began to try to persuade his friend to take up this offer, indicating that Malibran had been engaged for Naples in January 1835.\nOn a professional level, Bellini became very concerned around the middle of April 1834, when he learned that Donizetti would be composing for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien during the same season, 1834\u201335. According to Weinstock, quoting letters sent to Florimo in Italy at around that time (and continuing almost up to the premiere of \"I puritani\"), Bellini perceived this to be a plot orchestrated by Rossini. In a long, rambling letter of 2,500 words to Florino of 11 March 1834, he expresses his frustrations.\nBut over a year later and with hindsight\u2014after \"Puritani\"'s great success which came way ahead of that of Donizetti's first work for Paris, \"Marin Faliero\"\u2014he outlines \"the plot which was being hatched against me\" and the strategies which he adopted to counter it. These strategies included expanding his contacts with Rossini to secure his growing friendship by continuing to see him on numerous occasions to seek his advice, noting \"I have always adored Rossini, and I succeeded, and happily\u00a0... [having] tamed Rossini's hatred, I no longer was frightened and finished that work of mine which won me so much honour\". In a series of letters to Florimo throughout the year, he wrote of Rossini's increasing support, even love: \"I hear that he speaks well of me\" (4 September 1834); \"...\u00a0if I have Rossini's protection, I'll be situated very well\" (4 November); \"The most beautiful is that Rossini loves me very, very, very much\" (18 November); and \"...\u00a0my very dear Rossini who now loves me as a son\" (21 January 1835, following the dress rehearsal).\nHowever, during the time during which he was composing \"Puritani\", Bellini recounted the details of another bout of what he describes as \"gastric fever\" and which Weinstock describes as \"that brief indisposition, which had been recurring almost every year at the onset of warm weather\".\n\"I puritani\": January 1834 to January 1835.\nHaving signed the contract for a new opera, Bellini began to look around for a suitable subject and, in a letter to Florimo of 11 March 1834, he alludes to the opera which was to become \"I puritani\", noting: \"I am about to lose my mind over the plot of the opera for Paris, as it has been impossible to find a suitable subject for my purpose and adaptable to the company\".\nIn the same letter, he continues by stating that he was working towards finding a subject with the Italian \u00e9migr\u00e9, Count Pepoli, who came from a prominent Bologna family and who had been active in opposition to Austrian rule of Italy, until forced into exile in France and England. Although Pepoli had yet to write for the opera house, he made acquaintance with Bellini at one of the salons both attended. The process of writing the libretto and working with the composer was a struggle (notes Weinstock), added to by a period of illness which Bellini reports, although\u2014on 11 April\u2014he is able to report in a letter to Ferlito that he was well and that \"I have chosen the story for my Paris opera; it is of the times of Cromvello [Cromwell], after he had King Charles I of England beheaded.\" In his letter, he continues by providing a synopsis, indicating that his favourite singers\u2014Giulia Grisi, Rubini, Tamburini, and Lablache\u2014would be available for the principal roles, and that he would begin to write the music by 15 April if he has received the verses. He also referred to the offer from Naples for April 1836 and noting his financial demands with the questions as to how this might be received.\nThe chosen source was a play performed in Paris only six months before, \"T\u00eates Rondes et Cavalieres\" (\"Roundheads and Cavaliers\"), written by Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Ancelot and Joseph Xavier Saintine, which some sources state was based on Walter Scott's novel \"Old Mortality\", while others state that there is no connection. The composer had prepared the way for his librettist by providing him with a scenario of thirty-nine scenes (thus compressing the original drama into manageable proportions), reducing the number of characters from nine to seven and at the same time, giving them names of a more Italianate, singable quality.\nContinuing to work on the yet-unnamed \"I Puritani\", Bellini moved to Puteaux\u2014\"a half an hour by road\" from central Paris, as the guest of an English friend, Samuel Levys, \"where I hope to complete my opera more carefully\". At some time in the late Spring (specific date unknown) Bellini wrote to Pepoli to remind him that he should bring the first act of the opera with him the following day \"so that we can finish discussing the first act, which\u00a0... will be interesting, magnificent, and proper poetry for music in spite of you and all your absurd rules\u00a0...\" At the same time, he lays out one basic rule for the librettist to follow:\nCarve into your head in adamantine letters: \"The opera must draw tears, terrify people, make them die through singing\"\nBy late June, there had been considerable progress and, in a letter copied into one written to Florimo on 25 July, Bellini writes in reply to Alesandro Lanari, now the director of the Royal Theatres of Naples. Because Lanari had written to him on 10 April 1834 regarding an opera for Naples, Bellini tells him that the first act of \"Puritani\" is finished and that he expects to complete the opera by September, in order that he may then have time to write for Naples. In this letter to Lanari, the composer lays down some very strict terms, some of which received counter-offers in August, but none of which were accepted by the composer. Finally, Bellini stated that he did not want \"to negotiate with anybody until I see what success my opera will have\". This included a proposal from the Op\u00e9ra-Comique for a new opera for them.)\nBy September he was writing to Florimo of being able to \"polish and re-polish\" in the three remaining months before rehearsals and he expresses happiness with Pepoli's verses (\"a very beautiful trio for the two basses and \"La Grisi\"\")and by around mid-December he had submitted the score for Rossini's approval, with rehearsals planned for late December/early January. The dress rehearsal on 20 January 1835 was attended by many people\u2014\"All of high society, all the great artists, and everyone most distinguished in Paris were in the theatre, enthusiastic.\"\u2014and the premiere, postponed by two days, took place on 24 January 1835. Bellini's ecstatic letter to Florimo, which followed, recounts the enthusiastic reception of many of the numbers throughout the performance, most especially the second act \"stretta\" so that, by its end:\nThe French had all gone mad; there were such noise and such shouts that they themselves were astonished at being so carried away.\u00a0... In a word, my dear Florimo, it was an unheard of thing, and since Saturday, Paris has spoken of it in amazement.\u00a0... I showed myself to the audience, which shouted as if insane.\u00a0... How satisfied I am! [He concludes by noting the success of the singers]: \"Lablache sang like a god, Grisi like a little angel, Rubini and Tamburini the same.\"\nThe opera became \"the rage of Paris\" and was given 17 performances to end the season on 31 March.\nParis: January to September 1835.\nIn the immediate aftermath of \"I puritani\"'s success, Bellini was awarded two honours: the first by King Louis-Philippe, naming him as \"chevalier\" of the L\u00e9gion d'honneur; the second by King Ferdinand II in Naples, awarding him the cross of the \"Order of Francesco I\". Bellini then dedicated \"I puritiani\" \"To the Queen of the French\", Queen Marie-Em\u00e9lie. But from a personal point of view, Bellini expressed his sadness at not having seen Florimo for so long, and there flowed a succession of invitations, then demands that Florimo come to Paris to visit him, but from February to July, Florimo ignored the offers and finally, in a letter to him, Bellini stated: \"I'll no longer ask for reasons, and I'll see you when I see you.\" After that, he attempted to persuade his uncle, Vincenzo Ferlito, to visit, but without success.\nDuring the final preparations in 1834 for the staging of \"Puritani\" and up to its delay into 1835, Bellini had concluded an agreement with Naples to present three operas there\u2014including the re-writing of parts of the music for Malibran\u2014beginning in the following January. All that went by the wayside when the revised score failed to arrive on time, and performances were abandoned and the contract was scrapped. Thus, during March, Bellini did nothing, but did attend the final performance of \"Puritani\" on the 31st. On 1 April, he wrote a very lengthy letter to Ferlito laying out the entire history of his life in Paris to date, as well as reviving the old jealousies about Donizetti and Rossini's so-called \"enmity\" toward him. He ended by mentioning that \"my future plans are to be able to arrange a contract with the French Grand Op\u00e9ra and remain in Paris, making it my home for the present.\" Additionally, he discusses the prospect of marriage to a young woman who \"is not rich, but she has an uncle and aunt who are: if they will give her 200,000 francs, I'll marry her\", but remarks that he is in no hurry.\nThroughout May, accounts came to him from London of the success of \"I puritani\" and the failure of a revival of \"Norma\" (due to the poor performances by both the Adalgisa and Pollione), although later reports of Giulietta Grisi's Norma\u2014in contrast to those of Pasta\u2014were not good either, and Bellini was pleased that it was not Grisi who gave the opera in Paris. Over the summer, Bellini's general mood was reported to be \"dark\": discussion with the Op\u00e9ra could not proceed until a new director was appointed; \"he writes long letters, crowded with projects, ideas, reveries that the hand seems to have trouble restraining\"; and, as Weintock concludes, all of these things seem to \"inescapably suggest a man deeply disturbed physically, psychologically, or both\".\nAt one of the literary gatherings which Bellini attended earlier in the year, Bellini met the writer Heinrich Heine. Both men then attended a dinner that summer, at which the writer is reported to have remarked:\nYou are a genius, Bellini, but you will pay for your great gift with a premature death. All the great geniuses died very young, like Raphael and like Mozart.\nThe rather superstitious Bellini was horrified. Also, Heine's literary portrait of Bellini, which became part of his unfinished novel \"Florentinische N\u00e4chte\" (\"Florentine Nights\") published in 1837, emphasized the less-appealing aspects of the composer's personality, summing up a description of him as \"a sigh in dancing pumps\".\nIn his last-known letter to Filippo Santocanale, Bellini wrote on 16 August, followed by one to Florimo on 2 September. In the latter, he mentions that \"for three days I've been slightly disturbed by a diarrhea, but I am better now, and think that it is over.\"\nFinal illness and death.\nIt was clear from Bellini's reaction to Heine's remarks that he did not like Heine. Attempting to reconcile the two men, Madame Joubert, who had attended the summer event, invited both to dinner, along with her friend, the Princess Belgiojoso. Bellini failed to appear; instead, he sent a note stating that he was too ill. Weinstock reports that the princess sent Doctor Luigi Montallegri to Puteaux. Over a few days, he reported to Carlo Severini of the Th\u00e9atre-Italien with four notes, the first (on 20 September) stated \"no appreciable improvement\". On the following day, Montallegri reported a slight improvement, and on the 22nd, the doctor stated that he \"hopes to declare him out of danger tomorrow\". However, the fourth note\u2014on 22 September\u2014is far more pessimistic; it reported that it was the thirteenth day of the illness and that Bellini had \"passed a very restless night\". And then, during the daytime of the 23rd, Montallegri indicated that there had been what Weinstock describes as \"a terrifying convulsion\" and that death was close. It appears that Bellini died at around 5\u00a0pm on 23 September 1835.\nImmediately taking charge of arrangements, Rossini began to plan Bellini's funeral and entombment, as well as caring for his estate. He ordered that a post-mortem be performed, following an order which came directly from the King. The distinguished Court-appointed Doctor Dalmas performed the autopsy and reported his findings on the cause of death:\nIt is evident that Bellini succumbed to an acute inflammation of the colon, compounded by an abscess in the liver. The inflammation of the intestine had produced violent symptoms of dysentery during life.\nRossini then created a committee of Parisian musicians in order to find support for a subscription to build a monument to the dead composer, as well as supporting a funeral mass to be celebrated on 2 October in the chapel of the H\u00f4tel des Invalides.\nOn 27 September and 3 October, Rossini wrote to Santocanale in Palermo providing very detailed accounts of all that he had done immediately following Bellini's death as well as what had taken place on 2 October. Initially, Rossini regarded burial in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery as a short-term arrangement, not knowing where the final resting place would turn out to be. Despite attempts over many years to have Bellini's remains transferred to Catania, that did not take place until 1876, when the casket containing his remains was taken to the cathedral in Catania and reburied. His elaborate now empty tomb in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery remains and is neighbouring that of Rossini, whose bones were also eventually transferred back to Italy.\nOf the many tributes which poured forth following Bellini's death, one stands out. It was written by Felice Romani and published in Turin on 1 October 1835. In it, he stated:\n... Perhaps no composers other than ours, know as well as Bellini the necessity for a close union of music with poetry, dramatic truth, the language of emotions, the proof of expression.\u00a0... I sweated for fifteen years to find a Bellini! A single day took him from me!\nToday, the Museo Belliniano, housed in the Palazzo Gravina-Cruyllas in Catania\u2014Bellini's birthplace\u2014preserves memorabilia and manuscripts. He was commemorated on the front of (before Italy switched to the Euro) with the back showing a scene from the opera \"Norma\".\nBellini, romanticism and melodrama.\nWhen planning the subject of his next opera after La Scala's \"Il pirata\", Bellini had been invited to write an opera for Parma's inauguration of the new Teatro Ducale in early 1829. In the initial contract, Bellini was given power over who was to write the libretto and, after meeting the composer and \"prima donna\", the Parman librettist Luigi Torrigiani's work had been rejected. The aspiring librettist laid a complaint against Bellini in a report to Parma's Grand Chamberlain in December 1828 (which was ignored). In it, the aggrieved librettist sums up Bellini's tastes in Romantic drama: \"[he] likes Romanticism and exaggeration. He declares that Classicism is cold and boring.\u00a0... He is entranced by unnatural meetings in forests, among graves, tombs and the like\u00a0...\"\nIn writing the libretto for \"Zaira\", Romani expressed his position in relation to Voltaire's tragedy by noting in the preface to the libretto: \"\"Zaira\" therefore is not covered with the ample cloak of Tragedy but wrapped in the tight form of Melodrama.\"\nPersonal life and relationships.\nBellini was a notorious womaniser as evidenced in his letters to Francesco Florimo. However, three people had a prominent place in his life: Francesco Florimo, Maddelena Fumaroli and Giuditta Turina.\nFrancesco Florimo.\nOne of the closest people in Bellini's life was Francesco Florimo, whom he met as a fellow student at the Naples Conservatory. Throughout Bellini's lifetime, the two shared a close correspondence. During the 1820 revolution, Bellini and Florimo joined a secret society, the Carboneria. Their closeness is evident in their letters. For example, on 12 January 1828, Bellini wrote that theirs were \"hearts made only to be friends to the last breath.\" Bellini wrote in 1825 that \"Your existence is necessary to mine\". Further, on 11 February 1835, Bellini wrote: \" my excellent, my honest, my angelic friend! The more we know the world, the more we shall see how rare is our friendship.\" Based on these letters, some have speculated about Bellini's sexuality, but Weinstock (1971) believed such interpretations are anachronistic. Rosselli (1996) expands on this point: contrary to how they may seem to modern readers, the expressions of close friendship in these letters were commonplace in Mediterranean societies and the world of early 1800s Italian opera rather than a reflection of sexual attachment. Once Bellini left Naples for Milan, the two men seldom saw one another; their last meeting was in Naples in late 1832, when Bellini was there with Giuditta Turina, before the pair departed for Milan via Florence. Florimo's published recollections\u2014written fifty years after the events they recall\u2014may be flawed. In later years, Bellini declared that Florimo \"was the only friend in whom [I] could find comfort\". Interpretation of Florimo's collection of letters is complicated however by evidence that he often altered or completely fabricated some of his correspondences with Bellini to create an idealized image of the composer. Florimo was also known to have destroyed some compromising letters involving Bellini's affairs with married women, including some in which Bellini wrote in detail about his affair with Giuditta Turina. After Bellini's death Florimo became his literary executor.\nMaddalena Fumaroli.\nAlthough the frustrating affair with Maddalena Fumaroli, which, as noted above, came to nothing during these early years, the success achieved by \"Bianca e Gernado\" gave Bellini fresh hope that her parents would finally relent, and a new appeal was made through a friend. This was utterly rejected by Maddalena's father, who returned all the letters which she had received along with a letter from him stating that \"my daughter will never marry a poor piano player (\"suonatore di cembalo\")\". However, when Florimo gave him the news, he said that he was going to try again and win, but the next move was to come later from the Fumaroli family.\nAt some time before March 1828, after the major success of \"Il pirata\" and just as Bellini was about to leave Milan for his production of \"Bianca e Ferdinando\" in Genoa, he received a notification from his go-between with the Fumaroli family that they had withdrawn their rejection of his proposal. But by then\u2014with the efforts to build his career and with time and distance between him and Maddalena\u2014his feelings had changed, and, using Florimo to communicate to the family, he rejected the offer, expressing the feeling that he would be unable to support her financially. Even Maddalena's own pleas in three letters which followed failed to change his mind.\nGiuditta Turina.\nThe one significant relationship which Bellini had after 1828 was the five-year relationship with Giuditta Turina, a young married woman with whom he began a passionate affair when both were in Genoa in April 1828 for the production of \"Bianca e Fernando\". Their relationship lasted until Bellini went to Paris. Bellini's letters to his friend Florimo indicate his satisfaction with the nature of the liaison, particularly because it kept him from having to marry\u2014and thus becoming distracted from his work.\nHowever, in May 1833, while he was in London, a significant change in Bellini's relationship with Giuditta followed from the discovery by her husband of a compromising letter from Bellini. The result was that he decided to seek a legal separation and have her removed from his house. For Bellini, it meant the possibility of taking on responsibility for her, and he had no interest in doing that, having cooled in his feelings for her. When he wrote to Florimo from Paris the following year, he clearly stated that \"I constantly am being threatened from Milan with Giuditta's coming to Paris\", at which point he says he'll leave that city if that were to happen. Then he continues: \"I no longer want to be put in the position of renewing a relationship that made me suffer great troubles\". When Turina announced that she was leaving her husband, Bellini left her, saying \"with so many commitments, such a relationship would be fatal to me,\" expressing his fear of romantic attachments getting in the way of his musical career. Ultimately, he resisted any long-term emotional commitment and never married.\nHowever, Turina maintained contact with Florimo throughout her life, although [nothing] was heard from her after his death until she wrote a sad-but-friendly letter to Florimo. Florimo eventually returned the friendship and, as Galatopoulos notes, \"the death of Bellini was a mutual loss and Florimo needed Giuditta as much as she needed him\" so that the two corresponded for years and Florimo visited her in Milan \"at least once, in 1858\". She died on 1 December 1871.\nComplete works of Bellini.\nOperas.\nIn 1999, the Italian music publisher Casa Ricordi, in collaboration with the Teatro Massimo Bellini in Catania, embarked on a project to publish critical editions of the complete works of Bellini.\nSongs.\nThe following fifteen songs were published as a collection, \"Composizioni da Camera\", by Casa Ricordi in 1935 on the centenary of Bellini's death.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSix Early Songs\nTre Ariette\nSei Ariette\nSee also.\nOther important bel canto opera composers:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources"}
{"id": "32669", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32669", "title": "West African Vod\u00fan", "text": "African traditional religion\nVod\u00fan, Vodu, or vod\u00fans\u00ednsen is an African traditional religion practiced by the Aja, Ewe, and Fon peoples of Benin, Togo, Ghana, and Nigeria. Practitioners are commonly called or .\nVod\u00fan teaches the existence of a supreme creator divinity, under whom are lesser spirits called . Many of these deities are associated with specific areas, but others are venerated widely throughout West Africa; some have been absorbed from other religions, including Christianity and Hinduism. The are believed to physically manifest in shrines and they are provided with offerings, typically including animal sacrifice. There are several all-male secret societies, including Or\u00f3 and Eg\u00fang\u00fan, into which individuals receive initiation. Various forms of divination are used to gain information from the , the most prominent of which is F\u00e1, itself governed by a society of initiates.\nAmid the Atlantic slave trade of the 16th to the 19th century, were among the enslaved Africans transported to the Americas. There, their traditional religions influenced the development of new religions such as Haitian Vodou, Louisiana Voodoo, and Brazilian Candombl\u00e9 Jej\u00e9. Since the 1990s, there have been growing efforts to encourage foreign tourists to visit West Africa and receive initiation into Vod\u00fan.\nMany practice their traditional religion alongside Christianity, for instance by interpreting Jesus Christ as a . Although primarily found in West Africa, since the late 20th century the religion has also spread abroad and is practised by people of varied ethnicities and nationalities.\nDefinition.\nVod\u00fan is a religion. The anthropologist Timothy R. Landry noted that, although the term is commonly used, a more accurate name for the religion was , meaning \"spirit worship\". \nThe spelling \"Vod\u00fan\" is commonly used to distinguish the West African religion from the Haitian religion more usually spelled; this in turn is often used to differentiate it from Louisiana. \nAn alternative spelling sometimes used for the West African religion is \"Vodu\". In the Ewe language, Vo means \"freedom\" and \"du\" means \"collective\" or \"community\".\nThe religion's adherents are referred to as or, in the French language, . This means \"the people that know vodu\". Another common term for a practitioner is \"vod\u00fansi\", meaning \"wife of a \"vod\u00fan\"\".\nVod\u00fan is \"the predominant (indigenous) religious system\" of southern Benin, Togo, and parts of southeast Ghana. The anthropologist Judy Rosenthal noted that \"Fon and Ewe forms of Vodu worship are virtually the same\".\nIt is part of the same network of religions that include Yoruba religion as well as African diasporic traditions like Haitian Vodou, Cuban Santer\u00eda, and Brazilian Candombl\u00e9. As a result of centuries of interaction between Fon and Yoruba peoples, Landry noted that Vod\u00fan and Yoruba religion were \"at times, indistinguishable or at least, blurry\". Some Fon people even refer to Yoruba religion as \"Nago Vodun\", \"Nago\" being a common Fon word for the Yoruba people.\nVod\u00fan is a fragmented religion divided into \"independent small cult units\" devoted to particular spirits. Various sub-classifications of the religion have been suggested, but none have come to be regarded as definitive.\nAs a tradition, Vod\u00fan is not doctrinal, with no orthodoxy, and no central text. It is amorphous and flexible, changing and adapting in different situations, and emphasising efficacy over dogma. It is open to ongoing revision, being eclectic and absorbing elements from many cultural backgrounds, including from other parts of Africa but also from Europe, Asia, and the Americas. West African religions commonly absorb elements from elsewhere regardless of their origin; in West Africa, many individuals draw upon African traditional religions, Christianity, and Islam simultaneously to deal with life's issues. \nIn West Africa, sometimes abandon their religion for forms of Christianity like Evangelical Protestantism, although there are also Christians who convert to Vod\u00fan. A common approach is for people to practice Christianity while also engaging in Vod\u00fan rituals, although there are also who reject Christianity, deeming it incompatible with their tradition.\nBeliefs.\nIn Vod\u00fan, belief is centred around efficacy rather than Christian notions of faith.\nTheology.\nVod\u00fan teaches the existence of a single divine creator being. Below this entity are an uncountable number of spirits who govern different aspects of nature and society. Some are associated with particular cities, others with specific families.\nThe term comes from the Gb\u00e9 languages of the Niger-Congo language family. It translates as \"spirit\", \"God\", \"divinity\", or \"presence\". Among Fon-speaking Yoruba communities, the Fon term is regarded as being synonymous with the Yoruba language term \"\". Some Beninese acknowledge that certain Yoruba are more powerful than certain .\nThe art historian Suzanne Preston Blier called these \"mysterious forces or powers that govern the world and the lives of those who reside within it\". The religion is continually open to the incorporation of new spirit deities, while those that are already venerated may change and take on new aspects. Some Vod\u00fan practitioners for instance refer to Jesus Christ as the of the Christians. Since the mid-20th century, many Vod\u00fan practitioners have also adopted chromolithographs of Hindu deities or Sikh gurus and interpreted them as portrayals of particular \"vod\u00fan\".\nA common belief is that the came originally from the sea, with the term \"India\" having come to be used synonymously with \"the sea\" among many practitioners. The spirits are thought to dwell in (\"land of the dead\"), an invisible world parallel to that of humanity.\nThe spirits have their own individual likes and dislikes; each also has particular songs, dances, and prayers directed to them. These spirits are deemed to manifest within the natural world.\nWhen kings introduced new deities to the Fon people, it was often believed that these enhanced the king's power.\nThe cult of each has its own particular beliefs and practices. It may also have its own restrictions on membership, with some groups only willing to initiate family members. People may venerate multiple sometimes also attending services at a Christian church.\nProminent.\nOpening up communication between humanity and the spirit world is the \"vod\u00fan\" of the crossroads, known in Fon as L\u025bgb\u00e0, and in Ewe and Mina as Elegba. This figure may have been absorbed from the Yoruba, among whom he is called Eshu-Elegba. He is often the first spirit consulted for a new endeavour. Visually, he is characterised by his large erection. \nThe creator deity is Nana-Buluku. One of this being's offspring is Mawu-Lisa, an androgynous two-part deity also known as Mawu, Se, Segbo-Lisa, or Lissa. Lisa is the male side of this who commands the sun and daytime, while Mawu is its female side, responsible for commanding the moon and the night. As Lisa is represented by the colour white, albinos are often regarded as his incarnation. \nIn one tradition, Mawu bore seven children. Sakpata: Vodun of the Earth, X\u00eavioso (or X\u00eabioso): Vodun of Thunder, also associated with divine justice, Agbe: Vodun of the Sea, G\u00fb: Vodun of Iron and War, Ag\u00ea: Vodun of Agriculture and Forests, Jo: Vodun of Air, and L\u00eagba: Vodun of the Unpredictable.\nIn other stories, Mawu-Lisa is depicted as a single hermaphroditic person capable of impregnating herself, with two faces rather than being twins. In other branches, the Creator and other are known by different names, such as Sakpo-Disa (Mawu), Aholu (Sakpata), and Anidoho (Da), Gorovodu.\nThe D\u00e0n spirits are all serpents; D\u00e0n is a serpent associated with riches and cool breezes. Sakpat\u00e1 is the of earth and smallpox, but over time has come to be associated with new diseases like HIV/AIDS. X\u025bbyos\u00f2 or H\u025bvioso is the spirit of thunder and lightning; he is represented by a fire-spitting ram and is particularly popular in Southern Benin. The \"vod\u00fan\" of metal, blacksmithing, technology, and war is known in Fon as G\u016d and in Mine and Ewe as Egu; in more recent decades he has come to be associated with metal vehicles like cars, trains, and planes. Among the Ewe and Mina, he is Egu. Gb\u0103du is the wife of F\u00e1. Tohosu is the Fon \"vod\u00fan\" of royalty, lakes, streams, and human deformities. \nMami Wata or Mamiyata is a seductress, associated with the bringing of wealth. Along parts of coastal Benin and Togo, Mami Wata is regarded not as a singular spirit but as a larger pantheon of spirits. Mami Wata is widely portrayed in an image that derives from a late 19th-century chromolithograph of a snake charmer, probably Samoan, who worked in a German circus. Her husband is sometimes called Ako Ado and is associated with parakeets. Also linked to Mami Wata is Mami Dan, also known as Ekpon (the Mina word for panther), and who is deemed to clear the path for Mami Wata to proceed.\nCertain \"vod\u00fan\" have been transmitted from northern communities in recent centuries. One example is Tron, the \"vod\u00fan\" of the kola nut. He was introduced to the Vod\u00fan pantheon via Ewe speakers from Ghana and Togo, and is often claimed to have originated in a city called Acrachi in northern Ghana, which is potentially Ketekrachi. Another is Attingali, who originated in northern Ghana but whose veneration was reported in Parakov, Benin, by 1947. His cult is now concentrated around Abomey-Calavi.\nAlso part of the Vod\u00fan worldview is the , a type of forest spirit.\nPrayers to the usually include requests for financial wealth.\nPractitioners seek to gain well-being by focusing on the health and remembrance of their families. There may be restrictions on who can venerate the deity; practitioners believe that women must be kept apart from Gb\u0103du's presence, for if they get near her they may be struck barren or die. Devotion to a particular deity may be marked in different ways; devotees of the smallpox spirit Sakpat\u00e1 for instance scar their bodies to resemble smallpox scars.\nAncestral \"vod\u00fan\".\nAncestor veneration is important for Fon and Mina peoples.\nSome Vod\u00fan traditions specifically venerate spirits of deceased humans. The Tchamba tradition takes its name from an ethnic group and region in northern Togo. It honours the spirits of slaves from this region who are believed to have become ancestors of contemporary Ewe people. Female spirits in this complex are often called Maman Tchamba, and are believed to be married to male Tchamba spirits.\nSimilarly, the Gorovodu tradition also venerates enslaved northerners, who are described as being from the Hausa, Kaybe, Mossi, and Tchamba ethnicities.\nWhen a person is possessed by a Tchamba spirit, they may draw lines on their face with kaolin, symbolising the scarification markings of northern people.\nThe soul.\nAmong the Fon, a common belief is that the head is the seat of a person's soul. The head is thus of symbolic importance in Vod\u00fan.\nAc\u025b.\nAn important concept in Vod\u00fan is , a notion also shared by Yoruba religion and various African diasporic religions influenced by them.\nLandry defined as \"divine power\".\nIt is the of an object that is deemed to provide it with its power and efficacy.\nPractice.\nThe anthropologist Dana Rush noted that Vodun \"permeates virtually all aspects of life for its participants\". As a tradition, it prioritises action and getting things done. Rosenthal found that, among members of the Gorovodu tradition, people stated that they followed the religion because it helped to heal their children when the latter fell sick. Financial transactions play an important role, with both the and their priests typically expecting payment for their services.\nLandry described the religion as being \"deeply esoteric\".\nA male priest may be referred to with the Fon word . The priesthoods of particular spirits may bear specific names; the priestesses of Mama Wata are for instance called \"Mamisi\". These practitioners may advertise their ritual services using radio, television, billboard adverts, and the internet. There are individuals who claim the title of the \"supreme child of Vod\u00fan in Benin\", however there are competing claimants to the title and it is little recognised outside Ouidah.\nThe forest is a major symbol in Vod\u00fan.\nVodun practitioners believe that many natural materials contain supernatural powers, including leaves, meteorites, kaolin, soil from the crossroads, the feathers of African grey parrots, turtle shells, and dried chameleons. Landry stated that a connection to the natural environment was \"a dominant theme\" in the religion. The forest in particular is important in Vodun cosmology, and learning the power of the forest and of particular leaves that can be found there is a recurring theme among practitioners. Leaves, according to Landry, are \"building blocks for the spirits' power and material presence on earth\". Leaves will often be immersed in water to create (vodun water), which is used to wash both new shrines and new initiates.\nCertain \"vod\u00fan\" cults display clear Christian or Islamic influences. Initiates of the Attingali cult for instance celebrate Islamic holidays, while that of Tron involves observing fasting during both Ramadan and Lent. The Tron cult also incorporates a Vod\u00fan mass held on Sundays, which is an adoption of a Vod\u00fan ceremony in the form of a Catholic mass, while typically marking out ritual paraphernalia with the Islamic star and crescent moon symbol.\nInitiation.\nInitiation bestows a person with the power of a . It results in long-term obligations to the spirits that a person has received; that person is expected to honour their spirits with praise, to feed them, and to supply them with money, while in turn the spirit offers benefits to the initiate, giving them promises of protection, abundance, long life, and a large family. The Fon term \"yawotcha\", which potentially derives from Yoruba, refers to an initiation in which the initiate marries their .\nThe typical age of a person being initiated varies between spirit cults; in some cases children are preferred.\nThe process of initiation can last from a few months to a few years. It differs among spirit cults; in Benin, F\u00e1 initiation usually takes less than a week, whereas initiations into the cults of other may take several weeks or months. Initiation is expensive; especially high sums are generally charged for foreigners seeking initiation or training.\nPractitioners believe that some spirits embody powers that are too intense for non-initiates.\nBeing initiated is described as \"to find the spirit's depths\". Animal sacrifice is a typical feature of initiation.\nTrainees will often be expected to learn many different types of leaves and respective qualities.\nInitiation into the tradition of a particular \"vod\u00fan\" often entails certain commitments. Initiates of the Tron and Attingali traditions, for instance, are forbidden from eating pork, an idea probably adopted from Islam. Worshippers of the Tchamba spirits will often wear a \"tchambagan\" (\"metal of Tchamba\"), a metal bracelet consisting of black, white, and red elements.\nShrines.\nThe spirit temple is often referred to as the or the . This may be located inside a practitioner's home, in a publicly accessible communal area, or hidden in a part of the forest accessible only to initiates. Its location impacts who uses it; some are used only by a household, others by a village, and certain shrines attract international pilgrims.\nFor adherents, shrines are deemed to be physical incarnations of the spirits, not simply images or representations of them. Rosenthal called these shrines \"god-objects\". A wooden carved statue is referred to as a .\nParticular objects are selected for use in building a shrine based on intrinsic qualities they are believed to possess.\nThe constituent parts of the shrine are dependent on the identity of the spirit being enshrined there. F\u00e1 for instance is enshrined in 16 palm nuts, while X\u025bbyos\u00f2's shrines require (\"thunderstones') believed to have been created where lightning struck the earth. Tron's worship requires the presence of seven kola nuts. Gb\u01ced\u00f9, as the \"mother of creation,\" often requires that her shrines incorporate a vagina, either of a deceased family matriarch or of an animal, along with camwood, charcoal, kaolin, and mud. \nShrines to the Tchamba spirits will typically include cowry shells, as these were used as the currency to buy the Tchamba when they were enslaved people. Tchamba shrines will commonly also have a cement grinding stone, representing the slaves' task of grinding corn.\nL\u025bgb\u00e0, meanwhile, is represented by mounds of soil, typically covering leaves and other objects buried within it. There may also be some experimentation in the ingredients used in constructing the shrine, as practitioners hope to make the manifested spirit as efficacious as possible.\nCreating and maintaining shrines.\nPlant material is often used in building shrines, with specific leaves being important in the process. Offerings may be given to a tree from which material is harvested. Shrines may also include material from endangered species, including leopard hides, bird eggs, parrot feathers, insects, and elephant ivory. Various foreign initiates, while trying to leave West Africa, have found material intended for their shrines confiscated at airport customs.\nIn a ritual that typically incorporates divination, sacrifices, and leaf baths for both the objects and the practitioner, the spirit is installed within these shrines. It is the objects added, and the rituals performed while adding them, that are deemed to give the spirit its earthly power.\nAn animal will usually be sacrificed to ensure the spirit manifests within the shrine; it is believed that the animal charges the spirit's ac\u025b, which gives the shrine life. For shrines to L\u025bgb\u00e0, for instance, a rooster force-fed red palm oil will often by buried alive at the spot where the shrine is to be built.\nWhen praying at a shrine, it is customary for a worshipper to leave a gift of money for the spirits. There are often also pots around it in which offerings may be placed. Wooden stakes may be impaled into the floor around the shrine as part of an individual's petition.\nIn this material form, the spirits must be maintained, fed, and cared for.\nOfferings and prayers will be directed towards the shrine as a means of revitalising its power. At many shrines, years of dried blood and palm oil have left a patina across the shrine and offering vessels. Some have been maintained for hundreds of years. Shrines may also be adorned and embellished with new objects gifted by devotees. Shrines of Yal\u00f3d\u00e8 for instance may be adorned in brass bracelets, and those of X\u025bbyos\u00f2 with carved wooden axes. Although these objects are not seen as part of the spirit's material body itself, they are thought to carry the deity's divine essence.\nPossession.\nPossession is part of most Vod\u00fan cults. Rosenthal noted, from her ethnographic research in Togo, that females were more often possessed than males. Her research also found children as young as 10 being possessed, although most were over 15. In some groups, priests will rarely go into possession trance as they are responsible for overseeing the broader ceremony.\nThe possessed person is often referred to as the itself. Once the person has received the spirit, they will often be dressed in attire suitable for that possessing entity. The possessed will address other attendees, offering them advice on illnesses, conduct, and making promises. When a person is possessed, they may be cared for by another individual. Those possessed often enjoy the prestige of having hosted their deities.\nOfferings and animal sacrifice.\nThe Tchamba spirits, who are associated with the north, are deemed to favour northern foods like kola nuts and the millet-based drinks \"tchukutu\" and \"tchapkalo\".\nVodun involves animal sacrifices to both ancestors and other spirits, a practice called in Fon. Animal species commonly used for sacrifice include birds, dogs, cats, goats, rams, and bulls. There is ample evidence that in parts of West Africa, human sacrifice was also performed prior to European colonisation, such as in the Dahomey kingdom during the Annual Customs of Dahomey.\nTypically, a message to the spirits will be spoken into the animal's ear and its throat will then be cut. The shrine itself will be covered in the victim's blood. This is done to feed the spirit by nourishing its . Practitioners believe that this act maintains the relationship between humans and the spirits. The meat will be cooked and consumed by the attendees, something believed to bestow blessing from the for the person eating it. The individual who killed the animal will often take ritual precautions to pacify their victim and discourage their spirit from taking vengeance upon them.\nAmong followers in the United States, where butchery skills are far rarer, it is less common for practitioners to eat the meat. Also present in the U.S. are practitioners who have rejected the role of animal sacrifice in Vodun, deeming it barbaric.\nDivination.\nDivination plays an important role in Vod\u00fan. Different groups often utilise different divinatory methods; the priestesses of Mam\u00edw\u00e1t\u00e1 for instance employ mirror gazing, while the priests of Tron use kola nut divination. Among the Fon, divination trays are most often quadrangular in shape.\nIn Vodun, a diviner is called a . A successful diviner is expected to provide solutions to their client's problem, for instance selling them charms, spiritual baths, or ceremonies to alleviate their issue. The fee charged will often vary depending on the client, with the diviner charging a reduced rate for family members and a more expensive rate to either tourists or to middle and upper-class Beninese.\nDiviners will often recommend that their client seeks initiation.\nAcross Vod\u00fan's practitioners, F\u00e1 is often deemed the best form of divination. F\u00e1 is the Fon term; among the Ewe and Mina languages it is called Afa. The practice arose from the Yoruba people, and both the Fon and Ewe/Mina terms derive from the Yoruba word for this divinatory practice, If\u00e1. If\u00e1 is generally acknowledged as having arisen at Ile-Ife in Yorubaland but its practice has spread throughout what is now lower Nigeria and across coastal Benin, Togo, and into Ghana. F\u00e1/Afa involves casting either 16 palm nuts or a divining chain made of 8 half-seed shells, each bearing four sides. The way that these fall can produce one of 256 possible combinations, and each of these is associated with a verse called an \"odu\" that the diviner is expected to know and be able to interpret.\nF\u00e1\\Afa's initiates claim that it is the only system that has sufficient to be consistently accurate. F\u00e1 diviners typically believe that the priests of other spirits do not have the right to read the sacred signs of F\u00e1. A consultation with an initiate is termed a .\nOr\u00f3 and Eg\u00fang\u00fan.\nThe Or\u00f3 and Eg\u00fang\u00fan groups are all-male secret societies. In Beninese society, these groups command respect through fear. In contemporary Benin, it is common for a young man to be initiated into both societies on the same day.\nAccording to lore, Eg\u00fang\u00fan originated among Yoruba people in Oyo but spread westward, now being found throughout Southern Benin and Togo and into Ghana. Various stories are told about how Eg\u00fang\u00fan was brought to Ouidah, for example; in one tale, an enslaved Yoruba man manifested his ancestors as Eg\u00fang\u00fan, and in another a Yoruba man rode into the city on a white horse, followed by his ancestors. Among Fon speakers, the Eg\u00fang\u00fan are referred to as \"Kulito\" (\"the one from the path of death\"), a term designating an ancestor. The Fon typically divide these ancestral spirits into two classifications: the \"agbanon\" (\"the one with the load\"), who are aggressive and engage in spinning and chasing, and the \"weduto\" (\"the one who dances\"), who are non-aggressive and who dance with more poise.\nA culture of secrecy surrounds the Eg\u00fang\u00fan society.\nOnce initiated, a man will be expected to have his own Eg\u00fang\u00fan mask made; these masks are viewed as embodiments of the ancestors. Some people also make these masks, but do not consecrate or use them, for sale on the international art market, but other members of the society disapprove of this practice.\nWhen the Eg\u00fang\u00fan are dancing, they evoke fear and respect; a common belief is that if the dancer's costume touches an onlooker then the latter will die.\nHealing and.\nHealing is a central element of Vod\u00fan.\nThe Fon term can be translated into English as \"charm\"; many Francophone Beninese refer to them as . These are amulets made from zoological and botanical material that is then activated using secret incantations, the latter called (\"b\u01d2's language\"). Families or individuals often keep their recipes for creating a closely guarded secret; there is a widespread belief that if someone else discovers the precise ingredients they will have power over its maker. are often sold; tourists for instance often buy them to aid in attracting love, wealth, or protection while travelling.\n designed for specific functions may have particular names; a is alleged to offer invisibility while a provides the power of translocation.\nAnthropomorphic figurines produced especially in the Fon and Ayizo area of southern Benin are commonly called (\"b\u01d2 cadaver\"). These are often kept within a shrine or house\u2014sometimes concealed in the rafters or under a bed\u2014although in some places have also been situated outside, in public spaces. Although are not intended as representations of , early European travellers who encountered these objects labelled them \"idols\" and \"fetishes\".\nAnother belief in Vod\u00fan is in a universal and invisible power, and one which many practitioners regard as the most powerful spiritual force available. In English, has sometimes been translated as \"witchcraft\". Several such as K\u025bnn\u025bsi, M\u01d0n\u0254na, and Gb\u0103du, are thought to draw their power from .\nMany practitioners draw a distinction between , the destructive and harmful side of this power, and , its protective and benevolent side. People who claim to use this power call themselves and typically insist that they employ to protect their families from . In Vod\u00fan lore, becoming an comes at a cost, for the gives the practitioner a propensity for illness and shortens their life.\nAccording to Vod\u00fan belief, are capable of transforming into animals and flying. To become an , an individual must use to kill someone, commonly a relative. In the tradition, practitioners of send their soul out at night, where they gather with other practitioners to plot how they will devour other people's souls, ultimately killing them. Owls, black cats, and vultures are all regarded as dangerous agents of . Many people fear that their success will attract the envy of malevolent within their family or neighbourhood. The identity of the , many practitioners believe, can be ascertained through divination.\nLandry found that everyone he encountered in Benin believed in to various degrees, whereas many non-Africans arriving for initiation were more sceptical of its existence.\nThe \"vod\u00fan\" Tron has a particular reputation for combatting witchcraft.\nHistory.\nPre-colonial history.\nLandry noted that prior to European colonialism, Vod\u00fan was not identified as \"a monolithic religion\" but was \"a social system made of countless spirit and ancestor cults that existed without religious boundaries.\" Many of these cults were closely interwoven with political structures, sometimes representing something akin to state religions.\nFrom the early 16th century, waves of Adja and related peoples migrated eastward, establishing close ties with each other and forming the basis for the emergent Fon people. The Fon made contact with Portuguese sailors in the 16th century and subsequently also the French, British, Dutch, and Danish in the 17th and 18th centuries. The first document to reveal European interest in Vodun was the \"Doctrina Christiana\" from 1658.\nThe 17th century saw the rise of the Dahomey state in this area of West Africa. This generated religious change; early in the 17th century, Dahomey's king Agaja conquered the Xwed\u00e1 kingdom (in what is now southern Benin) and the Xwed\u00e1's serpent came to be widely adopted by the Fon.\nFrom c.\u20091727 to 1823, Dahomey was a vassal state of Oyo, the Yoruba-led kingdom to the east, with this period seeing considerable religious exchange between the two. Fon peoples adopted the F\u00e1, Or\u00f3, and Eg\u00fang\u00fan cults from the Yoruba. F\u00e1 was for instance present among the Fon by the reign of Dahomey's fifth ruler, Tegbesu (r.\u20091732\u00a0\u2013\u00a01774) and by the reign of Gezo (r.\u20091818\u00a0\u2013\u00a01858) had become well established in the Dahomean royal palace. It was then under Gezo's role that, according to tradition, the Eg\u00fang\u00fan was formally recognised in Dahomey.\nAs a result of the Atlantic slave trade, Ouidah became a major slave embarkation point from the 1670s through to 1860s. Practitioners of Vod\u00fan were among those enslaved and transported to the Americas, where their practices influenced those of developing African diasporic traditions. Coupled with the religion of the Kongo people from Central Africa, the Vod\u00fan religion of the Fon became one of the two main influences on Haitian Vodou. Like the name itself, many of the terms used in this creolised Haitian religion derive from the Fon language; including the names of many deities, which in Haiti are called . In Brazil, the dominant African diasporic religion became Candombl\u00e9 and this was divided into various traditions called \"nacoes\" (\"nations\"). Of these \"nacoes\", the Jeje tradition uses terms borrowed from Ewe and Fon languages, for instance referring to its spirit deities as .\nColonialism and Christianity.\nIn 1890, France invaded Dahomey and dethroned its king, B\u00e9hanzin. In 1894, it became a French protectorate under a puppet king, Agoli-agbo, but in 1900 the French ousted him and abolished the Kingdom of Dahomey. To the west, the area that became Togo became a German protectorate in 1884. Germany maintained control until 1919 when, following their defeat in the First World War, the eastern portion became part of the British Gold Coast and the western part became French territory.\nChristian missionaries were active in this part of West Africa from the 18th century. A German Presbyterian mission had established in the Gold Coast in 1737 before spreading their efforts into the Slave Coast in the 19th century. These Presbyterians attempted to break adherence to Vod\u00fan in the southern and plateau regions. The 19th century also saw conversion efforts launched by Roman Catholic, Anglican, and Methodist missionaries.\nAlthough proving less of an influence than Christianity, Islam also impacted Vod\u00fan, reflected in the occasional use of Islamic script in the construction of Vod\u00fan charms. Around the time of the Second World War, Indian merchants began setting up firms along the West African coast, allowing Hindu elements (especially the use of chromolithographs) to filter into Vod\u00fan.\nPost-colonial history.\nIn 1960, Dahomey became an independent state, as did Togo.\nIn 1972, Mathieu K\u00e9r\u00e9kou seized power of Dahomey in a military coup and subsequently transformed it into a Marxist-Leninist state, the People's Republic of Benin. K\u00e9r\u00e9kou believed that Vod\u00fan wasted time, money, and resources that were better spent on economic development. In 1973 he banned Vod\u00fan ceremonies during the rainy season, with further measures to suppress the religion following throughout the 1970s. Under K\u00e9r\u00e9kou's rule, Vodun priests had to perform new initiations in secret, and the duration of the initiatory process was often shortened from a period of years to one of months, weeks, or days.\nIn 1989, Benin transitioned to democratic governance. After becoming prime minister in 1991, Nic\u00e9phore Soglo lifted many anti-Vod\u00fan laws. The Beninese government planned \"Ouidah '92: The First International Festival of Vodun Arts and Cultures,\" which took place in 1993; among the special guests invited were Pierre Verger and Mama Lola, reflecting attempts to build links across the African diaspora. Also in 1993, it established 10 January as annual \"National Vod\u00fan Day.\" From the 1990s, the Beninese government increasingly made a concerted effort to encourage Vod\u00fan-themed tourism, hoping that many foreigners would come seeking initiation. The early 1990s also saw growing international interest in contemporary Beninese art, much of it influenced by Vod\u00fan.\nBy the late 1960s, some American black nationalists were travelling to West Africa to gain initiation into Vod\u00fan or Yoruba religion. By the late 1980s, some white middle-class Americans began arriving for the same reason.\nSome initiates of Haitian Vodou or Santer\u00eda still go to West Africa for initiation as they believe that it is there that the \"real secrets\" or \"true spiritual power\" can be found; the majority of arrivals seek initiation into F\u00e1. West Africans have also taken the religion to the U.S., where it has interacted and blended with diasporic religions like Vodou and Santer\u00eda. Many West African practitioners have seen the international promotion of Vod\u00fan as a means of healing the world and countering hate and violence, as well as a means of promoting their own ritual abilities to an international audience, which will potentially attract new clients.\nDemographics.\nAbout 17% of the population of Benin, some 1.6 million people, follow Vodun. (This does not count other traditional religions in Benin.) In addition, many of the 41.5% of the population that refer to themselves as \"Christian\" practice a syncretized religion, not dissimilar from Haitian Vodou or Brazilian Candombl\u00e9; indeed, many of them are descended from freed Brazilian slaves who settled on the coast near Ouidah.\nIn Togo, about half the population practices indigenous religions, of which Vodun is by far the largest, with some 2.5 million followers; there may be another million Vodunists among the Ewe of Ghana, as 13% of the total Ghana population of 20 million are Ewe and 38% of Ghanaians practice traditional religion. According to census data, about 14 million people practice traditional religion in Nigeria, most of whom are Yoruba practicing If\u00e1, but no specific breakdown is available.\nAlthough initially present only among West Africans, Vod\u00fan is now followed by people of many races, ethnicities, nationalities, and classes. Foreigners who come for initiation are predominantly from the United States; many of them have already explored African diasporic traditions like Haitian Vodou, Santer\u00eda, or Candombl\u00e9, or alternatively Western esoteric religions such as Wicca. Many of the spiritual tourists who arrived in West Africa had little or no Fon or French, nor an understanding of the region's cultural and social norms. Some of these foreigners seek initiation so that they can initiate others as a source of revenue.\nReception and influence.\nIn the view of some foreign observers, Vod\u00fan is Satanism and demon worship. Although seeing its deities as malevolent demons, many West African Christians still regard Vod\u00fan as being effective and powerful.\nSome Beninese regard Christianity as \"less worrisome and less expensive\" than Vod\u00fan; many individuals converted to Christianity to deal with bewitchment, believing that Jesus could heal and protect them for free, whereas any offering to counter witches would extract a substantial price.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32670", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32670", "title": "Vodun", "text": ""}
{"id": "32671", "revid": "41223635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32671", "title": "Vickers", "text": "British engineering company\nVickers was a British engineering company that existed from 1828 until 1999. It was formed in Sheffield as a steel foundry by Edward Vickers and his father-in-law, and soon became famous for casting church bells. The company went public in 1867, acquired more businesses, and began branching out into military hardware and shipbuilding. \nIn 1911, the company expanded into aircraft manufacture and opened a flying school. They expanded even further into electrical and railway manufacturing, and in 1928 acquired an interest in the Supermarine.\nBeginning in the 1960s, various parts of the company were nationalised, and in 1999 the rest of the company was acquired by Rolls-Royce plc, which sold the defence arm to Alvis plc. The Vickers name lived on in Alvis Vickers, until the latter was acquired by BAE Systems in 2004 to form BAE Systems Land Systems.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nVickers was formed in Sheffield as a steel foundry by Edward Vickers and his father-in-law George Naylor in 1828. Naylor was a partner in the foundry Naylor &amp; Sanderson and Vickers' brother William owned a steel rolling operation. Edward's investments in the railway industry allowed him to gain control of the company, based at Millsands and known as Naylor Vickers and Company. It began by making steel castings and quickly became famous for casting church bells. In 1854 Vickers' sons Thomas (a militia officer known familiarly as 'Colonel Tom') and Albert joined the business and their considerable talents \u2013 Tom Vickers as a metallurgist and Albert as a team-builder and salesman \u2013 were key to its subsequent rapid development. \"Its great architects,\" the historian Clive Trebilcock writes, \"Colonel T.E. (1833\u20131915) and Albert (1838\u20131919) Vickers... provided \"both\" inspired technical leadership... and equally astute commercial direction. Both men were autocrats by temperament, but neither shunned advice or avoided delegation; each, but particularly Albert, had a marked gift for the selection of talented subordinates.\"\nIn 1863 the company moved to a new site in Sheffield on the River Don in Brightside.\nVickers, Sons &amp; Company.\nThe company went public in 1867 as Vickers, Sons &amp; Company and gradually acquired more businesses, branching out into various sectors. In 1868 Vickers began to manufacture marine shafts, in 1872 they began casting marine propellers and in 1882 they set up a forging press. They were also supplying steel forgings for gun barrel manufacturers, including their future main competitor Armstrong, as early as 1870.\nAfter a decline in lucrative tool steel demand in the US during the first half of 1880s, the stockholders logically decided in spring 1887 to diversify into large-scale armaments production and approved \u00a31.5 million (1887, equivalent to \u00a3172.83 million in 2023) capital increase. By the end of 1888 Vickers produced and tested both their first artillery piece and first armour plate. The time could have never been more fortunate, with the Naval Defence Act 1889 significantly increasing the domestic demand and the invention of nickel steel armour rendering obsolete and worthless the investments of established producers into compound armour.\nVickers, Sons &amp; Maxim.\nVickers bought out the Barrow-in-Furness shipbuilder The Barrow Shipbuilding Company in 1897, acquiring its subsidiary the Maxim Nordenfelt Guns and Ammunition Company at the same time, to become Vickers, Sons &amp; Maxim.\nOrdnance and ammunition made during this period, including World War I, was stamped V.S.M.\nThe yard at Barrow became the \"Construction Yard\". With these acquisitions, Vickers could now produce a complete selection of products, from ships and marine fittings to armour plate and a whole suite of ordnance. In 1901 the Royal Navy's first submarine, \"Holland 1\", was launched at the Naval Construction Yard. In 1902 Vickers took a half share in the famous Clyde shipyard John Brown &amp; Company.\nFurther diversification occurred in 1901 with the acquisition of a proposed business which was incorporated as The Wolseley Tool and Motor Car Company and in 1905 the goodwill and patent rights of the Siddeley car. In 1911 a controlling interest was acquired in torpedo manufacturer Whitehead &amp; Company.\nVickers Limited.\nIn 1911 the company name was changed to Vickers Ltd and expanded its operations into aircraft manufacture by the formation of Vickers Ltd (Aviation Department) and a Vickers School of Flying was opened at Brooklands, Surrey on 20 January 1912. In 1919, the British Westinghouse electrical company was taken over as the Metropolitan Vickers Electrical Company; Metrovick. At the same time they came into Metropolitan's railway interests.\nReorganisation.\nA reorganisation during 1926 led to the retention of the rolling stock group: Metropolitan Carriage Wagon and Finance Company and The Metropolitan -Vickers Company and the disposal of: Vickers-Petters Limited, British Lighting and Ignition Company, the Plywood department at Crayford Creek, Canadian Vickers, William Beardmore and Co, and Wolseley Motors.\nMerger with Armstrong Whitworth.\nIn 1927, Vickers merged with Tyneside based engineering company Armstrong Whitworth to become Vickers-Armstrongs. Armstrong Whitworth had developed along similar lines to Vickers, expanding into various military sectors and was notable for their artillery manufacture at Elswick and shipbuilding at a yard at High Walker on the River Tyne. Armstrongs shipbuilding interests became the \"Naval Yard\", those of Vickers on the west coast the \"Naval Construction Yard\". Armstrong Whitworth Aircraft was not absorbed by the new company.\nIn 1928, the Aviation Department became Vickers (Aviation) Ltd and soon after acquired Supermarine, which became the \"Supermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd\". In 1938, both companies were re-organised as Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd, although the former Supermarine and Vickers works continued to brand their products under their former names. 1929 saw the merger of the acquired railway business with those of Cammell Laird to form Metropolitan Cammell Carriage &amp; Wagon.\nNationalisation.\nIn 1960, the aircraft interests were merged with those of the Bristol, English Electric and Hunting Aircraft to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC). This was owned by Vickers, English Electric and Bristol (holding 40%, 40% and 20% respectively). BAC in turn owned 70% of Hunting. The Supermarine operation was closed in 1963 and the Vickers name for aircraft was dropped in 1965. Under the terms of the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act BAC was nationalised in 1977 to become part of British Aerospace, which exists today in the guise of BAE Systems.\nThe Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act also led to the nationalisation of Vickers' shipbuilding division as part of British Shipbuilders. These had been renamed Vickers Armstrong Shipbuilders in 1955, changing again to Vickers Limited Shipbuilding Group in 1968. This division was privatised as Vickers Shipbuilding &amp; Engineering in 1986, later part of GEC's Marconi Marine. It remains in operation to this day as BAE Systems Submarines.\nVickers plc.\nWith their steelworking operations also nationalised into British Steel Corporation the remnants of Vickers became Vickers plc. In 1986, Vickers acquired the armaments manufacturer Royal Ordnance Factory, Leeds, which became Vickers Defence Systems. Other acquisitions included automotive engineers Cosworth in 1990, waterjet manufacturer Kamewa in 1986 and Norwegian marine propulsion and engineering company Ulstein in 1998. 1998 also saw the sale of Rolls-Royce Motors and Cosworth to Volkswagen Group for \u00a3430\u00a0million, beating out BMW's offer of \u00a3340\u00a0million.\nCurrent status of Vickers.\nIn 1927, Vickers merged with the Tyneside-based engineering firm Armstrong Whitworth to form Vickers-Armstrongs. Armstrong Whitworth developed in a similar way to Vickers, expanding into various military fields and became famous for its artillery construction at Elswick and shipbuilding at its yard at High Walker upon Tyne.\nIn 1928, the Aviation Department changed its name to Vickers (Aviation) Ltd and shortly afterwards acquired Supermarine, which became 'Supermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd'.\nIn 1938, the two companies were reorganised as Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd, although the former Supermarine and Vickers works continued to brand their products under their former names. In 1929, the acquired railway business was merged with that of Cammell Laird to form Metropolitan Cammell Carriage &amp; Wagon.\n1.6 Fifth change of the company\nAfter the Second World War Vickers-Armstrongs manufactured commercial aircraft. In 1959 it introduced the VC10 jet aircraft and in the same year the government forced a merger with Bristol Aeroplane Company, English Electric and Hunting Aircraft to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC).\nAlongside the achievements of BAC, the Hawker Siddeley Group were also experiencing success with the likes of the Hawker Harrier 'Jump Jet' and Hawker Siddeley Trident passenger aircraft. The two companies competed side by side for contracts throughout the 1960s and early 1970s, until the British Government expressed a desire for the two entities to merge. Finally, on 29 April 1977, the two companies were finally nationalised and a new company, British Aerospace Plc, emerged.\nThe rail business acquired by Vickers was sold to Alstom in 1989.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32672", "revid": "3461395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32672", "title": "Velocity of light", "text": ""}
{"id": "32673", "revid": "51001721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32673", "title": "Villard de Honnecourt", "text": "13th-century artist from Picardy, France\nVillard de Honnecourt (\"Wilars dehonecort\", \"Vilars de Honecourt\") was a 13th-century artist from Picardy in northern France. He is known to history only through a surviving portfolio or \"sketchbook\" containing about 250 drawings and designs of a wide variety of subjects.\nLife.\nNothing is known of Villard apart from what can be gleaned from his surviving \"sketchbook.\" Based on the large number of architectural designs in the portfolio, it was traditionally thought that Villard was a successful, professional, itinerant architect and engineer. This view is sometimes contested today, as there is no evidence of him ever working as an architect and the drawings contain some inaccuracies. However, Honnecourt compiled a manual that gave precise instructions for executing specific objects with explanatory drawings. In his writings he fused principles passed on from ancient geometry, medieval studio techniques, and contemporary practices. The author includes sections on technical procedures, mechanical devices, suggestions for making human and animal figures, and notes on the buildings and monuments he had seen. And his writings offer insights into the variety of interests and work of the 13th-century master mason in addition to providing an explanation for the spread of Gothic architecture in Europe. He traveled to some of the major ecclesiastical building sites of his day to record details of these buildings. His drawing of one of the west facade towers of Laon Cathedral and those of radiating chapels and a main vessel bay, interior and exterior, of Rheims Cathedral are of particular interest.\nVillard tells us, with pride, that he had been in many lands (\"Jai este en m[u]lt de tieres\") and that he made a trip to Hungary where he remained many days (\"maint ior\"), but he does not say why he went there or who sent him. It has recently been proposed that he may have been a lay agent or representative of the cathedral chapter of Cambrai Cathedral to obtain a relic of St. Elizabeth of Hungary who had made a donation to the cathedral chapter and to whom the chapter dedicated one of the radiating chapels in their new chevet. He also claimed to have made many of his drawings \"from life\" (\"al vif\"), an activity more usually associated with much later artists of the Renaissance.\nSketchbook.\nThe \"sketchbook\" or \"manual\" of Villard de Honnecourt (more correctly, an album or portfolio) dates to about c.1225-1235. It was discovered in the mid-19th century and is presently housed in the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France (BnF), Paris, under the shelfmark MS Fr 19093. It consists of 33 parchment sheets measuring on average 235x155 mm, or 9.25 x 6.1 inches. The manuscript is not complete and its original extent cannot be determined. Because the drawings and captions are oriented in many different directions, the album appears to have been assembled in an ad hoc fashion, as if the individual sheets were not originally intended to be bound together into book form. It is unclear whether it was Villard himself or a later party who assembled and bound the leaves into a book.\nThe album contains about 250 drawings. These include architectural designs (plans, elevations, and details, often of identifiable buildings), a great variety of human and animal subjects, ensembles of religious and secular figures perhaps derived from or intended as sculptural groups, ecclesiastical objects, mechanical devices (including a perpetual-motion machine), engineering constructions such as lifting devices and a water-driven saw, a number of automata, designs for war engines such as a trebuchet, and many other subjects. Many drawings are accompanied by annotations and labels.\nThe original purpose of the album is debatable. Originally it was thought to have served as a kind of training manual for practicing architects. This is rejected by some current researchers who think Villard's drawings seem ill-suited to such a purpose, though it can also be argued that the drawings are deliberately simplistic and abstracted to serve as coded mnemonic devices for architects who were initiated into the relevant oral tradition.\nFacsimiles.\nSeveral printed facsimiles of the album have appeared.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32674", "revid": "1300024773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32674", "title": "Vertical interval timecode", "text": "Type of timecode in a video signal\nVertical Interval Timecode (VITC, pronounced \"vitsee\") is a form of SMPTE timecode encoded on one scan line in a video signal. These lines are typically inserted into the vertical blanking interval of the video signal.\nWith one exception, VITC contains the same payload as SMPTE linear timecode (LTC), embedded in a new frame structure with extra synchronization bits and an error-detection checksum. The exception is that VITC is encoded twice per interlaced video frame, once in each field, and one additional bit (the \"field flag\") is used to distinguish the two fields.\nA video frame may contain more than one VITC code if necessary, recorded on different lines. This is often used in production, where different entities may want to encode different sets of time-code metadata on the same tape.\nAs a practical matter, VITC can be more 'frame-accurate' than LTC, particularly at very slow tape speeds on analog formats. LTC readers can lose track of code at slow jog speeds whereas VITC can be read frame-by-frame if need be. Conversely, at high speeds (FF/rew.), the VITC is often unreadable due to image distortions, so the LTC is often used instead. Some VCRs have an auto selection between the two formats to provide the highest accuracy.\nVITC is 90 bits long: 32 bits of time code, 32 bits of user data, 18 synchronization bits, and 8 bits of checksum. It is transmitted using non-return-to-zero encoding at a bit rate of 115 times the line rate. (The unused 25 bit times are to leave room for the horizontal blanking interval.)\nThe exact nature of the color frame sequence depends on the video standard being used. In the case of the three main composite video standards, PAL video has an 8-field (4 frame) color frame sequence, and NTSC and SECAM both have 4-field (2 frame) color frame sequences.\nPreserving the color framing sequence of video across edits and between channels in video effects was an important issue in early analog composite videotape editing systems, as cuts between different color sequences would cause jumps in subcarrier phase, and mixing two signals of different field dominance would result in color artifacts on the part of the signal that was not in sync with the output color frame sequence.\nTo help prevent these problems, SMPTE time code contains a color framing bit, which can be used to indicate that the video material the timecode refers to follows a standard convention regarding the synchronization of video time code and the color framing sequence. If the color framing bit was set in both types of material, the editing system could then always ensure that color framing was preserved by constraining edit decisions between input sources to keep the correct relationship between the timecode sequences, and hence the color framing sequences.\nSee also.\nRelated technologies and standards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32676", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32676", "title": "Vandalism", "text": "Deliberate damage or defacement of an object or structure\nVandalism is the action involving deliberate destruction of or damage to public or private property.\nThe term includes property damage, such as graffiti and defacement directed towards any property without permission of the owner. The term finds its roots in an Enlightenment view that the Germanic Vandals were a uniquely destructive people, as they sacked Rome in 455 AD.\nEtymology.\nThe Vandals, an ancient Germanic people, are associated with senseless destruction as a result of their sack of Rome under King Genseric in 455. During the Enlightenment, Rome was idealized, while the Goths and Vandals were blamed for its destruction. The Vandals may not have been any more destructive than other invaders of ancient times, but they did inspire English poet John Dryden to write, \"Till Goths, and Vandals, a rude Northern race, Did all the matchless Monuments deface\" (1694). However, the Vandals did intentionally damage statues, which may be why their name is associated with the vandalism of art. The term \"Vandalisme\" was coined in 1794 by Henri Gr\u00e9goire, bishop of Blois, to describe the destruction of artwork following the French Revolution. The term was quickly adopted across Europe. This new use of the term was important in colouring the perception of the Vandals from later Late Antiquity, popularizing the pre-existing idea that they were a barbaric group with a taste for destruction.\nHistorically, vandalism has been justified by painter Gustave Courbet as destruction of monuments symbolizing \"war and conquest\". Therefore, it is often done as an expression of contempt, creativity, or both. Courbet's attempt, during the 1871 Paris Commune, to dismantle the Vend\u00f4me column, a symbol of the past Napoleon III authoritarian Empire, was one of the most celebrated events of vandalism. Nietzsche himself would meditate after the Commune on the \"fight against culture\", taking as example the intentional burning of the Tuileries Palace on 23 May 1871. \"The criminal fight against culture is only the reverse side of a criminal culture\" wrote Klossowski after quoting Nietzsche.\nIn a proposal to the International Conference for Unification of Criminal Law held in Madrid in 1933, Raphael Lemkin envisaged the creation of two new international crimes (delicta juris gentium): the crime of barbarity, consisting in the extermination of racial, religious, or social collectivities, and the crime of vandalism, consisting in the destruction of cultural and artistic works of these groups. The proposal was not accepted. A figurative accusation of vandalism was applied towards the theology of Marcion of Sinope.\nAs a crime.\nPrivate citizens commit vandalism when they willfully damage or deface the property of others or the commons. Some vandalism may qualify as culture jamming or sniggling: it is thought by some to be artistic in nature even though carried out illegally or without the property owner's permission. Examples include at least some graffiti art, billboard \"liberation\", and possibly crop circles. Criminal vandalism takes many forms. Graffiti on public property is common in many inner cities as part of a gang culture, where they might be used as territorial markers.\nMore serious forms of vandalism that may take place during public unrest such as rioting can involve the willful destruction of public and private property. Vandalism per se is sometimes considered one of the less serious common crimes, but it can become quite serious and distressing when committed extensively, violently, or as an expression of hatred and intimidation.\nExamples.\nExamples of vandalism include salting lawns, cutting trees without permission, egg throwing, breaking windows, arson, spraying paint on others' properties, tagging, placing glue into locks, tire slashing, \"keying\" (scratching) paint, ransacking a property, flooding a house by clogging a sink and leaving the water running, and pulling up plants from the roots without permission.\nPolitical.\nIn elections, opposing candidates' supporters may engage in \"political vandalism\"\u2060\u2014the act of defacing opponents' political posters, bumper stickers, billboards, and other street marketing material. Although the nature of this material is temporary, its effect can be long-lasting as it may reflect both negatively and positively on the candidate whose material is being vandalized as well as on the presumed candidate whose supporters are engaging in the vandalism.\nIn addition, activists may use the tactic of property destruction as means of protest, e.g. by smashing the windows of banks, shops and government institutions and setting fire to cars. This often takes place during riots but can also happen as a stand-alone event, e.g. by animal rights activists destroying property owned by farmers, hunters, biotech companies, and research facilities and setting free animals (which is sometimes referred to as eco-terrorism by opponents). Vandalism is also a common tactic of black blocs.\nMotives.\nActions of this kind can be ascribed to anger or envy, or to spontaneous, opportunistic behaviour, possibly for peer acceptance or bravado in gang cultures, or disgruntlement with the target (victim) person or society. Another common motive is to seek attention, and for personal gain. Opportunistic vandalism of this nature may also be filmed, the mentality of which can be akin to happy slapping. The large-scale prevalence of gang graffiti in some inner cities has almost made it acceptable to the societies based there, so much so that it may go unnoticed, or not be removed, possibly because it may be a fruitless endeavour, to be graffitied on once again. Greed can motivate vandalism as can some political ideologies, wish to draw attention to problems, frustration, even playfulness. Youngsters, the most common vandals, frequently experience low status and boredom. Vandalism enables powerless people to attack those above them, take control and frighten others. Unpunished vandalism can provide relief which reinforces the behaviour. Vandalism by one person can lead to imitation. Teenage boys and men in their 20s are most likely to vandalize, but older adults and females are also known to sometimes vandalize, with young children occasionally vandalizing, but in a much smaller form, such as making small crayon drawings on walls.\nCriminological research into vandalism has found that it serves many purposes for those who engage in it and stems from a variety of motives. Sociologist Stanley Cohen describes seven different types of vandalism:\nReaction of authorities.\nIn view of its incivility, punishment for vandalism can be particularly severe in some countries. In Singapore, for example, a person who attempts to cause or commits an act of vandalism may be liable to imprisonment for up to three years and may also be punished with caning. Vandalism in the UK is construed as an environmental crime and may be punished with an ASBO (Anti-Social Behaviour Order).\nIn the 1990s, former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani cracked down on \"quality of life crimes\", including graffiti. NY Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern described graffiti as \"a metaphor for urban decay perhaps best shown in 'A Clockwork Orange'\" adding that \"New York City will not be like that\".\nCybervandalism.\nCybervandalism is vandalism on the internet, most commonly website defacement. Certain kinds of malware that have no financial intent may also be considered cybervandalism.\nVandalism of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia involves the addition of humorous, nonsensical, offensive or false content to articles.\nVandalism on web maps has been called \"cartographic vandalism\".\nDefacement.\nDefacement is a type of vandalism that involves damaging the appearance or surface of something. The object of damage may be architecture, books, paintings, sculpture, or other forms of art.\nExamples of defacement include:\nIconoclasm led to the defacement of many religious artworks.\nAs art.\nThough vandalism in itself is illegal, it is often also an integral part of modern popular culture. French painter Gustave Courbet's attempt to disassemble the Vend\u00f4me column during the 1871 Paris Commune was probably one of the first artistic acts of vandalism, celebrated at least since Dada performances during World War I. The Vend\u00f4me column was considered a symbol of the recently deposed Second Empire of Napoleon III, and dismantled as such.\nAfter the burning of the Tuileries Palace on 23 May 1871, Philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche himself meditated about the \"fight against culture\", wondering what could justify culture if it were to be destroyed in such a \"senseless\" manner (the arguments are: culture is justified by works of art and scientific achievements; exploitation is necessary to those achievements, leading to the creation of exploited people who then fight against culture. In this case, culture cannot be legitimised by art achievements, and Nietzsche writes: \"I {also} know what it means: fighting against culture\". After quoting him, Klossowski writes: \"The criminal fight against culture is only the reverse side of a criminal culture\".\nAs destruction of monument, vandalism can only have sense in a culture respecting history, archeology: Nietzsche spoke of \"monumental history\". As destruction of monumental history, vandalism was assured a long life (as Herostratus proved): Performance art could make such a claim, as well as Hakim Bey's \"poetic terrorism\" or \"Destroy 2000 Years of Culture\" from Atari Teenage Riot. Gustave Courbet's declaration stated:\n\"Attendu que la colonne Vend\u00f4me est un monument d\u00e9nu\u00e9 de toute valeur artistique, tendant \u00e0 perp\u00e9tuer par son expression les id\u00e9es de guerre et de conqu\u00eate qui \u00e9taient dans la dynastie imp\u00e9riale, mais que r\u00e9prouve le sentiment d'une nation r\u00e9publicaine, [le citoyen Courbet] \u00e9met le v\u0153u que le gouvernement de la D\u00e9fense nationale veuille bien l'autoriser \u00e0 d\u00e9boulonner cette colonne.\"\nHence, painter Courbet justified the dismantlement of the Vend\u00f4me column on political grounds, downgrading its artistic value. Vandalism poses the problem of the value of art compared to life's hardships: Courbet thought that the political values transmitted by this work of art neutralized its artistic value. His project was not followed; however, on 12 April 1871, the Commune voted to dismantle the imperial symbol, and the column was taken down on 8 May. After the assault on the Paris Commune by Adolphe Thiers, Gustave Courbet was condemned to pay part of the expenses.\nIn 1974, Norman Mailer glorified the art of vandalism in his essay \"The Faith of Graffiti\", which likened tagging in New York City to the work of Giotto and Rauschenberg. New York Authorities responded by coating subway walls with Teflon paint, jailing taggers and requiring hardware stores to keep spray paint under lock and key.\nTags, designs, and styles of writing are commonplace on clothing, and are an influence on many of the corporate logos. Many skateparks and similar youth-oriented venues are decorated with commissioned graffiti-style artwork, and in many others patrons are welcome to leave their own. There is still, however, a fine line between vandalism as an artform, as a political statement, and as a crime. Bristol-born guerrilla artist Banksy's claim is that official vandalism is far worse than that perpetrated by individuals, and that he is decorating buildings of no architectural merit.\nGraphic design.\nDefacing could also be one of the techniques that many graphic designers use, by applying their own hand writing on a graphic itself. Sometimes the use of this technique might be mistaken as vandalism to the original work, as exemplified by the work of Stefan Sagmeister, including his Lou Reed CD cover. A unique use of the defacement technique is the CD cover for A.P.C. by Jean Touitou, where the designer wrote the title, volume number, and date with her own hand writing on the pre-print blank CD. Creative vandalism of this sort is not limited to writing and sketching. For example, the spraying on the KPIST album Golden coat for MNW Records by Sweden graphic uses gold spray, which may be considered an act of vandalism, but the customer may also appreciate the unicity of each cover that had been sprayed gold in different ways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32678", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32678", "title": "Vocoder", "text": "Voice encryption, transformation, and synthesis device\nA vocoder (, a portmanteau of \"vo\"ice and en\"coder\") is a category of speech coding that analyzes and synthesizes the human voice signal for audio data compression, multiplexing, voice encryption or voice transformation.\nThe vocoder was invented in 1938 by Homer Dudley at Bell Labs as a means of synthesizing human speech. This work was developed into the channel vocoder which was used as a voice codec for telecommunications for speech coding to conserve bandwidth in transmission.\nBy encrypting the control signals, voice transmission can be secured against interception. Its primary use in this fashion is for secure radio communication. The advantage of this method of encryption is that none of the original signal is sent, only envelopes of the bandpass filters. The receiving unit needs to be set up in the same filter configuration to re-synthesize a version of the original signal spectrum.\nThe vocoder has also been used extensively as an electronic musical instrument. The decoder portion of the vocoder, called a voder, can be used independently for speech synthesis.\nTheory.\nThe human voice consists of sounds generated by the periodic opening and closing of the glottis by the vocal cords, which produces an acoustic waveform with many harmonics. This initial sound is then filtered by movements in the nose, mouth and throat (a complicated resonant piping system known as the vocal tract) to produce fluctuations in harmonic content (formants) in a controlled way, creating the wide variety of sounds used in speech. There is another set of sounds, known as the unvoiced and plosive sounds, which are created or modified by a variety of sound-generating disruptions of airflow occurring in the vocal tract.\nThe vocoder analyzes speech by measuring how its spectral energy distribution characteristics fluctuate across time. This analysis results in a set of temporally parallel envelope signals, each representing the individual frequency band amplitudes of the user's speech. Put another way, the voice signal is divided into a number of frequency bands (the larger this number, the more accurate the analysis) and the level of signal present at each frequency band, occurring simultaneously, is measured by an envelope follower, representing the spectral energy distribution across time. This set of envelope amplitude signals is called the \"modulator\". \nTo recreate speech, the vocoder reverses the analysis process, variably filtering an initial broadband noise (referred to alternately as the \"source\" or \"carrier\"), by passing it through a set of band-pass filters, whose individual envelope amplitude levels are controlled, in real time, by the set of analyzed envelope amplitude signals from the modulator.\nThe digital encoding process involves a periodic analysis of each of the modulator's multiband set of filter envelope amplitudes. This analysis results in a set of digital pulse code modulation stream readings. Then the pulse code modulation stream outputs of each band are transmitted to a decoder. The decoder applies the pulse code modulations as control signals to the corresponding amplifiers of the output filter channels.\nInformation about the fundamental frequency of the initial voice signal (as distinct from its spectral characteristic) is discarded; it was not important to preserve this for the vocoder's original use as an encryption aid. It is this dehumanizing aspect of the vocoding process that has made it useful in creating special voice effects in popular music and audio entertainment.\nInstead of a point-by-point recreation of the waveform, the vocoder process sends only the parameters of the vocal model over the communication link. Since the parameters change slowly compared to the original speech waveform, the bandwidth required to transmit speech can be reduced. This allows more speech channels to utilize a given communication channel, such as a radio channel or a submarine cable.\nAnalog vocoders typically analyze an incoming signal by splitting the signal into multiple tuned frequency bands or ranges. To reconstruct the signal, a carrier signal is sent through a series of these tuned band-pass filters. In the example of a typical robot voice the carrier is noise or a sawtooth waveform. There are usually between 8 and 20 bands.\nThe amplitude of the modulator for each of the individual analysis bands generates a voltage that is used to control amplifiers for each of the corresponding carrier bands. The result is that frequency components of the modulating signal are mapped onto the carrier signal as discrete amplitude changes in each of the frequency bands.\nOften there is an unvoiced band or sibilance channel. This is for frequencies that are outside the analysis bands for typical speech but are still important in speech. Examples are words that start with the letters \"s\", \"f\", \"ch\" or any other sibilant sound. Using this band produces recognizable speech, although somewhat mechanical sounding. Vocoders often include a second system for generating unvoiced sounds, using a noise generator instead of the fundamental frequency. This is mixed with the carrier output to increase clarity.\nIn the channel vocoder algorithm, among the two components of an analytic signal, considering only the amplitude component and simply ignoring the phase component tends to result in an unclear voice; on methods for rectifying this, see phase vocoder.\nHistory.\nThe development of a vocoder was started in 1928 by Bell Labs engineer Homer Dudley, who was granted patents for it on March 21, 1939, and Nov 16, 1937.\nTo demonstrate the speech synthesis ability of its decoder section, the voder (voice operating demonstrator) was introduced to the public at the AT&amp;T building at the 1939\u20131940 New York World's Fair. The voder consisted of an electronic oscillator\u00a0\u2013 a sound source of pitched tone\u00a0\u2013 and a noise generator for hiss, 10 bands of resonator filters, each controlled by a variable-gain amplifier as a vocal tract, and the manual controllers including a set of pressure-sensitive keys for filter control, and a foot pedal for pitch control of tone. The filters controlled by keys convert the tone and the hiss into vowels, consonants, and inflections. This was a complex machine to operate, but a skilled operator could produce recognizable speech.\nDudley's vocoder was used in the SIGSALY system, which was built by Bell Labs engineers in 1943. SIGSALY was used for encrypted voice communications during World War\u00a0II. The KO-6 voice coder was released in 1949 in limited quantities; it was a close approximation to the SIGSALY at 1200 bit/s. In 1953, KY-9 THESEUS 1650 bit/s voice coder used solid-state logic to reduce the weight to from SIGSALY's , and in 1961 the HY-2 voice coder, a 16-channel 2400 bit/s system, weighed and was the last implementation of a channel vocoder in a secure speech system.\nLater work in this field has since used digital speech coding. The most widely used speech coding technique is linear predictive coding (LPC). Another speech coding technique, adaptive differential pulse-code modulation (ADPCM), was developed by P.\u00a0Cummiskey, Nikil S.\u00a0Jayant and James L.\u00a0Flanagan at Bell Labs in 1973.\nModern implementations.\nEven with the need to record several frequencies and additional unvoiced sounds, the compression of vocoder systems is impressive. Standard speech-recording systems capture frequencies from about 500 to 3,400\u00a0Hz, where most of the frequencies used in speech lie, typically using a sampling rate of 8\u00a0kHz (slightly greater than the Nyquist rate). The sampling resolution is typically 8 or more bits per sample, for a data rate in the range of 64 kbit/s, but a good vocoder can provide a reasonably good simulation of voice with as little as 5 kbit/s of data.\n\"Toll quality\" voice coders, such as ITU G.729, are used in many telephone networks. G.729 in particular has a final data rate of 8 kbit/s with superb voice quality. G.723 achieves slightly worse quality at data rates of 5.3 and 6.4 kbit/s. Many voice vocoder systems use lower data rates, but below 5 kbit/s voice quality begins to drop rapidly.\nSeveral vocoder systems are used in NSA encryption systems:\nModern vocoders that are used in communication equipment and in voice storage devices today are based on the following algorithms:\nVocoders are also currently used in psychophysics, linguistics, computational neuroscience and cochlear implant research.\nLinear prediction-based.\nSince the late 1970s, most non-musical vocoders have been implemented using linear prediction, whereby the target signal's spectral envelope (formant) is estimated by an all-pole IIR filter. In linear prediction coding, the all-pole filter replaces the bandpass filter bank of its predecessor and is used at the encoder to \"whiten\" the signal (i.e., flatten the spectrum) and again at the decoder to re-apply the spectral shape of the target speech signal.\nOne advantage of this type of filtering is that the location of the linear predictor's spectral peaks is entirely determined by the target signal and can be as precise as allowed by the time period to be filtered. This is in contrast with vocoders realized using fixed-width filter banks, where the location of spectral peaks is constrained by the available fixed frequency bands. LP filtering also has disadvantages in that signals with a large number of constituent frequencies may exceed the number of frequencies that can be represented by the linear prediction filter. This restriction is the primary reason that LP coding is almost always used in tandem with other methods in high-compression voice coders.\nWaveform-interpolative.\nWaveform-interpolative (WI) vocoder was developed at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories around 1995 by W.B. Kleijn, and subsequently, a low-complexity version was developed by AT&amp;T for the DoD secure vocoder competition. Notable enhancements to the WI coder were made at the University of California, Santa Barbara. AT&amp;T holds the core patents related to WI and other institutes hold additional patents.\nArtistic effects.\nUses in music.\nFor musical applications, a source of musical sounds is used as the carrier, instead of extracting the fundamental frequency. For instance, one could use the sound of a synthesizer as the input to the filter bank, a technique that became popular in the 1970s.\nHistory.\nWerner Meyer-Eppler, a German scientist with a special interest in electronic voice synthesis, published a thesis in 1948 on electronic music and speech synthesis from the viewpoint of sound synthesis. Later he was instrumental in the founding of the Studio for Electronic Music of WDR in Cologne, in 1951.\nOne of the first attempts to use a vocoder in creating music was the \"Siemens Synthesizer\" at the Siemens Studio for Electronic Music, developed between 1956 and 1959.\nIn 1968, Robert Moog developed one of the first solid-state musical vocoders for the electronic music studio of the University at Buffalo.\nIn 1968, Bruce Haack built a prototype vocoder, named \"Farad\" after Michael Faraday. It was first featured on \"The Electronic Record For Children\" released in 1969 and then on his rock album \"The Electric Lucifer\" released in 1970.\nVocoder effects have been used by musicians in both electronic music and as a special effect, along with more traditional instruments. In 1969, Sly and the Family Stone used it in \"Sex Machine\", a song on the album \"Stand!\". Other artists who have made vocoders an essential part of their music, overall or during an extended phase. Examples include the German synthpop group Kraftwerk, the Japanese new wave group Polysics, Stevie Wonder (\"Send One Your Love\", \"A Seed's a Star\") and jazz/fusion keyboardist Herbie Hancock during his late 1970s period. In 1982 Neil Young used a Sennheiser Vocoder VSM201 on six of the nine tracks on \"Trans\". The chorus and bridge of Michael Jackson's \"P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)\". features a vocoder (\"Pretty young thing/You make me sing\"), courtesy of session musician Michael Boddicker.\nAmong the most consistent users of the vocoder in emulating the human voice are Daft Punk, who have used this instrument from their first album \"Homework\" (1997) to their latest work \"Random Access Memories\" (2013) and consider the convergence of technological and human voice \"the identity of their musical project\". For instance, the lyrics of \"Around the World\" (1997) are integrally vocoder-processed, \"Get Lucky\" (2013) features a mix of natural and processed human voices, and \"Instant Crush\" (2013) features Julian Casablancas singing into a vocoder.\nVoice effects in other arts.\nRobot voices became a recurring element in popular music during the 20th century. Apart from vocoders, several other methods of producing variations on this effect include: the Sonovox, Talk box, Auto-Tune, linear prediction vocoders, speech synthesis, ring modulation and comb filter.\nVocoders are used in television production, filmmaking and games, usually for robots or talking computers. The robot voices of the Cylons in \"Battlestar Galactica\" were created with an EMS Vocoder 2000. The 1980 version of the \"Doctor Who\" theme, as arranged and recorded by Peter Howell, has a section of the main melody generated by a Roland SVC-350 vocoder. A similar Roland VP-330 vocoder was used to create the voice of Soundwave, a character from the \"Transformers\" series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32679", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32679", "title": "Vlaardingen", "text": "Vlaardingen () is a large town and municipality in South Holland in the Netherlands. It is located on the north bank of the Nieuwe Maas river at the confluence with the Oude Maas. The municipality administers an area of , of which is land, with residents in .\nGeography.\nThe town is divided into a northern part (locally known as the \"Holy\") and a southern part by the A20 motorway. On the east the town is separated from Schiedam by the A4 motorway. Other places nearby are the small town Maassluis to the west, the village Schipluiden and the city Delft to the north, the town Schiedam and city Rotterdam to the east and the town of Spijkenisse in the south-west, on the other side of the river Nieuwe Maas. The A20 connects Rotterdam to the village Hook of Holland. The (the tunnel that runs under the Nieuwe Waterweg) connects the A20 to the A15.\nThe centre of the town is on the west side of the old harbour, which was originally a stream ('De Vlaarding') from the peat lands north and east of the town, running to the Meuse estuary.\nHistory.\nThe area around Vlaardingen was already settled by about 2900 to 2600 BC. In 1990, a skeleton dated around 1300 BC was dug up in the edge of Vlaardingen. Some human nuclear DNA was identified, the oldest found anywhere in the Netherlands. In Roman times a stronghold or vicus named \"Flenio\" may have been on the site of modern Vlaardingen. Between roughly 250 AD and 700 AD the region seems to have been uninhabited, like much of the west of the Netherlands. In 726 or 727 the area is again mentioned as \"In Pagio Marsum\", where a small church was established, around which Vlaardingen formed. The church is mentioned on a list of churches Willibrord, the \"Apostle to the Frisians\", inhered to the Abbey of Echternach.\nIn 1018, Vlaardingen was a stronghold of Dirk III, who levied an illegal toll on ships on the Meuse river. An army sent by German Emperor Henry II to stop this practice was defeated by Dirk III in the (First) Battle of Vlaardingen. In 1047, his successor Dirk IV repelled another such attack (Second Battle of Vlaardingen). The first of these battles was commemorated in 2018 by a historical reenactment\nA flood disaster of December 21, 1163 (Saint Thomas Flood), ended the growth of Vlaardingen. The Counts of Holland moved away and its development stagnated.\nIn 1273, Vlaardingen was granted town privileges by Floris V, Count of Holland. Older town privileges are possible, but not provable.\nIn 1574, during the Eighty Years War of Dutch independence, a group of Watergeuzen burnt down Vlaardingen as commanded by William of Orange to prevent the Spanish from capturing the town. Vlaardingen later became a shipbuilding area and a significant harbour for the herring fishing industry. The fishing boats (originally \"haringbuizen\", later also \"sloepen\" and \"loggers\") ceased to use Vlaardingen in the years after World War II.\nIn 1855, the former municipality of Zouteveen was merged into the municipality Vlaardingerambacht which in turn was merged with Vlaardingen in 1941 during the German occupation of the Netherlands.\nBecause of industrialization in and close to Vlaardingen, the town suffered from heavy air pollution and, sometimes, pathogenic smog during the 1970s. One day, a high school had to be closed because of the smog. Many environmental groups arose in and around Vlaardingen as it was seen as one of the most polluted cities of the country.\nVlaardingen consists of eight districts/neighbourhoods:\nPolitics.\nSeats in the town council after the municipal elections in 2022:\nThe mayor is Bert Wijbenga (VVD).\nEconomy.\nA Unilever research centre is located in Vlaardingen (located next to the former Sunlight factory, later called Lever Faberge Sourcing Unit Vlaardingen). There are still some ship repair business(es) in Eastern Vlaardingen beside the Nieuwe Maas River. The Vulcaanhaven was for many years the largest privately owned artificial harbour in the world. The last major herring factory, Warmelo &amp; Van Der Drift, left Vlaardingen in the middle of 2012 to relocate to Katwijk aan Zee. There are still some ferry terminals (DFDS Seaways, sailing to Felixstowe and Immingham and P&amp;O Ferries sailing to Hull).\nAttractions.\nMonuments.\nHistorical buildings in the town include the \"Grote Kerk\" (Big Church), the \"Waag\" (Weighing Bridge) next to the church and the old town hall (used for weddings), all on the \"Markt\", the former marketplace, the \"Visbank\" (Fish Auction) at the harbour and the \"Oude Lijnbaan\" (Old Ropewalk, where ropes were made). The \"Grote Kerk\" was probably established between 1156 and 1164 and has been expanded, damaged and rebuilt. To the north of the old harbour is the old Aeolus windmill, which operates and sells ground cereals. The harbour is a marina and open-air museum with old ships. At the harbour is the \"Museum Vlaardingen\" (before: \" Visserijmuseum\" and the \"Visserij en Vlaardings Museum\"), a museum dedicated to commercial sea fishing and lore. A war memorial to the crew of a Wellington bomber from No. 142 Squadron RAF killed when it was shot down over Vlaardingen in March 1942 has been erected in \"Wijkpark Holy-Noord\" in June 2012.\nOn \"Emaus Cemetery\" in Vlaardinger Ambacht six members of the resistance group \"Geuzen\" are buried. They were executed in March 1941. Nine adjacent headstones are symbolic for nine other members of the \"Geuzen\" who were also executed and buried elsewhere.\nEvents.\nThe \"Vlaardings Loggerfestival\" (\"Logger\" is a traditional ship used for herring fishery, the customary English name is \"lugger\") is held on the first Saturday of June. The festival used to be called \"Haring en Bierfeest\" (translation: herring and beer festival), but in 2003 the mayor decided to rename it. In 2015, the name \"Haring en Bierfeest\" reappeared again.\nSince 1987, the \"Geuzenpenning\" is an award that is yearly bestowed by a local foundation in cooperation with the town's municipality to human rights activists from all over the world.\nNotable residents.\nPeople who are born in or (have) lived in Vlaardingen:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "32680", "revid": "1318475623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32680", "title": "Vilfredo Pareto", "text": "Italian polymath (1848\u20131923)\nVilfredo Federico Damaso Pareto (; ; born Wilfried Fritz Pareto; 15 July 1848 \u2013 19 August 1923) was an Italian polymath, whose areas of interest included sociology, civil engineering, economics, political science, and philosophy. He made several important contributions to economics, particularly in the study of income distribution and in the analysis of individuals' choices, and was one of the minds behind the Lausanne School of economics. He was also responsible for popularising the use of the term \"elite\" in social analysis and contributed to elite theory. He has been described as \"one of the last Renaissance scholars. Trained in physics and mathematics, he became a polymath whose genius radiated into nearly all other major fields of knowledge.\"\nHe introduced the concept of Pareto efficiency and helped develop the field of microeconomics. He was also the first to claim that income follows a Pareto distribution, which is a power law probability distribution. The Pareto principle was named after him, and it was built on his observations that 80% of the wealth in Italy belonged to about 20% of the population. He also contributed to the fields of mathematics and sociology.\nBiography.\nPareto was born of an exiled noble Genoese family on 15 July 1848 in Paris, the centre of the popular revolutions of that year. His father, Raffaele Pareto (1812\u20131882), was an Italian civil engineer and Ligurian marquis who had left Italy much as Giuseppe Mazzini and other Italian nationalists had. His mother, Marie Metenier, was a French woman. Enthusiastic about the revolutions of 1848 in the German states, his parents named him Wilfried Fritz, which became Vilfredo Federico upon his family's move back to Italy in 1858.\nIn his childhood, Pareto lived in a middle-class environment, receiving a high standard of education, attending the newly created \"Istituto Tecnico Leardi\" where Ferdinando Pio Rosellini was his mathematics professor. In 1869, he earned a doctorate in engineering from what is now the Polytechnic University of Turin, then known as the Technical School for Engineers, with a dissertation entitled \"The Fundamental Principles of Equilibrium in Solid Bodies\". His later interest in equilibrium analysis in economics and sociology can be traced back to this dissertation. Pareto was among the contributors to the Rome-based magazine \"La Ronda\" between 1919 and 1922.\nFrom civil engineer to classical liberal economist.\nFor some years after graduation, Pareto worked as a civil engineer, first for the state-owned Italian Railway Company and later in private industry. He was manager of the Iron Works of San Giovanni Valdarno and later general manager of Italian Iron Works. He did not begin serious work in economics until his mid-forties. He started his career as a fiery advocate of classical liberalism, besetting the most ardent British liberals with his attacks on any form of government intervention in the free market. In 1886, he became a lecturer on economics and management at the University of Florence. His stay in Florence was marked by political activity, much of it fueled by his own frustrations with government regulators. In 1889, after the death of his parents, Pareto changed his lifestyle, quitting his job and marrying a Russian woman, Alessandrina Bakunina.\nEconomics and sociology.\nIn 1893, Pareto succeeded L\u00e9on Walras to the chair of Political Economy at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland where he remained for the rest of his life. He published there in 1896\u20131897 a textbook containing the Pareto distribution of how wealth is distributed, which he believed was a constant \"through any human society, in any age, or country\". In 1906, he made the famous observation that twenty per cent of the population owned eighty per cent of the property in Italy, later generalised by Joseph M. Juran into the Pareto principle, also termed the 80\u201320 rule. Pareto maintained cordial personal relationships with individual socialists but always thought their economic ideas were severely flawed. He later became suspicious of their motives and denounced socialist leaders as an \"aristocracy of brigands\" who threatened to despoil the country and criticized the government of the Italian statesman Giovanni Giolitti for not taking a tougher stance against worker strikes. Growing unrest among labour in the Kingdom of Italy led him to the anti-socialist and anti-democratic camp. His attitude towards Italian fascism in his last years is a matter of controversy.\nPareto's relationship with scientific sociology in the age of the foundation is grafted in a paradigmatic way at the moment in which he, starting from the political economy, criticizes positivism as a totalizing and metaphysical system devoid of a rigorous logical-experimental method. In this sense we can read the fate of the Paretian production within a history of the social sciences that continues to show its peculiarity and interest for its contributions in the 21st\u00a0century. The story of Pareto is also part of the multidisciplinary research of a scientific model that privileges sociology as a critique of cumulative models of knowledge as well as a discipline tending to the affirmation of relational models of science.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1889, Pareto married Alessandrina Bakunina, a Russian woman. She left him in 1902 for a young servant. Twenty years later in 1923, he married Jeanne Regis, a French woman, just before his death in Geneva, Switzerland, on 19 August 1923.\nSociology.\nPareto's later years were spent in collecting the material for his best-known work, \"Trattato di sociologia generale\" (1916) (\"The Mind and Society\", published in 1935). His final work was \"Compendio di sociologia generale\" (1920). In his \"Trattato di Sociologia Generale\" (1916, rev. French trans. 1917), published in English by Harcourt, Brace, in a four-volume edition edited by Arthur Livingston under the title \"The Mind and Society\" (1935), Pareto developed the notion of the circulation of elites, the first social cycle theory in sociology. He is famous for saying \"history is a graveyard of aristocracies\".\nPareto might have turned to sociology for an understanding of why his mathematical economic theories did not always predict actions of individuals in practice, in the belief that unforeseen or uncontrollable social factors intervened. His sociology holds that much social action is nonlogical and that much personal action is designed to give spurious logicality to non-rational actions. We are driven, he taught, by certain \"residues\" and by \"derivations\" from these residues. The more important of these have to do with conservatism and risk-taking, and human history is the story of the alternate dominance of these sentiments in the ruling elite, which comes into power strong in conservatism but gradually changes over to the philosophy of the \"foxes\" or speculators. A catastrophe results, with a return to conservatism; the \"lion\" mentality follows. This cycle might be broken by the use of force, says Pareto, but the elite becomes weak and humanitarian and shrinks from violence.\nAmong those who introduced Pareto's sociology to the United States were George C. Homans and Lawrence Joseph Henderson at Harvard, and Paretian ideas gained considerable influence, especially on Harvard sociologist Talcott Parsons, who developed a systems approach to society and economics that argues the \"status quo\" is usually functional. The American historian Bernard DeVoto played an important role in introducing Pareto's ideas to these Cambridge intellectuals and other Americans in the 1930s. Wallace Stegner, in his biography of DeVoto, recounts these developments and says this about the often misunderstood distinction between \"residues\" and \"derivations\". He wrote: \"Basic to Pareto's method is the analysis of society through its non-rational 'residues,' which are persistent and unquestioned social habits, beliefs, and assumptions, and its 'derivations,' which are the explanations, justifications, and rationalizations we make of them. One of the commonest errors of social thinkers is to assume rationality and logic in social attitudes and structures; another is to confuse residues and derivations.\"\nFascism and power distribution.\nRenato Cirillo wrote that Pareto had frequently been considered a predecessor of fascism as a result of his support for the movement when it began. Cirillo disagreed with this interpretation, suggesting that Pareto was critical of fascism in his private letters. Pareto argued that democracy was an illusion and that a ruling class always emerged and enriched itself. For him, the key question was how actively the rulers ruled. For this reason, he called for a drastic reduction of the state and welcomed Benito Mussolini's rule as a transition to this minimal state so as to liberate the perceived pure economic forces.\nAs a young student, Mussolini had attended some of Pareto's lectures at the University of Lausanne in 1904. It has been argued that Mussolini's move away from socialism towards a form of elitism may be attributed to Pareto's ideas. Franz Borkenau, a biographer, argued that Mussolini followed Pareto's policy ideas during the beginning of his tenure as prime minister. Karl Popper dubbed Pareto the \"theoretician of totalitarianism\"; according to Cirillo, there is no evidence in Popper's published work that he read Pareto in any detail before repeating what was then a common but dubious judgement in anti-fascist circles.\nEconomic concepts.\nPareto theory of maximum economics.\nPareto turned his interest to economic matters, and he became an advocate of free trade, finding himself in conflict with the Italian government. His writings reflected the ideas of L\u00e9on Walras that economics is essentially a mathematical and natural science. He tried to sketch economics in analogy to mechanics, explicitly linking pure (and applied) economics to pure (and applied) mechanics, presenting a concordance table relating the two sciences. Pareto was a leader of the \"Lausanne School\" and represents the second generation of the Neoclassical Revolution. His \"tastes-and-obstacles\" approach to general equilibrium theory was resurrected during the great \"Paretian Revival\" of the 1930s and has influenced theoretical economics since. In his \"Manual of Political Economy\" (1906) the focus is on equilibrium in terms of solutions to individual problems of \"objectives and constraints\". He used the indifference curve of Edgeworth (1881) extensively, for the theory of the consumer and, another great novelty, in his theory of the producer. He gave the first presentation of the trade-off box now known as the \"Edgeworth-Bowley\" box.\nPareto was the first to realize that cardinal utility could be dispensed with, and economic equilibrium thought of in terms of ordinal utility, that is, it was not necessary to know how much a person valued this or that, only that he preferred X of this to Y of that. Utility was a preference-ordering. With this, Pareto not only inaugurated modern microeconomics but he also attacked the alliance of economics and utilitarian philosophy, which calls for the greatest good for the greatest number; Pareto said \"good\" cannot be measured. He replaced it with the notion of Pareto-optimality, the idea that a system is enjoying maximum economic satisfaction when no one can be made better off without making someone else worse off. Pareto optimality is widely used in welfare economics and game theory. A standard theorem is that a perfectly competitive market creates distributions of wealth that are Pareto optimal.\nConcepts.\nSome economic concepts based on Pareto's work are still in use in the 21st century. The Pareto chart is a special type of histogram, used to view the causes of a problem in order of severity from largest to smallest. It is a statistical tool that graphically demonstrates the Pareto principle or the 80\u201320 rule. The Pareto principle concerns the distribution of income, while the Pareto distribution is a probability distribution used, among other things, as a mathematical realization of Pareto's law, and Ophelimity is a measure of purely economic satisfaction. The Pareto index is a measure of the inequality of income distribution. Pareto argued that in all countries and times the distribution of income and wealth is highly skewed, with a few holding most of the wealth. He argued that all observed societies follow a regular logarithmic pattern:formula_1 where N is the number of people with wealth higher than x, and A and m are constants. Over the years, Pareto's law proved remarkably close to observed data, with economists typically finding it plausible according to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\". The Pareto efficiency is generally not very discriminating while the concept of potential Pareto-efficiency, also known as Kaldor-Hicks efficiency, is more discriminating and is widely used in economics. A common criticism outside of economics is that it relies on subjective preferences. According to \"Oxford Reference\", the Pareto principle can be controversial in welfare economics since its assumptions are empirically questionable, may embody value-judgements, and tend to favour the \"status quo\". As a result of its silence on the initial distribution of resources, most sociologists are also critical of Paretian welfare economics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32681", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32681", "title": "Voice analysis", "text": "Component of speech recognition\nVoice analysis is the study of speech sounds for purposes other than linguistic content, such as in speech recognition. Such studies include mostly medical analysis of the voice (phoniatrics), but also speaker identification. More controversially, some believe that the truthfulness or emotional state of speakers can be determined using voice stress analysis or layered voice analysis.\nAnalysis methods.\nVoice problems that require voice analysis most commonly originate from the vocal folds or the laryngeal musculature that controls them, since the folds are subject to collision forces with each vibratory cycle and to drying from the air being forced through the small gap between them, and the laryngeal musculature is intensely active during speech or singing and is subject to tiring. However, dynamic analysis of the vocal folds and their movement is physically difficult. The location of the vocal folds effectively prohibits direct, invasive measurement of movement. Less invasive imaging methods such as x-rays or ultrasounds do not work because the vocal cords are surrounded by cartilage, which distorts image quality. Movements in the vocal cords are rapid, fundamental frequencies are usually between 80 and 300 Hz, thus preventing usage of ordinary video. Stroboscopic, and high-speed videos provide an option, but to see the vocal folds a fiberoptic probe leading to the camera must be positioned in the throat, which makes speaking difficult. In addition, placing objects in the pharynx usually triggers a gag reflex that stops voicing and closes the larynx. In addition, stroboscopic imaging is only useful when the vocal fold vibratory pattern is closely periodic.\nThe most important indirect methods are currently inverse filtering of either microphone or oral airflow recordings and electroglottography (EGG). In inverse filtering, the speech sound (the radiated acoustic pressure waveform, as obtained from a microphone) or the oral airflow waveform from a circumferentially vented (CV) mask is recorded outside the mouth and then filtered by a mathematical method to remove the effects of the vocal tract. This method estimates the glottal input of voice production by recording output and using a computational model to invert the effects of the vocal tract. The other kind of noninvasive indirect indication of vocal fold motion is the electroglottography, in which electrodes placed on either side of the subject's throat at the level of the vocal folds record the changes in the conductivity of the throat according to how large a portion of the vocal folds are touching each other. It thus yields one-dimensional information of the contact area. Neither inverse filtering nor EGG are sufficient to completely describe the complex 3-dimensional pattern of vocal fold movement, but can provide useful indirect evidence of that movement.\nAnother way to conduct voice analysis is to look at voice characteristics. Some characteristics of voice are phonation, pitch, loudness, and rate. These characteristics can be used to evaluate a person's voice and can aid in the voice analysis process. Phonation is typically tested by looking at different types of data collected from a person such as words with long vowels, words with many phonemes, or just typical speech. A person's pitch can be evaluated by making the person produce the highest and lowest sounds they can, as well as sounds in between. A keyboard can be used to aid in this process. Loudness is valuable to look at because for certain people, loudness affects the way they produce certain sounds. Some people need to speak louder for certain phonemes in comparison to others just so they can produce them. This can be tested by asking the person to use the same amount of loudness while singing a scale. Rate is also important because it looks at how fast or slow a person speaks.\nUse in medicine.\nA medical study of the voice can be, for instance, analysis of the voice of patients who have had a polyp removed from their vocal cords through an operation. Computerized methods can be used to assess such issues in an objective manner. An experienced voice therapist can quite reliably evaluate the voice, but this requires extensive training and is still subjective.\nAnother active research topic in medical voice analysis is vocal loading evaluation. The vocal cords of a person who speaks for an extended time suffer from tiring\u2014that is, the process of speaking exerts a load on the vocal cords and tires the tissue. Among professional voice users (e.g., teachers, sales people) this tiring can cause voice failures and sick leaves. Voice analysis has been studied as an objective means to evaluate such problems.\nVoice analysis was an important factor in the study of vocal cord paralysis. It effects different functions of the vocal cords, from speech to breathing and voice analysis is used to study the effectiveness of Thyroplasty (medialization thyroplasty) improvements on the vocal cords after the surgery. Traditional voice recording is used in pre-operation to record the voices of chosen patients to be compared with the post-operation usage, along with more complex recordings using an https://, photoglottography, and videokymography. Medical professionals have the ability to read and understand the results from the complex recordings, but knowledge from a voice professional is needed within these experiments for accurate results. Voice experts were an important to tie the physical examination of the vocal cords to the neurological examination to ensure the success of the surgery because of their trained ear. Perceptual evaluation of voice is heavily reliant on voice quality, a factor assessed preferably by voice specialists (speech therapists). A professional voice analyzer has a trained ear and can block out excess variants that can be deceptive from the results.\nUse in forensics.\nVoice analysis is used in a branch of forensic science called audio forensics. These analyses are generally performed on evidence for the purposes of evaluating the authenticity of the audio in question, enhancing features of the audio that may be hidden beneath distracting background noise, interpreting the audio from the perspective of a forensic expert, or in some cases for the purposes of speaker identification.\nAn expert will employ a variety of techniques in their analysis. The minimum of procedures are \"critical listening, waveform analysis, and spectral analysis\". Critical listening involves a thorough breakdown of both foreground and background sounds through repetitive listening. Waveform analysis visualizes the audio for the examiner to see any irregularities that may occur. Spectral analysis visualizes the frequency of the audio for an examiner to pick out features of interest.\nOne case in which audio played a larger role is the Trayvon Martin case, where a recording of a call made to the police was analyzed to determine if background screams came from George Zimmerman or from Martin.\nForensic Voice.\nExperts in forensic voice analyze recordings by examining transmitted and stored speech, enhancing it and decoding it for criminal investigations, court trials, and federal agencies.\nTo utilize audio recordings in court, a forensic phonetician must authenticate the recording to detect tampering, enhance the audio, and interpret the speech. Their first job is to ensure that the speech in the recording being used is comprehensible. Oftentimes, samples have poor sound quality due to environmental factors such as wind or movement. Other times the sound degradation is due to technological issues within the recording device. Any investigative work on speaker identification cannot be done until the recording is of proper quality. Different solutions for poor comprehensibility are done using computer programs that allow the user to filter and eliminate noise. Computer software is also able to convert the speech to spectra and waveforms, which is useful for the forensic phonetician. However, any work done on the recording should be done after a copy of the original recording is made.\nA main part of the forensic phonetician's job is speaker identification. The interpretation process might include piecing together a timeline, transcribing the dialog, and identifying unknown or unintelligible sounds in the audio recording. In court, the expert ultimately serves to explain the facts surrounding the audio evidence, providing an explanation of relevant acoustical and physical principles to explain what is evidenced by the recording. Reports are made to include detailed information, if there is a section of the recording that is not comprehensible or is inaudible, an explanation of what was happening (in the recording), and a description of what is missing from the recording.\nSpeaker Identification.\nVoice analysis has a role in speaker identification. This is when the identity of a speaker is unknown, and has to be identify from an array of other voices or suspects when pertaining to a crime investigation or court trial.\u00a0 Proper identification of speaker and voices particularly for criminal cases depend on a list of factors, like familiarity, exposure, delay, tone of voice, voice disguising, and accents. Familiarity with a speaker increases the chances of properly identifying a voice, and distinguishing it. The amount of exposure to a voice also aids in correctly identifying a voice, even if it is an unfamiliar one. A hearer that listen to a longer utterance or was exposed to a voice more often is better at recognizing a voice, than someone who perhaps was only able to hear one word. A delay between the time of hearing a voice and the time of identifying the speaker also decreases the prospect of identifying the correct speaker. The tone of voice affects the ability to identify the right speaker. If the tone does not match that of the speaker at the time of comparison, it will prove to be more difficult to analyse. Disguise of the voice, for example when a speaker is whispering, will also hinder the ability to accurately match and identify the speaker. In some cases, individuals who speak the same language as the speaker whose voice is being analysed will have an easier time identifying them because of the accent and stress of the voice. Speaker identification is additionally complicated by distortions from the technical method of recording and speaker based issues, such as emotional states or alternative motives causing a discrepancy between their voice and that of a recording. The methods of speaker identification in forensics include the use of earwitnesses who are used to identify voices they have heard, the aural-perceptual approach conducted by a specialist regarding the suprasegmentals of an individual's speech, and computer-based approaches."}
{"id": "32682", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32682", "title": "VSE (operating system)", "text": "VSEn (\"Virtual Storage Extended\") is an operating system for IBM mainframe computers, the latest one in the DOS/360 lineage, which originated in 1965. It is less common than z/OS and is mostly used on smaller machines.\nDOS/VSE was introduced in 1979 as a successor to DOS/VS; in turn, DOS/VSE was succeeded by VSE/SP version 1 in 1983, and VSE/SP version 2 in 1985. In the late 1980s, there was a widespread perception among VSE customers that IBM was planning to discontinue VSE and migrate its customers to MVS instead, although IBM relented and agreed to continue to produce new versions of VSE. In February 2005, IBM announced z/VSE as successor to VSE/ESA 2.7, which was named to reflect the new System z branding for IBM's mainframe product line. In June 2021, 21st Century Software Inc announced that it had licensed the z/VSE source code from IBM with the intention of developing new versions of the operating system. As part of this transfer, z/VSE was renamed to VSEn.\nOverview.\nDOS/360 originally used 24-bit addressing. As the underlying hardware evolved, VSE/ESA acquired 31-bit addressing capability.\nIBM released z/VSE Version 4, which requires 64-bit z/Architecture hardware and can use 64-bit real mode addressing, in 2007. With z/VSE 5.1 (available since 2011) z/VSE introduced 64-bit virtual addressing and memory objects (chunks of virtual storage), that are allocated above 2\u00a0GB.\nUser interfaces.\nJob Control Language (JCL).\nA Job Control Language (JCL) that continues in the positional-parameter orientation of earlier DOS systems is VSEn's batch processing primary user interface. There is also another, special interface for system console operators.\nBeyond batch.\nVSEn, like z/OS systems, had traditionally provided 3270 terminal user interfaces. However, most VSEn installations have at least begun to add Web browser access to VSEn applications. VSEn's TCP/IP is a separately priced option for historic reasons, and is available in two different versions from two vendors. Both vendors provide a full function TCP/IP stack with applications, such as telnet and FTP. One TCP/IP stack provides IPv4 communication only, the other IPv4 and IPv6 communication. In addition to the commercially available TCP/IP stacks for VSEn, IBM also provides the Linux Fastpath method which uses IUCV socket or Hipersockets connections to communicate with a Linux guest, also running on the mainframe.\nUsing this method the VSEn system is able to fully exploit the native Linux TCP/IP stack.\nIBM recommends that z/VSE customers run Linux on IBM Z alongside, on the same physical system, to provide another 64-bit application environment that can access and extend z/VSE applications and data via Hipersockets using a wide variety of middleware. CICS, one of the most popular enterprise transaction processing systems, is extremely popular among VSEn users and now implements recent innovations such as Web services. Db2 is also available and popular.\nDevice support.\nVSEn can use ECKD, FBA and SCSI devices. Fibre Channel access to SCSI storage devices was initially available on z/VSE 3.1 on a limited basis (including on IBM's Enterprise Storage Server (ESS), IBM System Storage DS8000, DS6000 series), but the limitations disappeared with 4.2 (thus including IBM Storwize V7000, V5000, V3700 and V9000).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32683", "revid": "49795829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32683", "title": "Villanelle", "text": "Fixed verse form; nineteen-line poetic form consisting of five tercets followed by a quatrain\nA villanelle, also known as villanesque, is a nineteen-line poetic form consisting of five tercets followed by a quatrain. There are two refrains and two repeating rhymes, with the first and third lines of the first tercet repeated alternately at the end of each subsequent stanza until the last stanza, which includes both repeated lines. The villanelle is an example of a fixed verse form. The word derives from Latin, then Italian, and is related to the initial subject of the form being the pastoral.\nThe form started as a simple ballad-like song with no fixed form; this fixed quality would only come much later, from the poem \"Villanelle (J'ay perdu ma Tourterelle)\" (1606) by Jean Passerat. From this point, its evolution into the \"fixed form\" used in the present day is debated. Despite its French origins, the majority of villanelles have been written in English, a trend which began in the late nineteenth century. The villanelle has been noted as a form that frequently treats the subject of obsessions, and one which appeals to outsiders; its defining feature of repetition prevents it from having a conventional tone.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"villanelle\" derives from the Italian \"villanella\", referring to a rustic song or dance, and which comes from \"villano\", meaning peasant or villein. \"Villano\" derives from the Medieval Latin , meaning a \"farmhand\". The etymology of the word relates to the fact that the form's initial distinguishing feature was the pastoral subject.\nHistory.\nThe villanelle originated as a simple ballad-like song\u2014in imitation of peasant songs of an oral tradition\u2014with no fixed poetic form. These poems were often of a rustic or pastoral subject matter and contained refrains. Prior to the nineteenth century, the term would have simply meant \"country song\", with no particular form implied\u2014a meaning it retains in the vocabulary of early music. According to Julie Kane, the refrain in each stanza indicates that the form descended from a \"choral dance song\" wherein a vocal soloist\u2014frequently female\u2014semi-improvised the \"unique\" lyrics of each stanza, while a ring of dancers\u2014all female, or male and female mixed\u2014chimed in with the repetitive words of the refrain as they danced around her in a circle.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Villanelle (J'ay perdu ma Tourterelle)\"\n&lt;poem&gt;\nJ'ay perdu ma Tourterelle:\nEst-ce point celle que j'oy?\nJe veus aller apr\u00e9s elle.\nTu regretes ta femelle,\nHelas! aussi fai-je moy,\nJ'ay perdu ma Tourterelle.\n(I have lost my turtledove:\nIsn't that her gentle coo?\nI will go and find my love.\nHere you mourn your mated love;\nOh, God\u2014I am mourning too:\nI have lost my turtledove.)\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n The first two stanzas of \"Villanelle (J'ay perdu ma Tourterelle)\" by Jean Passerat (1534\u20131602), which established the modern villanelle form\nThe fixed-form villanelle, containing the nineteen-line dual-refrain, derives from Jean Passerat's poem \"Villanelle (J'ay perdu ma Tourterelle)\", published in 1606. The \"New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics\" (1993) suggests that this became the standard \"villanelle\" when prosodists such as C\u00e9sar-Pierre Richelet based their definitions of the form on that poem. This conclusion is refuted by Kane, however, who argues that it was instead Pierre-Charles Berthelin's additions to Richelet's \"Dictionnaire de rimes\" that first fixed the form, followed a century later by the poet Th\u00e9odore de Banville; his creation of a parody to Passerat's \"J'ay perdu\u00a0...\" would lead Wilhelm T\u00e9nint and others to think that the villanelle was an antique form.\nDespite its classification and origin as a French poetic form, by far the majority of villanelles have been written in English. Subsequent to the publication of Th\u00e9odore de Banville's treatise on prosody \"Petit trait\u00e9 de po\u00e9sie fran\u00e7aise\" (1872), the form became popularised in England through Edmund Gosse and Austin Dobson. Gosse, Dobson, Oscar Wilde, Andrew Lang, and John Payne were among the first English practitioners\u2014theirs and other works were published in Gleeson White's \"Ballades and Rondeaus, Chants Royal, Sestinas, Villanelles, &amp;c. Selected\" (1887), which contained 32 English-language villanelles composed by 19 poets.\nMost modernists disdained the villanelle, which became associated with the overwrought formal aestheticism of the 1890s, i.e., the decadent movement in England. In his 1914 novel \"A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man\", James Joyce includes a villanelle written by his protagonist Stephen Dedalus. William Empson revived the villanelle more seriously in the 1930s, and his contemporaries and friends W. H. Auden and Dylan Thomas also picked up the form. Dylan Thomas's \"Do not go gentle into that good night\" is perhaps the most renowned villanelle of all. Theodore Roethke and Sylvia Plath wrote villanelles in the 1950s and 1960s, and Elizabeth Bishop wrote a particularly famous and influential villanelle, \"One Art,\" in 1976. The villanelle reached an unprecedented level of popularity in the 1980s and 1990s with the rise of the New Formalism. Since then, many contemporary poets have written villanelles, and they have often varied the form in innovative ways; in their anthology of villanelles (\"Villanelles\"), Annie Finch and Marie-Elizabeth Mali devote a section entitled \"Variations on the Villanelle\" to such innovations.\nForm.\nThe villanelle consists of five stanzas of three lines (tercets) followed by a single stanza of four lines (a quatrain) for a total of nineteen lines. It is structured by two repeating rhymes and two refrains: the first line of the first stanza serves as the last line of the second and fourth stanzas, and the third line of the first stanza serves as the last line of the third and fifth stanzas. The rhyme-and-refrain pattern of the villanelle is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll 'a' lines rhyme, similarly all formula_1 lines, and formula_2 and formula_3 indicate two different refrains which are repeated exactly. It can be schematized as formula_4.\nThe villanelle has no established meter, although most 19th-century villanelles used trimeter or tetrameter and most 20th-century villanelles used pentameter. Slight alteration of the refrain line is permissible.\nEffect.\nWith reference to the form's repetition of lines, Philip K. Jason suggests that the \"villanelle is often used, and properly used, to deal with one or another degree of obsession\" citing Sylvia Plath's \"Mad Girl's Love Song\" amongst other examples. He notes the possibility for the form to evoke, through the relationship between the repeated lines, a feeling of dislocation and a \"paradigm for schizophrenia\". This repetition of lines has been considered to prevent villanelles from possessing a \"conventional tone\" and that instead they are closer in form to a song or lyric poetry. Stephen Fry opines that the villanelle \"is a form that seems to appeal to outsiders, or those who might have cause to consider themselves as such\", having a \"playful artifice\" which suits \"rueful, ironic reiteration of pain or fatalism\". (In spite of this, the villanelle has also often been used for light verse, as for instance Louis Untermeyer's \"Lugubrious Villanelle of Platitudes\".)\nOn the relationship between form and content, Anne Ridler notes in an introduction to her own poem \"Villanelle for the Middle of the Way\" a point made by T. S. Eliot, that \"to use very strict form is a help, because you concentrate on the technical difficulties of mastering the form, and allow the content of the poem a more unconscious and freer release\". In an introduction to his own take on the form, entitled \"Missing Dates\", William Empson suggests that while the villanelle is a \"very rigid form\", nonetheless W. H. Auden\u2014in his long poem \"The Sea and the Mirror\"\u2014had \"made it sound absolutely natural like the innocent girl talking\".\nPoem.\n&lt;poem&gt;Do not go gentle into that good night,\nOld age should burn and rave at close of day;\nRage, rage against the dying of the light.\nThough wise men at their end know dark is right,\nBecause their words had forked no lightning they\nDo not go gentle into that good night.\nGood men, the last wave by, crying how bright\nTheir frail deeds might have danced in a green bay,\nRage, rage against the dying of the light.\nWild men who caught and sang the sun in flight,\nAnd learn, too late, they grieved it on its way,\nDo not go gentle into that good night.\nGrave men, near death, who see with blinding sight\nBlind eyes could blaze like meteors and be gay,\nRage, rage against the dying of the light.\nAnd you, my father, there on the sad height,\nCurse, bless, me now with your fierce tears, I pray.\nDo not go gentle into that good night.\nRage, rage against the dying of the light.&lt;/poem&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32684", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32684", "title": "The House on the Hill (poem)", "text": ""}
{"id": "32685", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32685", "title": "Victor Borge", "text": "Danish-American comedian and pianist (1909\u20132000)\nB\u00f8rge Rosenbaum (; ; January 3, 1909 \u2013 December 23, 2000), known professionally as Victor Borge ( ), was a Danish-American actor, comedian, and pianist who achieved great popularity in radio and television in both North America and Europe. His blend of music and comedy earned him the nicknames \"The Clown Prince of Denmark,\" \"The Unmelancholy Dane,\" and \"The Great Dane.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and career.\nVictor Borge was born B\u00f8rge Rosenbaum on January 3, 1909 in Copenhagen, Denmark, into an Ashkenazi Jewish family. His parents, Frederikke (n\u00e9e\u00a0Lichtinger) and Bernhard Rosenbaum, were both musicians: his father a violist in the Royal Danish Orchestra, and his mother a pianist. Borge began piano lessons at the age of two, and it was soon apparent that he was a prodigy. He gave his first piano recital when he was eight years old, and in 1918 was awarded a full scholarship at the Royal Danish Academy of Music, studying under Olivo Krause. Later on, he was taught by Victor Schi\u00f8ler, Liszt's student Frederic Lamond, and Busoni's pupil Egon Petri.\nBorge played his first major concert in 1926 at the Odd Fellows Mansion concert hall. After a few years as a classical concert pianist, he started his now-famous stand-up act with the signature blend of piano music and jokes. He married the American Elsie Chilton in 1933, the same year he debuted with his revue acts. Borge started touring extensively in Europe, where he began telling anti-Nazi jokes.\nWhen the German armed forces occupied Denmark on April 9, 1940, during World War II, Borge was playing a concert in neutral Sweden and decided to go to Finland. He traveled to America on the United States Army transport , the last neutral ship to make it out of Petsamo, Finland, and arrived 28 August 1940, with only $20 (about $ today), with $3 going to the customs fee. Disguised as a sailor, Borge returned to Denmark once during the occupation to visit his dying mother.\nMove to America.\nEven though Borge could not speak English upon arrival, he quickly managed to adapt his jokes to the American audience, learning English by watching movies. He took the name of Victor Borge and, in 1941, he started on Rudy Vallee's radio show. He was hired soon after by Bing Crosby for his \"Kraft Music Hall\" programme.\nBorge quickly rose to fame, winning Best New Radio Performer of the Year in 1942 and earning favorable reviews for his performances at New York City's Roxy Theater and Capitol Theatre in 1943. Soon after the award, he was offered film roles with stars such as Frank Sinatra (in \"Higher and Higher\"). While hosting \"The Victor Borge Show\" on NBC beginning in 1946, he developed many of his trademarks, including repeatedly announcing his intent to play a piece but getting \"distracted\" by something or other, making comments about the audience, or discussing the usefulness of Chopin's \"Minute Waltz\" as an egg timer. He would also start out with some well-known classical piece like Beethoven's \"Moonlight Sonata\" and suddenly move into a pop or jazz tune, such as Cole Porter's \"Night and Day\" or \"Happy Birthday to You\".\nStyle.\nOne of Borge's other famous routines was \"Phonetic Punctuation,\" in which he read a passage from a book and added exaggerated sound effects to stand for most of the main punctuation marks, such as periods, commas, and exclamation marks. Another is his \"Inflationary Language\", in which he added one to every number or homophone of a number in the words he spoke. For example: \"once upon a time\" becomes \"twice upon a time\", \"wonderful\" becomes \"twoderful\", \"forehead\" becomes \"fivehead\", \"anyone for tennis\" becomes \"anytwo five elevennis\", \"I ate a tenderloin with my fork, and so on and so forth\" becomes \"I nine an elevenderloin with my fivek, and so on and so fifth\".\nBorge used physical and visual elements in his live and televised performances. He would play a strange-sounding piano tune from sheet music, looking increasingly confused; turning the sheet upside down or sideways, he would then play the actual tune, flashing a joyful smile of accomplishment to the audience (he had, at first, been literally playing the tune upside down or sideways). \nWhen his energetic playing of another song would cause him to fall off the piano bench, he would open the seat lid, take out the two ends of an automotive seat belt, and buckle himself onto the bench, \"for safety\". Conducting an orchestra, he might stop and order a violinist who had played a sour note to get off the stage, then resume the performance and have the other members of the section move up to fill the empty seat while they were still playing: from off stage would come the sound of a gunshot.\nHis musical sidekick in the 1960s, Leonid Hambro, was also a well-known concert pianist. In 1968, classical pianist \u015eahan Arzruni joined him as his straight man, performing together on one piano a version of Liszt's Second Hungarian Rhapsody, considered a musical-comedic classic. Borge performed a version of the routine with Rowlf the Dog on Season 4 of \"The Muppet Show\".\nHe also enjoyed interacting with the audience. Seeing an interested person in the front row, he would ask them, \"Do you like good music?\" or \"Do you care for piano music?\" After an affirmative answer, Borge would take a piece of sheet music from his piano and say, \"Here is some\", and hand it over. After the audience's laughter died down, he would say, \"That'll be $1.95\" (or whatever the current price might be). He would then ask whether the audience member could read music; if the member said yes, he would ask a higher price. If he got no response from the audience after a joke, he would often add \"\u2026 when this ovation has died down, of course.\" The delayed punchline to handing the person the sheet music would come when he would reach the end of a number and begin playing the penultimate notes over and over, with a puzzled look. He would then go back to the person in the audience, retrieve the sheet music, tear off a piece of it, stick it on the piano, and play the last couple of notes from it.\nMaking fun of modern theater, he would sometimes begin a performance by asking if there were any children in the audience. There always were, of course. He would sternly order them out, then say, \"We do have some children in here; that means I can't do the second half in the nude. I'll wear the tie (pause). The long one (pause). The very long one, yes.\"\nIn his stage shows in later years, he would include a segment with opera singer Marylyn Mulvey. She would try to sing an aria, and he would react and interrupt, with such antics as falling off the bench in \"surprise\" when she hit a high note. He would also remind her repeatedly not to rest her hand on the piano, telling her that if she got used to it, \"and one day a piano was not there \u2013 \"Fffftttt!\"\" After the routine, the spotlight would rest on Mulvey, and she would sing a serious number with Borge accompanying in the background.\nLater career.\nBorge appeared on \"Toast of the Town\" hosted by Ed Sullivan several times during 1948. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States the same year. He started the \"Comedy in Music \" show at John Golden Theatre in New York City on October 2, 1953. \"Comedy in Music\" became the longest running one-man show in the history of theater with 849 performances when it closed on January 21, 1956, a feat which placed it in the \"Guinness Book of World Records\".\nContinuing his success with tours and shows, Borge played with and conducted orchestras including the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the New York Philharmonic and London Philharmonic. He appeared with the Cleveland Opera Company in Mozart's \"The Magic Flute\" in 1979 and at London's Royal Opera House Covent Garden in Bizet's \"Carmen\" in 1986. Always modest, he felt honored when he was invited to conduct the Royal Danish Orchestra at the Royal Danish Theatre in Copenhagen in 1992. \nHis later television appearances included his \"Phonetic Punctuation\" routine on \"The Electric Company\" in a filmed sketch. He would also use this sketch on \"The Electric Company\"'s subsequent LP record, during its \"Punctuation\" song. In addition, he appeared several times on \"Sesame Street\", and he was a guest star during the fourth season of \"The Muppet Show\".\nVictor Borge continued to tour until his last days, performing up to 60 times per year when he was 90 years old. His microphone of choice since circa 1982 was the Shure SM59.\nOther endeavors.\nBorge made several appearances on the TV show \"What's My Line?\", both as a celebrity panelist and as a contestant with the occupation \"poultry farmer\". (The latter was not a comedy routine: as a business venture, Borge raised and popularized Rock Cornish game hens, starting in the 1950s.)\nBorge helped start several trust funds, including the Thanks to Scandinavia Fund, which was started in dedication to those who helped the Jews escape the German persecution during the war.\nAside from his musical work, Borge wrote three books: \"My Favorite Intermissions\" and \"My Favorite Comedies in Music\" (both with Robert Sherman), and the autobiography \"Smilet er den korteste afstand\" (\"The Smile is the Shortest Distance\") with Niels-J\u00f8rgen Kaiser.\nIn 1979 Borge founded the American Piano Awards (then called the Beethoven Foundation) with Julius Bloom and Anthony P. Habig. American Piano Awards now produces two major biennial piano competitions: the Classical Fellowship Awards and the Jazz Fellowship Awards.\nBorge was a member of the executive committee of the Writers and Artists for Peace in the Middle East, a pro-Israel group.\nFamily.\nVictor Borge married his first wife, Elsie Chilton, in 1933. After divorcing Elsie, he married Sarabel Sanna Scraper in 1953, and they stayed married until her death at the age of 83 in September 2000.\nBorge had five children (who occasionally performed with him): Ronald Borge and Janet Crowle (adopted) with Elsie Chilton, and Sanna Feirstein, Victor Bernhard (Vebe) Jr., and Frederikke (Rikke) Borge with Sarabel.\nDeath.\nOn 23 December 2000, Borge died in Greenwich, Connecticut, at the age of 91, after 75 years of entertaining. He died peacefully in his sleep a day after returning from a concert in Denmark. \"It was just his time to go,\" Frederikke Borge said. \"He's been missing my mother terribly.\" (His wife had died only three months earlier.) Barely a week earlier he had recorded what would be his final televised interview with Danish television, later aired on New Year's Eve. In a poetic coincidence, when asked where he would be spending his Christmas and New Year's, Borge responded \"somewhere completely different\".\nIn accordance with Borge's wishes, his connection to both the United States and Denmark was marked by having part of his ashes interred at Putnam Cemetery in Greenwich, with a replica of the iconic Danish statue \"The Little Mermaid\" sitting on a large rock at the grave site, and the other part in Western Jewish Cemetery (\"Mosaisk Vestre Begravelsesplads\"), in Copenhagen.\nAwards and honors.\nBorge received an honorary degree from Trinity College Connecticut in 1997. Over the years, he was also awarded an honorary Doctorate of Music from Butler University in 1970, Dana College in 1976 and the University of Connecticut in 1983. In addition, he was awarded a Doctorate of Humane Letters from Luther College in 1985.\nWhen the Royal Danish Orchestra celebrated its 550th anniversary in 1998, Borge was appointed an honorary member \u2014 at that time one of only ten in the orchestra's history.\nVictor Borge received numerous awards and honors during the course of his career. Borge received Kennedy Center Honors in 1999. He was decorated with badges of chivalric orders by the five Nordic countries, receiving the Order of the Dannebrog (Denmark), Order of Vasa (Sweden), in 1973 the Knight First Class of the Order of St. Olav (Norway), Order of the White Rose of Finland, and the Order of the Falcon (Iceland). In 1986, he was a recipient of the Ellis Island Medal of Honor in recognition of his contributions to the improvement of American society.\nLegacy.\nVictor Borge Hall, located in Scandinavia House in New York City, was named in Borge's honor in 2000, as was Victor Borges Plads (\"Victor Borge Square\") in Copenhagen in 2002. In 2009, a statue celebrating Borge's centennial was erected on the square.\nAsteroid (5634) Victorborge is named in his honor.\nFrom January 23 to May 9, 2009, the life of Borge was celebrated by The American-Scandinavian Foundation with \"Victor Borge: A Centennial Celebration.\"\nFilm and television.\nOn March 14, 2009, a television special about Borge's life, \"100 Years of Music and Laughter\", aired on PBS.\nOn February 7, 2017, it was reported that, according to a press release by the Danish production company M&amp;M Productions, both a television series and cinematic film about the life of Borge were planned to be filmed in 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32687", "revid": "3810835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32687", "title": "Vulvovaginal health", "text": ""}
{"id": "32688", "revid": "1306117790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32688", "title": "Vulvodynia", "text": "Chronic pain syndrome of the vulvar area\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nVulvodynia is a chronic pain condition that affects the vulvar area and occurs without an identifiable cause. Symptoms typically include a feeling of burning or irritation. It has been established by the ISSVD that for the diagnosis to be made symptoms must last at least three months.\nCause and diagnosis.\nThe causes of vulvodynia are not fully understood, but there are many sub-types of vulvodynia with different causes, including an excess of nerve fibers, hormonal imbalances, inflammation, and muscular dysfunction. Some factors influencing the disease may include genetics, immunology, and possibly diet. Diagnosis is by ruling out other possible causes. This may or may not include a biopsy of the area.\nTreatment and epidemiology.\nTreatment may involve a number of different measures; however, as vulvodynia has many sub-types, none is universally effective, and the evidence to support their effectiveness is often poor. Some of these measures include medications, pelvic floor physical therapy, surgery, and counselling. Vulvodynia is estimated to affect up to 10-28% of women.\nSigns and symptoms.\nPain is the most notable symptom of vulvodynia, and can be characterized as a burning, stinging, irritation or sharp pain that occurs in the vulva and entrance to the vagina. It may be constant, intermittent or happen only when the vulva is touched, but vulvodynia usually has a long duration.\nSymptoms may occur in one place (\"localized\") or the entire vulvar area (\"generalized\"). It can occur during or after sexual activity, when tampons are inserted, or when prolonged pressure is applied to the vulva, such as during sitting, bike riding, or horseback riding. The pain can be provoked by touch (\"provoked\") or constant (\"unprovoked\"). Some cases of vulvodynia are idiopathic where no specific cause can be determined.\nVestibulodynia.\nVestibulodynia, formerly known as vulvar vestibulitis syndrome (VVS), or simply vulvar vestibulitis, refers to pain localized to the vestibular region. It tends to be associated with a highly localized \"burning\" or \"cutting\" type of pain.\nVestibulodynia is the most common subtype of vulvodynia that affects premenopausal women \u2013 the syndrome has been cited as affecting about 10%\u201315% of women seeking gynecological care.\nClitorodynia.\nThe pain of vulvodynia may extend into the clitoris; this is referred to as clitorodynia. Clitorodynia may be sometimes caused by clitoris adhesions, a condition where the hood of the clitoris becomes stuck to the clitoris itself. Symptoms may include pain, hypersensitivity, hyposensitivity, difficulty with arousal, muted or absent orgasm. Clitoral adhesions are common among female patients with lichen sclerosus, but also occur among the general population. The prevalence of clitoral adhesions is unknown. Clitorodynia has been neglected in medical research and under-recognized in clincical practice.\nCauses.\nVulvodynia has many different sub-types and causes. The disease is highly idiopathic. Identifying the cause is important to determine the appropriate treatment.\nPain confined to the vulval vestibule, known as vestibulodynia, has at least three known sub-types: neuroproliferation, hormonally-mediation, and inflammation. Neuroproliferation can be present from birth or acquired later in life. This type of vestibulodynia is known as neuroproliferative vestibulodynia. Hormonally-mediated vestibulodynia can be caused by hormonal medications like oral birth control. Inflammatory vestibulodynia can develop as part of an immune response.\nOther possible causes include Sj\u00f6gren syndrome, the symptoms of which include chronic vaginal dryness. Others include genetic predisposition to inflammation, allergy or other sensitivity (for example: oxalates in the urine), an autoimmune disorder similar to lupus erythematosus or to eczema or to lichen sclerosus, infection (e.g., yeast infections, bacterial vaginosis, HPV, HSV), injury, and neuropathy\u2014including an increased number of nerve endings in the vaginal area. Some cases seem to be negative outcomes of genital surgery, such as a labioplasty. Initiation of hormonal contraceptives that contain low- dose estrogen before the age of 16 could predispose women to vulvar vestibulitis syndrome. A significantly lower pain threshold, especially in the posterior vestibulum, has also been associated with the use of hormonal contraceptives in women without vulvar vestibulitis syndrome. Pelvic floor dysfunction may be the underlying cause of some women's pain.\nMany co-morbidities are commonly associated with vulvodynia, including fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, interstitial cystitis, pelvic floor dysfunction, endometriosis, depression and anxiety disorders.\nDiagnosis.\nThe condition is one of exclusion and other vulvovaginal problems should be ruled out. The diagnosis is based on the typical complaints of the patient, essentially normal physical findings, and the absence of identifiable causes per the differential diagnosis. Cotton swab testing is used to differentiate between generalized and localized pain and delineate the areas of pain and categorize their severity. Patients often will describe the touch of a cotton ball as extremely painful, like the scraping of a knife. A diagram of pain locations may be helpful in assessing the pain over time. The vagina should be examined, and tests, including wet mount, vaginal pH, fungal culture, and Gram stain, should be performed as indicated. Fungal culture may identify resistant strains.\nSurveys have estimated that only about half of the women who meet the criteria for vulvodynia will seek medical help. Many will see several doctors before a correct diagnosis is made. Less than 2% of the people who seek help obtain a diagnosis. Many gynecologists are not familiar with this family of conditions. Affected women are also often hesitant to seek treatment for chronic vulvar pain, especially since many women begin experiencing symptoms around the same time they become sexually active. Moreover, the absence of any visible symptoms means that before being successfully diagnosed many patients have been told that the pain is \"in their head\". The misattribution of women's vulvo-vaginal pain to a psychological origin rather than a medical one is traceable back to the influence of Freudian psychoanalysis.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nIn recent years, diagnostic algorithms for the diagnosis of the various sub-types of and causes of vulvar pain have been developed and refined. The International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health (ISSWSH) supports this diagnostic algorithm.\nTreatment.\nThere are a number of possible treatments with none being uniformly effective. Treatments include:\nMedications.\nA number of medications have been used to treat vulvodynia. Evidence to support their use, however, is often poor. These include creams and ointments containing lidocaine, estrogen or tricyclic antidepressants. Antidepressants and anticonvulsants in pill form are sometimes tried but have been poorly studied. Injectable medications included steroids and botulinum toxin have been tried with limited success.\nPhysical therapy.\nMany patients who have vulvodynia also have high-tone pelvic floor, meaning that their pelvic floor muscles are too tight. This may contribute to their pain in the area. Pelvic floor physical therapy may help treat the pelvic floor dysfunction and help the patient gain greater control over their pelvic floor muscles.\nSurgery.\nVestibulectomy is a surgery to remove the vulval vestibule, and it may be recommended for certain patients. It has been suggested as a first-line treatment for neuroproliferative vestibulodynia. It has successful long-term outcomes, but is often only offered after conservative measures have failed.\nLifestyle.\nA number of lifestyle changes are often recommended such as using cotton underwear, not using substances that may irritate the area, and using lubricant during sex. The use of alternative medicine has not been sufficiently studied to make recommendations.\nCounseling.\nGynaecologist-led educational seminars delivered in a group format have a significant positive impact on psychological symptoms and sexual functioning in women who have provoked (caused by a stimulus such as touch or sexual activity) vestibulodynia (pain localized in the vulvar vestibule).\nEpidemiology.\nThe percentage of women affected is not entirely clear, but estimates range between 10-28%. Many other conditions that are not truly vulvodynia (diagnosis is made by ruling out other causes of vulvar pain) could be confused with it. Vulvar pain is a quite frequent complaint in women's health clinics.\nPatient communities.\nGiven the difficulty of getting diagnosed and treated for vulvodynia, patients have formed communities to help each other access healthcare and to advocate for better recognition of the disease.\nFounded in 1994, the National Vulvodynia Association (NVA) is a non-profit that helps connect patients to each other and to medical providers who can help them. They maintain a healthcare provider referral list and have geographically-organized patient support groups. The NVA secured the first funding for vulvodynia research in the 1990s, and it continues to provide seed grants for research on vulvodynia.\nTight Lipped is a second, younger community of vulvodynia patients. Founded in 2019, Tight Lipped started as a story-telling podcast focused on ending the stigma and mystery surrounding vulvovaginal pain. It has evolved into a grassroots, patient-led organization devoted to changing how chronic vulvovaginal pain conditions like vulvodynia are understood by the medical community and by society.\nThere are several online communities of patients on sites like Facebook and Reddit. Because medical knowledge is so hard to access, patients resort to other patients' knowledge to get help.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32689", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32689", "title": "Victor Meldrew", "text": "Sitcom character\nVictor Meldrew is a fictional character in the BBC One sitcom \"One Foot in the Grave\", created by David Renwick and portrayed by Richard Wilson. The character epitomised the archetypal grumpy old man. Meldrew is a foil for the bothersome aspects of children, cars, animals, power cuts and next-door neighbours.\nThe character was created specifically for Wilson, with whom Renwick had worked on the series \"Hot Metal\", though Wilson initially turned the part down as at 53, he felt he was too young to play the 60-year-old Meldrew. Renwick considered Les Dawson for the part before Wilson changed his mind.\nVictor is the only character to appear in every episode of the show.\nCharacter.\nIn the first episode, Meldrew, aged 60, is forced into early retirement from his job as a security guard when the office where he worked installs an automatic security system (which he describes as \"being replaced by a box\"). The series follows Meldrew as he tries to fill his new-found leisure with odd jobs and unusual idiosyncrasies, or to get a new job. However, he regularly finds himself mistreated, misunderstood or simply the victim of bad luck, and consequently leads to his complaining heartily.\nMeldrew is famous for his catchphrase, \"I don't believe it!!\" (copied exactly from Trevor Baxter playing Professor Litefoot in the final episode of The Talons of Weng-Chiang). Other frequently used expressions of exasperation are \"Unbe-lieeeve-able!\", \"What in the name of \"bloody hell\"?!\" and \"In the name of sanity!\" Victor is something of a hypochondriac, keeping a medical dictionary with him to look up every ailment he believes has befallen him (Margaret describes it as \"browsing through to see what he can die of next\").\nThe series was so successful that in the United Kingdom, \"Victor Meldrew\" has become a byword for a bitter and complaining elderly man. However, both Renwick and Wilson himself have disagreed that Victor is an example of this stereotype and he is shown to be more of a tragicomedy character, not bitter and grumpy by nature, but driven to it due to his habit of attracting trouble. Renwick once pointed out in an interview that the name \"Victor\" is ironic, since he almost always ends up as the loser.\nIn the final episode, \"Things Aren't Simple Any More\", Meldrew is killed by a hit-and-run driver. This eliminated any realistic possibility of a seventh series. Passers-by left bouquets of flowers in homage at the filming location, a railway bridge in Shawford, a small village in Hampshire.\nReception.\nPhil Wickham of the University of Exeter observed that \"the whole point of the series is that Meldrew is the only sane voice in a mad world\".\nJonathan Bignell in his book \"Media Semiotics\" observes that the reason people laugh at Victor Meldrew is not simply that his behaviour is excessive, but that it contrasts with how all the other characters in the TV series are behaving.\nMeldrew's name is associated with aggression or grumpiness; the journal \"Age and Ageing\" notes that \"Viewers of Victor Meldrew (\"One Foot in the Grave\") would not be surprised that hostility contributes to mortality in grumpy old men.\" Similarly, \"The Daily Telegraph\" uses Richard Wilson's Meldrew to refer to people who enjoy \"a good moan\", while Jenny Turner in the \"London Review of Books\" can observe that \"the timing and rhythm (of Geoff Dyer's \"Jeff in Venice, Death in Varanasi\") have the flippancy of stand-up comedy. The voice has Eeyore in it, and Morrissey and Victor Meldrew, and could only be English and from that postwar, post-punk generation\".\nThe BBC recalls first that \"the role of Victor Meldrew transformed Scottish TV-actor Richard Wilson into a household name and award-winning comedy performer.\" In addition, \"So popular was his character that 'Victor Meldrew' has endured as a cultural reference for any grumpy old man.\" And finally and more loosely, \"many viewers identified with his rages at the irritants of modern life: litter, junk mail, traffic, rudeness, streetlamps and car mechanics and to some, Victor Meldrew was a champion of the people, albeit a very grumpy one.\"\nMeldrew's persona is so powerful that Richard Wilson is perceived as \"99 per cent Meldrew\" by at least one critic, and when taking on a serious role as Malvolio in Shakespeare's \"Twelfth Night\", another critic felt that Wilson's \"performance was overly influenced by his desire to 'shed the Victor Meldrew stereotype'\".\nIn the modern series of \"Doctor Who\", after the debut of the Twelfth Doctor, as portrayed by Peter Capaldi, Alison Graham of the \"Radio Times\" compared Capaldi's Doctor to Meldrew, as both were \"abrasive, acerbic and [have] no truck with modern life\".\nThe third series of the Channel 4 comedy \"Father Ted\" features Wilson playing a fictional version of himself, and the Meldrew character's catchphrase is repeated several times during one episode.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32690", "revid": "44087959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32690", "title": "Vratislaus I, Duke of Bohemia", "text": "Duke of Bohemia from 915 to 921\nVratislaus (or Wratislaus) I (; c.\u2009888 \u2013 13 February 921), a member of the P\u0159emyslid dynasty, was Duke of Bohemia from 915 until his death in 921.\nLife.\nHe was a son of Duke Bo\u0159ivoj I of Bohemia by his wife Ludmila and the younger brother of Duke Spytihn\u011bv I. Around 906, he married Drahom\u00edra, a Hevellian princess, to establish close ties with the Polabian Slavs. Vratislaus had at least two sons, Wenceslaus and Boleslaus, both of whom succeeded him as Bohemian dukes. Some historians believe that St\u0159ezislava, the wife of the Bohemian nobleman Slavn\u00edk, founder of the Slavn\u00edk dynasty, was also the daughter of Vratislaus.\nUpon the death of his elder brother Spytihn\u011bv in 915, Vratislaus became duke at a time when the Bohemian lands around Prague Castle had already distanced themselves from the political and cultural sphere of Great Moravia and fallen under the influence of East Francia, especially during the rule of Duke Arnulf of Bavaria. The contemporary \"Annales Fuldenses\" report that the Bavarian forces had attacked Prince Mojm\u00edr II of Moravia in alliance with the Bohemians already in the year 900. On the other hand, Duke Vratislaus offered the Hungarian invaders free passage and supported their campaign against the Saxon duke Henry the Fowler in the year 915.\nVratislaus is credited with the establishment of St. George's Basilica at Prague Castle and also with the foundation of the Silesian city of Wroc\u0142aw (Breslau), whose Latin name \"Vratislavia\" denotes his initiative. He died in battle against the Hungarians, possibly in 919, although 921 is more often conjectured.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32692", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32692", "title": "V\u00ed\u00f0arr", "text": "Norse deity\nIn Norse mythology, V\u00ed\u00f0arr (Old Norse: , possibly \"wide ruler\", sometimes anglicized as Vidar , Vithar, Vidarr, and Vitharr) is a god among the \u00c6sir associated with vengeance. V\u00ed\u00f0arr is described as the son of Odin and the j\u00f6tunn Gr\u00ed\u00f0r and is foretold to avenge his father's death by killing the wolf Fenrir at Ragnar\u00f6k, a conflict he is described as surviving. V\u00ed\u00f0arr is attested in the \"Poetic Edda\", compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, the \"Prose Edda\", written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and is interpreted as depicted with Fenrir on the Gosforth Cross. A number of theories surround the figure, including theories around potential ritual silence and a Proto-Indo-European basis.\nAttestations.\n\"Poetic Edda\".\nIn the \"Poetic Edda\", V\u00ed\u00f0arr is mentioned in the poems \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", \"Vafthr\u00fadnism\u00e1l\", \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", and \"Lokasenna\".\nIn stanzas 54 and 55 of the poem \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\", a v\u00f6lva tells Odin that his son V\u00ed\u00f0arr will avenge Odin's death at Ragnar\u00f6k by stabbing Fenrir in the heart:\nThen comes Sigfather's | mighty son,\nVithar, to fight | with the foaming wolf;\nIn the giant's son | does he thrust his sword\nFull to the heart: | his father is avenged.\nIn stanzas 51 and 53 of \"Vafthr\u00fadnism\u00e1l\", Vaf\u00fer\u00fa\u00f0nir states that V\u00ed\u00f0arr and his brother V\u00e1li will both live in the \"temples of the gods\" after Surtr's fire has ceded and that V\u00ed\u00f0arr will avenge the death of his father, Odin, by sundering the cold jaws of Fenrir in battle:\nIn stanza 17 of \"Gr\u00edmnism\u00e1l\", during Odin's visions of various dwelling places of the gods, he describes V\u00ed\u00f0arr's (anglicized as \"Vidar\") residence:\nBrushwood grows and high grass\nwidely in Vidar's land\nand there the son proclaims on his horse's back\nthat he's keen to avenge his father.\nAccording to \"Lokasenna\", Loki rebukes the gods at the start of the poem for not properly welcoming him to the feast at \u00c6gir's hall. In stanza 10, Odin finally relents to the rules of hospitality, urging V\u00ed\u00f0arr to stand and pour a drink for the quarrelsome guest. V\u00ed\u00f0arr follows his orders. Loki toasts the \u00c6sir before beginning his flyting.\n\"Prose Edda\".\nV\u00ed\u00f0arr is referenced in the \"Prose Edda\" books \"Gylfaginning\" and \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\".\nV\u00ed\u00f0arr is referenced in the book \"Gylfaginning\" in chapters 29, 51, and 53. In chapter 29, V\u00ed\u00f0arr is introduced by the enthroned figure of High as \"the silent god\" with a thick shoe, that he is nearly as strong as the god Thor, and that the gods rely on him in times of immense difficulties.\nIn chapter 51, High foretells that, during Ragnar\u00f6k, the wolf Fenrir will devour Odin, and V\u00ed\u00f0arr will avenge him by stepping down with one foot on the lower jaw of the monster, grabbing his upper jaw in one hand and tearing his mouth apart, killing him. V\u00ed\u00f0arr's \"thick shoe\" is described as consisting of all the extra leather pieces that people have cut from their own shoes at the toe and heel, collected by the god throughout all time. Therefore, anyone who is concerned enough to give assistance to the gods should throw these pieces away. According to some mythologists, he owed this peculiar footgear to his mother Grid, who, knowing that he would be called upon to fight against fire on the last day, designed it as a protection against the fiery element, as her iron gauntlet had shielded Thor in his encounter with Geirrod.\nIn chapter 54, following Ragnar\u00f6k and the rebirth of the world, it is told that V\u00ed\u00f0arr along with his brother V\u00e1li will have survived both the swelling of the sea and the fiery conflagration unleashed by Surtr, completely unharmed, and shall thereafter dwell on the field I\u00f0av\u00f6llr, \"where the city of Asgard had previously been\".\nAccording to \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", V\u00ed\u00f0arr was one of the twelve presiding male gods seated in their thrones at a banquet for the visiting \u00c6gir. At a point in dialogue between the skaldic god Bragi and \u00c6gir, Snorri himself begins speaking of the myths in euhemeristic terms and states that the historical equivalent of V\u00ed\u00f0arr was the Trojan hero Aeneas who survived the Trojan War and went on to achieve \"great deeds\".\nLater in the book, various kennings are given for V\u00ed\u00f0arr, including again the \"silent As\", \"possessor of the iron shoe\", \"enemy and slayer of Fenrisulf\", \"the gods' avenging As\", \"father's homestead-inhabiting As\", \"son of Odin\", and \"brother of the \u00c6sir\". In the tale of the god Thor's visit to the hall of the j\u00f6tunn Geirr\u00f6d, Gr\u00ed\u00f0r is stated as the mother of \"V\u00ed\u00f0arr the Silent\" who assists Thor in his journey. In chapter 33, after returning from Asgard and feasting with the gods, \u00c6gir invites the gods to come to his hall in three months. Fourteen gods make the trip to attend the feast, including V\u00ed\u00f0arr. In chapter 75, V\u00ed\u00f0arr's name appears twice in a list of \u00c6sir.\nArchaeological record.\nThe mid-11th century Gosforth Cross, located in Cumbria, England, has been described as depicting a combination of scenes from the Christian Judgement Day and the pagan Ragnar\u00f6k. The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style, including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head, one of whose feet is thrust into the beast's forked tongue and on its lower jaw, while a hand is placed against its upper jaw, a scene interpreted as V\u00ed\u00f0arr fighting Fenrir. The depiction has also been theorized as a metaphor for Jesus' defeat of Satan.\nTheories.\nTheories have been proposed that V\u00ed\u00f0arr's silence may derive from a ritual silence or other abstentions which often accompany acts of vengeance, as for example in \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" and \"Baldrs draumar\" when V\u00e1li, conceived for the sole purpose of avenging Baldr's death, abstains from washing his hands and combing his hair \"until he brought Baldr's adversary to the funeral pyre\". Parallels have been drawn between chapter 31 of Tacitus' 1st century CE work \"Germania\" where Tacitus describes that members of the Chatti, a Germanic tribe, may not shave or groom before having first slain an enemy.\nDum\u00e9zil.\nGeorges Dum\u00e9zil theorized that V\u00ed\u00f0arr represents a cosmic figure from an archetype derived from the Proto-Indo-Europeans. Dum\u00e9zil stated that he was aligned with both vertical space, due to his placement of his foot on the wolf's lower jaw and his hand on the wolf's upper jaw, and horizontal space, due to his wide step and strong shoe, and that, by killing the wolf, V\u00ed\u00f0arr keeps the wolf from destroying the cosmos, and the cosmos can thereafter be restored after the destruction resulting from Ragnar\u00f6k.\nDum\u00e9zil thus conceives of V\u00ed\u00f0arr as a spatial god. Dum\u00e9zil substantiates his claim with the text of the \"Lokasenna\", in which V\u00ed\u00f0arr, trying to mediate the dispute with Loki, urges the other Aesir to \"grant Loki his space\" at the feasting table. Dum\u00e9zil argues that this play on V\u00ed\u00f0arr's spatiality would have been understood by an audience familiar with the god, an interpretation further warranted by his reading of the Lokasenna as being in significant part a book of puns and word plays about the different Aesir.\nDum\u00e9zil also suggests that V\u00ed\u00f0arr's spatiality is seen in the Vishnu of the Vedic traditions, both etymologically (the \"Vi\"- root) and mythologically, citing the story of Bali and Vishnu. In this legend, Vishnu (in the form of Vamana) tricks the malevolent king Bali, who has secured dominion over the whole Earth, by making Bali promise to grant Vamana all the land he can cover in three paces. Vamana turns himself into a giant and strides across all of heaven and Earth, taking Bali's head and granting him immortality in lieu of taking the last pace.\nDum\u00e9zil theorizes that these myths of Fenrir vs. V\u00ed\u00f0arr and Bali vs. Vishnu may have a common origin in an Indo-European god of spatiality, similar but distinct from the hypothetical framing or entry / exit god that spawned Janus and Heimdallr.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32693", "revid": "36878010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32693", "title": "Vowel", "text": "Sound in spoken language, articulated with an open vocal tract\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt; \nA vowel is a speech sound pronounced without any stricture in the vocal tract. Vowels are one of the two principal classes of speech sounds, the other being the consonant. Vowels vary in quality, loudness, and length. They are usually voiced and are closely involved in prosodic variation such as tone, intonation and stress. The nucleus, or \"center\", of a syllable typically consists of a vowel sound (though this is not always the case). \nThe word \"vowel\" comes from the Latin word , meaning \"vocal\" (i.e. relating to the voice). \nIn English, the word \"vowel\" is commonly used to refer both to vowel sounds and to the written symbols that represent them: \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8e\u27e9, \u27e8i\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, \u27e8u\u27e9, and sometimes \u27e8y\u27e9, and \u27e8w\u27e9.\nDefinition.\nThere are two complementary definitions of vowel, one phonetic and the other phonological.\nThe phonetic definition of \"vowel\" (i.e. a sound produced with no constriction in the vocal tract) does not always match the phonological definition (i.e. a sound that forms the peak of a syllable). The approximants and illustrate this: both are without much of a constriction in the vocal tract (so phonetically they seem to be vowel-like), but they occur at the onset of syllables (e.g. in \"yet\" and \"wet\") which suggests that phonologically they are consonants. A similar debate arises over whether a word like \"bird\" in a rhotic dialect has an r-colored vowel or a syllabic consonant . The American linguist Kenneth Pike (1943) suggested the terms \"vocoid\" for a phonetic vowel and \"vowel\" for a phonological vowel, so using this terminology, and are classified as vocoids but not vowels. However, Maddieson and Emmory (1985) demonstrated from a range of languages that semivowels are produced with a narrower constriction of the vocal tract than vowels, and so may be considered consonants on that basis. Nonetheless, the phonetic and phonemic definitions would still conflict for the syllabic /l/ in \"table\" or the syllabic nasals in \"button\" and \"rhythm\".\nArticulation.\nThe traditional view of vowel production, reflected for example in the terminology and presentation of the International Phonetic Alphabet, is one of articulatory features that determine a vowel's \"quality\" as distinguishing it from other vowels. Daniel Jones developed the cardinal vowel system to describe vowels in terms of the features of tongue \"height\" (vertical dimension), tongue \"backness\" (horizontal dimension) and \"roundedness\" (lip articulation). These three parameters are indicated in the schematic quadrilateral IPA vowel diagram on the right. There are additional features of vowel quality, such as the velum position (nasality), type of vocal fold vibration (phonation), and tongue root position.\nThis conception of vowel articulation has been known to be inaccurate since 1928. Peter Ladefoged has said that \"early phoneticians... thought they were describing the highest point of the tongue, but they were not. They were actually describing formant frequencies.\" (See below.) The IPA \"Handbook\" concedes that \"the vowel quadrilateral must be regarded as an abstraction and not a direct mapping of tongue position.\"\nNonetheless, the concept that vowel qualities are determined primarily by tongue position and lip rounding continues to be used in pedagogy, as it provides an intuitive explanation of how vowels are distinguished.\nHeight.\nTheoretically, vowel height refers to the vertical position of either the tongue or the jaw (depending on the model) relative to either the roof of the mouth or the aperture of the jaw. In practice, however, it refers to the first formant (lowest resonance of the voice), abbreviated F1, which is associated with the height of the tongue. There are two terms commonly applied to refer to two degrees of vowel height: in close vowels, also known as high vowels, such as and , the first formant is consistent with the tongue being positioned close to the palate, high in the mouth, whereas in open vowels, also known as low vowels, such as , F1 is consistent with the jaw being open and the tongue being positioned low in the mouth. Height is defined by the inverse of the F1 value: the higher the frequency of the first formant, the lower (more open) the vowel. In John Esling's usage, where fronted vowels are distinguished in height by the position of the jaw rather than the tongue, only the terms 'open' and 'close' are used, as 'high' and 'low' refer to the position of the tongue.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet has letters for six degrees of vowel height for full vowels (plus the reduced mid vowel ), but it is extremely unusual for a language to distinguish this many degrees without other attributes. The IPA letters distinguish (sorted according to height, with the top-most one being the highest and the bottom-most being the lowest):\nThe letters \u27e8\u27e9 are defined as close-mid but are commonly used for true mid vowels. If more precision is required, true mid vowels may be written with a lowering or raising diacritic: \u27e8\u27e9 or \u27e8\u27e9.\nThe Kensiu language, spoken in Malaysia and Thailand, is highly unusual in contrasting true mid vowels with both close-mid and open-mid vowels, without any additional parameters such as length, roundness or ATR. The front vowels, , along with open , make a six-way height distinction; this holds even for the nasal vowels. A few varieties of German have been reported to have five contrastive vowel heights that are independent of length or other parameters. For example, the Bavarian dialect of Amstetten has thirteen long vowels, which have been analyzed as four vowel heights (close, close-mid, mid, open-mid) each among the front unrounded, front rounded, and back rounded vowels, along with an open vowel for a fifth height: . Apart from the aforementioned Kensiu language, no other language is known to contrast more than four degrees of vowel height.\nThe parameter of vowel height appears to be the primary cross-linguistic feature of vowels in that all spoken languages that have been researched till now use height as a contrastive feature. No other parameter, even backness or rounding (see below), is used in all languages. Some languages have vertical vowel systems in which at least at a phonemic level, only height is used to distinguish vowels.\nBackness.\nVowel backness is named for the position of the tongue during the articulation of a vowel relative to the back of the mouth. As with vowel height, however, it is \"defined\" by a formant of the voice, in this case the second, F2, not by the position of the tongue. In front vowels, such as , the frequency of F2 is relatively high, which generally corresponds to a position of the tongue forward in the mouth, whereas in back vowels, such as , F2 is low, consistent with the tongue being positioned towards the back of the mouth.\nThe International Phonetic Alphabet defines five degrees of vowel backness (sorted according to backness, with the top-most one being the front-most back and the bottom-most being the back-most):\nTo them may be added front-central and back-central, corresponding to the vertical lines separating central from front and back vowel spaces in several IPA diagrams. However, \"front-central\" and \"back-central\" may also be used as terms synonymous with \"near-front\" and \"near-back\". No language is known to contrast more than three degrees of backness nor is there a language that contrasts front with near-front vowels nor back with near-back ones.\nAlthough some English dialects have vowels at five degrees of backness, there is no known language that distinguishes five degrees of backness without additional differences in height or rounding.\nRoundedness.\nRoundedness is named after the rounding of the lips in some vowels. Because lip rounding is easily visible, vowels may be commonly identified as rounded based on the articulation of the lips. Acoustically, rounded vowels are identified chiefly by a decrease in F2, although F1 is also slightly decreased.\nIn most languages, roundedness is a reinforcing feature of mid to high back vowels rather than a distinctive feature. Usually, the higher a back vowel, the more intense is the rounding. However, in some languages, roundedness is independent from backness, such as French and German (with front rounded vowels), most Uralic languages (Estonian has a rounding contrast for and front vowels), Turkic languages (with a rounding distinction for front vowels and ), and Vietnamese with back unrounded vowels.\nNonetheless, even in those languages there is usually some phonetic correlation between rounding and backness: front rounded vowels tend to be more front-central than front, and back unrounded vowels tend to be more back-central than back. Thus, the placement of unrounded vowels to the left of rounded vowels on the IPA vowel chart is reflective of their position in formant space.\nDifferent kinds of labialization are possible. In mid to high rounded back vowels the lips are generally protruded (\"pursed\") outward, a phenomenon known as \"endolabial rounding\" because the insides of the lips are visible, whereas in mid to high rounded front vowels the lips are generally \"compressed\" with the margins of the lips pulled in and drawn towards each other, a phenomenon known as \"exolabial rounding.\" However, not all languages follow that pattern. Japanese , for example, is an exolabial (compressed) back vowel, and sounds quite different from an English endolabial . Swedish and Norwegian are the only two known languages in which the feature is contrastive; they have both exo- and endo-labial close front vowels and close central vowels, respectively. In many phonetic treatments, both are considered types of rounding, but some phoneticians do not believe that these are subsets of a single phenomenon and posit instead three independent features of \"rounded\" (endolabial), \"compressed\" (exolabial), and unrounded. The lip position of unrounded vowels may also be classified separately as \"spread\" and \"neutral\" (neither rounded nor spread). Others distinguish compressed rounded vowels, in which the corners of the mouth are drawn together, from compressed unrounded vowels, in which the lips are compressed but the corners remain apart as in spread vowels.\nFront, raised and retracted.\nThe conception of the tongue moving in two directions, high\u2013low and front\u2013back, is not supported by articulatory evidence and does not clarify how articulation affects vowel quality. Vowels may instead be characterized by the three directions of movement of the tongue from its neutral position: front (forward), raised (upward and back), and retracted (downward and back). Front vowels ( and, to a lesser extent , etc.), can be secondarily qualified as close or open, as in the traditional conception, but this refers to jaw rather than tongue position. In addition, rather than there being a unitary category of back vowels, the regrouping posits raised vowels, where the body of the tongue approaches the velum (], etc.), and retracted vowels, where the root of the tongue approaches the pharynx (, etc.):\nMembership in these categories is scalar, with the mid-central vowels being marginal to any category.\nNasalization.\nNasalization occurs when air escapes through the nose. Vowels are often nasalised under the influence of neighbouring nasal consonants, as in English \"hand\" . \"Nasalised vowels\", however, should not be confused with \"nasal vowels\". The latter refers to vowels that are distinct from their oral counterparts, as in French vs. .\nIn nasal vowels, the velum is lowered, and some air travels through the nasal cavity as well as the mouth. An oral vowel is a vowel in which all air escapes through the mouth. Polish and Portuguese also contrast nasal and oral vowels.\nPhonation.\nVoicing describes whether the vocal cords are vibrating during the articulation of a vowel. Most languages have only voiced vowels, but several Native American languages, such as Cheyenne and Totonac, have both voiced and devoiced vowels in complementary distribution. Vowels are devoiced in whispered speech. In Japanese and in Quebec French, vowels that are between voiceless consonants are often devoiced. Keres is disputed to have phonemic voiceless vowels but no language is confirmed to have them phonemically.\nModal voice, creaky voice, and breathy voice (murmured vowels) are phonation types that are used contrastively in some languages. Often, they co-occur with tone or stress distinctions; in the Mon language, vowels pronounced in the high tone are also produced with creaky voice. In such cases, it can be unclear whether it is the tone, the voicing type, or the pairing of the two that is being used for phonemic contrast. The combination of phonetic cues (phonation, tone, stress) is known as \"register\" or \"register complex\".\nTenseness.\nTenseness is used to describe the opposition of \"tense vowels\" vs. \"lax vowels\". This opposition has traditionally been thought to be a result of greater muscular tension, though phonetic experiments have repeatedly failed to show this.\nUnlike the other features of vowel quality, tenseness is only applicable to the few languages that have this opposition (mainly Germanic languages, e.g. German), whereas the vowels of the other languages (e.g. Spanish) cannot be described with respect to tenseness in any meaningful way.\nOne may distinguish the English tense vs. lax vowels roughly, with its spelling. Tense vowels usually occur in words with the final silent \u27e8e\u27e9, as in \"mate\". Lax vowels occur in words without the silent \u27e8e\u27e9, such as \"mat\". In American English, lax vowels do not appear in stressed open syllables.\nIn traditional grammar, \"long vowels\" vs. \"short vowels\" are more commonly used, compared to \"tense\" and \"lax\". The two sets of terms are used interchangeably by some because the features are concomitant in some varieties of English. In most Germanic languages, lax vowels can only occur in closed syllables. Therefore, they are also known as \"checked vowels\", whereas the tense vowels are called \"free vowels\" since they can occur in any kind of syllable.\nTongue root position.\nAdvanced tongue root (ATR) is a feature common across much of Africa, the Pacific Northwest, and scattered other languages such as Modern Mongolian. The contrast between advanced and retracted tongue root resembles the tense-lax contrast acoustically, but they are articulated differently. Those vowels involve noticeable tension in the vocal tract.\nSecondary narrowings in the vocal tract.\nPharyngealized vowels occur in some languages like Sedang and the Tungusic languages. Pharyngealisation is similar in articulation to retracted tongue root but is acoustically distinct.\nA stronger degree of pharyngealisation occurs in the Northeast Caucasian languages and the Khoisan languages. They might be called epiglottalized since the primary constriction is at the tip of the epiglottis.\nThe greatest degree of pharyngealisation is found in the strident vowels of the Khoisan languages, where the larynx is raised, and the pharynx constricted, so that either the epiglottis or the arytenoid cartilages vibrate instead of the vocal cords.\nThe terms \"pharyngealized\", \"epiglottalized\", \"strident\", and \"sphincteric\" are sometimes used interchangeably.\nRhotic vowels.\nRhotic vowels are the \"R-colored vowels\" of American English and a few other languages.\nReduced vowels.\nSome languages, such as English and Russian, have what are called 'reduced', 'weak' or 'obscure' vowels in some unstressed positions. These do not correspond one-to-one with the vowel sounds that occur in stressed position (so-called 'full' vowels), and they tend to be mid-centralized in comparison, as well as having reduced rounding or spreading. The IPA has long provided two letters for obscure vowels, mid \u27e8\u27e9 and lower \u27e8\u27e9, neither of which are defined for rounding. Dialects of English may have up to four phonemic reduced vowels: , , and higher unrounded and rounded . (The non-IPA letters \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 may be used for the latter to avoid confusion with the clearly defined values of IPA letters like \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9, which are also seen, since the IPA only provides for two reduced vowels.)\nAcoustics.\nThe acoustics of vowels are fairly well understood. The different vowel qualities are realized in acoustic analyses of vowels by the relative values of the formants, acoustic resonances of the vocal tract which show up as dark bands on a spectrogram. The vocal tract acts as a resonant cavity, and the position of the jaw, lips, and tongue affect the parameters of the resonant cavity, resulting in different formant values. The acoustics of vowels can be visualized using spectrograms, which display the acoustic energy at each frequency, and how this changes with time.\nThe first formant, abbreviated \"F1\", corresponds to vowel openness (vowel height). Open vowels have high F1 frequencies, while close vowels have low F1 frequencies, as can be seen in the accompanying spectrogram: The and have similar low first formants, whereas has a higher formant.\nThe second formant, F2, corresponds to vowel frontness. Back vowels have low F2 frequencies, while front vowels have high F2 frequencies. This is very clear in the spectrogram, where the front vowel has a much higher F2 frequency than the other two vowels. However, in open vowels, the high F1 frequency forces a rise in the F2 frequency as well, so an alternative measure of frontness is the \"difference\" between the first and second formants. For this reason, some people prefer to plot as F1 vs. F2\u00a0\u2013\u00a0F1. (This dimension is usually called 'backness' rather than 'frontness', but the term 'backness' can be counterintuitive when discussing formants.)\nIn the third edition of his textbook, Peter Ladefoged recommended using plots of F1 against F2\u00a0\u2013\u00a0F1 to represent vowel quality. However, in the fourth edition, he changed to adopt a simple plot of F1 against F2, and this simple plot of F1 against F2 was maintained for the fifth (and final) edition of the book. Katrina Hayward compares the two types of plots and concludes that plotting of F1 against F2\u00a0\u2013\u00a0F1 \"is not very satisfactory because of its effect on the placing of the central vowels\", so she also recommends use of a simple plot of F1 against F2. In fact, this kind of plot of F1 against F2 has been used by analysts to show the quality of the vowels in a wide range of languages, including RP, the Queen's English, American English, Singapore English, Brunei English, North Frisian, Turkish Kabardian, and various indigenous Australian languages.\nR-colored vowels are characterized by lowered F3 values.\nRounding is generally realized by a decrease of F2 that tends to reinforce vowel backness. One effect of this is that back vowels are most commonly rounded while front vowels are most commonly unrounded; another is that rounded vowels tend to plot to the right of unrounded vowels in vowel charts. That is, there is a reason for plotting vowel pairs the way they are.\nProsody and intonation.\nIn addition to variation in vowel quality as described above, vowels vary as a result of differences in prosody. The most important prosodic variables are pitch (fundamental frequency), loudness (intensity) and length (duration). However, the features of prosody are usually considered to apply not to the vowel itself, but to the syllable in which the vowel occurs. In other words, the \"domain\" of prosody is the syllable, not the segment (vowel or consonant). We can list briefly the effect of prosody on the vowel component of a syllable.\nMonophthongs, diphthongs, triphthongs.\nA vowel sound whose quality does not change throughout the vowel is called a monophthong. Monophthongs are sometimes called \"pure\" or \"stable\" vowels. A vowel sound that glides from one quality to another is called a diphthong, and a vowel sound that glides successively through three qualities is a triphthong.\nAll languages have monophthongs and many languages have diphthongs, but triphthongs or vowel sounds with even more target qualities are relatively rare cross-linguistically. English has all three types: the vowel sound in \"hit\" is a monophthong , the vowel sound in \"boy\" is in most dialects a diphthong , and the vowel sounds of \"flower\", , form a triphthong or disyllable, depending on the dialect.\nIn phonology, diphthongs and triphthongs are distinguished from sequences of monophthongs by whether the vowel sound may be analyzed into distinct phonemes. For example, the vowel sounds in a two-syllable pronunciation of the word \"flower\" () phonetically form a disyllabic triphthong but are phonologically a sequence of a diphthong (represented by the letters \u27e8ow\u27e9) and a monophthong (represented by the letters \u27e8er\u27e9). Some linguists use the terms \"diphthong\" and \"triphthong\" only in this phonemic sense.\nWritten vowels.\nThe name \"vowel\" is often used for the symbols that represent vowel sounds in a language's writing system, particularly if the language uses an alphabet. In writing systems based on the Latin alphabet, the letters \u27e8a\u27e9, \u27e8e\u27e9, \u27e8i\u27e9, \u27e8o\u27e9, \u27e8u\u27e9, \u27e8y\u27e9, \u27e8w\u27e9 and sometimes others can all be used to represent vowels. However, not all of these letters represent the vowels in all languages that use this writing, or even consistently within one language. Some of them, especially \u27e8w\u27e9 and \u27e8y\u27e9, are also used to represent approximant consonants. Moreover, a vowel might be represented by a letter usually reserved for consonants, or a combination of letters, particularly where one letter represents several sounds at once, or vice versa; examples from English include \u27e8igh\u27e9 in \"thigh\" and \u27e8x\u27e9 in \"x-ray\". In addition, extensions of the Latin alphabet have such independent vowel letters as \u27e8\u0105\u27e9, \u27e8\u0119\u27e9, \u27e8\u012f\u27e9, \u27e8\u01eb\u27e9, and \u27e8\u0173\u27e9.\nThe phonetic values vary considerably by language, and some languages use \u27e8i\u27e9 and \u27e8y\u27e9 for the consonant , e.g., initial \u27e8i\u27e9 in Italian or Romanian and initial \u27e8y\u27e9 in English. In the original Latin alphabet, there was no written distinction between \u27e8v\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9, and the letter represented the approximant and the vowels and . In Modern Welsh, \u27e8w\u27e9 represents these same sounds. There is not necessarily a direct one-to-one correspondence between the vowel sounds of a language and the vowel letters. Many languages that use a form of the Latin alphabet have more vowel sounds than can be represented by the standard set of five vowel letters. In English spelling, the five letters \u27e8a\u27e9 \u27e8e\u27e9 \u27e8i\u27e9 \u27e8o\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9 can represent a variety of vowel sounds, while the letter \u27e8y\u27e9 frequently represents vowels (as in e.g., \"gym\", \"happy\", or the diphthongs in \"cry\", \"thyme\"); \u27e8w\u27e9 is used in representing some diphthongs (as in \"cow\") and to represent a monophthong in the borrowed words \"cwm\" and \"crwth\" (sometimes \"cruth\").\nOther languages cope with the limitation in the number of Latin vowel letters in similar ways. Many languages make extensive use of combinations of letters to represent various sounds. Other languages use vowel letters with modifications, such as \u27e8\u00e4\u27e9 in Swedish, or add diacritical marks, like ogoneks, to vowels to represent the variety of possible vowel sounds. Some languages have also constructed additional vowel letters by modifying the standard Latin vowels in other ways, such as \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9 or \u27e8\u00f8\u27e9 that are found in some of the Scandinavian languages. The International Phonetic Alphabet has a set of 28 symbols representing the range of essential vowel qualities, and a further set of diacritics to denote variations from the basic vowel.\nThe writing systems used for some languages, such as the Hebrew alphabet and the Arabic alphabet, do not ordinarily mark all the vowels, since they are frequently unnecessary in identifying a word. Technically, these are called abjads rather than alphabets. Although it is possible to construct English sentences that can be understood without written vowels (\"cn y rd ths?\"), single words in English lacking written vowels can be indistinguishable; consider \"dd\", which could be any of \"dad, dada, dado, dead, deed, did, died, diode, dodo, dud, dude, odd, add\", and \"aided\". (Abjads generally express some word-internal vowels and all word-initial and word-final vowels, whereby the ambiguity will be much reduced.) The Masoretes devised a vowel notation system for Hebrew Jewish scripture that is still widely used, as well as the trope symbols used for its cantillation; both are part of oral tradition and still the basis for many bible translations\u2014Jewish and Christian.\nShifts.\nThe differences in pronunciation of vowel letters between English and its related languages can be accounted for by the Great Vowel Shift. After printing was introduced to England, and therefore after spelling was more or less standardized, a series of dramatic changes in the pronunciation of the vowel phonemes occurred, and continued into recent centuries, but were not reflected in the spelling system. This has led to numerous inconsistencies in the spelling of English vowel sounds and the pronunciation of English vowel letters (and to the mispronunciation of foreign words and names by speakers of English).\nAudio samples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSystems.\nThe importance of vowels in distinguishing one word from another varies from language to language. Nearly all languages have at least three phonemic vowels, usually as in Classical Arabic, some Malayic languages of Borneo (including Banjarese) and Inuktitut, though Adyghe and many Sepik languages have a vertical vowel system of . Very few languages have fewer, though some Arrernte, Circassian, and Ndu languages have been argued to have just two, and , with being epenthetic.\nIt is not straightforward to say which language has the most vowels, since that depends on how they are counted. For example, long vowels, nasal vowels, and various phonations may or may not be counted separately; indeed, it may sometimes be unclear if phonation belongs to the vowels or the consonants of a language. If such things are ignored and only vowels with dedicated IPA letters ('vowel qualities') are considered, then very few languages have more than ten. The Germanic languages have some of the largest inventories: Standard Danish has 11 to 13 short vowels (), while the Amstetten dialect of Bavarian has been reported to have thirteen long vowels: . The situation can be quite disparate within a same family language: Spanish and French are two closely related Romance languages but Spanish has only five pure vowel qualities, , while classical French has eleven: and four nasal vowels . The Mon\u2013Khmer languages of Southeast Asia also have some large inventories, such as the ten vowels of Khmer: . Wu dialects have the largest inventories of Chinese; the Jinhui dialect of Wu has also been reported to have eleven vowels: ten basic vowels, , plus restricted ; this does not count the seven nasal vowels.\nOne of the most common vowels is ; it is nearly universal for a language to have at least one open vowel, though most dialects of English have an and a \u2014and often an , all open vowels\u2014but no central . Some Tagalog and Cebuano speakers have rather than , and Dhangu Yolngu is described as having , without any peripheral vowels. is also extremely common, though Tehuelche has just the vowels with no close vowels. The third vowel of the Arabic-type three-vowel system, , is considerably less common. A large fraction of the languages of North America happen to have a four-vowel system without : ; Nahuatl and Navajo are examples.\nIn most languages, vowels serve mainly to distinguish separate lexemes, rather than different inflectional forms of the same lexeme as they commonly do in the Semitic languages. For example, while English \"man\" becomes \"men\" in the plural, \"moon\" is a completely different word.\nWords without vowels.\nIn rhotic dialects of English, as in Canada and the United States, there are many words such as \"bird, learn, girl, church, worst, worm, myrrh\" that some phoneticians analyze as having no vowels, only a syllabic consonant . However, others analyze these words instead as having a rhotic vowel, . The difference may be partially one of dialect.\nThere are a few such words that are disyllabic, like \", curtain,\" and \"turtle:\" , and (or , , and ), and even a few that are trisyllabic, at least in some accents, such as \"purpler\" , \"hurdler\" , \"gurgler\" , and \"certainer\" .\nThe word \"and\" frequently contracts to a simple nasal \"\u2019n,\" as in \"lock 'n key\" . Words such as \"will, have,\" and \"is\" regularly contract to \"\u2019ll\" , \"\u2019ve\" , and \"'s\" . However, none of them are pronounced alone without vowels, so they are not phonological words. Onomatopoeic words that can be pronounced alone, and that have no vowels or ars, include \"hmm, pst!, shh!, tsk!,\" and \"zzz\". As in other languages, onomatopoeiae stand outside the normal phonotactics of English.\nThere are other languages that form lexical words without vowel sounds. In Serbo-Croatian, for example, the consonants and (the difference is not written) can act as a syllable nucleus and carry rising or falling tone; examples include the tongue-twister and geographic names such as . In Czech and Slovak, either or can stand in for vowels: \"wolf\", \"neck\". A particularly long word without vowels is , meaning \"quarter-handful\", with two syllables (one for each R), or , a verb form meaning \"you flipped (sth) down\" (eg a marble). Whole sentences (usually tongue-twisters) can be made from such words, such as , meaning \"stick a finger through your neck\" (), and , which means \"A morel full of spots wetted from fogs\". (Here has two syllables based on L; and the preposition consists of a single consonant. Only prepositions do this in Czech, and they normally link phonetically to the following word, so not really behave as vowelless words.) In Russian, there are also prepositions that consist of a single consonant letter, like , , and . However, these forms are actually contractions of , , and respectively, and these forms are still used in modern Russian before words with certain consonant clusters for ease of pronunciation.\nIn Kazakh and certain other Turkic languages, words without vowel sounds may occur due to reduction of weak vowels. A common example is the Kazakh word for one: , pronounced . Among careful speakers, however, the original vowel may be preserved, and the vowels are always preserved in the orthography.\nIn Southern varieties of Chinese, such as Cantonese and Minnan, some monosyllabic words are made of exclusively nasals, such as Cantonese \"no\" and \"five\". Minnan also has words consisting of a consonant followed by a syllabic nasal, such as \"pn\u0304g\" \"cooked rice\".\nSo far, all of these syllabic consonants, at least in the lexical words, have been sonorants, such as , , , and , which have a voiced quality similar to vowels. (They can carry tone, for example.) However, there are languages with lexical words that not only contain no vowels, but contain no sonorants at all, like (non-lexical) \"shh!\" in English. These include some Berber languages, some languages of the American Pacific Northwest, such as Nuxalk, and some Northwest Caucasian languages, such as Abaza language. An example from Nuxalk is \"seal fat\" (pronounced , as spelled), and a longer one is \"clhp'xwlhtlhplhhskwts\"' (pronounced ) \"he had had in his possession a bunchberry plant\". (Follow the Nuxalk link for other examples.) Berber examples include \"you took it off\" and \"you gave it\". Some words may contain one or two consonants only: \"be\", \"feed on\". \nAbaza language often drops word-final /\u0259/ when forming compounds, making combinations such as \u0445\u044a\u043a\u04cf\u0445\u0432\u0431\u043a\u044a\u0432\u044b\u043b\u043a\u04cf /q\u02b0k\u02bc\u03c7\u02b7bq\u02b7\u02bc\u0259lk\u02bc/ \"five vats of sour cream\" possible. Therefore, even though the dictionary forms \u0445\u044a\u043a\u04cf\u044b /q\u02b0k\u02bc\u0259/ \"sour cream\" and \u0445\u0432\u043f\u0430 /\u03c7\u02b7p\u02b0a/ \"five\" have a schwa at the end, the consonant cluster /q\u02b0k\u02bc/ and the sole consonant /\u03c7\u02b7/ (-pa is a counting suffix) can be analysed as the full word, with final vowels probably being a result of obligatory nucleus (such as in the first example, where the word \u0431\u043a\u044a\u0432\u044b\u043b /bq\u02b7\u02bc\u0259l/ \"vat\" is a closed syllable, preventing the vowel deletion, unless /l/ is analysed as a syllabic consonant, which would still make it a nucleus but would make the word vowelless). \nIn Mandarin Chinese, words and syllables such as and are sometimes described as being syllabic fricatives and affricates phonemically, and , but these do have a voiced segment that carries the tone. \nIn the Japonic language Miyako, there are words with no voiced sounds, such as 'dust', 'breast/milk', 'day', 'a comb', 'to make', 'to build', 'month', 'to cut', 'to pull'. \nSome analyses of Wandala is reported to have no phonemic vowels.\nWords consisting of only vowels.\nIt is not uncommon for short grammatical words to consist of only vowels, such as \"a\" and \"I\" in English. Lexical words are somewhat rarer in English and are generally restricted to a single syllable: \"eye, awe, owe\", and in non-rhotic accents \"air, ore, err\". Vowel-only words of more than one syllable are generally foreign loans, such as \"ai\" (two syllables: ) for the maned sloth, or proper names, such as \"Iowa\" (in some accents: ).\nHowever, vowel sequences in hiatus are more freely allowed in some other languages, most famously perhaps in Bantu and Polynesian languages, but also in Japanese and Finnic languages. In such languages there tends to be a larger variety of vowel-only words. In Swahili (Bantu), for example, there is \"aua\" 'to survey' and \"eua\" 'to purify' (both three syllables); in Japanese, \"aoi\" \u9752\u3044 'blue/green' and \"oioi\" \u8ffd\u3005 'gradually' (three and four morae); and in Finnish, 'intention' and 'open!' (both two syllables), although some dialects pronounce them as and . In Urdu, \u0101ye/aaie \u0622\u0626\u06cc\u06d2 or \u0101yn \u0622\u0626\u06cc\u06ba 'come' is used. Hawaiian, and the Polynesian languages generally, have unusually large numbers of such words, such as (a small green fish), which is three syllables: . Most long words involve reduplication, which is quite productive in Polynesian: 'grooves', 'breath', 'tough' (all four syllables), 'crying' (five syllables, from 'to weep'), or 'false mullet' (sp. fish, three or five syllables).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32695", "revid": "50857144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32695", "title": "V6 engine", "text": "Piston engine with six cylinders in a \"V\" configuration\nA V6 engine is a six-cylinder piston engine where the cylinders and cylinder blocks share a common crankshaft and are arranged in a V configuration.\nThe first V6 engines were designed and produced independently by Marmon Motor Car Company, Deutz Gasmotoren Fabrik and Delahaye. Engines built after World War II include the Lancia V6 engine in 1950 for the Lancia Aurelia, and the Buick V6 engine in 1962 for the Buick Special. The V6 layout has become the most common layout for six-cylinder automotive engines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDesign.\nDue to their short length, V6 engines are often used as the larger engine option for vehicles which are otherwise produced with inline-four engines, especially in transverse engine vehicles. A downside for luxury cars is that V6 engines produce more vibrations than straight-six engines. Some sports cars like the Porsche 911 use flat-six engines instead of V6 engines, due to their near perfect primary engine balance and lower centre of gravity (which improves the handling).\nThe displacement of modern V6 engines is typically between , though larger and smaller examples have been produced, such as the Mazda V6 used in the 1991\u20131998 Mazda MX-3, or the Mitsubishi V6 engine used in the 1992\u20131998 Mirage/Lancer, while the largest gasoline V6 built was the GMC V6 used in the 1962 GMC C/K series 6500.\nBalance and smoothness.\nAll V6 engines with even firing spacing\u2014regardless of the V-angle between the cylinder banks\u2014are subject to a primary imbalance caused by each bank consisting of an straight-three engine, due to the odd number of cylinders in each bank. Straight-six engines and flat-six engines do not experience this imbalance. To reduce the vibrations caused by this imbalance, most V6 engines use a harmonic damper on the crankshaft and/or a counter-rotating balance shaft.\nSix-cylinder designs have less pulsation in the power delivery than four-cylinder engines, due to the overlap in the power strokes of the six-cylinder engine. In a four-cylinder, four-stroke engine, only one piston is on a power stroke at any given time. Each piston comes to a complete stop and reverses direction before the next one starts its power stroke, which results in a gap between power strokes, especially at lower engine speeds (RPM). In a six-cylinder engine with an even firing interval, the next piston starts its power stroke 60\u00b0 before the previous one finishes, which results in smoother delivery of power to the flywheel.\nComparing engines on a dynamometer, a V6 engine shows instantaneous torque peaks of 154% above mean torque and valleys of 139% below mean torque, with a small amount of negative torque (engine torque reversals) between power strokes. In the case of a four-cylinder engine, the peaks are approximately 270% above mean torque and 210% below mean torque, with 100% negative torque being delivered between strokes. However, a V6 with uneven firing intervals of 90\u00b0 and 150\u00b0 shows large torque variations of 185% above and 172% below mean torque.\nCylinder bank angles.\n10 to 15 degrees.\nSince 1991, Volkswagen has produced narrow angle \"VR6\" engines with V-angles of 10.5 and 15 degrees shared by both banks of cylinders, in a design similar to the 1922\u20131976 Lancia V4 engine. These engines use a single cylinder head so are technically a straight engine with the name \"VR6\" coming from the combination of German words \"Verk\u00fcrzt\" and \"Reihenmotor\" meaning \"shortened inline engine\". The VR6 engines were used in transverse engine front-wheel drive cars which were originally designed for inline-four engines. Due to the minimal extra length and width of the VR6 engine, it could be fitted to the engine compartments relatively easily, in order to provide a displacement increase of 60 percent .\nSince there is no room in the V between the cylinder banks for an intake system, all the intakes are on one side of the engine, and all the exhausts are on the other side. It uses a firing order of 1-5-3-6-2-4 (which is the firing order used by most straight-six engines), rather than the common V6 firing order of 1-2-3-4-5-6 or 1-6-5-4-3-2.\n60 degrees.\nA V-angle of 60 degrees is the optimal configuration for V6 engines regarding engine balance. When individual crank pins are used for each cylinder (i.e. using a six-throw crankshaft), an even firing interval of 120 degrees can be used. This firing interval is a multiple of the 60-degree V-angle; therefore, the combustion forces can be balanced through the use of the appropriate firing order.\nThe inline-three engine that forms each cylinder bank, however, produces unbalanced rotating and reciprocal forces. These forces remain unbalanced in all V6 engines, often leading to the use of a balance shaft to reduce the vibration.\nThe 1950 Lancia V6 engine was pioneering in its use of a six-throw crankshaft to reduce vibration. More recent designs often use a three-throw crankshaft with 'flying arms' between the crankpins allowing for an even firing interval of 120 degrees to be achieved. A pair of counterweights on the crankshaft can then be used to almost perfectly cancel out the primary forces16 and reduce the secondary vibrations to acceptable levels. The engine mounts can be designed to absorb these remaining vibrations.\nA 60-degree V-angle results in a narrower engine overall than V6 engines with larger V-angles. This angle often results in the overall more compact engine, making the engine easier to fit either longitudinally or transversely in the engine compartment.\n90 degrees.\nMany manufacturers, particularly American ones, built V6 engines with a V-angle of 90 degrees based on their existing 90-degree V8 engines. Such configurations were easy to design by removing two cylinders and replacing the V8 engine's four-throw crankshaft with a three-throw crankshaft. This reduced design costs, allowed the new V6 to share components with the V8 engine, and sometimes allowed manufacturers to build the V6 and V8 engines on the same production line.\nThe downsides of a 90 degree design are a wider engine which is more vibration-prone than a 60 degree V6. The initial 90 degree V6 engines (such as the Buick Fireball V6 engine) had three shared crankpins arranged at 120 degrees from each other, due to their origins from the V8 engines. This resulted in an uneven firing order, with half of the cylinders using a firing interval of 90 degrees and other half using an interval of 150 degrees. The uneven firing intervals resulted in rough-running engines with \"unpleasant\" vibrations at low engine speeds.\nSeveral modern 90 degree V6 engines reduce the vibrations using split crankpins offset by 30 degrees between piston pairs, which creates an even firing interval of 120 degrees for all cylinders. For example, the 1977 Buick 231 \"even-fire\" V6 engine was an upgraded version of the Buick Fireball engine with a split-pin crankshaft to reduce vibration by achieving an even firing order.16 Such a 'split' crankpin is weaker than a straight one, but modern metallurgical techniques can produce a crankshaft that is adequately strong.\nA balance shaft and/or crankshaft counterweights can be used to reduce vibrations in 90 degree V6 engines.\n120 degrees.\nAt first glance, 120 degrees might seem to be the optimal V-angle for a V6 engine, since pairs of pistons in alternate banks can share crank pins in a three-throw crankshaft and the combustion forces are balanced by the firing interval being equal to the angle between the cylinder banks. A 120 degree configuration, unlike the 60 degree or 90 degree configurations, would not require crankshafts with flying arms, split crankpins, or seven main bearings to be even-firing. However, the primary imbalance caused by odd number of cylinders in each bank still remains in a 120 degree V6 engine. This differs from the perfect balance achieved by a 90 degree V8 engine with a commonly used crossplane crankshaft, because the inline-four engine in each bank of the V8 engine does not have this primary imbalance.\nA 120 degree design also results in a large width for the engine, being only slightly narrower than a flat-six engine (which does not have the balance problems of the V6 engine). Therefore, the flat-six engine has been used in various automobiles, whereas use of the 120 degree V6 engine has been limited to a few truck and racing car engines, with the exception of the McLaren M630 engine, which uses a 120 degree bank angle with a single balance shaft to eliminate all primary couples. The M630 also takes advantage of the wide angle by placing the turbochargers inside the vee, commonly referred to as a 'hot vee' configuration. The Ferrari 296 GTB is the first Ferrari road car to sport a V6 turbo with a vee angle of 120 degrees between the cylinder banks.\nOther angles.\nOther angle V6 engines are possible but can suffer from severe vibration problems unless very carefully designed. Notable V-angles include:\nUse in automobiles.\nIn 1906, a few years after 4 cylinder engines and V8 engines had come into existence, the first known V6 engine was built. This V6 engine was a single prototype automotive engine built by Marmon Motor Car Company in the United States. The engine did not reach production. Similarly, a single prototype engine was produced by Buick in 1918.\nIn 1910 Delahaye produced the first 30\u00b0 3.2-litre V6 which was installed in the 1911 Delahaye Type 44 automobile.\nThe Lancia V6 engine was introduced in the 1950 Lancia Aurelia. Lancia had been producing V4 engines for approximately 30 years, and one of the key goals was to reduce the vibrations compared with the V4 engine. The V6 engine used a 60 degree V-angle and six crankpins, resulting in an evenly-spaced firing order to reduce vibrations.\nOther manufacturers took note and soon other V6 engines were designed. In 1959, the GMC V6 engine was introduced in the form of a 60-degree petrol engine used in pickup trucks and carryalls. The Buick V6 engine was introduced in 1962 and was based on the all-alloy Buick 215 V8, which shared its 90\u00b0 bank angle, but unlike the Buick V8, used all-cast iron construction. Initially an uneven-firing engine, Buick later redesigned the crankshaft to a \"split-pin\" configuration to create an \"even-firing\" version. After it became the 3800 V6 in 1990, the engine gained a reputation as a reliable, powerful, fuel-efficient workhorse that became a mainstay of GM's FWD mid-size and full-size cars. It was discontinued in 2008. Over 25 million units had been built, making it one of the most-produced engines in history, and it was on Ward's 10 Best Engines of the 20th century list.\nFord introduced its European road car engines in 1965 with the German division's Cologne V6, and the Ford Essex V6 engine, introduced by Ford's United Kingdom division in 1966; both engines used a 60-degree V-angle. The 1967 Dino 206 GT was Ferrari's first V6 road car, which had a 65-degree V-angle.\nThe 1979-2005 Alfa Romeo V6 engine was introduced in the Alfa Romeo Alfa 6 luxury sedan and later used in many other Alfa Romeo models. This engine used a 60 degree V-angle, an all-aluminium construction and two valves per cylinder. A turbocharged version was introduced in 1991 and a four valve per cylinder version was introduced in 1997. Also in 1970, the Citro\u00ebn SM grand tourer was introduced, powered by a 90-degree V6 built by Maserati. The Chevrolet 90\u00b0 V6 engine was introduced in 1978 and produced for 36 years.\nThe first mass-produced Japanese V6 engine was the Nissan VG engine, a 60-degree design which was produced from 1983 to 2004. The Honda C engine was introduced in 1985, followed by the Mitsubishi 6G7 engine and the Mazda J engine in 1986, the Toyota VZ engine in 1988, and the Isuzu V engine in 1992. Hyundai introduced the first South Korean Hyundai Sigma engine based on technology shared from the Mitsubishi unit in 1995.\nGerman car manufacturers were relatively slow to adopt V6 engines, because engineers believed that they lacked the smoothness of an inline-six engine. The first German V6 engine was a 2.8 liter 90\u00b0 V6 that was launched in the 1990 Audi 100. Different variants of this engine gradually replaced the inline-5 engines that were commonly used in large and/or high-performance Audi vehicles. The second engine was the VR6 engine, which was introduced across Volkswagen's mid-size and sports car lineup in the 1990s. In 1998, Mercedes-Benz introduced its first V6 engine, the M112, while BMW has continued to use inline-six engines. Mercedes-Benz discontinued production of V6 engines in 2023, and has returned to making inline-six engines.\nThe first independently designed British V6 engine was the Rover KV6 engine, which replaced the Honda C engine that was previously used in the Rover 800. Jaguar used the Ford-based AJ-V6 engine until 2011 in their smaller cars, but also shared a V6 version of the 90\u00b0 AJ-V8 engine with Land Rover for use in the XE, XF, XJ, F-Type and the F-Pace. Land Rover used it in the Range Rover, Range Rover Sport, Range Rover Velar, and the Discovery 4.\nThe 90\u00b0 V6 engine was discontinued in 2020, and Jaguar Land Rover replaced it with the new Ingenium engine, which has an inline-six variant for JLR's bigger cars and SUVs.\nBy the mid-1990s, the V6 layout was the most common configuration for six-cylinder automotive engines, with V6 engines having replaced most of the straight-six engines. Today, it is being progressively replaced across the car industry by turbocharged 4-cylinder engines, which can produce similar power, but in a smaller package that produces cleaner emissions, has better fuel economy, and are less expensive to produce.\nMotor racing.\nThe Lancia Aurelia (the first series production car with a V6 engine) was also successful in motor racing. Four of the \"Aurelia B20 Coupes\" were entered in the 1951 Mille Miglia with the best placed cars finishing second and fourth. A tuned version of the Lancia V6 engine producing was used in the Lancia D24. The D24 competed in sports car racing and won the 1953 Carrera Panamericana with Juan Manuel Fangio at the wheel.\nThe initial version of the Ferrari Dino engine was a racing engine used in Formula Two racing in the 1957 season. It had a V-angle of 65 degrees and dual overhead camshafts. The Dino V6 underwent several evolutions, including a version used in the 1958 Ferrari 246 Formula One racing car. A few years later, the 1961\u20131964 Ferrari 156 Formula One car used a new V6 engine with a V-angle of 120 degrees and a displacement of . This engine was shorter and lighter than the Ferrari Dino engine, and the simplicity and low center of gravity of the engine was an advantage in racing. It won a large number of races between and . However, Ferrari's founder had a personal dislike of the 120 degree layout, preferring a 65 degree layout, and after that time it was replaced by other engines. The Dino engine was also used in the Lancia Stratos, which was a highly successful rally car that won the World Rally Championship in 1974, 1975 and 1976.\nA notable racing use of the Alfa Romeo V6 engine was the Alfa Romeo 155 V6 TI, designed for the 1993 DTM season and equipped with a engine making a peak power of at 11,900 rpm.\nThe \"Renault-Gordini CH1\" was a 90 degree V6 engine with an iron block. It was introduced in the 1973 \"Alpine-Renault A440\" sports car racing car. This engine won the European 2\u00a0L prototype championship in 1974 and several European Formula Two Championships. A turbocharged version was used in the Renault Alpine A442, which won the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1978.\nA turbocharged version of the \"Renault-Gordini CH1\" engine was introduced in the 1977 Renault RS01 Formula One car. Renault struggled with reliability issues in 1977 and 1978; however, the 1979 season saw some good results at a few races. In 1981, the Ferrari 126C Formula One car used a turbocharged V6 engine. Ferrari won the Formula One constructors' championship with turbocharged V6 engines in 1982 and 1983. Initial versions used a 120 degree V-angle, before switching to a 90 degree V-angle for the 1987 Ferrari F1/87 racing car. Other successful turbocharged V6 Formula One cars in the era of 1982\u20131988 were the McLaren MP4/2, McLaren MP4/3, McLaren MP4/4, Williams FW10, Williams FW11, Williams FW12, Lotus 95T, Lotus 97T, Lotus 98T, Lotus 99T and Lotus 100T.\nThe Nissan GTP ZX-Turbo and Nissan NPT-90 competed in the IMSA sports car prototype category from 1985 to 1994 and used a turbocharged V6 engine loosely based on the Nissan VG30ET production car engine. The Nissan 300ZX used a similar engine to compete in the 1996\u20131997 All Japan Grand Touring Car Championship (now known as the 'Super GT' championship).\nDownsizing to V6 engines in open-wheeler racing became more common:\nUse in marine vessels and railway engines.\nV6 engines are popular powerplants in medium to large outboard motors.\nThe first V6 engine to reach production was built from 1908 to 1913 by the Deutz Gasmotoren Fabrik in Germany. These V6 engines were used as the generator for gasoline-electric railway engines.\nUse in motorcycles.\nThe Laverda V6 was a racing motorcycle which was unveiled at the 1977 Milan show. It entered the 1978 Bol d'Or 24 hour endurance race, however it retired with mechanical issues after approximately 8 hours.\nHorex has produced road motorcycles with VR6 engines since 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32696", "revid": "245306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32696", "title": "Vehmic court", "text": "Courts in the later Middle Ages in Westphalia, Germany\nThe Vehmic courts, Vehmgericht, holy vehme, or simply Vehm, also spelled Feme, Vehmegericht, Fehmgericht, are names given to a tribunal system of Westphalia in Germany active during the Late Middle Ages, based on a fraternal organisation of lay judges called \"free judges\" ( or ). The original seat of the courts was in Dortmund. Proceedings were sometimes secret, leading to the alternative titles of \"secret courts\" (), \"silent courts\" (), or \"forbidden courts\" (). After the execution of a death sentence, the corpse could be hanged on a tree to advertise the fact and deter others.\nThe peak of activity of these courts was during the 14th to 15th centuries, with lesser activity attested for the 13th and 16th centuries, and scattered evidence establishing their continued existence during the 17th and 18th centuries. They were finally abolished by order of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, king of Westphalia, in 1811.\nThe Vehmic courts were the regional courts of Westphalia which, in turn, were based on the county courts of Franconia. They received their jurisdiction from the Holy Roman Emperor, from whom they also received the capacity to pronounce capital punishment () which they exercised in his name. Everywhere else the power of life and death, originally reserved to the Emperor alone, had been usurped by the territorial nobles; only in Westphalia, called \"the Red Earth\" because here the imperial \"Blutbann\" (jurisdiction over life and death) was still valid, were capital sentences passed and executed by the Vehmic courts in the Emperor's name alone.\nEtymology.\nThe term's origin is uncertain, but seems to enter Middle High German from Middle Low German. The word \"v\u00ebme\" first appears in the Middle High German literature of the 13th century as a noun with the meaning of \"punishment\". A document dated to 1251 has the reference \"illud occultum judicium, quod vulgariter vehma seu vridinch appellari consuevit.\" (\"It is hidden justice, that by common fashion is habitually referred to as \"vehma\" or \"vridinch\".\")\nThe general meaning of \"punishment\" is unrelated to the special courts of Westphalia which were thus originally just named \"courts of punishment\". But as the word entered the Southern German dialects via Saxony and Westphalia, the word's meaning in Early Modern German became attached to the activities of these courts specifically.\nJacob Grimm thought that the word is identical in origin to a homophonous word for the raising of pigs on forest pastures (), just as the more familiar German \"Zucht\" can mean both breeding and discipline. Grimm considers the spelling with \"h\" unetymological in spite of its early occurrence in some 13th century documents, and hypothesizes a \"lost root\" \"\"f\u00ebmen\", connecting with Old Norse \"fimr\" and conjecturing a Gothic \"fiman, fam, f\u00eamun?\"\".\nDuring 18th to 19th century Romanticism, there were various misguided attempts to explain the obscure term, or to elevate it to the status of a remnant of pagan antiquity, scoffed at by Grimm's entry in his \"Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch\". An etymology suggested by James Skene in 1824 derives the word from \"Baumgericht\" (Lit. \"Tree law\"), supposedly the remnant of a pagan \"forest law\" of the Wild hunt and pagan secret societies.\nOrigin.\nThe Westphalian Vehmic courts developed from the High Medieval \"free courts\" (\"Freigerichte\"), which had jurisdiction within a \"free county\" (). As a result of the 14th century imperial reform of the Holy Roman Empire (Golden Bull of 1356), the Landgraviates lost much of their power, and the \"Freigerichte\" disappeared, with the exception of Westphalia, where they retained their authority and transformed into the Vehmic court.\nThe seat of the Vehmic court () was at first Dortmund, in a square between two linden trees, one of which was known as the \"Femelinde\". With the growing influence of Cologne during the 15th century, the seat was moved to Arnsberg in 1437.\nMembership and procedure.\nThe sessions were often held in secret, whence the names of \"secret court\" (), \"silent court\" (), etc. Attendance of secret sessions was forbidden to the uninitiated, on pain of death, which led to the designation \"forbidden courts\" (). A chairman () presided over the court, and lay judges () passed judgment. The court also constituted a Holy Order.\nAny free man \"of pure bred German stock\" and of good character could become a judge. The new candidate was given secret information and identification symbols. The \"knowing one\" () had to keep his knowledge secret, even from his closest family (\"vor Weib und Kind, vor Sand und Wind\"). Lay judges had to give formal warnings to known troublemakers, issue warrants, and take part in executions.\nThe organization of the \"Fehme\" was elaborate. The centre of each jurisdiction was referred to as a \"free seat\" (), and its head or chairman () was often a secular or spiritual prince, or sometimes a civic community leader. The archbishop of Cologne sat at the top of the hierarchy, \"supreme over all\" (). The actual president of the court was the \"free count\" (), chosen for life by the \"Stuhlherr\" from among the \"Freisch\u00f6ffen\", who formed the great body of the initiated. Of these the lowest rank were the \"Fronboten\" or \"Freifronen\", charged with the maintenance of order in the courts and the duty of carrying out the commands of the \"Freigraf\". The immense development of the \"Fehme\" is explained by the privileges of the \"Freisch\u00f6ffen\"; for they were subject to no jurisdiction but those of the Westphalian courts: whether as accused or accuser they had access to the secret sessions, and they shared in the discussions of the general chapter as to the policy of the society. At their initiation these swore to support the \"Fehme\" with all their powers, to guard its secrets, and to bring before its tribunal anything within its competence that they might discover. They were then initiated into the secret signs by which members recognized each other, and were presented with a rope and with a knife on which were engraved the mystic letters S.S.G.G., supposed to mean \"Stein, Strick, Gras, gr\u00fcn\" (stone, rope, grass, green).\nThe \"Freistuhl\" was the place of session, and was usually a hillock, or some other well-known and accessible spot. The \"Freigraf\" and the \"Sch\u00f6ffen\" (judges) occupied the bench, before which a table, with a sword and rope upon it, was placed. The court was held by day and, unless the session was declared secret, all freemen, whether initiated or not, were admitted. The accusation was in the old German form; but only a \"Freisch\u00f6ffe\" could act as accuser. If the offence came under the competence of the court, meaning it was punishable by death, a summons to the accused was issued under the seal of the \"Freigraf\". This was not usually served on him personally, but was nailed to his door, or to some convenient place where he was certain to pass. Six weeks and three days' grace were allowed, according to the old Saxon law, and the summons was thrice repeated. If the accused appeared, the accuser stated the case, and the investigation proceeded by the examination of witnesses as in an ordinary court of law. The judgment was put into execution on the spot if that was possible.\nThe secret court, from whose procedure the whole institution has acquired its evil reputation, was closed to all but the initiated, although these were so numerous as to secure quasi-publicity; any one not a member on being discovered was instantly put to death, and the members present were bound under the same penalty not to disclose what took place. Crimes of a serious nature, and especially those that were deemed unfit for ordinary judicial investigation, such as heresy and witchcraft, fell within its jurisdiction, as also did appeals by persons condemned in the open courts, and likewise the cases before those tribunals in which the accused had not appeared. The accused, if a member, could clear himself by his own oath, unless he had revealed the secrets of the \"Fehme\". If he were one of the uninitiated it was necessary for him to bring forward witnesses to his innocence from among the initiated, whose number varied according to the number on the side of the accuser, but twenty-one in favour of innocence necessarily secured an acquittal. The only punishment which the secret court could inflict was death. If the accused appeared, the sentence was carried into execution at once; if he did not appear, it was quickly made known to the whole body, and the \"Freisch\u00f6ffe\" who was the first to meet the condemned was bound to put him to death. This was usually done by hanging, the nearest tree serving for gallows. A knife with the mystic letters was left beside the corpse to show that the deed was not a murder.\nIt has been claimed that, in some cases, the condemned would be set free, given several hours' head start and then hunted down and put to death. So fearsome was the reputation of the \"Fehme\" and its reach that many thus released committed suicide rather than prolonging the inevitable. This practice could have been a holdover from the ancient Germanic legal concept of outlawry (\"Acht\").\nLegend and romance have combined to exaggerate the sinister reputation of the Fehmic courts; but modern historical research has largely discounted this, proving that they never employed torture, that their sittings were only sometimes secret, and that their meeting-places were always well known.\nThe spread of the Vehmic courts.\nThe system, though ancient, came into wider use only after the division of the duchy of Saxony after the fall of Henry the Lion, when the archbishop of Cologne Engelbert II of Berg, (also duke of Westphalia from 1180) placed himself at the head of the Fehme as representative of the emperor. The organization then spread rapidly. Every free man born in lawful wedlock and not excommunicated nor an outlaw was eligible for membership.\nPrinces and nobles were initiated; and in 1429 even the Emperor Sigismund himself became \"a true and proper of the Holy Roman Empire.\" There is a manuscript in the Town Hall of the Westphalian town of Soest which consists of an original Vehmic Court Regulation document, along with illustrations.\nBy the middle of the 14th century, these (Latin ), sworn associates of the Fehme, were scattered in thousands throughout the length and breadth of Germany, known to each other by secret signs and pass-words, and all of them pledged to serve the summons of the secret courts and to execute their judgment.\nDecline and dissolution of the Courts.\nThat an organization of this character should have outlived its usefulness and ushered in corruption and other intolerable abuses was inevitable; from the mid-fifteenth century protests were raised against the enormities of the court.\nWith the growing power of the territorial sovereigns and the gradual improvement of the ordinary process of justice, the functions of the Fehmic courts were superseded. By the action of the Emperor Maximilian and of other German princes they were, in the 16th century, once more restricted to Westphalia, and here, too, they were brought under the jurisdiction of the ordinary courts, and finally confined to mere police duties. With these functions, however, but with the old forms long since robbed of their impressiveness, they survived into the 19th century. They were finally abolished by order of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Bonaparte, king of Westphalia, in 1811. The last Freigraf died in 1835.\nModern use of the term.\nFollowing the abandonment of the Vehmic courts, the term acquired a connotation of mob rule and lynching. In Modern German, the spelling of \"Feme\" is most common. Other variant forms are: Fehme, Feime, Veme. The verb \"verfemen\" is in current use and means \"to ostracise\", i.e. by public opinion rather than formal legal proceeding. A noun derived from this is \"Verfemter\" \"outlaw, ostracised person\".\nThe term was used in this sense \u2014 of \"mob justice\" bubbling up from below \u2014 by writers such as Thomas Carlyle (1840)\nand Karl Marx (1856).\nWithin the politically heated turmoil of the early German Weimar Republic after World War I, the media frequently used the term \"Fememord\" to refer to right-wing political homicides, e.g. the murder of Jewish politicians such as Kurt Eisner (1919) or Walther Rathenau (1922) and other politicians including Matthias Erzberger (1921) by right-wing groups such as Organisation Consul. In 1926, the 27th \"Reichstag\" commission officially differentiated the contemporarily common \"Fememorde\" from political assassination in that assassination was by definition exerted upon open political opponents, whereas a \"Fememord\" was a form of lethal vengeance committed upon former or current members of an organization that they had become a traitor to. This definition is also found in the pseudo-archaic, alliterative right-wing phrase \"Verr\u00e4ter verfallen der Feme!\" (\"Traitors shall be ostracized!\", i. e. killed), quoted throughout the 1920s in mass media reports regarding violent acts of vengeance among the German Right.\nThe Vehmic courts in fiction.\nVehmic courts play a key role in the novel \"Anne of Geierstein or, The Maiden of the Mist\" by Sir Walter Scott in which Archibald von Hagenbach, the Duke of Burgundy's governor at Brisach (Switzerland), is condemned and executed by the Vehmgericht. Scott drew his inspiration from Goethe's play \"Goetz von Berlichingen\" which he had translated, incorrectly. Hector Berlioz's first opera, \"Les francs-juges\", was inspired by Scott's presentation of the Vehmic Courts. Though the work was never staged the overture survives as a concert piece. In the very first concert of Berlioz's work, on 26 May 1828, the overture was performed along with the Opus 1 \"Waverley\" overture, a further indication of Berlioz's debt to Scott's fiction. The \"Les francs-juges\" overture later became the signature tune for \"Face to Face\", the early series of British television interviews presented by John Freeman.\nIn William Makepeace Thackeray's novel \"Vanity Fair\" \"Was Rebecca guilty or not?\" the Vehmgericht of the servants' hall had pronounced against her.\nA character in the Dorothy L. Sayers novel \"Murder Must Advertise\" appears at a fancy-dress party as a member of the Vehmgericht, which allows him to wear a hooded costume to disguise his identity. People in Femgericht costumes also appear in Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella \"Dream Story\".\nIn \"Fritz Lang\"'s \"M\", the local criminals of an unnamed city (probably Berlin) capture a child murderer and hold a vigilante court.\nIn \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\", the Vehmic courts are mentioned as being connected to Nazi Werwolf commandos as well as the Illuminati.\nIn \"A Study in Scarlet\", a Sherlock Holmes novel by Arthur Conan Doyle, a newspaper article mentions the Vehmgericht, stating that the features of a recent death are similar to the organization's killings.\nThe Vehmgericht also appear as antagonists in \"The Strong Arm\", an 1899 novel set in the Holy Roman Empire by British-Canadian author Robert Barr.\nGeoff Taylor's 1966 novel, \"Court of Honor\", features the Fehme being revived by a German officer and Martin Bormann in the dying days of the Third Reich.\nSeason 3, episode 12 of \"The Blacklist\", titled \"The Vehm\" is based on a group of vigilantes using medieval torture methods to kill paedophiles and money launderers.\nJack Mayer's 2015 historical fiction, \"Before the Court of Heaven\", depicts the Fehme, and 'Fehme justice' as part of the extreme right-wing conspiracy to bring down Germany's Weimar democracy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32697", "revid": "17723088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32697", "title": "Violette Szabo", "text": "French espionage agent\nViolette Reine Elizabeth Szabo, GC (n\u00e9e Bushell; 26 June 1921 \u2013 c.\u20095 February 1945) was a British-French Special Operations Executive (SOE) agent during the Second World War and a posthumous recipient of the George Cross. On her second mission into occupied France, Szabo was captured by the German army, interrogated, tortured, and deported to Ravensbr\u00fcck concentration camp in Germany, where she was executed.\nEarly life.\nViolette Bushell was born on 26 June 1921 in Paris, France, to Charles George Bushell and Reine Blanche Leroy, as the second child of five and the only daughter. Szabo's father, son of a publican from Hampstead Norreys, was serving as a British Army driver in France during the First World War when he met her mother, a dressmaker originally from Pont-Remy, Somme. After the war the couple lived in London, where Charles worked as a taxi-driver, car salesman and shopkeeper.\nDuring the early 1930s, as a result of the Great Depression, Bushell and her youngest brother, Dickie, lived with their maternal aunt in Picardy, northern France. The family was reunited in South London when Violette was 11 years old. She was an active and lively girl, enjoying gymnastics, long-distance bicycling and ice-skating with four brothers and several male cousins. Bushell was regarded as a tomboy, especially after being taught to shoot by her father; her shooting was reputedly very accurate.\nWhile Bushell had temporarily lost the ability to speak English in Picardy, she quickly relearned the language while attending school in Brixton. There she was reportedly popular and regarded as exotic, owing to her ability to speak another language. Her home life was loving, though she often clashed with her strict father and once ran away to France after an argument. The family, except her monolingual father, would often converse in French.\nAt the age of 14, Bushell went to work for a French corseti\u00e8re in South Kensington and later worked at retailer Woolworths in Oxford Street. At the outbreak of the Second World War, she was working at Le Bon March\u00e9, a Brixton department store.\nSecond World War.\nIn early 1940, Bushell joined the Women's Land Army and was sent to carry out strawberry picking in Fareham, Hampshire, but she soon returned to London to work in an armaments factory in Acton. She met \u00c9tienne Szabo, a decorated non-commissioned officer in the French Foreign Legion of Hungarian descent, at the Bastille Day parade in London in 1940, where Bushell had been sent by her mother, accompanied by her friend Winnie Wilson, to bring home a homesick French soldier for dinner. They married at Aldershot Register Office in Manor Park on 21 August 1940 after a 42-day romance; Violette was 19, \u00c9tienne was 31. They enjoyed a week's honeymoon before \u00c9tienne set off from Liverpool to fight in the abortive Free French attack on Dakar, Senegal. From there, he went to South Africa before seeing action, again against the Vichy French, in the successful Anglo-Free French campaigns in Eritrea and Syria in 1941. He returned to the UK for a brief leave later in the year.\nAfter her marriage, Szabo became a switchboard operator for the General Post Office in central London, working throughout the Blitz. Bored by the job, she enlisted in the Auxiliary Territorial Service (ATS) on 11 September 1941. She was posted to Leicester for initial training before being sent to one of the first mixed anti-aircraft batteries of the 7th Heavy Anti-Aircraft Training Regiment, Royal Artillery in Oswestry, Shropshire for specialised instruction as a predictor and then to the 481st Heavy (Mixed) Anti-Aircraft Battery. After further training in Anglesey, Gunner Szabo and her unit were posted to Frodsham, Cheshire, near Warrington, from December 1941 to February 1942. Szabo found within weeks that she was pregnant, so she left the ATS to return to London for the birth.\nSzabo took a flat in Notting Hill, which was to be her home until she left for her second mission to France in June 1944. On 8 June 1942, she gave birth to Tania Damaris Desiree Szabo at St Mary's Hospital while \u00c9tienne was stationed at Bir Hakeim in North Africa. The following day, he took part in a valiant defence against the \"Afrika Korps\", escaping with his battalion from the assault of the 15th Panzer Division on 10 June.\nSzabo sent her baby to childminders while she worked at the South Morden aircraft factory, where her father was stationed. During this period, she was informed of her husband's death in action. \u00c9tienne had died on 24 October 1942&lt;ref name=\"countytimes/25142161\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; from chest wounds received while leading his men in a diversionary attack on Qaret el Himeimat, at the beginning of the Second Battle of El Alamein; he had never seen his daughter. It was \u00c9tienne's death that made Szabo accept an offer to train as a field agent in the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) as her best way of fighting the enemy that had killed her husband.\nSpecial Operations Executive.\nIt is unclear how or why Szabo was recruited by F-Section, as her surviving official file is thin, but her fluency in French and her previous service in the ATS probably brought her to the attention of SOE. She would have been invited to an interview regarding war work with E. Potter, the alias of Selwyn Jepson, a detective novelist and the F-Section recruiter. Szabo was given security clearance on 1 July 1943 and selected for training as a field agent on 10 July. She was commissioned as a section leader in the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry, a civilian service often used by SOE as a cover for female agents.\nAfter an assessment for fluency in French and a series of interviews, Szabo was sent from 7\u201327 August to STS 4, a training school at Winterfold House, and after a moderately favourable report, to Special Training School 24 of Group A at Arisaig in the Scottish Highlands in September and October. Szabo received intensive instruction in fieldcraft, night and daylight navigation, weapons and demolition. Again her reports were mixed, but she passed the course and moved on to Group B.\nSzabo was sent to the SOE \"finishing school\" at Beaulieu, Hampshire, where she learnt escape and evasion, uniform recognition, communications and cryptography, and had further training in weaponry. The final stage in training was parachute jumping, which was taught at Ringway Airport near Manchester. On her first attempt, Szabo badly sprained her ankle and was sent home for recuperation, spending some time in Bournemouth (it was this ankle that was to fail her later in France). She was able to take the parachuting course again and passed with a second class in February 1944. On 24 January 1944, Szabo made her will, witnessed by Vera Atkins and Major R. A. Bourne Paterson of SOE, naming her mother, Reine, as executrix and her daughter Tania as sole beneficiary.\nIn 2012 Max Hastings wrote that Szabo was \"adored by the men and women of SOE both for her courage and endless infectious Cockney laughter\", while Leo Marks remembered her as \"A dark-haired slip of mischief...She had a Cockney accent which added to her impishness\". Assessments by her trainers were mixed: \"she lacks ruse, stability and the finesse which is required and...she is too easily influenced...[but] she set an example to the whole party by her cheerfulness and eagerness to please\".\nFirst mission.\nDue to the ankle injury, Szabo's first deployment was delayed, but it was during her second course at Ringway that she first met Philippe Liewer (d. c. 1948). While in London, she also socialised with Bob Maloubier, so SOE decided she would work as a courier for Liewer's Salesman circuit. However, the mission was postponed when F Section received a signal from Harry Peulev\u00e9's (codename Jean) Author circuit warning that several members of the Rouen-Dieppe group had been arrested, including Claude Malraux (codename Cicero; brother of novelist Andre Malraux) and radio operator Isidore Newman. This extra time meant Szabo could be sent for a refresher course in wireless operation in London, and it was then that Leo Marks, SOE's cryptographer, seeing her struggle with her original French nursery rhyme, gave Szabo his own composition, \"The Life That I Have\" as her code poem.\nOn the night of 5/6 April 1944, Szabo and Liewer were flown from RAF Tempsford in Bedfordshire in a Westland Lysander aircraft and landed in German-occupied France, near the village of Azay-le-Rideau in the heart of the Loire Valley. Her cover was that she was a commercial secretary named Corinne Reine Leroy (the latter two names being her mother's first and maiden names), who was born on 26 June 1921 (her real birthdate) in Bailleul, and who was a resident of Le Havre, which gave her reason to travel to the Restricted Zone of German occupation on the coast.\nUnder the code name \"Louise\", which happened to be her nickname (she was also nicknamed \"La P'tite Anglaise\", as she stood only 5'3\" tall), she and SOE colleague Philippe Liewer (under the name \"Major Charles Staunton\"), organiser of the Salesman circuit, tried to assess the damage made by the German arrests, with Szabo travelling to Rouen, where Liewer could not go as a wanted man (both he and Maloubier were on wanted posters with their codenames), and to Dieppe to gather intelligence and carry out reconnaissance. It soon became clear that the circuit, which originally involved over 120 members (80 in Rouen and 40 on the coast) had been exposed beyond repair. Szabo returned to Paris to brief Liewer, and in the two days, before they were due to depart, she bought a dress for Tania, three frocks and a yellow sweater for herself, and perfume for her mother and herself. While the destruction of Salesman was a heavy blow to SOE, her reports on the local factories producing war materials for the Germans were important in establishing Allied bombing targets.\nShe returned to England by Lysander, piloted by Bob Large, DFC, of the RAF, on 30 April 1944, landing after a stressful flight in which the plane was hit by anti-aircraft fire over Chateaudun, and Szabo was thrown about the body of the plane. Large had turned off the intercom when attacked and did not turn it back on for the rest of the flight, so when the plane landed heavily due to a burst tyre, and he went to get Szabo out, she (thinking they had been shot down and not having seen her blond pilot) let Large have a volley of abuse in French, mistaking him for a German. When she realised what had really happened, he was rewarded with a kiss. Philippe Liewer returned at the same time in another Lysander. On 24 May 1944 Szabo was promoted to Ensign in the FANY.\nSecond mission.\nAfter two aborted attempts, due to stormy weather on the night of 4/5 June and the abandonment of the intended landing ground on 5/6 June by the Resistance reception committee because of German patrols, Szabo and three colleagues were dropped by parachute from a USAAF Liberator flown from RAF Harrington in Northamptonshire onto a landing field near Sussac on the outskirts of Limoges early on 8 June 1944 (immediately following D-Day, and Tania Szabo's second birthday). Szabo was part of a four-person team sent to operate in the department of Haute Vienne with the circuit codename 'Salesman II', led by her SOE commander Philippe Liewer (now codenamed Hamlet), whose rolled-up Rouen circuit had been 'Salesman', and including Second Lieutenant Jean-Claude Guiet (codenames Claude and Virgile) of the United States Army as wireless operator (W/O), and Bob Maloubier (alias Robert 'Bob' Mortier; codenames Clothaire and Paco), Szabo and Liewer's friend and comrade of SOE who was to act as military instructor to the local Maquis, and who had worked as weapons instructor and explosives officer for Liewer on the original Salesman I circuit. For this mission, Szabo's cover was that she was a Mme Villeret, the young widow of an antiques dealer from Nantes. It is possible Szabo twisted an ankle on landing.\nUpon arrival, she was sent to co-ordinate the activities of the local maquis in sabotaging communication lines during German attempts to stem the Normandy landings. When he arrived in the Limousin, Philippe Liewer found the local maquis to be poorly led and less prepared for action than he had expected. To better co-ordinate Resistance activity against the Germans, he decided to send his courier, Szabo, as his liaison officer to the more active Maquis of Correze and the Dordogne, led by Jacques Poirier (SOE), head of the renamed Digger circuit, who had taken over from Harry Peulev\u00e9 of the Author circuit, upon the latter's arrest. However, due to poor intelligence gathering by the local Resistance, Liewer was unaware that the 2nd SS Panzer Division was making its slow journey north to the Normandy battlefields through his area.\nCapture and interrogation.\nAt 9.30 am on 10 June, Szabo set off on her mission, not inconspicuously by bicycle as Liewer would have preferred, but in a Citroen driven by a young maquis section leader, Jacques Dufour ('Anastasie'). He had insisted upon using the car, even though the Germans had forbidden the use of cars by the French after D-Day, to drive her half of the of her journey. At her request to Liewer, Szabo was armed with a Sten gun and eight magazines of ammunition. She was dressed in a light suit, flat-heeled shoes and no stockings. On their way across the sunlit fields of south-central France, they picked up Jean Bariaud, a 26-year-old Resistance friend of Dufour, who was meant to accompany them on the return journey.\nTheir car raised the suspicions of German troops at an unexpected roadblock outside of Salon-la-Tour that had been set up to find Sturmbannf\u00fchrer Helmut K\u00e4mpfe, a battalion commander of the 2nd SS Panzer Division, who had been captured by the local resistance. When Dufour slowed the car, the unarmed Bariaud was able to escape and later warn the Salesman team of the arrest of his two companions.\nAccording to Minney and Vickers, when they had stopped, Szabo and Dufour leapt from the car, he to the left and she to the right and the cover of a tree, as Dufour opened fire. A gun battle ensued during which a woman emerging from a barn was killed by the Germans. As armoured cars arrived at the scene, Szabo crossed the road to join Dufour, and they leapt a gate, before running across a field towards a small stream. They then ran up a hill towards some trees, when Szabo fell and severely twisted an ankle. She refused Dufour's offer of help, urging him to flee, and, dragging herself to the edge of the cornfield, she struggled to an apple tree. Standing behind the tree, she then provided Dufour with covering fire, allowing him to make his escape to hide in a friend's barn. Szabo fought the Germans for thirty minutes, killing a corporal, possibly more, and wounding some others. Eventually, she ran out of ammunition and was captured by two men who dragged her up the hill to a bridge over a railway. She was hot, dishevelled, and in pain. Szabo was questioned by a young officer whose armoured car had drawn up nearby. She was then taken away. Szabo's captors were most likely from the 1st Battalion of 3rd SS Panzer Grenadier Regiment Deutschland (\"Das Reich\" Division) whose commanding officer was the missing Sturmbannf\u00fchrer K\u00e4mpfe.\nIn R.J. Minney's biography, as above, she is described as putting up fierce resistance with her Sten gun, although German documents of the incident record no German injuries or casualties. A recent biography of Vera Atkins, the intelligence officer for the French section of SOE, notes that there was a great deal of confusion about what happened to Szabo\u2014the story was revised four times\u2014and states that the Sten gun incident \"was probably a fabrication\". Szabo's most recent biographer, Susan Ottaway, includes the battle in her book, as does Tania Szabo in hers, and Philip Vickers in his book on \"Das Reich\". Authors Sarah Helm and Max Hastings express doubt about the story of the battle.\nViolette Szabo was transferred to the custody of the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (\"SD\", the SS Security Service) in Limoges, where she was interrogated for four days by SS-Sturmbannf\u00fchrer Kowatch. She gave her name as \"Vicky Taylor\", the name she had intended to use if she needed to return to England via Spain. (Her reason for choosing this name is unknown, but it may have been a play on \"szabo\" being the Hungarian word for \"tailor\".) From there, she was moved to Fresnes Prison in Paris and brought to Gestapo headquarters at 84 Avenue Foch for interrogation and torture by the \"Sicherheitsdienst\", who by now knew of her true identity and activities as an SOE agent.\nRavensbr\u00fcck.\nWith the Allies driving deep into France and George Patton's Third US Army heading towards Paris, the decision was taken by the Germans to send their most valuable French prisoners to Germany. On 8 August 1944, Szabo, shackled to SOE wireless operator Denise Bloch, was entrained with other male and female prisoners, including several SOE agents she knew, for transfer. At some point in the journey, probably outside Chalons-sur-Marne, an Allied air raid caused the guards to temporarily abandon the train, allowing Szabo and Bloch to get water from a lavatory to the caged male prisoners in the next carriage, the two women both providing inspiration and a morale boost to the suffering men. When the train reached Reims, the prisoners were taken by lorries to a large barn for two nights, where Szabo, still tied at the ankle to Bloch, who was in good spirits, was able to wash some of her clothes in a rudimentary fashion and to speak about her experiences to her SOE colleague Harry Peulev\u00e9.\nFrom Reims, via Strasbourg, the prisoners went by train to Saarbr\u00fccken and a transit camp in the suburb of Neue Bremm, where hygiene facilities were nonexistent, and food was only indigestible bread crusts. After about ten days, Szabo and most of the other women were sent on to Ravensbr\u00fcck concentration camp for women where 50,000 (out of a total population of 130,000) were to die during the war. They reached Ravensbr\u00fcck in late August 1944. \nAlthough she endured hard labour and malnutrition, she helped save the life of Belgian resistance courier Hortense Daman, kept up the spirits of her fellow detainees, and, according to fellow inmate American Virginia d'Albert-Lake, constantly planned to escape. While at Ravensbr\u00fcck, Szabo, Denise Bloch, Lilian Rolfe and Lake were among 1,000 French women sent to the Heinkel factory at the sub-camp of Torgau. Here they protested and refused to make munitions, and were forced to work in the vegetable cellar outside the camp walls and then to dig potatoes. The British women also made contact with French prisoners at a nearby POW camp who, being better fed, provided them with extra rations and offered to send messages to London with a transmitter they had built (there is no evidence they were successful).\nAfter the Torgau incident, Szabo, Bloch, Rolfe and Lake were part of a group of around 250 prisoners sent back to Ravensbr\u00fcck on 6 October, where Szabo was put to work in the fabric store. In late October 1944, the protest women were transferred to a punishment camp at K\u00f6nigsberg, where they were forced into harsh physical labour felling trees, clearing rock-hard icy ground for the construction of an airfield and digging a trench for a narrow-gauge railway. Szabo volunteered for tree-felling in the forest, where the trees gave some shelter from the bitter winds (Lilian and Denise were too ill to join her). In the bitter East Prussian winter of 1944, each day the women were forced to stand for \"Appell\" (roll-call) in the early morning for up to five hours before being sent to work, many of them freezing to death. Szabo was dressed only in the summer clothes she had been wearing when sent to Germany and the women received barely any food and slept in frozen barracks without blankets. According to Christine Le Scornet, a seventeen-year-old French girl whom Szabo befriended, and Jeannie Rousseau, the co-leader of the Torgau revolt, she maintained her morale, was optimistic about liberation and continued to plan to escape. On 19 or 20 January 1945, the three British agents were recalled to Ravensbr\u00fcck and sent first to the \"Strafblock\", where they were possibly brutally assaulted and then to the punishment bunker, where they were kept in solitary confinement. The women were already in poor physical condition\u2014Rolfe could barely walk\u2014and the abuse finally weakened Szabo's morale.\nExecution.\nSzabo was killed in the execution alley at Ravensbr\u00fcck, aged 23, on or before 5 February 1945. She was shot in the back of the head while kneeling down, by SS-Rottenf\u00fchrer Schult in the presence of camp commandant Fritz Suhren (who pronounced the death penalty), camp overseer and deputy commandant Johann Schwarzhuber, SS-Scharf\u00fchrer Zappe, SS-Rottenf\u00fchrer Walter Schenk (responsible for the crematorium), chief camp doctor Dr. Richard Trommer and dentist Dr. Martin Hellinger, from the deposition of Schwarzhuber recorded by Vera Atkins 13 March 1946. Denise Bloch and Lilian Rolfe \u2013 neither of whom could walk and were carried on stretchers \u2013 were shot at the same time, by order of the highest Nazi authorities; the bodies were disposed of in the camp crematorium. Their clothes were not returned to the camp \"Effektenkammer\" (property store) as usually happened after executions.\nComparisons.\nAlong with Szabo, Bloch, and Rolfe, one other member of the SOE was also executed at Ravensbr\u00fcck: Cecily Lefort. She was killed in the gas chamber sometime in February 1945. \nForty-one female Section F SOE agents served in France, some for more than two years, most for only a few months. Twenty-six of them survived World War II. Twelve were executed including Szabo, one was killed when her ship was sunk, two died of disease while imprisoned, and one died of natural causes. Female agents ranged in age from 20 to 53 years.\nAwards and honours.\nSzabo was the second woman to be awarded the George Cross, bestowed posthumously on 17 December 1946. The citation was published in the \"London Gazette\" and read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"St. James's Palace, S.W.1. 17 December 1946\"\nThe KING has been graciously pleased to award the GEORGE CROSS to: \u2014\nViolette, Madame SZABO (deceased), Women's Transport Service (First Aid Nursing Yeomanry).\nMadame Szabo volunteered to undertake a particularly dangerous mission in France. She was parachuted into France in April 1944, and undertook the task with enthusiasm. In her execution of the delicate researches entailed she showed great presence of mind and astuteness. She was twice arrested by the German security authorities but each time managed to get away. Eventually, however, with other members of her group, she was surrounded by the Gestapo in a house in the south-west of France. Resistance appeared hopeless but Madame Szabo, seizing a Sten-gun and as much ammunition as she could carry, barricaded herself in part of the house and, exchanging shot for shot with the enemy, killed or wounded several of them. By constant movement, she avoided being cornered and fought until she dropped exhausted. She was arrested and had to undergo solitary confinement. She was then continuously and atrociously tortured but never by word or deed gave away any of her acquaintances or told the enemy anything of any value. She was ultimately executed. Madame Szabo gave a magnificent example of courage and steadfastness.\nThe \"croix de guerre avec \u00e9toile de bronze\" was awarded by the French government in 1947 and the M\u00e9daille de la R\u00e9sistance in 1973. As one of the SOE agents who died for the liberation of France, Lieutenant Violette Szabo, FANY, is listed on the Valen\u00e7ay SOE Memorial.\nBoth Violette and \u00c9tienne Szabo were awarded the French Croix de Guerre for their bravery in the field. On 28 January 1947 their four-year-old daughter Tania was presented with Violette's George Cross (gazetted on 17 December 1946) from King George VI on behalf of her late mother. Violette and \u00c9tienne Szabo are believed to be the most decorated married couple of the Second World War.\nOn 22 July 2015, Violette Szabo's medals and numerous associated items were sold at auction, realising \u00a3260,000 (\u00a3312,000 including buyer's premium). The purchaser was Lord Ashcroft, who placed the George Cross on permanent display at the Imperial War Museum from 7 October 2015.&lt;ref name=\"BaW/Nov-2015/Szabo\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMuseums and memorials.\nSzabo has no known grave. Her official point of commemoration is the Commonwealth War Graves Commission Brookwood 1939\u20131945 Memorial to the Missing in Brookwood Military Cemetery, Surrey. She is named on panel 26. column 3.\nThe Violette Szabo GC Museum is housed in the cottage in Wormelow Tump, Herefordshire, that Violette's English cousins formerly owned, and that Violette would visit before the war to enjoy walks in the surrounding hills. She also stayed at the farm while she was recuperating from her ankle injury and between her two missions to France. Tania Szabo attended the museum's opening in 2000, as did Virginia McKenna, Leo Marks and members of SOE.\nThe Jersey War Tunnels have a permanent exhibition room dedicated to Szabo.\nThe Royal College of Music offers an annual award called the Violette Szabo GC Memorial Prize for pianists who accompany singers.\nThere is a mural dedicated to Szabo in Stockwell, South London, painted in 2001: Stockwell War Memorial, Stockwell Road. Painted on the exterior of the entrance to a deep level shelter, this mural was executed by Brian Barnes (with the assistance of children from Stockwell Park School). It features Stockwell's famous people such as Szabo and Vincent Van Gogh. It also commemorates the local people who gave their life in the war.\nIn 2008, a bronze bust of Szabo by sculptor Karen Newman was unveiled at the Albert Embankment of the River Thames, in front of Lambeth Palace.\nAt the entrance to Lambeth Town Hall there is a plaque commemorating Szabo's residence in that borough.\nThere is a memorial to Szabo in Le Clos, close to where the Salesman II team landed on 8 June 1944. She is named on the SOE memorial at Valen\u00e7ay to the agents of F Section who gave their lives for the liberation of France, and also on the memorial to the SOE agents who flew from England but did not return at RAF Tempsford.\nThere is also a memorial to Szabo at the entrance to the rugby field in the village of Salon-la-Tour, where she was captured.\nMedia.\nSzabo's daughter, Tania Szabo, wrote a reconstruction of her two 1944 missions in France with flashbacks to her growing up. Author Jack Higgins wrote the foreword and US-French radio-operator, Jean-Claude Guiet, who had accompanied her on the mission in the Limousin, wrote the introduction. On 15 November 2007, at the launch of the book, \"Young Brave and Beautiful: The Missions of Special Operations Executive Agent Lieutenant Violette Szabo\" (), at the Jersey War Tunnels, the Lieutenant Governor of Jersey said of her, \"She's an inspiration to those young people today doing the same work with the risk of the same dangers\". Odette Churchill GC said, \"She was the bravest of us all.\"\nSzabo's wartime activities in German-occupied France were dramatised in the film \"Carve Her Name with Pride\", starring Virginia McKenna and based on the 1956 book of the same name by R. J. Minney.\nThe 2009 video game \"Velvet Assassin\" by Replay Studios is inspired by Szabo's life as an allied spy during the Second World War, with the protagonist sharing her first name.\nThe 2018 ten minute short play, \"The Life That I Have\", developed for the 365 Days of Women by playwright Libby Mitchell, is inspired by Szabo's last moments and her time in Ravensbr\u00fcck. It also includes the heroines Vera Atkins, Denise Bloch, and Lilian Rolfe.\nIn June 2018, her daughter Tania was interviewed about her mother for the Pioneering Women Special airing on BBC's \"Antiques Roadshow\", Series 41.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "32698", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32698", "title": "Visual flight rules", "text": "Regulations for flying an aircraft in clear weather conditions\nIn aviation, visual flight rules (VFR) is a set of regulations under which a pilot operates an aircraft in weather conditions generally clear enough to allow the pilot to see where the aircraft is going. Specifically, the weather must be better than basic VFR weather minima, i.e., in visual meteorological conditions (VMC), as specified in the rules of the relevant aviation authority. The pilot must be able to operate the aircraft with visual reference to the ground, and by visually avoiding obstructions and other aircraft.\nIf the weather is less than VMC, pilots are required to use instrument flight rules, and operation of the aircraft will be primarily through referencing the instruments rather than visual reference. In a control zone, a VFR flight may obtain a clearance from air traffic control to operate as Special VFR.\nRequirements.\nVFR requires a pilot to be able to see outside the cockpit to control the aircraft's altitude, navigate, and avoid obstacles and other aircraft. Governing agencies establish specific requirements for VFR flight, including minimum visibility, and distance from clouds, to ensure that aircraft operating under VFR are visible from enough distance to ensure safety.\nUnder visual meteorological conditions, the minimum visual range, distance from clouds, or cloud clearance requirements to be maintained above ground vary by jurisdiction, and may also vary according to the airspace in which the aircraft is operating.\nIn some countries, VFR flight is permitted at night, and is known as night VFR. This is generally permitted only under more restrictive conditions, such as maintaining minimum safe altitudes, and may require additional training as a pilot at night may not be able to see and avoid obstacles.\nThe VFR pilot is required to \"see and avoid\" obstacles and other aircraft. Pilots flying under VFR assume responsibility for their separation from all other aircraft and are generally not assigned routes or altitudes by air traffic control (ATC). Depending on the category of airspace in which the flight is being conducted, VFR aircraft may be required to have a transponder to help Air Traffic Control identify the aircraft on radar in order that ATC can provide separation from IFR aircraft.\nMeteorological conditions that meet the minimum requirements for VFR flight are termed visual meteorological conditions (VMC). If they are not met, the conditions are considered instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), and a flight may only operate under IFR. IFR operations have specific training requirements and certification required of the pilot, and increased equipment requirements for the aircraft. Additionally, an IFR flight plan must usually be filed in advance.\nFor efficiency of operations, some ATC operations will routinely provide \"pop-up\" IFR clearances for aircraft operating VFR, but that are arriving at an airport that does not meet VMC requirements. For example, in the United States, California's Oakland (KOAK), Monterey (KMRY) and Santa Ana (KSNA) airports routinely grant temporary IFR clearance when a low coastal overcast forces instrument approaches, while the rest of the state is still under visual flight rules. \nFor pilots without an instrument rating who cannot legally fly by instrument flight rules, the restrictions of VMC minima can be troublesome in locations where weather conditions can change suddenly and unexpectedly or when weather events are highly localized. For instance, a small cloud forming over the airport at less than 1000 feet technically requires the airport to allow only IFR flights using instrument approaches/departures. A VFR flight intending to land there would normally be denied clearance, and would either have to divert to another field with VMC, or declare an emergency and override the denial of clearance, which can prompt an inquiry and possibly result in adverse consequences for the pilot.\nTo avoid these scenarios, VFR flights intending to land at or take off from an airport experiencing localized conditions marginally below VMC minima may request Special VFR clearance from the tower. SVFR flight is only allowed while within the portion of an airport's controlled airspace (class B, C, or D) that extends to the surface, and it must be explicitly requested by the pilot and granted by the tower (some airports, primarily large Class B facilities, do not allow SVFR operation in their airspace at all). Visibility on the ground must still be greater than one statute mile, but most other VMC minima such as ceiling are waived. The pilot is required to maintain VFR separation distances from other aircraft and, by requesting SVFR, asserts that they can do so despite the marginal conditions. For departing flights, the pilot must be flying in VMC by the time they leave the surface footprint of the controlled airspace (otherwise they would be flying VFR in IMC which is illegal).\nVFR flight is not allowed in airspace known as \"class A\", regardless of the meteorological conditions except after failure of two way radio communications or during declared emergencies such as VFR traffic attempting to avoid severe weather formations. In the United States, class A airspace is measured using flight levels, and begins at FL180 up to FL600, which is about 18,000 to 60,000 feet as measured using an altimeter at standard pressure (29.92 inHg, 1013 mbar). An exception to IFR-only flying in this airspace is the occasional allowance of sailplanes within designated \"wave windows\" which may be opened by air traffic control when high altitude flights are to be conducted into mountain lee waves. \nTraffic advisories.\nIn the United States, Canada, and Australia, a pilot operating under VFR outside Class B, C, D airspace can request \"flight following\" from ATC, to receive continuous verbal updates on air traffic. This service is provided by ATC if workload permits, but it is an advisory service only. The responsibility for maintaining separation with other aircraft and proper navigation still remains with the pilot in command (PIC). In the United Kingdom, this is known as a \"Traffic Service\". In other countries, it is known as \"Flight Information Service\".\nPilot certifications.\nIn the United States and Canada, any certified pilot who meets specific recency of experience criteria may operate an airworthy aircraft under VFR.\nVFR cruising altitude rules in the US and Canada.\nIn the US, there are specific VFR cruising altitudes, based on the aircraft's course, to assist pilots in separating their aircraft while operating under visual flight above 3,000\u00a0ft above the surface (AGL) but below 18,000\u00a0ft Mean Sea Level (MSL). Unofficially, most pilots use these rules at all levels of cruise flight. FAR 91.159 states that any aircraft:\nLow flying rules in the US.\nIn the US, FAR Part 91 (specifically 91.119) of the Federal Aviation Regulations controls the minimum safe altitudes by which aircraft can be operated in the National Airspace System.\nThough specific altitudes are called as noted below - there is an overreaching general requirement to maintain sufficient altitude that if a power unit fails, an emergency landing without undue hazard to persons or property on the surface can be made. This may be significantly higher than 500\u00a0feet or 1,000\u00a0feet.\nAn aircraft must maintain an altitude of 500 feet above the surface, except over open water or sparsely populated areas. In those cases, the aircraft may not be operated closer than 500 feet to any person, vessel, vehicle, or structure.\nAn aircraft must maintain an altitude of 1,000\u00a0feet above the highest obstacle within a horizontal radius of 2,000\u00a0feet of the aircraft over any congested area of a city, town, or settlement, or over any open air assembly of persons.\nOther aircraft, such as helicopters, powered parachutes, and weight-shift-control aircraft, are not required to meet the FAR 91 minimums, so long as their operation is conducted without hazard to persons or property on the surface.\nLow flying rules in the EU.\nIn all EU member states, the Standardised European Rules of the Air apply: these set out a minimum altitude of 150\u00a0m (500\u00a0ft) above any obstacle within a radius of 150\u00a0m (500\u00a0ft), except with permission, or when taking off or landing. If an aircraft is flying over a congested area (town, settlement, etc.) it must fly high enough so that in the case of an engine failure, it is able to land clear safely \"AND\" it must not fly less than 300\u00a0m (1000\u00a0ft) above the highest fixed object within 600 m of the aircraft.\nMember states are allowed to modify the low flying rule to suit their jurisdiction, for instance in the UK, the \"500\u00a0ft Rule\" allows pilots to fly below 500\u00a0ft as long as they are no closer than 500\u00a0ft to any person, vessel, vehicle, building or structure. \nThe rules for flying near congested areas are the same in the UK as the rest of the EU\nControlled visual flight rules.\nCVFR flight is used in locations where aviation authorities have determined that VFR flight should be allowed, but that ATC separation and minimal guidance are necessary. In this respect, CVFR is similar to instrument flight rules (IFR) in that ATC will give pilots headings and altitudes at which to fly, and will provide separation and conflict resolution. However, pilots and aircraft do not need to be IFR rated to fly in CVFR areas, which is highly advantageous. An example of airspace where CVFR is common would be \"Canadian Class B\" airspace.\nThe CVFR concept is used in Canada and certain European countries, but not in the U.S., where the Private Pilot certificate itself authorizes the pilot to accept clearances under VFR.\nIn Israel, for example, VFR does not exist. All visual flights must be performed under CVFR rules.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32699", "revid": "1317681596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32699", "title": "Veit Stoss", "text": "German sculptor (1447\u20131533)\nVeit Stoss (, also spelled Sto\u00df and Stuoss; ; ; before 1450\u00a0\u2013 about 20 September 1533) was a leading German sculptor, mostly working with wood, whose career covered the transition between the late Gothic and the Northern Renaissance. His style emphasized pathos and emotion, helped by his virtuoso carving of billowing drapery; it has been called \"late Gothic Baroque\". He had a large workshop, and in addition to his own works there are a number by pupils. He is best known for the altarpiece in St. Mary's Basilica in Krak\u00f3w, Poland.\nEarly life and marriage.\nAccording to the contracts and other official documents written in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, Stoss was born in a place pronounced as Horb or Horbn. Most researchers identify this place with Horb am Neckar near Stuttgart in Germany. However, there are artistic traces indicating that Stoss's early education could have taken place in the modern Switzerland. Moreover, his brother was certainly born in Aarau in northern Switzerland, which suggests that the artist's family lived in the region and that Stoss was rather born in the town of Horben, located 30 km southeast of Aarau\nHis exact date of birth is unknown though it must have been shortly before 1450. Nothing about his life is known for certain before 1473 when he moved to Nuremberg in Franconia and married Barbara Hertz. Their eldest son Andreas was born there before 1477, when Stoss moved to Krak\u00f3w, the royal capital of Poland, where he was commissioned to produce the enormous polychrome wooden Altar of Veit Stoss (O\u0142tarz Wita Stwosza) at St Mary's Church in Krak\u00f3w. His son Stanis\u0142aw who was born in Krak\u00f3w the next year was also a sculptor.\nIn Krak\u00f3w (1477\u20131496).\nVeit lived and worked in Krak\u00f3w for almost twenty years, from 1477\u20131496. His name is usually polonized as Wit Stwosz. The altar in Krak\u00f3w was completed in 1489, and was the largest triptych of its time. Like Stoss' other large works, it required a large workshop including specialized painters and gilders. Other important works from Stoss' period in Poland were the tomb of Casimir IV in Wawel Cathedral, the marble tomb of Zbigniew Ole\u015bnicki in Gniezno, and the altar of Saint Stanislaus. The Polish court was more aware of Italian styles than Nuremberg patrons of that time, and some of Stoss' Polish work used Renaissance classical ornament.\nDuring World War II, on the order of Hans Frank\u00a0\u2013 the Governor-General of that region of occupied Poland\u00a0\u2013 the dismantled Altar was shipped to Nazi Germany around 1941. It was rediscovered in 1945 in Bavaria, hidden in the basement of the heavily bombed Nuremberg Castle. The High Altar underwent major restoration work in Poland and was put back in its place at the Basilica ten years later.\nIn Nuremberg (1496-1533).\nIn 1496, Stoss returned to Nuremberg with his wife and eight children. He reacquired his citizenship for three gulden and resumed his work there as a sculptor. Between 1500 and 1503 he carved an altar, now lost, for the parish church of Schwaz, Tyrol of the \"Assumption of Mary\". In 1503, he was arrested for forging the seal and signature of a fraudulent contractor and was sentenced to be branded on both of his cheeks and prohibited from leaving Nuremberg without the explicit permission of the city council. He was pardoned in 1506 by Emperor Maximilian and his civil rights reinstated.\nDespite the prohibition he went to M\u00fcnnerstadt in 1504, to paint and gild the altarpiece that Tilman Riemenschneider had left in plain wood ten years earlier, presumably according to his contract (unlike Stoss, his workshop did not include painters and gilders). Leaving wood sculpture unpainted was a new taste at the time, and \"perhaps the tastes of the city council were somewhat provincial.\" He also created the altar for Bamberg Cathedral and various other sculptures in Nuremberg, including the \"Annunciation\" and \"Tobias and the Angel\". In 1506 he was arrested a second time. In 1507, Emperor Maximilian wrote a letter of pardon. The sole argument was made on the account of his genius. The council of the Imperial free city Nuremberg refused to give him a public notice. But Maximilian's intervention saved him from the dungeons and having his hands chopped off. He was able to resettle in Nuremberg from 1506, but was shunned by the council and received few large commissions from that time onwards. In 1512, the Emperor asked Stoss to help with the planning of his tomb monument, which was eventually placed in the Hofkirche, Innsbruck; it seems Stoss's attempts to cast in brass were unsuccessful.\nDuring the period 1515\u20131520, Veit Stoss received a commission for sculptures by Raffaele Torrigiani, a rich Florentine merchant. In 1516 he made \"Tobias and the Angel\" (now in Germanisches Nationalmuseum, Nuremberg), and a statue of Saint Roch for the Basilica of Santissima Annunziata in Florence. This wooden statue represents the saint in a traditional way: in the garb of a pilgrim, lifting his tunic to demonstrate the plague sore in his thigh. Even Giorgio Vasari, who did not think much of artists north of the Alps, praised it in his \"Le Vite\" and called it \"a miracle in wood\", though misattributing it.\nVeit Stoss was buried at St. Johannis cemetery in Nuremberg.\nArtistic sons.\nHis artistic legacy was continued by his sons, of whom Stanislaus (Polish: Stanis\u0142aw; d. 1528), worked from 1505 on as a woodcarver in Crakow, while three other sons settled in Transylvania sometime after 1515: Johann (Hans; painter and woodcarver, author of masterful winged altarpieces; d. before 1531) in Sch\u00e4\u00dfburg (Sighi\u015foara), goldsmith Martin in Medwisch (Media\u015f), and woodcarver Veit the Younger in Kronstadt (Bra\u015fov), where he , died before 1534.\nIn popular culture.\nVeit Stoss is featured in Judith Weir's opera, \"The Black Spider\". He is one of the singing sculptors in Act 3 Scene 2 inside the Wawel Cathedral. He is shown chiseling at the tomb of King Casimir IV.\nThere is a Polish book (1913) and film (1961) \"Historia \u017c\u00f3\u0142tej ci\u017cemki\" (\"The story of a yellow crakow\") about Veit Stoss in Cracow.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32700", "revid": "50014652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32700", "title": "Volcanic explosivity index", "text": "Predictive qualitative scale for explosiveness of volcanic eruptions\nThe volcanic explosivity index (VEI) is a scale used to measure the size of explosive volcanic eruptions. It was devised by Christopher G. Newhall of the United States Geological Survey and Stephen Self in 1982.\nVolume of products, eruption cloud height, and qualitative observations (using terms ranging from \"gentle\" to \"mega-colossal\") are used to determine the explosivity value. The scale is open-ended with the largest eruptions in history given a magnitude of 8. A value of 0 is given for non-explosive eruptions, defined as less than of tephra ejected; and 8 representing a supervolcanic eruption that can eject (240 cubic miles) of tephra and have a cloud column height of over . The scale is logarithmic, with each interval on the scale representing a tenfold increase in observed ejecta criteria, with the exception of between VEI-0, VEI-1 and VEI-2.\nClassification.\nWith indices running from 0 to 8, the VEI associated with an eruption is dependent on how much volcanic material is thrown out, to what height, and how long the eruption lasts. The scale is logarithmic from VEI-2 and up; an increase of 1 index indicates an eruption that is 10 times as powerful. As such, there is a discontinuity in the definition of the VEI between indices 1 and 2. The lower border of the volume of ejecta jumps by a factor of one hundred, from , while the factor is ten between all higher indices. In the following table, the frequency of each VEI indicates the approximate frequency of new eruptions of that VEI or higher.\nAbout 40 eruptions of VEI-8 magnitude within the last 132 million years (Mya) have been identified, of which 30 occurred in the past 36 million years. Considering the estimated frequency is on the order of once in 50,000 years, there are likely many such eruptions in the last 132 Mya that are not yet known. Based on incomplete statistics, other authors assume that at least 60 VEI-8 eruptions have been identified. The most recent is Lake Taup\u014d's Oruanui eruption, more than 27,000 years ago, which means that there have not been any Holocene eruptions with a VEI of 8.\nThere have been at least 10 eruptions of VEI-7 in the last 11,700 years. There are also 58 Plinian eruptions, and 13 caldera-forming eruptions, of large, but unknown magnitudes. By 2010, the Global Volcanism Program of the Smithsonian Institution had cataloged the assignment of a VEI for 7,742 volcanic eruptions that occurred during the Holocene (the last 11,700 years) which account for about 75% of the total known eruptions during the Holocene. Of these 7,742 eruptions, about 49% have a VEI of 2 or lower, and 90% have a VEI of 3 or lower.\nLimitations.\nUnder the VEI, ash, lava, lava bombs, and ignimbrite are all treated alike. Density and vesicularity (gas bubbling) of the volcanic products in question is not taken into account. In contrast, the DRE (dense-rock equivalent) is sometimes calculated to give the actual amount of magma erupted. Another weakness of the VEI is that it does not take into account the power output of an eruption, which makes the VEI extremely difficult to determine with prehistoric or unobserved eruptions.\nAlthough VEI is quite suitable for classifying the explosive magnitude of eruptions, the index is not as significant as sulfur dioxide emissions in quantifying their atmospheric and climatic impact.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32703", "revid": "50274877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32703", "title": "Versailles, Yvelines", "text": "Prefecture of Yvelines, \u00cele-de-France\n \nVersailles ( , ) is a commune in the department of the Yvelines, \u00cele-de-France, known worldwide for the Ch\u00e2teau de Versailles and the gardens of Versailles, which is designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Located in the western suburbs of the French capital, from the centre of Paris, Versailles is a wealthy suburb of Paris with a service-based economy and is a major tourist destination. According to the 2017 census, the population of the city is 85,862, down from a peak of 94,145 in 1975.\nA new town founded by order of King Louis XIV, Versailles was the \"de facto\" capital of the Kingdom of France for over a century, from 1682 to 1789, before becoming the cradle of the French Revolution. After having lost its status as a royal city, it became the \"pr\u00e9fecture\" (regional capital) of the Seine-et-Oise d\u00e9partement in 1790, then of Yvelines in 1968. It is also a Roman Catholic diocese.\nVersailles is historically known for numerous treaties such as the Treaty of Paris, which ended the American Revolution, and the Treaty of Versailles, after World War I. Today, the Congress of France \u2013 the name given to the body created when both houses of the French Parliament, the National Assembly and the Senate, gather in the Ch\u00e2teau de Versailles to vote on revisions to the Constitution.\nName.\nThe argument over the etymology of \"Versailles\" tends to privilege the Latin word \"versare\", meaning \"to keep turning, turn over and over\", an expression used in medieval times for ploughed lands, cleared lands (lands that had been repeatedly \"turned over\"). This word formation is similar to Latin \"seminare\" (\"to sow\"), which gave French \"semailles\" (\"sowings\", \"sown seeds\").\nDuring the Revolution of 1789, city officials had proposed to the convention to rename Versailles \"Berceau-de-la-Libert\u00e9\" (\"Cradle of Liberty\"), but they had to retract their proposal when confronted with the objections of the majority of the population.\nA seat of power.\nFrom May 1682, when Louis XIV moved the court and government permanently to Versailles, until his death in September 1715, Versailles was the unofficial capital of the kingdom of France. For the next seven years, during the \"R\u00e9gence\" of Philippe d'Orl\u00e9ans, the royal court of the young King Louis XV was the first in Paris, while the Regent governed from his Parisian residence, the Palais-Royal. Versailles was again the unofficial capital of France from June 1722, when Louis XV returned to Versailles, until October 1789, when a Parisian mob forced Louis XVI and the royal family to move to Paris. Versailles again became the unofficial capital of France from March 1871, when Adolphe Thiers' government took refuge in Versailles, fleeing the insurrection of the Paris Commune, until November 1879, when the newly elected government and parliament returned to Paris. During the various periods when government affairs were conducted from Versailles, Paris remained the official capital of France.\nVersailles was made the \"pr\u00e9fecture\" of the Seine-et-Oise \"d\u00e9partement\" at its inception in March 1790 (at which time Seine-et-Oise had approximately 420,000 inhabitants). By the 1960s, with the growth of the Paris suburbs, the \"Seine-et-Oise\" had reached more than 2\u00a0million inhabitants, and was deemed too large and ungovernable, and thus it was split into three \"d\u00e9partements\" in January 1968. Versailles was made the \"pr\u00e9fecture\" of the Yvelines \"d\u00e9partement\", the largest chunk of the former \"Seine-et-Oise\". At the 2017 census the \"Yvelines\" had 1,438,266 inhabitants.\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville has been the meeting place of the town council since 1900.\nVersailles is the seat of a Roman Catholic diocese (bishopric) which was created in 1790. The diocese of Versailles is subordinate to the archdiocese of Paris.\nIn 1975, Versailles was made the seat of a Court of Appeal whose jurisdiction covers the western suburbs of Paris.\nSince 1972, Versailles has been the seat of one of France's 30 nationwide \"acad\u00e9mies\" (districts) of the Ministry of National Education. The \"acad\u00e9mie de Versailles\", the largest of France's thirty \"acad\u00e9mies\" by its number of pupils and students, is in charge of supervising all the elementary schools and high schools of the western suburbs of Paris.\nVersailles is also an important node for the French army, a tradition going back to the monarchy with, for instance, the military camp of Satory and other institutions.\nGeography.\nVersailles is located west-southwest from the centre of Paris. The city sits on an elevated plateau, above sea level (whereas the elevation of the centre of Paris is only above sea level), surrounded by wooded hills: in the north the forests of \"Marly\" and Fausses-Reposes, and in the south the forests of Satory and Meudon.\nThe city (commune) of Versailles has an area of , which is a quarter of the area of the city of Paris. In 1989, Versailles had a population density of , whereas Paris had a density of .\nBorn out of the will of a king, the city has a rational and symmetrical grid of streets. By the standards of the 18th century, Versailles was a very modern European city. Versailles was used as a model for the building of Washington, D.C., by Pierre Charles L'Enfant.\nClimate.\nVersailles has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"). Summer days are usually warm and pleasant with average temperatures between , and a fair amount of sunshine. in the winter, sunshine is scarce; days are cool, and nights are cold but generally above freezing with low temperatures around . Light night frosts are however quite common, but the temperature seldom dips below . Snow falls every year, but rarely stays on the ground. The city sometimes sees light snow or flurries with or without accumulation.\nHistory.\nThe name of Versailles appears for the first time in a medieval document dated 1038. In the feudal system of medieval France, the lords of Versailles came directly under the king of France, with no intermediary overlords between them and the king; yet they were not very important lords. At the end of the 11th century castle and the Saint Julien church. Its farming activity and its location on the road from Paris to Dreux and Normandy brought prosperity to the village, culminating in prosperity at the end of the 13th century, the so-called \"century of Saint Louis\", famous for the prosperity of northern France and the building of Gothic cathedrals. The 14th century brought the Black Death and the Hundred Years' War, and with them death and destruction. At the end of the Hundred Years' War in the 15th century, the village started to recover, with a population of only 100 inhabitants.\nIn 1561, Martial de Lom\u00e9nie, Secretary of State for Finances under King Charles IX, became the lord of Versailles. He obtained permission to establish four annual fairs and a weekly market on Thursdays. The population of Versailles then was 500 inhabitants. Martial de Lom\u00e9nie was murdered during the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre (24 August 1572). In 1575, Albert de Gondi, a man from Florence who had come to France with Catherine de' Medici, bought the seigneury of Versailles.\nLouis XIII.\nHenceforth Versailles was the possession of the Gondi family, a family of wealthy and influential parliamentarians at the \"Parlement\" of Paris. Several times during the 1610s, the de Gondis invited King Louis XIII to hunt in the large forests around Versailles. In 1622, the king purchased a parcel of forest for his private hunting. In 1624, he acquired more and entrusted Philibert Le Roy with the construction of a small hunting lodge of red bricks and stone with a slate roof. In 1632, the king bought the totality of the land and seigneury of Versailles from Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Gondi. The hunting lodge was enlarged to the size of a small ch\u00e2teau between 1632 and 1634.\nAt the death of Louis XIII, in 1643, the village had 1,000 inhabitants.\nThis small ch\u00e2teau was the site of one of the historical events that took place during the reign of Louis XIII, on 10 November 1630, when, on the Day of the Dupes, the party of the queen mother was defeated and Richelieu was confirmed as Prime Minister.\nLouis XIV.\nKing Louis XIV, son of Louis XIII, was only four years old when his father died. It was 20 years later, in 1661, when Louis XIV commenced his personal reign, that the young king showed interest in Versailles. The idea of leaving Paris, where, as a child, he had experienced first-hand the insurrection of the Fronde, had never left him. Louis XIV commissioned his architect Le Vau and his landscape architect Le N\u00f4tre to transform the castle of his father, as well as the park, in order to accommodate the court. In 1678, after the Treaty of Nijmegen, the king decided that the court and the government would be established permanently in Versailles, which happened on 6 May 1682.\nAt the same time, a new city was emerging from the ground, resulting from an ingenious decree of the king dated 22 May 1671, whereby the king authorized anyone to acquire a lot in the new city for free. There were only two conditions to acquire a lot: 1- a token tax of 5 shillings (\"5 sols\") per arpent of land should be paid every year ($0.03 per per year in 2005 US dollars); 2- a house should be built on the lot according to the plans and models established by the \"Surintendant des B\u00e2timents du Roi\" (architect in chief of the royal demesne). The plans provided for a city built symmetrically with respect to the \"Avenue de Paris\" (which starts from the entrance of the castle). The roofs of the buildings and houses of the new city were not to exceed the level of the Marble Courtyard, at the entrance of the castle (built above a hill dominating the city), so that the perspective from the windows of the castle would not be obstructed.\nThe old village and the Saint Julien church were demolished to make room for buildings housing the administrative services managing the daily life in the castle. On both sides of the \"Avenue de Paris\" were built the Notre-Dame neighbourhood and the Saint-Louis neighbourhood, with new large churches, markets, and aristocratic mansions, all built in a very homogeneous style according to the models established by the \"Surintendant des B\u00e2timents du Roi\". Versailles was a vast construction site for many years. Little by little, all those who needed or desired to live close to the centre of power came to Versailles. At the death of the Sun King in 1715, the village of Versailles had turned into a city of approximately 30,000 inhabitants.\nLouis XV and Louis XVI.\nWhen the court of King Louis XV returned to Versailles in 1722, the city had 24,000 inhabitants. With the reign of Louis XV, Versailles grew even further. Versailles was the capital of the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and the whole of Europe admired its new architecture and design trends. Soon enough, the strict building rules decided under Louis XIV were not respected anymore, real estate speculation flourished, and the lots that had been given for free under Louis XIV were now on the market for hefty prices. By 1744, the population reached 37,000 inhabitants. The cityscape changed considerably under kings Louis XV and Louis XVI. Buildings were now taller. King Louis XV built a Ministry of War, a Ministry of Foreign Affairs (where the Treaty of Paris (1783) ending the American Revolutionary War was signed in 1783 with the United Kingdom), and a Ministry of the Navy. By 1789, the population had reached 60,000 inhabitants, and Versailles was now the seventh or eighth-largest city in France, and one of the largest cities in Europe.\nFrench Revolution.\nSeat of political power, Versailles naturally became the cradle of the French Revolution. The Estates-General met in Versailles on 5 May 1789. The members of the Third Estate took the Tennis Court Oath on 20 June 1789, and the National Constituent Assembly abolished feudalism on 4 August 1789. Eventually, on 5 and 6 October 1789, a crowd of women joined by some members of the national guard from Paris invaded the castle to protest bread prices and forced the royal family to move to Paris. The National Constituent Assembly followed the king to Paris soon afterwards, and Versailles lost its role as the capital city. During this turbulent time, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Coste, who had also been the chief physician of the King's Armies, was appointed mayor of Versailles.\nFrom then on, Versailles lost a good deal of its inhabitants. From 60,000, the population had declined to 26,974 inhabitants by 1806. The castle, stripped of its furniture and ornaments during the Revolution, was left abandoned, with only Napoleon briefly staying one night there and then leaving the castle for good. Louis-Philippe, who took the throne in the July Revolution of 1830, transformed the palace into a National Museum dedicated to \"all the glories of France\" in 1837. Versailles had become a sleepy town, a place of pilgrimage for those nostalgic for the old monarchy.\n19th century to the present day.\nThe Franco-Prussian War of 1870 put Versailles in the limelight again. On 18 January 1871, the victorious Germans proclaimed the king of Prussia, Wilhelm I, emperor of Germany in the very Hall of Mirrors of the castle, in an attempt to take revenge for the conquests of Louis XIV two centuries earlier. Then in March of the same year, following the insurrection of the Paris Commune, the French Third Republic government under Thiers relocated to Versailles, and from there directed the military suppression of the insurrection.\nRestoration of a monarchy almost occurred in 1873, with parliament offering the crown to Henri, comte de Chambord, but his refusal to accept the tricolour flag that had been adopted during the Revolution made the restoration of the monarchy impossible for the time being. Versailles became again the political centre of France, full of buzz and rumours, with its population briefly peaking at 61,686 in 1872, matching the record level of population reached on the eve of the French Revolution 83 years earlier. Eventually, however, left-wing republicans won a string of parliamentary elections, defeating the parties supporting a restoration of the monarchy, and the new majority decided to relocate the government to Paris in November 1879. Versailles then experienced a new population setback (48,324 inhabitants at the 1881 census). After that, Versailles never again functioned as the seat of the capital of France, but the presence of the French Parliament there in the 1870s left a vast hall, built in one aisle of the palace, which the French Parliament uses when it meets in Congress to amend the French Constitution, as well as when the President of France addresses the two chambers of the French Parliament.\nOnly in 1911 did Versailles definitely recover its level of population of 1789, with 60,458 inhabitants at the 1911 census. In 1919, at the end of the First World War, Versailles came into the limelight again as the various treaties ending the war were signed in the castle proper and in the Grand Trianon. After 1919, as the suburbs of Paris continued to expand, Versailles was absorbed by the urban area of Paris, and the city experienced a strong demographic and economic growth, turning it into a large suburban city of the metropolitan area of Paris. The role of Versailles as an administrative and judicial centre has been reinforced in the 1960s and 1970s, and somehow Versailles has become the main centre of the western suburbs of Paris.\nIn the present times, the centre of the town has kept its very bourgeois atmosphere, while more middle-class neighbourhoods have developed around the train stations and on the outskirts of the city. Versailles is a chic suburb of Paris, well linked to the centre of Paris by several train lines. However, the city is extremely compartmentalized, divided by large avenues inherited from the monarchy, which create the impression of several small cities ignoring each other. Versailles was never an industrial city, even though there are a few chemical and food-processing plants. Essentially, Versailles is a place of services, such as public administration, tourism, business, congresses, and festivals. From 1951 until France's withdrawal from the NATO unified command in 1966, nearby Rocquencourt functioned as the site for SHAPE. Versailles is an important military centre, with several units and training schools headquartered at the Satory military base, which hosted the headquarters of the famed 2nd French Armored Division until 1999, and where a military exhibition is organized annually.\nCulture.\nVersailles' primary cultural attraction is the Palace, with its ornately decorated rooms and historic significance. The Potager du roi is a kitchen garden created under Louis XIV to supply fruits and vegetables to the Court. It is officially recognized as a Remarkable Garden of France.\nThe town also has other points of cultural notability; in recent times, its position as an affluent suburb of Paris has meant that it forms a part of the Paris artistic scene, and musical groups such as Phoenix, Air, Fuzati, and Daft Punk have some link to the city, as does the director Michel Gondry.\nSignificant portions of Marie Antoinette (2006 film), directed by Sofia Coppola, were filmed on location in Versailles.\nSport.\nFootball Club de Versailles 78 is a semi-professional association football club founded in 1989. Their home stadium is the Stade de Montbauron, which has a capacity of 6,208 people.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe headquarters of the Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines University is located in the city, as well as the ISIPCA, a post-graduate school in perfume, cosmetics products, and food flavour formulation.\nTransport.\nVersailles is served by Versailles-Chantiers station, which is an interchange station on Paris RER line C, on the Transilien La D\u00e9fense suburban rail line, on the Transilien Paris-Montparnasse suburban rail line, and on several national rail lines, including low-frequency TGV service.\nVersailles is served by two other stations on Paris RER line C: Versailles-Ch\u00e2teau\u2013Rive Gauche (the closest station to the Palace of Versailles and consequently the station most frequently used by tourists) and Porchefontaine.\nVersailles is also served by two stations on the Transilien Paris-Saint-Lazare suburban rail line: Versailles-Rive Droite and Montreuil.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nVersailles is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32705", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32705", "title": "Volunteer", "text": ""}
{"id": "32706", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32706", "title": "Vancouver", "text": "City in British Columbia, Canada\nVancouver is a major city in Western Canada, located in the Lower Mainland region of British Columbia. As the most populous city in the province, the 2021 Canadian census recorded 662,248 people in the city, up from 631,486 in 2016. The Metro Vancouver area had a population of 2.6million in 2021, making it the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada. Greater Vancouver, along with the Fraser Valley, comprises the Lower Mainland with a regional population of over 3million. Vancouver has the highest population density in Canada, with over , and the fourth highest in North America (after New York City, San Francisco, and Mexico City).\nVancouver is one of the most ethnically and linguistically diverse cities in Canada: 49.3 percent of its residents are not native English speakers, 47.8 percent are native speakers of neither English nor French, and 54.5 percent of residents belong to visible minority groups. It has been consistently ranked one of the most liveable cities in Canada and in the world. In terms of housing affordability, Vancouver is also one of the most expensive cities in Canada and in the world. Vancouverism is the city's urban planning design philosophy.\nIndigenous settlement of Vancouver began more than 10,000 years ago and included the Squamish, Musqueam, and Tsleil-Waututh (Burrard) peoples. The beginnings of the modern city, which was originally named Gastown, grew around the site of a makeshift tavern on the western edges of Hastings Mill that was built on July 1, 1867, and owned by proprietor Gassy Jack. The Gastown steam clock marks the original site. Gastown then formally registered as a townsite dubbed Granville, Burrard Inlet. The city was renamed \"Vancouver\" in 1886 through a deal with the Canadian Pacific Railway. The Canadian Pacific transcontinental railway was extended to the city by 1887. The city's large natural seaport on the Pacific Ocean became a vital link in the trade between Asia-Pacific, East Asia, Europe, and Eastern Canada.\nVancouver has hosted many international conferences and events, including the 1954 Commonwealth Games, UN Habitat I, Expo 86, APEC Canada 1997, the World Police and Fire Games in 1989 and 2009; several matches of the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup including the finals at BC Place in downtown Vancouver, and the 2010 Winter Olympics and Paralympics which were held in Vancouver and Whistler, a resort community north of the city. In 1969, Greenpeace was founded in Vancouver. The city became the permanent home to TED conferences in 2014.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], the Port of Vancouver is the fourth-largest port by tonnage in the Americas, the busiest and largest in Canada, and the most diversified port in North America. While forestry remains its largest industry, Vancouver is well known as an urban centre surrounded by nature, making tourism its second-largest industry. Major film production studios in Vancouver and nearby Burnaby have turned Greater Vancouver and nearby areas into one of the largest film production centres in North America, earning it the nickname \"Hollywood North\".\nEtymology.\nThe city takes its name from George Vancouver, who explored the inner harbour of Burrard Inlet in 1792 and gave various places British names. The family name \"Vancouver\" itself originates from the Dutch \"van Coevorden\", denoting somebody from the city of Coevorden, Netherlands. The explorer's ancestors came to England \"from Coevorden\", which is the origin of the name that eventually became \"Vancouver\".\nThe indigenous Squamish people who reside in a region that encompasses southwestern British Columbia including this city gave the name which means \"place of many maple trees\"; this was originally the name of a village inhabited by said people where a sawmill was established by Edward Stamp as part of the foundations to the British settlement later becoming part of Vancouver.\nIn h\u0259n\u0313q\u0313\u0259min\u0313\u0259m\u0313 (the Downriver dialect of Halkomelem) spoken by the Musqueam, there is no specific term for Vancouver. Rather there existed names for specific villages and landscape features that the people knew intimately in the area in which Vancouver exists currently, as opposed to larger geographic features. The region where Vancouver is currently located was referred to by the St\u00f3\ua789l\u014d in the Upriver Halkomelem dialect as , meaning \"wide at the bottom/end\". Speakers of the Island dialect of Halkomelem referred to the region of Vancouver as or , referring to the Squamish, or as , a transliteration of the English word \"Vancouver\".\nHistory.\nBefore 1850.\nArchaeological records indicate that Aboriginal people were already living in the Vancouver area from 8,000 to 10,000 years ago.\nThe Squamish, Musqueam, and Tsleil-Waututh (Burrard) peoples of the Coast Salish group had villages in various parts of present-day Vancouver, such as Stanley Park, False Creek, Kitsilano, Point Grey and near the mouth of the Fraser River.\nEuropeans became acquainted with the area of the future Vancouver when Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Narv\u00e1ez of Spain explored the coast of present-day Point Grey and parts of Burrard Inlet in 1791\u2014although one author contends that Francis Drake may have visited the area in 1579.\nThe explorer and North West Company trader Simon Fraser and his crew became the first-known Europeans to set foot on the site of the present-day city. In 1808, they travelled from the east down the Fraser River, perhaps as far as Point Grey.\nEarly growth.\nThe Fraser Gold Rush of 1858 brought over 25,000 men, mainly from California, to nearby New Westminster (founded February 14, 1859) on the Fraser River, on their way to the Fraser Canyon, bypassing what would become Vancouver. Vancouver is among British Columbia's youngest cities; the first European settlement in what is now Vancouver was not until 1862 at McCleery's Farm on the Fraser River, just east of the ancient village of Musqueam in what is now Marpole. A sawmill was established at Moodyville (now the City of North Vancouver) in 1863, beginning the city's long relationship with logging. It was quickly followed by mills owned by Captain Edward Stamp on the south shore of the inlet. Stamp, who had begun logging in the Port Alberni area, first attempted to run a mill at Brockton Point, but difficult currents and reefs forced the relocation of the operation in 1867 to a point near the foot of Dunlevy Street. This mill, known as the Hastings Mill, became the nucleus around which Vancouver formed. The mill's central role in the city waned after the arrival of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) in the 1880s. It nevertheless remained important to the local economy until it closed in the 1920s. The settlement, which came to be called Gastown, proliferated around the original makeshift tavern established by Gassy Jack in 1867 on the edge of the Hastings Mill property.\nIn 1870, the colonial government surveyed the settlement and laid out a townsite, renamed \"Granville\" in honour of the then\u2013British Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Granville. This site, with its natural harbour, was selected in 1884 as the terminus for the Canadian Pacific Railway, to the disappointment of Port Moody, New Westminster and Victoria, all of which had vied to be the railhead. A railway was among the inducements for British Columbia to join the Confederation in 1871, but the Pacific Scandal and arguments over the use of Chinese labour delayed construction until the 1880s.\nIncorporation.\nThe City of Vancouver was incorporated on April 6, 1886, the same year that the first transcontinental train arrived. CPR president William Van Horne arrived in Port Moody to establish the CPR terminus recommended by Henry John Cambie and gave the city its name in honour of George Vancouver. The Great Vancouver Fire on June 13, 1886, razed the entire city. The Vancouver Fire Department was established that year and the city quickly rebuilt. Vancouver's population grew from a settlement of 1,000 people in 1881 to over 20,000 by the turn of the century and 100,000 by 1911.\nVancouver merchants outfitted prospectors bound for the Klondike Gold Rush in 1898. One of those merchants, Charles Woodward, had opened the first Woodward's store at Abbott and Cordova Streets in 1892 and, along with Spencer's and the Hudson's Bay department stores, formed the core of the city's retail sector for decades.\nThe economy of early Vancouver was dominated by large companies such as the CPR, which fuelled economic activity and led to the rapid development of the new city; in fact, the CPR was the main real estate owner and housing developer in the city. While some manufacturing did develop, including the establishment of the British Columbia Sugar Refinery by Benjamin Tingley Rogers in 1890, natural resources became the basis for Vancouver's economy. The resource sector was initially based on logging and later on exports moving through the seaport, where commercial traffic constituted the largest economic sector in Vancouver by the 1930s.\nThe 20th century.\nThe dominance of the economy by big business was accompanied by an often militant labour movement. The first major sympathy strike was in 1903 when railway employees struck against the CPR for union recognition. Labour leader Frank Rogers was killed by CPR police while picketing at the docks, becoming the movement's first martyr in British Columbia. The rise of industrial tensions throughout the province led to Canada's first general strike in 1918, at the Cumberland coal mines on Vancouver Island. Following a lull in the 1920s, the strike wave peaked in 1935 when unemployed men flooded the city to protest conditions in the relief camps run by the military in remote areas throughout the province. After two tense months of daily and disruptive protesting, the relief camp strikers decided to take their grievances to the federal government and embarked on the On-to-Ottawa Trek, but their protest was put down by force. The workers were arrested near Mission and interned in work camps for the duration of the Depression.\nOther social movements, such as the first-wave feminist, moral reform, and temperance movements, were also instrumental in Vancouver's development. Mary Ellen Smith, a Vancouver suffragist and prohibitionist, became the first woman elected to a provincial legislature in Canada in 1918.https:// Alcohol prohibition began in the First World War and lasted until 1921 when the provincial government established control over alcohol sales, a practice still in place today. Canada's first drug law came about following an inquiry conducted by the federal minister of Labour and future prime minister, William Lyon Mackenzie King. King was sent to investigate damages claims resulting from a riot when the Asiatic Exclusion League led a rampage through Chinatown and Japantown. Two of the claimants were opium manufacturers, and after further investigation, King found that white women were reportedly frequenting opium dens as well as Chinese men. A federal law banning the manufacture, sale, and importation of opium for non-medicinal purposes was soon passed based on these revelations. These riots, and the formation of the Asiatic Exclusion League, also act as signs of a growing fear and mistrust towards the Japanese living in Vancouver and throughout BC. These fears were exacerbated by the attack on Pearl Harbor leading to the eventual internment or deportation of all Japanese-Canadians living in the city and the province. After the war, these Japanese-Canadian men and women were not allowed to return to cities like Vancouver causing areas, like the aforementioned Japantown, to cease to be ethnically Japanese areas as the communities never revived.\nAmalgamation with Point Grey and South Vancouver gave the city its final boundaries not long before it became the third-largest metropolis in the country. As of January 1, 1929, the population of the enlarged Vancouver was 228,193.\nGeography.\nLocated on the Burrard Peninsula, Vancouver lies between Burrard Inlet to the north and the Fraser River to the south. The Strait of Georgia, to the west, is shielded from the Pacific Ocean by Vancouver Island. The city has an area of , including both flat and hilly ground and is in the Pacific Time Zone (UTC\u22128) and the Pacific Maritime Ecozone.\nUntil the city's naming in 1885, \"Vancouver\" referred to Vancouver Island, and it remains a common misconception that the city is located on the island. The island and the city are both named after Royal Navy Captain George Vancouver (as is the city of Vancouver, Washington, in the United States).\nVancouver has one of the largest urban parks in North America, Stanley Park, which covers . The North Shore Mountains dominate the cityscape, and on a clear day, scenic vistas include the snow-capped volcano Mount Baker in the state of Washington to the southeast, Vancouver Island across the Strait of Georgia to the west and southwest, and Bowen Island to the northwest.\nEcology.\nThe vegetation in the Vancouver area was originally temperate rainforest, consisting of conifers with scattered pockets of maple and alder and large areas of swampland (even in upland areas, due to poor drainage). The conifers were a typical coastal British Columbia mix of Douglas fir, western red cedar and western hemlock. The area is thought to have had the largest trees of these species on the British Columbia Coast. Only in Elliott Bay, Seattle, did the size of trees rival those of Burrard Inlet and English Bay. The largest trees in Vancouver's old-growth forest were in the Gastown area, where the first logging occurred and on the southern slopes of False Creek and English Bay, especially around Jericho Beach. The forest in Stanley Park was logged between the 1860s and 1880s, and evidence of old-fashioned logging techniques such as springboard notches can still be seen there.\nMany plants and trees growing throughout Vancouver and the Lower Mainland were imported from other parts of the continent and points across the Pacific. Examples include the monkey puzzle tree, the Japanese maple and various flowering exotics, such as magnolias, azaleas and rhododendrons. Some species imported from harsher climates in Eastern Canada or Europe have grown to immense sizes. The native Douglas maple can also attain a tremendous size. Many of the city's streets are lined with flowering varieties of Japanese cherry trees donated from the 1930s onward by the government of Japan. These flower for several weeks in early spring each year, an occasion celebrated by the Vancouver Cherry Blossom Festival. Other streets are lined with flowering chestnut, horse chestnut and other decorative shade trees.\nClimate.\nVancouver's climate, one of the mildest and most temperate climates in Canada, is classified as an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") bordering on a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\"). While the city has the coolest summer average high of all major Canadian metropolitan areas, winters in Greater Vancouver are the fourth-mildest of Canadian cities, after nearby Victoria, Nanaimo and Duncan, all on Vancouver Island.\nVancouver is one of the wettest Canadian cities. However, precipitation varies throughout the metropolitan area. Annual precipitation as measured at Vancouver International Airport in Richmond averages , compared with in the downtown area and in North Vancouver. The daily maximum averages in July and August, with highs rarely reaching . The summer months are typically dry, with only one in five days receiving precipitation during July and August. In contrast, most days from November through March record some precipitation.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded at the airport was set on July 30, 2009, and the highest temperature ever recorded within the city of Vancouver was occurring first on July 31, 1965, again on August 8, 1981, and also on May 29, 1983. The coldest temperature ever recorded in the city was on January 14, 1950 and again on December 29, 1968.\nOn average, snow falls nine days per year, with three days receiving or more. Average yearly snowfall is but typically does not remain on the ground for long.\nVancouver's growing season averages 237 days, from March 18 until November 10. Vancouver's 1981\u20132010 USDA Plant Hardiness Zone ranges from 8a to 9a depending on elevation and proximity to water.\nCityscape.\nUrban planning.\nAs of 2021,[ [update]] Vancouver is the most densely populated city in Canada. Urban planning in Vancouver is characterized by high-rise residential and mixed-use development in urban centres, as an alternative to sprawl. As part of the larger Metro Vancouver region, it is influenced by the policy direction of livability as illustrated in Metro Vancouver's Regional Growth Strategy.\nVancouver ranked high on the Global Liveability Ranking and stood at number 1 on the list for several years until 2011. In recent years, it has dropped, ranking as low as 16 in 2021. As of 2022[ [update]], Vancouver was ranked as having the fifth-highest quality of living of any city on Earth. According to \"Forbes\", Vancouver had the fourth-most expensive real estate market in the world in 2019. Vancouver has also been ranked among Canada's most expensive cities in which to live. Sales in February 2016 were 56.3 percent higher than the 10-year average for the month. \"Forbes\" also ranked Vancouver as the tenth-cleanest city in the world in 2007.\nVancouver's characteristic approach to urban planning originated in the late 1950s, when city planners began to encourage the building of high-rise residential towers in Vancouver's West End, subject to strict requirements for setbacks and open space to protect sight lines and preserve green space. The success of these dense but livable neighbourhoods led to the redevelopment of urban industrial sites, such as North False Creek and Coal Harbour, beginning in the mid-1980s. The result is a compact urban core that has gained international recognition for its \"high amenity and 'livable' development\". In 2006, the city launched a planning initiative entitled EcoDensity, with the stated goal of exploring ways in which \"density, design, and land use can contribute to environmental sustainability, affordability, and livability\".\nArchitecture.\nThe Vancouver Art Gallery is housed downtown in the neoclassical former courthouse built in 1906. The courthouse building was designed by Francis Rattenbury, who also designed the British Columbia Parliament Buildings and the Empress Hotel in Victoria, and the lavishly decorated second Hotel Vancouver. The 556-room Hotel Vancouver, opened in 1939 and the third by that name, is across the street with its copper roof. The Gothic-style Christ Church Cathedral, across from the hotel, opened in 1894 and was declared a heritage building in 1976.\nThere are several modern buildings in the downtown area, including the Harbour Centre, the Vancouver Law Courts and surrounding plaza known as Robson Square (designed by Arthur Erickson) and the Vancouver Library Square (designed by Moshe Safdie and DA Architects), reminiscent of the Colosseum in Rome, and the recently completed Woodward's building Redevelopment (designed by Henriquez Partners Architects).\nThe original BC Hydro headquarters building (designed by Ron Thom and Ned Pratt) at Nelson and Burrard Streets is a modernist high-rise, now converted into the Electra condominium. Also notable is the \"concrete waffle\" of the MacMillan Bloedel building on the north-east corner of the Georgia and Thurlow intersection.\nA prominent addition to the city's landscape is the giant tent-frame Canada Place (designed by Zeidler Roberts Partnership Partnership, MCMP &amp; DA Architects), the former Canada Pavilion from the 1986 World Exposition, which includes part of the Convention Centre, the Pan-Pacific Hotel, and a cruise ship terminal. Two modern buildings that define the southern skyline away from the downtown area are City Hall and the Centennial Pavilion of Vancouver General Hospital, both designed by Townley and Matheson in 1936 and 1958, respectively.\nA collection of Edwardian buildings in the city's old downtown core were, in their day, the tallest commercial buildings in the British Empire. These were, in succession, the Carter-Cotton Building (former home of \"The Province\" newspaper), the Dominion Building (1907) and the Sun Tower (1911), the former two at Cambie and Hastings Streets and the latter at Beatty and Pender Streets.\nThe Sun Tower's cupola was finally exceeded as the Empire's tallest commercial building by the elaborate Art Deco Marine Building in the 1920s. The Marine Building is known for its elaborate ceramic tile facings and brass-gilt doors and elevators, which make it a favourite location for movie shoots. Topping the list of tallest buildings in Vancouver is Living Shangri-La, the tallest building in BC at and 62\u00a0storeys. The second-tallest building in Vancouver is the Paradox Hotel Vancouver at , followed by the Private Residences at Hotel Georgia, at . The fourth-tallest is One Wall Centre at and 48\u00a0storeys, followed closely by the Shaw Tower at .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Canadian census conducted by Statistics Canada, Vancouver had a population of 662,248 living in 305,336 of its 328,347 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 631,486, making it the eighth-largest among Canadian cities. More specifically, Vancouver is the fourth-largest in Western Canada after Calgary, Edmonton and Winnipeg. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021, the most densely populated Canadian municipality with more than 5,000 residents.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the metropolitan area referred to as Greater Vancouver had a population of 2,642,825 living in 1,043,319 of its 1,104,532 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 2,463,431, the third-most populous metropolitan area in the country and the most populous in Western Canada. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021. Approximately 75 percent of the people living in Metro Vancouver live outside Vancouver itself.\nThe larger Lower Mainland-Southwest economic region (which includes also the Squamish-Lillooet, Fraser Valley, and Sunshine Coast Regional District) has a population of over 3.04million.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 274,365 persons or 42.2% of the total population of Vancouver. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were mainland China (63,275 persons or 23.1%), Philippines (29,930 persons or 10.9%), Hong Kong (25,480 persons or 9.3%), India (14,640 persons or 5.3%), United Kingdom (12,895 persons or 4.7%), Vietnam (12,120 persons or 4.4%), Taiwan (9,870 persons or 3.6%), United States of America (9,790 persons or 3.6%), Iran (8,775 persons or 3.2%), and South Korea (6,495 persons or 2.4%).\nEthnicity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVancouver has been called a \"city of neighbourhoods\". Each neighbourhood in Vancouver has a distinct character and ethnic mix. People of English, Scottish, and Irish origins were historically the largest ethnic groups in the city, and elements of British society and culture are still visible in some areas, particularly South Granville and Kerrisdale. Germans are the next-largest European ethnic group in Vancouver and were a leading force in the city's society and economy until the rise of anti-German sentiment with the outbreak of World War I in 1914. Today, Chinese are the largest visible ethnic group in Vancouver; the city has a diverse Chinese-speaking community with speakers of several dialects, notably Cantonese and Mandarin. Neighbourhoods with distinct ethnic commercial areas include Chinatown, Punjabi Market, Little Italy, Greektown, and (formerly) Japantown.\nSince the 1980s, immigration increased substantially, making the city more ethnically and linguistically diverse; 49 percent of Vancouver's residents do not speak English as their first language. Over 25 percent of the city's inhabitants are of Chinese heritage. In the 1980s, an influx of immigrants from Hong Kong in anticipation of the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to China, combined with an increase in immigrants from mainland China and previous immigrants from Taiwan, established in Vancouver one of the highest concentrations of ethnic Chinese residents in North America. Another significant Asian ethnic group in Vancouver includes South Asians, forming approximately 7 percent of the city's inhabitants; while a small community had existed in the city since 1897, larger waves of migration began in the 1950s and 1960s, prompting new Punjabi immigrants to establish a \"Little India\" (known as Punjabi Market) and preside over much of the mass construction of the \"Vancouver Special\" across the southeastern quadrant of the city, notably within the Sunset neighbourhood prior to the suburbanization of the community to outer suburbs such as Surrey or Delta.\nOther Asian-origin groups that reside in Vancouver include Filipinos (5.9%), Japanese (1.7%), Korean (1.7%), West Asians (1.9%), as well as sizable communities of Vietnamese, Indonesians, and Cambodians. Despite increases in Latin American immigration to Vancouver in the 1980s and 1990s, recent immigration has been comparatively low. However, growth in the Latino population\u00a0\u2013 which largely consists of Mexicans and Salvadorans\u00a0\u2013 rose in the late 2010s and early 2020s. African immigration has been similarly stagnant (3.6% and 3.3% of total immigrant population, respectively). The black population of Vancouver is small in comparison to other Canadian major cities, making up 1.3 percent of the city. Hogan's Alley, a small area adjacent to Chinatown, just off Main Street at Prior, was once home to a significant black community. The Black population consists of Somalis, Jamaicans/Caribbeans, and other groups, including those who descended from African Americans. The neighbourhood of Strathcona was the core of the city's Jewish community. In 1981, approximately 24 percent of the city population belonged to a visible minority group; at the same time, this proportion was roughly 14 percent for the entire metropolitan area. By 2016, the proportion in the city had grown to 52 percent.\nPrior to the Hong Kong diaspora of the 1990s, the largest non-British ethnic groups in the city were Irish and German, followed by Scandinavian, Italian, Ukrainian, Chinese, and Punjabi. From the mid-1950s until the 1980s, many Portuguese immigrants came to Vancouver, and the city had the third-largest Portuguese population in Canada in 2001. Eastern Europeans, including Russians, Czechs, Poles, Romanians and Hungarians began immigrating after the Soviet takeover of Eastern Europe after World War II. Greek immigration increased in the late 1960s and early '70s, with most settling in the Kitsilano area. Vancouver also has a significant aboriginal community of about 15,000 people.\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nVancouver has a large LGBT community, with a recognized gay male enclave focused in the West End neighbourhood of the downtown core, particularly along Davie Street, officially designated as Davie Village, though the gay community is omnipresent throughout West End and Yaletown areas. Vancouver is host to one of the country's largest annual pride parades.\nLanguage.\nAccording to the 2021 Canadian census, 612,215 persons, or 94.1% of Vancouver's population, know the English language; 96,965 persons or 14.9% of the population, know the Cantonese language, followed by Mandarin (74,695 or 11.5%), French (60,990 or 9.4%), Tagalog (30,430 or 4.7%), Punjabi (19,130 or 2.9%), Hindi (15,025 or 2.3%), Vietnamese (14,905 or 2.3%), Persian languages (12,330 or 1.9%), Japanese (12,075 or 1.9%), German (11,050 or 1.7%), Korean (10,480 or 1.6%), Portuguese (8,715 or 1.3%), Italian (7,740 or 1.2%), and Russian (7,620 or 1.2%).\nFurthermore, the 2021 census stated 332,135 persons or 50.7% of Vancouver's population have English as a mother tongue; Cantonese is the mother tongue of 77,435 persons or 11.8% of the population, followed by Mandarin (41,695 or 6.4%), Tagalog (18,675 or 2.9%), Spanish (16,735 or 2.6%), Punjabi (13,305 or 2.0%), Vietnamese (11,870 or 1.8%), Persian languages (10,315 or 1.6%), Korean (8,605 or 1.3%), Japanese (7,150 or 1.1%), Portuguese (6,740 or 1.0%), Russian (5,155 or 0.8%), German (4,725 or 0.7%), Hindi (4,355 or 0.7%), and Italian (4,000 or 0.6%).\nReligion.\nWhile most British Columbians are secular or non-religious, Vancouver's Asian population has been noted for its Christian faith. As of the 2021 Canadian census, religious groups in Vancouver include:\nHomelessness.\nHomelessness is a significant and persistent issue in Vancouver. A 2019 count found that at least 2,223 people in the city were experiencing homelessness, the highest number recorded since counts began in 2005. Of those surveyed, 28 percent reported having no physical shelter. Indigenous people accounted for 39 percent of all respondents. Three-fifths of respondents said at least two health concerns, and 67 percent said an addiction to at least one substance.\nEconomy.\nWith its location on the Pacific Rim and at the western terminus of Canada's transcontinental highway and rail routes, Vancouver is one of the nation's largest industrial centres. Port Metro Vancouver, Canada's largest and most diversified port, does more than $172billion in trade with over 160 different trading economies annually. Port activities generate $9.7billion in gross domestic product and $20.3billion in economic output. Vancouver is also the headquarters of forest product and mining companies. In recent years, Vancouver has become a centre for software development, biotechnology, aerospace, video game development, animation studios and television production and film industry. Vancouver hosts approximately 65 movies and 55 TV series annually and is the third largest film and TV production centre in North America, supporting 20,000 jobs. The city's strong focus on lifestyle and health culture also makes it a hub for many lifestyle brands with Lululemon, Arc'teryx, Kit and Ace, Mountain Equipment Co-op, Herschel Supply Co., Aritzia, Reigning Champ, and Nature's Path Foods all founded and headquartered in Vancouver. Vancouver was also the birthplace of 1-800-GOT-JUNK? and Western Canada's largest online-only publication, \"Daily Hive\".\n Conversely, since the onset of the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, multiple media organizations and economists have continued to warn of a severe long-term economic doom loop impending for Vancouver, similar to the decline noted in San Francisco, California.\nVancouver's scenic location makes it a major tourist destination. Over 10.3million people visited Vancouver in 2017. Annually, tourism contributes approximately $4.8billion to the Metro Vancouver economy and supports over 70,000 jobs. Many visit to see the city's gardens, Stanley Park, Queen Elizabeth Park, VanDusen Botanical Garden and the mountains, ocean, forest and parklands which surround the city. Each year over a million people pass through Vancouver on cruise ship vacations, often bound for Alaska.\nVancouver is the most stressed city in the spectrum of affordability of housing in Canada. In 2012, Vancouver was ranked by Demographia as the second-most unaffordable city in the world, rated as even more severely unaffordable in 2012 than in 2011. The city has adopted various strategies to reduce housing costs, including cooperative housing, legalized secondary suites, increased density and smart growth. As of April 2010, the average two-level home in Vancouver sold for a record high of $987,500, compared with the Canadian average of $365,141. A factor explaining the high property prices may be policies by the Canadian government which permit snow washing, which allows foreigners to buy property in Canada while shielding their identities from tax authorities, making real estate transactions an effective way to conduct money laundering.\nSince the 1990s, the development of high-rise condominiums in the downtown peninsula has been financed, in part, by an inflow of capital from Hong Kong immigrants due to the former colony's 1997 handover to China. Such development has clustered in the Yaletown and Coal Harbour districts and around many of the SkyTrain stations to the east of the downtown. The city's selection to co-host the 2010 Winter Olympics was also a major influence on economic development. Concern was expressed that Vancouver's increasing homelessness problem would be exacerbated by the Olympics because owners of single-room occupancy hotels, which house many of the city's lowest-income residents, converted their properties to attract higher-income residents and tourists. Another significant international event held in Vancouver, the 1986 World Exposition, received over 20million visitors and added $3.7billion to the Canadian economy. Some still-standing Vancouver landmarks, including the SkyTrain public transit system and Canada Place, were built as part of the exposition.\nGovernment.\nVancouver, unlike other British Columbia municipalities, is incorporated under the \"Vancouver Charter\". The legislation, passed in 1953, supersedes the \"Vancouver Incorporation Act, 1921\" and grants the city more and different powers than other communities possess under British Columbia's \"Municipalities Act\".\nThe civic government was dominated by the centre-right Non-Partisan Association (NPA) since World War II, albeit with some significant centre-left interludes until 2008. The NPA fractured over the issue of drug policy in 2002, facilitating a landslide victory for the Coalition of Progressive Electors (COPE) on a harm reduction platform. Subsequently, North America's only legal safe injection site at the time, Insite, was opened for the significant number of intravenous heroin users in the city.\nVancouver is governed by the eleven-member Vancouver City Council, a nine-member School Board, and a seven-member Park Board, all of whom serve four-year terms. Unusually for a city of Vancouver's size, all municipal elections are on an at-large basis. Historically, in all levels of government, the more affluent west side of Vancouver has voted along conservative or liberal lines. In contrast, the city's eastern side has voted along left-wing lines. This was reaffirmed with the results of the 2005 provincial election and the 2006 federal election.\nThough polarized, a political consensus has emerged in Vancouver around several issues. Protection of urban parks, a focus on the development of rapid transit as opposed to a freeway system, a harm-reduction approach to illegal drug use, and a general concern about community-based development are examples of policies that have come to have broad support across the political spectrum in Vancouver.\nIn the 2008 municipal election campaign, NPA incumbent mayor Sam Sullivan was ousted as mayoral candidate by the party in a close vote, which instated Peter Ladner as the new mayoral candidate for the NPA. Gregor Robertson, a former MLA for Vancouver-Fairview and head of Happy Planet, was the mayoral candidate for Vision Vancouver, the other main contender. Vision Vancouver candidate Gregor Robertson defeated Ladner by a considerable margin, nearing 20,000 votes. The balance of power was significantly shifted to Vision Vancouver, which held seven of the ten spots for councillor. Of the remaining three, COPE received two and the NPA one. For park commissioner, four seats went to Vision Vancouver, one to the Green Party, one to COPE, and one to NPA. For school trustees, there were four Vision Vancouver seats, three COPE seats, and two NPA seats. In the 2018 Vancouver municipal election, independent Kennedy Stewart was elected mayor of Vancouver. Stewart was later defeated as mayor in the 2022 Vancouver municipal election by Ken Sim, the runner-up in the 2018 election.\nVancouver's budget consists of a capital and an operating component. In 2023, the operating budget was $1.97billion, with a 5-year financial plan, developed in 2022, that projected the budget would increase to $2.46billion by 2027. The 2023 capital budget was $580million, with a 2023 to 2026 Capital Plan that anticipates $3.5billion in expenditures in those four years. Budget increases are primarily funded through increases in property taxes and community amenity contributions imposed in exchange for increases in allowable density as part of the construction permitting process. Utility and other user fees have also been increased but represent a small portion of Vancouver's overall budget.\nRegional government.\nAlong with 20 other municipalities, one electoral area and one treaty First Nation, Vancouver is a member municipality of Metro Vancouver, the regional government whose seat is in Burnaby. While each member of Metro Vancouver has its own separate local governing body, Metro Vancouver oversees standard services and planning functions within the area, such as providing drinking water; operating sewage and solid waste handling; maintaining regional parks; managing air quality, greenhouse gases and ecological health; and providing a strategy for regional growth and land use.\nProvincial and federal representation.\nIn the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia, Vancouver is represented by 12 members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs). As of 2025, the 2024 general election saw eleven seats go to the BC New Democratic Party and one seat go to the BC Conservatives.\nIn the House of Commons of Canada as of 2025, Vancouver is represented by seven members of Parliament. In the 2025 federal election, the Liberals held three seats (Vancouver Quadra, Vancouver Centre, and (Vancouver Granville) and won the newly created district of Vancouver Fraserview\u2014South Burnaby, while the NDP held on to two seats (Vancouver East and Vancouver Kingsway). The Conservatives gained the newly created district of Richmond Centre\u2014Marpole.\nPolicing and crime.\nVancouver operates the Vancouver Police Department, with 1,327 sworn members and an operating budget of $316.5million in 2018. Over 19 percent of the city's budget was spent on police protection in 2018 and by 2023 that has increased to 20.2 percent.\nThe Vancouver Police Department's operational divisions include a bicycle squad, a marine squad, and a dog squad. It also has a mounted squad, used primarily to patrol Stanley Park and for crowd control. The police work in conjunction with civilian and volunteer-run Community Police Centres. In 2006, the police department established its own counterterrorism unit. In 2005, a new transit police force, the Greater Vancouver Transportation Authority Police Service (now the Metro Vancouver Transit Police), was established with full police powers.\nBefore the legalization of marijuana, Vancouver police generally did not arrest people for possessing small amounts of marijuana. In 2000, the Vancouver Police Department established a specialized drug squad, \"Growbusters\", to carry out an aggressive campaign against the city's estimated 4,000 hydroponic marijuana growing operations (or grow-ops) in residential areas. As with other law enforcement campaigns targeting marijuana this initiative has been sharply criticized.\nSince 1982, when Vancouver's homicide rate peaked at around 9.6 per 100,000 people with a total of 40 murders, the city's overall crime rate has declined, with a few notable exceptions, one being in 1991, when the city surpassed its homicide record with 41 being reported, giving the city a slightly lower homicide rate of 8.7 per 100,000 residents than its peak. However, in 2013, Vancouver reached a record low 6 murders, resulting in a homicide rate of 1 per 100,000 residents. As of 2018[ [update]], Vancouver had the ninth-highest crime rate, dropping five spots since 2005, among Canada's 35 census metropolitan areas. As with other Canadian cities, the overall crime rate has been falling \"dramatically\". The rate of firearm related violence dropped from 45.3 per 100,000 in 2006, the highest of any major metropolitan region in Canada at that time, to 16.2 in 2017. A series of gang-related incidents in early 2009 escalated into what police dubbed a gang war.\nVancouver plays host to special events, such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference, the Clinton-Yeltsin Summit, and the Symphony of Fire fireworks show that require significant policing. The 1994 Stanley Cup riot overwhelmed police and injured as many as 200 people. A second riot took place following the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals.\nTo reduce the public health risk from discarded hypodermic needles commonly found on downtown and the adjacent Downtown Eastside streets, the city runs a continuous collection effort, recovering approximately 1000 needles per day from public spaces. According to Vancouver Coastal Health, the regional health authority and a distributor of clean needles to intravenous drug users, there has never been a documented case of disease transmission from an accidental needlestick.\nMilitary.\nJericho Beach in Vancouver is the location of the headquarters of 39 Canadian Brigade Group of the Canadian Army. Local primary reserve units include The Seaforth Highlanders of Canada and The British Columbia Regiment (Duke of Connaught's Own), based at the Seaforth Armoury and the Beatty Street Drill Hall, respectively, and the 15th Field Regiment, Royal Canadian Artillery. The Naval Reserve Unit is based on Deadman's Island in Stanley Park. RCAF Station Jericho Beach, the first air base in Western Canada, was taken over by the Canadian Army in 1947 when seaplanes were replaced by long-range aircraft. Most of the base facilities were transferred to the City of Vancouver in 1969, and the area was renamed \"Jericho Park\".\nEducation.\nThe Vancouver School Board enrolls more than 110,000 students in its elementary, secondary, and post-secondary institutions, making it the second-largest school district in the province. The district administers about 76 elementary schools, 17 elementary annexes, 18 secondary schools, 7 adult education centres, 2 Vancouver Learning Network schools, which include 18 French immersion schools, a Mandarin bilingual school, and fine arts (Byng Arts Mini School), gifted, and Montessori schools. The \"Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique\" operates three Francophone schools in that city: the primary schools \"\u00e9cole Rose-des-vents\" and \"\u00e9cole Anne-H\u00e9bert\" as well as the \"\u00e9cole secondaire Jules-Verne\". More than 46 independent schools of a wide variety are also eligible for partial provincial funding and educate approximately 10 percent of pupils in the city.\nThere are five public universities in the Greater Vancouver area, the largest and most prestigious being the University of British Columbia (UBC) and Simon Fraser University (SFU), with a combined enrolment of more than 90,000 undergraduates, graduates, and professional students in 2008. UBC often ranks among the top 40 best universities in the world and is ranked among the 20 best public universities in Canada. SFU consistently ranks as the top comprehensive university in Canada and is among the 350 best universities in the world. UBC's main campus is located on the tip of Burrard Peninsula, on the Point Grey campus lands just west of the University Endowment Lands with the city-proper adjacent to the east. SFU's main campus is in Burnaby. Both also maintain campuses in Downtown Vancouver and the southeastern suburban city of Surrey.\nThe other public universities in the metropolitan area around Vancouver are Capilano University in North Vancouver, Emily Carr University of Art and Design, and Kwantlen Polytechnic University, whose four campuses are all outside the city proper. Six private institutions also operate in the region: Trinity Western University in Langley, UOPX Canada in Burnaby, and University Canada West, NYIT Canada, Fairleigh Dickinson University, Columbia College, and Sprott Shaw College, all in Vancouver.\nVancouver Community College and Langara College are publicly funded college-level institutions in Vancouver, as is Douglas College with three campuses outside the city. The British Columbia Institute of Technology in Burnaby provides polytechnic education. These are augmented by private and vocational institutions and other colleges in the surrounding areas of Metro Vancouver that provide career, trade, technical, and university-transfer programs. In contrast, the Vancouver Film School and InFocus Film School provide one-year programs in film production, animation, and other entertainment arts.\nInternational students and English as a second language (ESL) students have been significant in the enrolment of these public and private institutions. For the 2008\u20132009 school year, 53 percent of Vancouver School Board's students spoke a language other than English at home.\nArts and culture.\nTheatre, dance, film and television.\nTheatre.\nProminent theatre companies in Vancouver include the Arts Club Theatre Company, which operates three venues, including one on Granville Island, and Bard on the Beach, a large summer Shakespeare festival. Smaller professional companies include Touchstone Theatre, the Cultch, Pacific Theatre, and Firehall Arts Centre. Non-professional theatre organizations include United Players and Metro Theatre, and Theatre Under the Stars, which produces musicals in the summer at Malkin Bowl in Stanley Park. Annual festivals held in Vancouver include the PuSh International Performing Arts Festival in January and the Vancouver Fringe Festival in September.\nThe Vancouver Playhouse Theatre Company operated for fifty years, ending in March 2012.\nDance.\nVancouver is home to Ballet BC, a ballet company whose principal venue is the Queen Elizabeth Theatre. Ballet BC was founded in 1986 and is British Columbia's only ballet company.\nThe Scotiabank Dance Centre, a converted bank building on the corner of Davie and Granville, functions as a gathering place and performance venue for Vancouver-based dancers and choreographers. Dances for a Small Stage is a semi-annual dance festival.\nFilm.\nThe Vancouver International Film Festival, which runs for two weeks each September, shows over 350 films and is one of North America's most prominent film festivals. The VIFF Centre venue, the Vancity Theatre, runs independent non-commercial films throughout the rest of the year, as do the Cinematheque and the Rio theatres.\nVancouver has become a significant film location, known as Hollywood North, as it has stood in for several U.S. cities. However, it has started to appear as itself in several feature films. Among are the 1994 US thriller \"Intersection\", starring Richard Gere and Sharon Stone; the 2007 Canadian ghost thriller \"They Wait\", starring Terry Chen and Jaime King; and the acclaimed Canadian 'mockumentary' \"Hard Core Logo\", and was named the second-best Canadian film of the last 15 years, in a 2001 poll of 200 industry voters, performed by Playback. Genie Award-winning filmmaker Mina Shum has filmed and set several of her internationally released features in Vancouver, including the Sundance-screened \"Long Life, Happiness &amp; Prosperity\" (2002).\nTelevision shows produced in Vancouver.\nMany past and current TV shows have been filmed and in Vancouver. The first Canadian prime time national series to be produced out of Vancouver was \"Cold Squad\" and its storyline was also physically set in the city. Other series set in or around the city of Vancouver include \"Continuum\", \"Da Vinci's Inquest\", \"Danger Bay\", \"Edgemont\", \"Godiva's\", \"Intelligence\", \"Motive\", \"Northwood\", \"\", \"Robson Arms\", \"The Romeo Section\", \"Shattered\", \"The Switch\", and \"These Arms of Mine\".\nTelevision shows produced (but not set) in Vancouver (that have been produced by American and Canadian studios alike) include \"21 Jump Street\", \"The 100\", \"The 4400\", \"Airwolf\", \"Almost Human\", \"Arrow\", \"Backstrom\", \"Caprica\", \"Cedar Cove\", \"Chesapeake Shores\", \"Chilling Adventures of Sabrina\", \"The Commish\", \"Dark Angel\", \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\", \"The Flash\", \"The Good Doctor\", \"Haters Back Off\", \"Hellcats\", \"Intelligence\", \"iZombie\", \"The Killing\", \"The L Word\", \"The Last of Us\", \"Life Unexpected\", \"The Man in the High Castle\", ', ', \"Once Upon a Time\", \"Psych\", \"Reaper\", \"Riverdale\", \"Rogue\", \"Smallville\", \"Stargate SG-1\", \"Supergirl\", \"Supernatural\", \"The Tomorrow People\", \"The Magicians\", \"Tru Calling\", \"Van Helsing\", \"Wild Cards\", \"Witches of East End\", and \"The X-Files\".\nLibraries and museums.\nLibraries in Vancouver include the Vancouver Public Library, with its main branch at Library Square, designed by Moshe Safdie. The central branch contains 1.5million volumes. Altogether, twenty-two branches contain 2.25million volumes. The Vancouver Tool Library is Canada's original tool lending library.\nThe Vancouver Art Gallery has a permanent collection of nearly 10,000 items and is the home of a significant number of works by Emily Carr. However, little or none of the permanent collection is ever on view. Downtown is also home to the Contemporary Art Gallery (Vancouver), which showcases temporary exhibitions by up-and-coming Vancouver artists. The Morris and Helen Belkin Art Gallery, with a small collection of contemporary works, is part of the University of British Columbia.\nIn the Kitsilano district are the Vancouver Maritime Museum, the H. R. MacMillan Space Centre, and the Vancouver Museum, the largest civic museum in Canada. The Museum of Anthropology at UBC is a leading museum of Pacific Northwest Coast First Nations culture. A more interactive museum is Science World at the head of False Creek. The city also features a diverse collection of Public Art.\nVisual art.\nVancouver is home to 13 of the 190 Artist Run Centres in Canada. Artwork and cultural artifacts from nations Indigenous to the land on which Vancouver is located are available to view at the Museum of Anthropology at UBC, largely because these artifacts were stolen as part of colonization.\nMusic and nightlife.\nMusical contributions from Vancouver include performers of classical, folk and popular music. The Vancouver Symphony Orchestra is the professional orchestra based in the city. The Vancouver Opera is a major opera company in the city, and City Opera of Vancouver is the city's professional chamber opera company. The city is home to several Canadian composers, including Rodney Sharman, Jeffrey Ryan, and Jocelyn Morlock.\nThe city produced a number of notable punk rock bands, including D.O.A. Other early Vancouver punk bands included the Subhumans, the Young Canadians, the Pointed Sticks, and U-J3RK5. When alternative rock became popular in the 1990s, several Vancouver groups rose to prominence, including 54-40, Odds, Moist, the Matthew Good Band, Sons of Freedom and Econoline Crush. Recent successful Vancouver bands include Gob, Marianas Trench, Theory of a Deadman and Stabilo. Today, Vancouver is home to several popular independent bands such as The New Pornographers, Japandroids, Destroyer, In Medias Res, Tegan and Sara, and independent labels including Nettwerk and Mint. Vancouver also produced influential metal band Strapping Young Lad and pioneering electro-industrial bands Skinny Puppy, Numb and Front Line Assembly; the latter's Bill Leeb is better known for founding ambient pop super-group Delerium. Other popular musical artists who made their mark from Vancouver include Carly Rae Jepsen, Bryan Adams, Sarah McLachlan, Heart, Prism, Trooper, Chilliwack, Payolas, Moev, Images in Vogue, Michael Bubl\u00e9, Stef Lang and Spirit of the West.\nMore significant musical performances are usually held at venues such as Rogers Arena, Queen Elizabeth Theatre, BC Place Stadium or the Pacific Coliseum. In contrast, more minor acts are held at places such as the Commodore Ballroom, the Orpheum Theatre and the Vogue Theatre. The Vancouver Folk Music Festival and the Vancouver International Jazz Festival showcase music from around the world in their respective genres. Vancouver's Hong Kong Chinese population has produced several Cantopop stars across the Hong Kong entertainment industry. Similarly, various Indo-Canadian artists and actors have a profile in Bollywood or other aspects of India's entertainment industry.\nVancouver has a vibrant nightlife scene, whether food and dining or bars and nightclubs. The Granville Entertainment District has the city's highest concentration of bars and nightclubs with closing times of 3am, in addition to various after-hours clubs open until late morning on weekends. The street can attract large crowds on weekends and is closed to traffic on such nights. Gastown is also a popular area for nightlife with many upscale restaurants and nightclubs, as well as the Davie Village, which is the centre of the city's LGBT community.\nMedia.\nVancouver is a centre for film and television production. Nicknamed Hollywood North, a distinction it shares with Toronto, the city has been used as a film making location for nearly a century, beginning with the Edison Manufacturing Company. In 2021, $3.6billion was spent on film production in Vancouver. This ranks Vancouver as the largest production hub in Canada and the 3rd largest in North America, behind Los Angeles and New York City.\nA wide mix of local, national, and international newspapers are distributed in the city. The two major English-language daily newspapers are the \"Vancouver Sun\" and \"The Province\". Also, there are two national newspapers distributed in the city, including \"The Globe and Mail\", which began publication of a \"national edition\" in BC in 1983 and recently expanded to include a three-page BC news section, and the \"National Post\", which centres on national news. Other local newspapers have included \"24H\" (a local free daily), the Vancouver franchise of the national free daily \"Metro\", the twice-a-week \"Vancouver Courier\", and the independent newspaper \"The Georgia Straight\". Three Chinese-language daily newspapers\u00a0\u2013 \"Ming Pao\", \"Sing Tao\" and \"World Journal\"\u00a0\u2013 cater to the city's large Cantonese- and Mandarin-speaking population. Several other local and international papers serve other multicultural groups in the Lower Mainland.\nSome of the local television stations include CBC, Citytv, CTV and Global BC. OMNI British Columbia produces daily newscasts in Cantonese, Mandarin, Punjabi and Korean, and weekly newscasts in Tagalog, as well as programs aimed at other cultural groups. Fairchild Group also has two television stations: Fairchild TV and Talentvision, serving Cantonese- and Mandarin-speaking audiences, respectively.\nRadio stations with news departments include CBC Radio One, CKNW and News 1130. The Franco-Columbian community is served by Radio-Canada outlets CBUFT-DT channel 26 (Ici Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9), CBUF-FM 97.7 (Premi\u00e8re Cha\u00eene) and CBUX-FM 90.9 (Espace musique). The multilingual South Asian community is served by Spice Radio on 1200 AM, which was established in 2014.\nMedia dominance is a frequently discussed issue in Vancouver as newspapers the \"Vancouver Sun\", \"The Province\", the \"Vancouver Courier\" and other local newspapers such as the \"Surrey Now\", the \"Burnaby Now\" and the \"Richmond News\", are all owned by Postmedia Network. The concentration of media ownership has spurred alternatives, making Vancouver a centre for independent online media including \"The Tyee\", \"The Vancouver Observer\", and NowPublic, as well as hyperlocal online media, like \"Daily Hive\" and \"Vancouver Is Awesome\", which provide coverage of community events and local arts and culture.\nTransportation.\nVancouver's streetcar system began on June 28, 1890, and ran from the (first) Granville Street Bridge to Westminster Avenue (now Main Street and Kingsway). Less than a year later, the Westminster and Vancouver Tramway Company began operating Canada's first interurban line between the two cities (extended to Chilliwack in 1910). Another line (1902), the Vancouver and Lulu Island Railway, was leased by the Canadian Pacific Railway to the British Columbia Electric Railway in 1905 and ran from the Granville Street Bridge to Steveston via Kerrisdale, which encouraged residential neighbourhoods outside the central core to develop. After 1897, the British Columbia Electric Railway (BCER) became the operator of the urban and interurban rail systems until 1958, when its remaining lines were dismantled in favour of trackless electric trolleys and gasoline or diesel buses. BCER later became the core of the newly created, publicly owned BC Hydro, established in 1962. Vancouver currently has the second-largest trolleybus fleet in North America, after San Francisco.\nSuccessive city councils in the 1970s and 1980s prohibited the construction of freeways as part of a long-term plan. As a result, the only major freeway within city limits is Highway 1, which passes through the north-eastern corner of the city. While the number of cars in Vancouver proper has been steadily rising with population growth, the rate of car ownership and the average distance driven by daily commuters have fallen since the early 1990s. Vancouver is the only major Canadian city with these trends. Even though the journey time per vehicle has increased by one-third and growing traffic mass, there are 7 percent fewer cars making trips into the downtown core. In 2012, Vancouver had the worst traffic congestion in Canada and the second-highest in North America, behind Los Angeles. As of 2013[ [update]], Vancouver had the worst traffic congestion in North America. Residents have been more inclined to live in areas closer to their interests, or use more energy-efficient means of travel, such as mass transit and cycling. This is, in part, the result of a push by city planners for a solution to traffic problems and pro-environment campaigns. Transportation demand management policies have imposed restrictions on drivers, making commuting more difficult and expensive while introducing more benefits for non-drivers.\nTransLink is responsible for roads and public transportation within Metro Vancouver (in succession to BC Transit, which had taken over the transit functions of BC Hydro). It provides bus service, including the RapidBus express service, a foot passenger and bicycle ferry service (known as SeaBus), an automated rapid transit service called SkyTrain, and West Coast Express commuter rail. Vancouver's SkyTrain system is currently running on three lines, the Millennium Line, the Expo Line and the Canada Line with a total of 53 stations as of 2017. Only 20 stations are within the City of Vancouver borders, with the remainder in the adjacent suburbs. A number of the city's biggest tourist attractions\u00a0\u2013 such as English Bay, Stanley Park, the Vancouver Aquarium, the Museum of Anthropology, and the Kitsilano neighbourhood\u00a0\u2013 are not connected by this rapid transit system.\nChanges are being made to the regional transportation network as part of Translink's 10-Year Transportation Plan. The Canada Line, opened on August 17, 2009, connects Vancouver International Airport and the neighbouring city of Richmond with the existing SkyTrain system. The Evergreen Extension, which opened on December 2, 2016, links the cities of Coquitlam and Port Moody with the SkyTrain system. As of January 2019, plans to extend the SkyTrain Millennium Line west to UBC as a subway under Broadway have been approved and there are plans for capacity upgrades and an extension to the Expo Line. Several road projects will be completed within the next few years, as part of the Provincial Government's Gateway Program.\nOther modes of transport add to the diversity of options available in Vancouver. Inter-city passenger rail service is operated from Pacific Central Station by Via Rail to points east, Amtrak Cascades to Seattle and Portland, and Rocky Mountaineer rail tour routes. Small passenger ferries in False Creek provide commuter service to Granville Island, Downtown Vancouver and Kitsilano. Vancouver has a citywide network of bicycle lanes and routes, supporting an active cyclist population year-round. Cycling has become Vancouver's fastest-growing mode of transportation. The bicycle-sharing system Mobi was introduced to the city in June 2016.\nVancouver is served by Vancouver International Airport (YVR), located on Sea Island in the city of Richmond, immediately south of Vancouver. Vancouver's airport is Canada's second-busiest airport, and the second-largest gateway on the west coast of North America for international passengers. HeliJet and float plane companies operate scheduled air service from Vancouver harbour and YVR south terminal. Two BC Ferry terminals also serve the city. One is to the northwest at Horseshoe Bay in West Vancouver, and the other is to the south at Tsawwassen in Delta.\nSports and recreation.\nThe city's mild climate and proximity to the ocean, mountains, rivers and lakes make the area a popular destination for outdoor recreation. Vancouver has over of parks, of which Stanley Park, at , is the largest. The city has several large beaches, many adjacent to one another, extending from the shoreline of Stanley Park around False Creek to the south side of English Bay, from Kitsilano to the University Endowment Lands, (which also has beaches that are not part of the city proper). The of beaches include Second and Third Beaches in Stanley Park, English Bay (First Beach), Sunset, Kitsilano Beach, Jericho, Locarno, Spanish Banks, Spanish Banks Extension, Spanish Banks West, and Wreck Beach. There is also a freshwater beach at Trout Lake in John Hendry Park. The coastline provides for many types of water sports, and the city is a popular destination for boating enthusiasts.\nWithin a 20- to 30-minute drive from downtown Vancouver are the North Shore Mountains, with three ski areas: Cypress Mountain, Grouse Mountain, and Mount Seymour. Mountain bikers have created world-renowned trails across the North Shore. The Capilano River, Lynn Creek and Seymour River, also on the North Shore, provide opportunities to whitewater enthusiasts during periods of rain and spring melt. However, the canyons of those rivers are more utilized for hiking and swimming than whitewater.\nRunning races include the Vancouver Sun Run (a race) every April; the Vancouver Marathon, held every May; and the Scotiabank Vancouver Half-Marathon held every June. The Grouse Grind is a climb up Grouse Mountain, open throughout the summer and fall months, including the annual Grouse Grind Mountain Run. Hiking trails include the Baden-Powell Trail, an arduous hike from West Vancouver's Horseshoe Bay to Deep Cove in the District of North Vancouver.\nVancouver is also home to notable cycling races. During most summers since 1973, the Global Relay Gastown Grand Prix has been held on the cobblestone streets of Gastown. This race and the UBC Grand Prix are part of BC Superweek, an annual series of professional cycling races in Metro Vancouver.\nThe British Columbia Derby is a nine-furlong horse race held at the Hastings Racecourse in the third week of September.\nIn 2009, Metro Vancouver hosted the World Police and Fire Games. Swangard Stadium, in the neighbouring city of Burnaby, hosted games for the 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup.\nVancouver, along with Whistler and Richmond, was the host city for the 2010 Winter Olympics and the 2010 Winter Paralympics. On June 12, 2010, it played host to Ultimate Fighting Championship 115 (UFC 115), which was the fourth UFC event to be held in Canada (and the first outside Montreal).\nIn 2011, Vancouver hosted the Grey Cup, the Canadian Football League (CFL) championship game, which is awarded every year to a different city that has a CFL team. The BC Titans of the International Basketball League played their inaugural season in 2009, with home games at the Langley Event Centre. Vancouver is a centre for the fast-growing sport of ultimate. During the summer of 2008 Vancouver hosted the World Ultimate Championships.\nThe Vancouver Canucks are an ice hockey team in the National Hockey League and have played there since 1970.\nThe National Basketball Association (NBA) expanded into Vancouver in 1995 with the establishment of the Vancouver Grizzlies. They played their games at GM Place (now Rogers Arena). After six years in Vancouver, the team relocated to Memphis, Tennessee in 2001.\nIn 2015, Vancouver was one of six venues for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup and hosted the Final game between the United States and Japan. Vancouver is one of two Canadian cities hosting matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup.\nVancouver is Canada's fittest major city, with an obesity rate of only 17.4%, compared to the national average of 24.8%. It is only surpassed by Kelowna, British Columbia with a rate of 17% and followed by Victoria, British Columbia at 19.6%. Overall, the province of British Columbia has the lowest obesity rate in Canada, followed by Quebec at 2nd and Ontario at 3rd.\nSustainability.\nThe City of Vancouver is a member of Metro Vancouver, which provides sustainable regional services to the Greater Vancouver area. The city electrical grid is serviced by BC Hydro, which claims 97.8% of the energy it generates is clean owing to the extensive use of hydroelectric power generation. The City of Vancouver is the greenest city in Canada according to an independent ongoing urban ecological footprint study.\nThe Greenest City action plan (GCAP) is a City of Vancouver urban sustainability initiative. Its primary mission was to ensure Vancouver would become the greenest city in the world by 2020. The GCAP originated based on the 2009 work of the Greenest City Action Team, a committee co-chaired by Vancouver mayor Gregor Robertson. The GCAP was approved by Vancouver city council in July 2011.\nIn May 2018, the Zero Waste 2040 Strategy was passed The city began work the same year on decreasing the amount of single-use items distributed in the city. It intends to ban these items by 2021 if businesses do not meet reduction targets. As part of the plan, a ban on plastic straws, polystyrene food packaging and free shopping bags was to go into effect in mid-2019.\nIn January 2022, the city council passed a regulation mandating that businesses charge a $0.25 fee on single-use cups. This decision was criticized because the fees stayed within the business and were not re-invested in city-wide environmental efforts. On March 28, 2023, the council enacted a by-law that repealed all single-use cup fees.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nThe City of Vancouver was one of the first cities in Canada to enter into an international sister cities arrangement. Special arrangements for cultural, social and economic benefits have been created with these sister cities.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32708", "revid": "15304212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32708", "title": "Saraswati River", "text": "River mentioned in the Vedas and ancient Indian epics\nThe Saraswati River (IAST: ) is a deified mythological river, first mentioned in the Rigveda and later in Vedic and post-Vedic texts. It played an important role in the Vedic religion, appearing in all but the fourth book of the Rigveda.\nAs a physical river, in the oldest texts of the Rigveda it is described as a \"great and holy river in north-western India,\" but in the middle and late Rigvedic books, it is described as a small river ending in \"a terminal lake (samudra).\" As the goddess Saraswati, the other referent for the term \"Saraswati\" which developed into an independent identity in post-Vedic times, the river is also described as a powerful river and mighty flood. The Saraswati is also considered by Hindus to exist in a metaphysical form, in which it formed a confluence with the sacred rivers Ganga and Yamuna, at the Triveni Sangam. According to Michael Witzel, superimposed on the Vedic Saraswati river is the \"heavenly river\": the Milky Way, which is seen as \"a road to immortality and heavenly after-life.\"\nRigvedic and later Vedic texts have been used to propose identification with present-day rivers, or ancient riverbeds. The Nadistuti Sukta in the Rigveda (10.75) mentions the Saraswati between the Yamuna in the east and the Shutudri(now known as Sutlej) in the west, while RV 7.95.1-2, describes the Saraswati as flowing to the samudra, a word now usually translated as 'ocean', but which could also mean \"lake.\" Later Vedic texts such as the Tandya Brahmana and the Jaiminiya Brahmana, as well as the Mahabharata, mention that the Saraswati dried up in a desert.\nSince the late 19th century CE, numerous scholars have proposed to identify the Saraswati with the Ghaggar-Hakra River system, which flows through modern-day northwestern-India and eastern-Pakistan, between the Yamuna and the Sutlej, and ends in the Thar desert. Recent geophysical research shows that the supposed downstream Ghaggar-Hakra paleochannel is actually a paleochannel of the Sutlej, which flowed into the Nara river, a delta channel of the Indus River. 10,000\u20138,000 years ago this channel was abandoned when the Sutlej diverted its course, leaving the Ghaggar-Hakra as a system of monsoon-fed rivers which did not reach the sea.\nThe Indus Valley Civilisation prospered when the monsoons that fed the rivers diminished around 5,000 years ago, and ISRO has observed that major Indus Valley Civilisation sites at Kalibangan (Rajasthan), Banawali and Rakhigarhi (Haryana), Dholavira and Lothal (Gujarat) lay along this course. When the monsoons that fed the rivers further diminished, the Hakra dried-up some 4,000 years ago, becoming an intermittent river, and the urban Harappan civilisation declined, becoming localized in smaller agricultural communities.\nIdentification of a \"mighty\" physical \"Rigvedic\" Saraswati with the Ghaggar-Hakra system is therefore problematic, since the Ghaggar-Hakra had dried up well before the time of the composition of the Rigveda. In the words of Wilke and Moebus, the Saraswati had been reduced to a \"small, sorry trickle in the desert\" by the time that the Vedic people migrated into north-west India. Rigvedic references to a physical river also indicate that the Saraswati \"had already lost its main source of water supply and must have ended in a terminal lake (samudra) approximately 3000 years ago,\" \"depicting the present-day situation, with the Saraswat\u012b having lost most of its water.\" Also, Rigvedic descriptions of the Saraswati do not match the actual course of the Ghaggar-Hakra.\n\"Saraswati\" has also been identified with the Helmand in ancient Arachosia, or , in present day southern Afghanistan, the name of which may have been reused from the more ancient Sanskrit name of the Ghaggar-Hakra river, after the Vedic tribes moved to the Punjab. The \"Saraswati\" of the Rigveda may also refer to two distinct rivers, with the family books referring to the Helmand River, and the more recent 10th mandala referring to the Ghaggar-Hakra.\nThe identification with the Ghaggar-Hakra system took on new significance in the early 21st century CE, with some Hindutva proponents suggesting an earlier dating of the Rigveda; renaming the Indus Valley Civilisation as the \"Saraswati Culture\", the \"Saraswati Civilisation\", the \"Indus-Saraswati Civilisation\" or the \"Sindhu-Saraswati Civilisation,\" suggesting that the Indus Valley and Vedic cultures can be equated; and rejecting the Indo-Aryan migration theory, which postulates an extended period of migrations of Indo-European speaking people into the Indian subcontinent between ca. 1900 BCE and 1400 BCE.\nEtymology.\n' is the feminine nominative singular form of the adjective ' (which occurs in the Rigveda as the name of the keeper of the celestial waters), derived from 's\u00e1ras' + 'vat', meaning 'having s\u00e1ras-'. Sanskrit ' means 'lake, pond' (cf. the derivative ' 'lake bird = Sarus crane'). Mayrhofer considers unlikely a connection with the root *\"\" 'run, flow' but does agree that it could have been a river that connected many lakes due to its abundant volumes of water-flow.\n\"\" is considered to be a cognate of Avestan \"Haraxvat\u012b\". In the younger Avesta, \"Haraxvat\u012b\" is Arachosia, a region described to be rich in rivers, and its Old Persian cognate \"Harauvati\".\nImportance in Hinduism.\nThe Saraswati river was revered and considered important for Hindus because it is said that it was on this river's banks, along with its tributary Drishadvati, in the Vedic state of Brahmavarta, that Vedic Sanskrit had its genesis, and important Vedic scriptures like initial part of Rigveda and several Upanishads were supposed to have been composed by Vedic seers. In the Manusmriti, Brahmavarta is portrayed as the \"pure\" centre of Vedic culture. Bridget and Raymond Allchin in \"The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan\" took the view that \"The earliest Aryan homeland in India\u2013Pakistan (Aryavarta or Brahmavarta) was in the Punjab and in the valleys of the Saraswati and Drishadvati rivers in the time of the Rigveda.\"\nRigveda.\nAs a river.\nThe Saraswati River is mentioned in all but the fourth book of the Vedas. Macdonell and Keith provided a comprehensive survey of Vedic references to the Saraswati River in their \"Vedic Index\". In the late book 10, only two references are unambiguously to the river: 10.64.9, calling for the aid of three \"great rivers\", Sindhu, Saraswati, Sarayu; and 10.75.5, the geographical list of the Nadistuti Sukta. In this hymn, the Saraswati River is placed between the Yamuna and the Shutudri.\nIn the oldest texts of the Rigveda she is described as a \"great and holy river in north-western India,\" but Michael Witzel notes that the Rigveda indicates that the Saraswati \"had already lost its main source of water supply and must have ended in a terminal lake (samudra) approximately 3000 years ago.\" The middle books 3 and 7 and the late books 10 \"depict the present-day situation, with the Saraswat\u012b having lost most of its water.\" The Saraswati acquired an exalted status in the mythology of the Kuru kingdom, where the Rigveda was compiled.\nAs a goddess.\nSaraswati is mentioned some fifty times in the hymns of the Rigveda. It is mentioned in thirteen hymns of the late books (1 and 10) of the Rigveda.\nThe most important hymns related to the goddess Saraswati are RV 6.61, RV 7.95 and RV 7.96. As a river goddess, she is described as a mighty flood, and is clearly not an earthly river. According to Michael Witzel, superimposed on the Vedic Saraswati river is the heavenly river Milky Way, which is seen as \"a road to immortality and heavenly after-life.\" The description of the Saraswati as the river of heavens, is interpreted to suggest its mythical nature.\nIn 10.30.12, her origin as a river goddess may explain her invocation as a protective deity in a hymn to the celestial waters. In 10.135.5, as Indra drinks Soma, he is described as refreshed by Saraswati. The invocations in 10.17 address Saraswati as a goddess of the forefathers as well as of the present generation. In 1.13, 1.89, 10.85, 10.66 and 10.141, she is listed with other gods and goddesses, not with rivers. In 10.65, she is invoked together with \"holy thoughts\" (') and \"munificence\" ('), consistent with her role as a goddess of both knowledge and fertility.\nThough Saraswati initially emerged as a river goddess in the Vedic scriptures, in later Hinduism of the Puranas, she was rarely associated with the river. Instead, she emerged as an independent goddess of knowledge, learning, wisdom, music and the arts. The evolution of the river goddess into the goddess of knowledge started with later Brahmanas, which identified her as \"V\u0101gdev\u012b\", the goddess of speech, perhaps due to the centrality of speech in the Vedic cult and the development of the cult on the banks of the river. It is also possible to postulate two originally independent goddesses that were fused into one in later Vedic times. Aurobindo has proposed, on the other hand, that \"the symbolism of the Veda betrays itself to the greatest clearness in the figure of the goddess Saraswati ... She is, plainly and clearly, the goddess of the World, the goddess of a divine inspiration\u00a0...\".\nOther Vedic texts.\nIn post-Rigvedic literature, the disappearance of the Saraswati is mentioned. Also the origin of the Saraswati is identified as Plaksa Prasravana (Pippala tree or Ashvaththa tree as known in India and Nepal).\nIn a supplementary chapter of the Vajasaneyi-Samhita of the Yajurveda (34.11), Saraswati is mentioned in a context apparently meaning the Sindhu: \"Five rivers flowing on their way speed onward to Saraswati, but then become Saraswati a fivefold river in the land.\" According to the medieval commentator Uvata, the five tributaries of the Saraswati were the Punjab rivers Drishadvati, Shutudri (Sutlej), Asikini (Chenab), Vipasha (Beas), Iravati (Ravi).\nThe first reference to the disappearance of the lower course of the Saraswati is from the Brahmanas, texts that are composed in Vedic Sanskrit, but dating to a later date than the Veda Samhitas. The Jaiminiya Brahmana (2.297) speaks of the 'diving under (upamajjana) of the Saraswati', and the Tandya Brahmana (or Pancavimsa Br.) calls this the 'disappearance' (vinasana). The same text (25.10.11\u201316) records that the Saraswati is 'so to say meandering' (kubjimati) as it could not sustain heaven which it had propped up.\nThe Plaksa Prasravana (place of source of the river) may refer to a spring in the Sivalik hills. The distance between the source and the Vinasana (place of disappearance of the river) is said to be 44\u00a0Ashvinas (between several hundred and 1,600\u00a0miles) (Tandya Br. 25.10.16; cf. Av. 6.131.3; Pancavimsa Br.).\nIn the Latyayana Srautasutra (10.15\u201319) the Saraswati seems to be a perennial river up to the Vinasana, which is west of its confluence with the Drshadvati (Chautang). The Drshadvati is described as a seasonal stream (10.17), meaning it was not from Himalayas. Bhargava has identified Drashadwati river as present-day Sahibi river originating from Jaipur hills in Rajasthan. The Asvalayana Srautasutra and Sankhayana Srautasutra contain verses that are similar to the Latyayana Srautasutra.\nPost-Vedic texts.\nWilke and Moebus note that the \"historical river\" Saraswati was a \"topographically tangible mythogeme\", which was already reduced to a \"small, sorry trickle in the desert\", by the time of composition of the Hindu epics. These post-Vedic texts regularly talk about drying up of the river, and start associating the goddess Saraswati with language, rather than the river.\nMahabharata.\nAccording to the Mahabharata (3rd c. BCE \u2013 3rd c. CE) the Saraswati River dried up to a desert (at a place named Vinasana or Adarsana) and joins the sea \"impetuously\". MB.3.81.115 locates the state of Kurupradesh or Kuru Kingdom to the south of the Saraswati and north of the Drishadvati. The dried-up, seasonal Ghaggar River in Rajasthan and Haryana reflects the same geographical view described in the Mahabharata.\nAccording to Hindu scriptures, a journey was made during the Mahabharata by Balrama along the banks of the Saraswati from Dwarka to Mathura. There were ancient kingdoms too (the era of the Mahajanapads) that lay in parts of north Rajasthan and that were named on the Saraswati River.\nPuranas.\nSeveral Puranas describe the Saraswati River, and also record that the river separated into a number of lakes (\"saras\").\nIn the Skanda Purana, the Saraswati originates from the water pot of Brahma and flows from Plaksa spring on the Himalayas. It then turns west at Kedara and also flows underground. Five distributaries of the Saraswati are mentioned. The texts reveal Saraswati river's goddess is Saraswati. According to the Vamana Purana 32.1\u20134, the Saraswati rose from the Plaksa spring.\nThe \"Padma Purana\" says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One who bathes and drinks there where the Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati join gets liberation. Here there is no doubt.\"\nContemporary religious significance.\nDiana Eck notes that the power and significance of the Saraswati for present-day Indian Subcontinent is in the persistent symbolic presence at the confluence of rivers all over Indian Subcontinent. Although underground , it is the third river, which emerges to join in the meeting of rivers, thus making the waters holy.\nAfter the Vedic Saraswati dried, new myths about the rivers arose. Saraswati is described to flow in the underworld and rise to the surface at some places. For centuries, the Saraswati river existed in a \"subtle or mythic\" form, since it corresponds with none of the major rivers of present-day South Asia. Many Hindus believe that the joining of the Ganges and Yamuna rivers at Triveni Sangam, Prayagraj, also converges with the unseen Saraswati river, which is believed to flow underground. This is despite Prayagaraj being at a large distance from the historic route of Sarasvati river as an underground river flowing east. The belief of the Saraswati joining at the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna originates from Puranic scriptures and denotes the \"powerful legacy\" the Vedic river left after her supposed disappearance. The belief is interpreted as \"symbolic\". The rivers Saraswati, Yamuna, Ganga are believed to be companions of Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva respectively. In lesser known configuration, Saraswati is said to form the Triveni confluence with rivers Hiranya and Kapila near Somnath temple. There are several other \"Triveni\"s in India where two physical rivers are joined by the \"unseen\" Saraswati, which adds to the sanctity of the confluence.\nHistorian Romila Thapar notes that \"once the river had been mythologised through invoking the memory of the earlier river, its name\u2014Saraswati\u2014could be applied to many rivers, which is what happened in various parts of the Indian Subcontinent.\"\nSeveral present-day rivers are also named Saraswati, after the Vedic Saraswati:\nIdentification theories.\nSince the 19th century CE, numerous attempts have been made to identify the mythical river Saraswati of the Vedas with physical rivers. Many think that the Vedic Saraswati once flowed east of the Indus (Sindhu) river. Scientists, geologists as well as scholars have identified the Saraswati with many present-day or now-defunct rivers.\nTwo theories are popular in the attempts to identify the Saraswati. Several scholars have identified the river with the present-day Ghaggar-Hakra River or dried up part of it, which is located in modern-day Northwestern India and Pakistan. A second popular theory associates the river with the Helmand River or an ancient river in the present Helmand Valley in Afghanistan.\nMost consider Saraswati a mythical river, an allegory not a \"thing\".\nThe identification with the Ghaggar-Hakra system took on new significance in the early 21st century, suggesting an earlier dating of the Rigveda, and renaming the Indus Valley Civilisation as the \"Saraswati culture\", the \"Saraswati Civilisation\", the \"Indus-Saraswati Civilisation\" or the \"Sindhu-Saraswati Civilisation,\" suggesting that the Indus Valley and Vedic cultures can be equated.\nRigvedic course.\nThe Rigveda contains several hymns which give an indication of the flow of the geography of the river, and an identification of the Saraswati, as also described in the later books of the Vedas.\nIdentifications in the Rigveda connecting the Saraswati with the Ghaggra-Hakra river:\nYet, the Rigveda also contains clues for an identification with the Helmand river in Afghanistan: \nThe Rigveda was composed during the latter part of the late Harappan period, and according to Shaffer, the reason for the predominance of the Saraswati in the Rigveda is the late Harappan (1900-1300 BCE) population shift eastwards to Haryana.\nGhaggar-Hakra River.\nThe present Ghaggar-Hakra River is a seasonal river in India and Pakistan that flows only during the monsoon season, but satellite images in possession of the ISRO and ONGC have confirmed that the major course of a river ran through the present-day Ghaggar River. The supposed paleochannel of the Hakra is actually a paleochannel of the Sutlej, flowing into the Nara river bed, presently a delta channel c.q. paleochannel of the Indus River. At least 10,000 years ago, well before the rise of the Harappan civilization, the sutlej diverted its course, leaving the Ghaggar-Hakra as a monsoon-fed river. Early in the 2nd millennium BCE the monsoons diminished and the Ghaggar-Hakra fluvial system dried up, which affected the Harappan civilisation.\nPaleochannels and ancient course.\nWhile there is general agreement that the river courses in the Indus Basin have frequently changed course, the exact sequence of these changes and their dating have been problematic.\nPre-Holocene diversion of the Sutlej and Yamuna.\nOlder publications have suggested that the Sutlej and the Yamuna drained into the Hakra well into Mature Harappan times, providing ample volume to the supply provided by the monsoon-fed Ghaggar. The Sutlej and Yamuna then changed course between 2500 BCE and 1900 BCE, due to either tectonic events or \"slightly altered gradients on the extremely flat plains,\" resulting in the drying-up of the Hakra in the Thar Desert. More recent publications have shown that the Sutlej and the Yamuna shifted course well before Harappan times, leaving the monsoon-fed Ghaggar-Hakra which dried-up during late Harappan times.\nClift et al. (2012), using dating of zircon sand grains, have shown that subsurface river channels near the Indus Valley Civilisation sites in Cholistan immediately below the presumed Ghaggar-Hakra channel show sediment affinity not with the Ghagger-Hakra, but instead with the Beas River in the western sites and the Sutlej and the Yamuna in the eastern ones. This suggests that the Yamuna itself, or a channel of the Yamuna, along with a channel of the Sutlej may have flowed west some time between 47,000 BCE and 10,000 BCE. The drainage from the Yamuna may have been lost from the Ghaggar-Hakra well before the beginnings of Indus civilisation.\nAjit Singh et al. (2017) show that the paleochannel of the Ghaggar-Hakra is a former course of the Sutlej, which diverted to its present course between 15,000 and 8,000 years ago, well before the development of the Harappan Civilisation. Ajit Singh et al. conclude that the urban populations settled not along a perennial river, but a monsoon-fed seasonal river that was not subject to devastating floods.\nKhonde et al. (2017) confirm that the Great Rann of Kutch received sediments from a different source than the Indus, but this source stopped supplying sediments after ca. 10,000 years ago. Likewise, Dave et al. (2019) state that \"[o]ur results disprove the proposed link between ancient settlements and large rivers from the Himalayas and indicate that the major palaeo-fluvial system traversing through this region ceased long before the establishment of the Harappan civilisation.\"\nAccording to Chaudhri et al. (2021) \"the Saraswati River used to flow from the glaciated peaks of the Himalaya to the Arabian sea,\" and an \"enormous amount of water was flowing through this channel network until BCE 11,147.\" This study suggests that the Saraswati was initially glacier-fed, weakened as glaciers shrank after 4000 BCE, relied mostly on rain until around 2000 years ago, and fully dried up by 1402 CE.\nIVC and diminishing of the monsoons.\nMany Indus Valley Civilisation (Harrapan Civilisation) sites are found on the banks of and in the proximity of the Ghaggar-Hakra fluvial system, due to the \"high monsoon rainfall\" which fed the Ghaggar-Hakra in Mature Harappan Times.\nGiosan et al., in their study \"Fluvial landscapes of the Harappan civilisation\", make clear that the Ghaggar-Hakra fluvial system was not a large glacier-fed Himalayan river, but a monsoonal-fed river. They concluded that the Indus Valley Civilisation prospered when the monsoons that fed the rivers diminished around 5,000 years ago. When the monsoons, which fed the rivers that supported the civilisation, further diminished and the rivers dried out as a result, the IVC declined some 4000 years ago. This in particular effected the Ghaggar-Hakra system, which became an intermittent river and was largely abandoned. Localized Late IVC-settlements are found eastwards, toward the more humid regions of the Indo-Gangetic Plain, where the decentralised late Harappan phase took place.\nThe same widespread aridification in the third millennium BCE also led to water shortages and ecological changes in the Eurasian steppes, leading to a change of vegetation, triggering \"higher mobility and transition to nomadic cattle breeding,\" These migrations eventually resulted in the Indo-Aryan migrations into South Asia.\nIdentification with the Saraswati.\nA number of archaeologists and geologists have identified the Saraswati river with the present-day Ghaggar-Hakra River, or the dried up part of it, despite the fact that it had already dried-up and become a small seasonal river before Vedic times.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th centuries, a number of scholars, archaeologists, and geologists have attempted to identify the Vedic Saraswati River with the Ghaggar-Hakra River, such as Christian Lassen (1800-1876), Max M\u00fcller (1823-1900), Marc Aurel Stein (1862\u20131943), C.F. Oldham and Jane Macintosh. Michel Danino, a Hindutva author who has been criticised for historical negationism and sectarian scholarship, notes that \"the 1500 km-long bed of the Saraswati\" was \"rediscovered\" in the 19th century. According to Danino, \"most Indologists\" were convinced in the 19th century that \"the bed of the Ghaggar-Hakra was the relic of the Saraswati.\"\nSome other recent archaeologists and geologists, such as Philip and Virdi (2006) and K.S. Valdiya (2013) have also attempted to identify the Saraswati with the Ghaggar. According to Gregory Possehl, \"Linguistic, archaeological, and historical data show that the Saraswati of the Vedas is the modern Ghaggar or Hakra.\"\nAccording to R.U.S. Prasad, \"we [...] find a considerable body of opinions [sic] among the scholars, archaeologists and geologists, who hold that the Saraswati originated in the Sivalik hills [...] and descended through Adi Badri, situated in the foothills of the Shivaliks, to the plains [...] and finally debouched herself into the Arabian sea at the Rann of Kutch.\" According to Valdiya, \"it is plausible to conclude that once upon a time the Ghagghar was known as \"Sarsut\u012b\",\" which is \"a corruption of \"Saraswati\",\" because \"at Sirs\u0101 on the bank of the Ghagghar stands a fortress called \"Sarsut\u012b\". Now in derelict condition, this fortress of antiquity celebrates and honours the river \"Sarsut\u012b\".\"\nTextual and historical objections.\nAshoke Mukherjee (2001), is critical of the attempts to identify the Rigvedic Saraswati. Mukherjee notes that many historians and archaeologists, both Indian and foreign, concluded that the word \"Saraswati\" (literally \"being full of water\") is not a noun, a specific \"thing\". However, Mukherjee believes that \"Saraswati\" is initially used by the Rigvedic people as an adjective to the Indus as a large river and later evolved into a \"noun\". Mukherjee concludes that the Vedic poets had not seen the palaeo-Saraswati, and that what they described in the Vedic verses refers to something else. He also suggests that in the post-Vedic and Puranic tradition the \"disappearance\" of Saraswati, which to refers to \"[going] under [the] ground in the sands\", was created as a complementary myth to explain the visible non-existence of the river.\nRomila Thapar terms the identification controversial and dismisses it, noticing that the descriptions of Saraswati flowing through the high mountains does not tally with Ghaggar's course and suggests that Saraswati is Haraxvati of Afghanistan. Wilke and Moebus suggest that the identification is problematic since the Ghaggar-Hakra river was already dried up at the time of the composition of the Vedas, let alone the migration of the Vedic people into northern India.\nRajesh Kocchar further notes that, even if the Sutlej and the Yamuna had drained into the Ghaggar during Rigvedic, it still would not fit the Rigvedic descriptions because \"the snow-fed Satluj and Yamuna would strengthen lower Ghaggar. Upper Ghaggar would still be as puny as it is today.\"\nHelmand river.\nAn alternative suggestion for the identity of the early Rigvedic Saraswati River is the Helmand River and its tributary Arghandab River in the Arachosia region in Afghanistan, separated from the watershed of the Indus by the Sanglakh Range. The Helmand historically besides Avestan \"Haetumant\" bore the name \"Haraxvaiti\", which is the Avestan form cognate to Sanskrit \"Saraswati\". The Avesta extols the Helmand in similar terms to those used in the Rigveda with respect to the Saraswati: \"The bountiful, glorious Haetumant swelling its white waves rolling down its copious flood\". However unlike the Rigvedic Saraswati, Helmand river never attained the status of a deity despite the praises in the Avesta. The identification of the \"Saraswati\" river with the \"Helmand\" river was first proposed by Thomas (1886), followed by Alfred Hillebrandt a couple of years thereafter.\nAccording to Konrad Klaus (1989), the geographic situation of the Saraswati and the Helmand rivers are similar. Both flow into terminal lakes: The Helmand flows into a swamp on the Iranian plateau (the extended wetland and lake system of Hamun-i-Helmand). This matches the Rigvedic description of the Saraswati flowing to the \"samudra\", which according to him at that time meant 'confluence', 'lake', 'heavenly lake', 'ocean'; the current meaning of 'terrestrial ocean' was not even felt in the Pali Canon.\nRajesh Kocchar (1999), after a detailed analysis of the Vedic texts and the geological environments of the rivers, concludes that there may be two Saraswati rivers mentioned in the Rigveda. The early Rigvedic Saraswati, which he calls \"Naditama Saraswati\", is described in Suktas 2.41, 7.36, etc. of the family books of the Rigveda, and drains into a \"samudra\". However, according to Rajesh, the description of the \"Naditama Saraswati\" in the Rigveda indicates that any long river which flows from the mountains to the sea, receiving tributaries along the way, can fit the general description of the Saraswati River. Rajesh presents arguments in his work that the Helmand River in Afghanistan could be identified with the earlier Saraswati River, citing reasons such as similarities between the description of Saraswati in the Rigveda and the description of the Helmand, also known as Haetumant, in the Avesta. Rajesh further rejects the identification of the older Saraswati with the Ghaggar, citing that western archaeological sites in Sind are older than eastern archaeological sites of the Ghaggar, suggesting an eastward migration of the bearers of the Rigvedic culture to the western Ganga plain. According to him, the Saraswati by this time had become an underground river, and the name was transferred to the Ghaggar, which disappeared in the desert. Rajesh Kocchar, however, believes that the name 'Harut' is traced to 'Harauvaiti' (the name for the region of Arachosia, not a river), and Harut is not actually a part of Arachosia but of Drangiana. The later Rigvedic Saraswati, which he calls \"Vinasana Saraswati\", is described in the Rigvedic Nadistuti Sukta (10.75). The later Rigvedic Saraswati is only in the post-Rigvedic Brahmanas said to disappear in the sands. According to Kocchar, the Ganga and Yamuna were small streams in the vicinity of the Harut River. When the Vedic people moved east into Punjab, they named the new rivers they encountered after the old rivers they knew from Helmand, and the \"Vinasana Saraswati\" may correspond with the Ghaggar-Hakra River.\nRomila Thapar (2004) declares the identification of the Ghaggar with the Saraswati controversial. Furthermore, the early references to the Saraswati could be the Haraxvati plain in Afghanistan. The identification with the Ghaggar is problematic, as the Saraswati is said to cut its way through high mountains, which is not the landscape of the Ghaggar.\nContemporary politico-religious meaning.\nDrying-up and dating of the Vedas.\nThe Vedic description of the goddess Saraswati as a mighty river, and the Vedic and Puranic statements about the drying-up and diving-under of the Saraswati, have been used by some as a reference point for historical revisionism of the Vedic culture. Some see these descriptions as a mighty river as evidence for an earlier dating of the Rigveda, identifying the Vedic culture with the Harappan culture, which flourished at the time that the Gaggar-Hakra had not dried up, and rejecting the Indo-Aryan migrations theory, which postulates a migration at 1500 BCE.\nMichel Danino places the composition of the Vedas therefore in the third millennium BCE, a millennium earlier than the conventional dates. Danino notes that accepting the Rigveda accounts as a mighty river as factual descriptions, and dating the drying up late in the third millennium, are incompatible. According to Danino, this suggests that the Vedic people were present in northern India in the third millennium BCE, a conclusion which is controversial amongst professional archaeologists. Danino states that there is an absence of \"any intrusive material culture in the Northwest during the second millennium BCE,\" a biological continuity in the skeletal remains, and a cultural continuity. Danino then states that if the \"testimony of the Saraswati is added to this, the simplest and most natural conclusion is that the Vedic culture was present in the region in the third millennium.\"\nDanino acknowledges that this asks for \"studying its tentacular ramifications into linguistics, archaeoastronomy, anthropology and genetics, besides a few other fields.\"\nIdentification with the Indus Valley Civilisation.\nThe Indus Valley Civilisation is sometimes called the \"Saraswati culture\", \"Saraswati Civilization\", \"Indus Ghaggar-Hakra civilisation,\" \"Indus-Saraswati Civilization,\" or \"Sindhu-Saraswati Civilization\" by Hindutva revisionists subscribing to the theory of Indigenous Aryanism. The terms refer to the Saraswati river mentioned in the Vedas, and equate the Vedic culture with the Indus Valley Civilisation. In this view, the Harappan civilisation flourished predominantly on the banks of the Ghaggar-Hakra, not the Indus. For example, Danino notes that his proposed dating of the Vedas to the third millennium BCE coincides with the mature phase of the Indus Valley civilisation, and that it is \"tempting\" to equate the Indus Valley and Vedic cultures.\nRomila Thapar points out that an alleged equation of the Indus Valley civilization and the carriers of Vedic culture stays in stark contrast to not only linguistic, but also archeological evidence. She notes that the essential characteristics of Indus valley urbanism, such as planned cities, complex fortifications, elaborate drainage systems, the use of mud and fire bricks, monumental buildings, extensive craft activity, are completely absent in the Rigveda. Similarly the Rigveda lacks a conceptual familiarity with key aspects of organized urban life (e.g. non-kin labour, facets or items of an exchange system or complex weights and measures) and doesn't mention objects found in great numbers at Indus Valley civilization sites like terracotta figurines, sculptural representation of human bodies or seals.\nHetalben Sindhav notes that claims of a large number of Ghaggar-Hakra sites are politically motivated and exaggerated. While the Indus remained an active river, the Ghaggar-Hakra dried-up, leaving many sites undisturbed. Sidhav further notes that the Ghaggar-Hakra was a tributary of the Indus, so the proposed Saraswati nomenclatura is redundant. According to archaeologist Shereen Ratnagar, many Ghaggar-Hakra sites in India are actually those of local cultures; some sites display contact with Harappan civilization, but only a few are fully developed Harappan ones. Moreover, around 90% of the Indus script seals and inscribed objects discovered were found at sites in Pakistan along the Indus river, while other places accounting only for the remaining 10%.\nRevival.\nIn 2015, Reuters reported that \"members of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, a right-wing Hindutva paramilitary organisation, know that proof of the physical existence of the Vedic river would bolster their concept of a golden age of Hindu Indian Subcontinent.\" The Bharatiya Janata Party Government had therefore ordered archaeologists to search for the river.\nAccording to the government of Indian state of Haryana, research and satellite imagery of the region has confirmed to have found the lost river when water was detected during digging of the dry river bed at Yamunanagar. Surveys and satellite photographs confirm that there was once a great river that rose in the Himalayas, entered the plains of Haryana, flowed through the Thar-Cholistan desert of Rajasthan and eastern Sindh (running roughly parallel to the Indus) and then reached the sea in the Rann of Kutchh in Gujarat. The strange marshy landscape of the Rann of Kutchh is partly due to the fact that it was once the estuary of a great river.\nThe government constituted Haryana Sarasvati Heritage Development Board (HSHDB) had conducted a trial run on 30 July 2016 filling the river bed with of water which was pumped into a dug-up channel from tubewells at Uncha Chandna village in Yamunanagar. The water is expected to fill the channel until Kurukshetra, a distance of 40 kilometres. Once confirmed that there is no obstructions in the flow of the water, the government proposes to flow in another after a fortnight. At that time, there were also plans to build three dams on the river route to keep it flowing perennially.\nIn 2021, the Chief Minister of the State of Haryana stated that over 70 organizations were involved with researching the Saraswati River's heritage, and that the river \"is still flowing underground from Adi Badri and up to Kutch in Gujarat.\"\nThe Saraswati revival project of Haryana seeks to build channels and dams along the route of the lost river in Haryana, and develop it as a tourist and pilgrimage circuit. Joint efforts by several states enroute, from the origin of its initial tributaries in Uttarakhand and Himachal, to its paleodelta in Gujarat with ancient dock at Lothal (one of the southernmost sites of the ancient Indus-Saraswati Valley civilisation with trade links to Mesopotamia and Sumer), via Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, are on to map and revive the flow till Gujarat and build religious tourism and irrigation-cum-flood control facilities along the way.\nInternational Saraswati Festival, organised by the Haryana Saraswati Heritage Development Board (HSHDB), is an annual 5-day international-level festival held in the last week of January in honor of Sarasvati River as a manifestation of Hindu goddess Saraswati, during which the annual pilgrimage along the Saraswati route is organised through various ghats on religious tirthas and Indus Valley civilization sites.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32709", "revid": "36384157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32709", "title": "VTOL", "text": ""}
{"id": "32710", "revid": "1222229866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32710", "title": "Veggie", "text": ""}
{"id": "32712", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32712", "title": "Vega", "text": "Brightest star in the constellation Lyra\n&lt;/td&gt;\n! style=\"text-align: center; background-color: #FFFFC0;\" colspan=\"2\" | Observation dataEpoch J2000.0\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Equinox J2000.0\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Constellation\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Right ascension\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Declination\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Apparent\u00a0magnitude\u00a0(V)\n! style=\"background-color: #FFFFC0; text-align: center;\" colspan=\"2\"| Characteristics\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Evolutionary\u00a0stage\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Spectral\u00a0type\n! style=\"text-align:left\" | U\u2212B \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | B\u2212V \n! style=\"text-align:left\" | Variable\u00a0type\n&lt;/th&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\n&lt;/th&gt;&lt;/tr&gt;\nVega is the brightest star in the northern constellation of Lyra. It has the Bayer designation \u03b1 Lyrae, which is Latinised to Alpha Lyrae and abbreviated Alpha Lyr or \u03b1 Lyr. This star is relatively close at only from the Sun, and one of the most luminous stars in the Sun's neighborhood, being intrinsically brighter than any star nearer to the sun. It is the fifth-brightest star in the night sky, and the second-brightest star in the northern celestial hemisphere, after Arcturus.\nVega has been extensively studied by astronomers, leading it to be termed \"arguably the next most important star in the sky after the Sun\". Vega was the northern pole star around 12000 BCE and will be so again around the year 13724, when its declination will be \u00b0\u00a014\u2032, less than six degrees from the Pole. Vega was the first star other than the Sun to have its image and spectrum photographed. It was one of the first stars whose distance was estimated through parallax measurements. Vega has functioned as the baseline for calibrating the photometric brightness scale and was one of the stars used to define the zero point for the UBV photometric system.\nVega is only about a tenth of the age of the Sun, but since it is 2.1 times as massive, its expected lifetime is also one tenth of that of the Sun; both stars are at present approaching the midpoint of their main sequence lifetimes. Compared with the Sun, Vega has a lower abundance of elements heavier than helium. Vega is also a variable star\u2014that is, a star whose brightness fluctuates. It is rotating rapidly with a speed of at the equator. This causes the equator to bulge outward due to centrifugal effects, and, as a result, there is a variation of temperature across the star's photosphere that reaches a maximum at the poles. From Earth, Vega is observed from the direction of one of these poles.\nBased on observations of more infrared radiation than expected, Vega appears to have a circumstellar disk of dust. This dust is likely to be the result of collisions between objects in an orbiting debris disk, which is analogous to the Kuiper belt in the Solar System. Stars that display an infrared excess due to dust emission are termed Vega-like stars. Observations by the James Webb Space Telescope show that the disk is exceptionally smooth, with no evidence of shaping by massive planets, though there is some evidence that there may be one or more Neptune-mass planets closer to the star.\nNomenclature.\n\"\u03b1 Lyrae\" (Latinised to \"Alpha Lyrae\") is the star's Bayer designation. The traditional name \"Vega\" (earlier \"Wega\") comes from a loose transliteration of the Arabic word ' (Arabic: \u0648\u0627\u0642\u0639) meaning \"falling\" or \"landing\", via the phrase ' (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0646\u0651\u0633\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0652\u0648\u0627\u0642\u0639), \"the falling eagle\". In 2016, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin of July 2016 included a table of the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN; which included \"Vega\" for this star. It is now so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.\nObservation.\nVega can often be seen near the zenith in the mid-northern latitudes during the evening in the Northern Hemisphere summer. From mid-southern latitudes, it can be seen low above the northern horizon during the Southern Hemisphere winter. With a declination of +38.78\u00b0, Vega can only be viewed at latitudes north of 51\u00b0 S. Therefore, it does not rise at all anywhere in Antarctica or in the southernmost part of South America, including Punta Arenas, Chile (53\u00b0 S). At latitudes to the north of 51\u00b0 N, Vega remains continuously above the horizon as a circumpolar star. Around July 1, Vega reaches midnight culmination when it crosses the meridian at that time. Complementarily, Vega swoops down and kisses the horizon at true North at midnight on Dec 31/Jan 1, as seen from 51\u00b0 N. \nEach night the positions of the stars appear to change as the Earth rotates. However, when a star is located along the Earth's axis of rotation, it will remain in the same position and thus is called a pole star. The direction of the Earth's axis of rotation gradually changes over time in a process known as the precession of the equinoxes. A complete precession cycle requires 25,770\u00a0years, during which time the pole of the Earth's rotation follows a circular path across the celestial sphere that passes near several prominent stars. At present the pole star is Polaris, but around 12,000 BCE the pole was pointed only five degrees away from Vega. Through precession, the pole will again pass near Vega around 14,000 CE. Vega is the brightest of the successive northern pole stars. In 210,000 years, Vega will become the brightest star in the night sky, and will peak in brightness in 290,000 years with an apparent magnitude of \u20130.81.\nThis star lies at a vertex of a widely spaced asterism called the Summer Triangle, which consists of Vega plus the two first-magnitude stars Altair, in Aquila, and Deneb in Cygnus. This formation is the approximate shape of a right triangle, with Vega located at its right angle. The Summer Triangle is recognizable in the northern skies for there are few other bright stars in its vicinity.\nObservational history.\nAstrophotography, the photography of celestial objects, began in 1840 when John William Draper took an image of the Moon using the daguerreotype process. On 17 July 1850, Vega became the first star (other than the Sun) to be photographed, when it was imaged by William Bond and John Adams Whipple at the Harvard College Observatory, also with a daguerreotype. In August 1872, Henry Draper took a photograph of Vega's spectrum, the first photograph of a star's spectrum showing absorption lines. Similar lines had already been identified in the spectrum of the Sun. In 1879, William Huggins used photographs of the spectra of Vega and similar stars to identify a set of twelve \"very strong lines\" that were common to this stellar category. These were later identified as lines from the Hydrogen Balmer series. Since 1943, the spectrum of this star has served as one of the stable anchor points by which other stars are classified.\nThe distance to Vega can be determined by measuring its parallax shift against the background stars as the Earth orbits the Sun. Giuseppe Calandrelli noted stellar parallax in 1805-6 and came up with a 4-second value for the star which was a gross overestimate. The first person to publish a star's parallax was Friedrich G. W. von Struve, when he announced a value of 0.125 arcsecond () for Vega. Friedrich Bessel was skeptical about Struve's data, and, when Bessel published a parallax of 0.314\u2033 for the star system 61 Cygni, Struve revised his value for Vega's parallax to nearly double the original estimate. This change cast further doubt on Struve's data. Thus most astronomers at the time, including Struve, credited Bessel with the first published parallax result. However, Struve's initial result was actually close to the currently accepted value of 0.129\u2033, as determined by the \"Hipparcos\" astrometry satellite.\nThe brightness of a star, as seen from Earth, is measured with a standardized, logarithmic scale. This apparent magnitude is a numerical value that decreases in value with increasing brightness of the star. The faintest stars visible to the unaided eye are sixth magnitude, while the brightest in the night sky, Sirius, is of magnitude \u22121.46. To standardize the magnitude scale, astronomers chose Vega and several similar stars and averaged their brightness to represent magnitude zero at all wavelengths. Thus, for many years, Vega was used as a baseline for the calibration of absolute photometric brightness scales. However, this is no longer the case, as the apparent magnitude zero point is now commonly defined in terms of a particular numerically specified flux. This approach is more convenient for astronomers, since Vega is not always available for calibration and varies in brightness.\nThe UBV photometric system measures the magnitude of stars through ultraviolet, blue and yellow filters, producing \"U\", \"B\" and \"V\" values, respectively. Vega is one of six A0V stars that were used to set the initial mean values for this photometric system when it was introduced in the 1950s. The mean magnitudes for these six stars were defined as: \"U\" \u2212 \"B\" = \"B\" \u2212 \"V\" =\u00a00. In effect, the magnitude scale has been calibrated so that the magnitude of these stars is the same in the yellow, blue and ultraviolet parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Thus, Vega has a relatively flat electromagnetic spectrum in the visual region\u2014wavelength range 350\u2013850 nanometers, most of which can be seen with the human eye\u2014so the flux densities are roughly equal; 2,000\u2013. However, the flux density of Vega drops rapidly in the infrared, and is near at .\nPhotometric measurements of Vega during the 1930s appeared to show that the star had a low-magnitude variability on the order of \u00b10.03 magnitude (around \u00b12.8% luminosity). This range of variability was near the limits of observational capability for that time, and so the subject of Vega's variability has been controversial. The magnitude of Vega was measured again in 1981 at the David Dunlap Observatory and showed some slight variability. Thus it was suggested that Vega showed occasional low-amplitude pulsations associated with a Delta Scuti variable. This is a category of stars that oscillate in a coherent manner, resulting in periodic pulsations in the star's luminosity. Although Vega fits the physical profile for this type of variable, other observers have found no such variation. Thus the variability was thought to possibly be the result of systematic errors in measurement. However, a 2007 article surveyed these and other results, and concluded that \"A conservative analysis of the foregoing results suggests that Vega is quite likely variable in the 1\u20132% range, with possible occasional excursions to as much as 4% from the mean\". Also, a 2011 article affirms that \"The long-term (year-to-year) variability of Vega was confirmed\".\nVega became the first solitary main-sequence star beyond the Sun known to be an X-ray emitter when in 1979 it was observed from an imaging X-ray telescope launched on an Aerobee 350 from the White Sands Missile Range. In 1983, Vega became the first star found to have a disk of dust. The Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) discovered an excess of infrared radiation coming from the star, and this was attributed to energy emitted by the orbiting dust as it was heated by the star.\nPhysical characteristics.\nVega's spectral class is A0V, making it a blue-tinged white main-sequence star that is fusing hydrogen to helium in its core. Since more massive stars use their fusion fuel more quickly than smaller ones, Vega's main-sequence lifetime is roughly one billion years, a tenth of the Sun's. The current age of this star is about 700\u00a0million years, or up to about half its expected total main-sequence lifespan. After leaving the main sequence, Vega will become a class-M red giant and shed much of its mass, finally becoming a white dwarf. At present, Vega has more than twice the mass of the Sun and its bolometric luminosity is about 40 times the Sun's. Because it is rotating rapidly, approximately once every 16.5 hours, and seen nearly pole-on, its apparent luminosity, calculated assuming it was the same brightness all over, is about 57 times the Sun's. If Vega is variable, then it may be a Delta Scuti type with a period of about 0.107\u00a0day.\nMost of the energy produced at Vega's core is generated by the carbon\u2013nitrogen\u2013oxygen cycle (CNO cycle), a nuclear fusion process that combines protons to form helium nuclei through intermediary nuclei of carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. This process becomes dominant at a temperature of about 17\u00a0million\u00a0K, which is slightly higher than the core temperature of the Sun, but is less efficient than the Sun's proton\u2013proton chain fusion reaction. The CNO cycle is highly temperature sensitive, which results in a convection zone about the core that evenly distributes the 'ash' from the fusion reaction within the core region. The overlying atmosphere is in radiative equilibrium. This is in contrast to the Sun, which has a radiation zone centered on the core with an overlying convection zone.\nThe energy flux from Vega has been precisely measured against standard light sources. At , the flux density is with an error margin of 2%. The visual spectrum of Vega is dominated by absorption lines of hydrogen; specifically by the hydrogen Balmer series with the electron at the n=2 principal quantum number. The lines of other elements are relatively weak, with the strongest being ionized magnesium, iron and chromium. The X-ray emission from Vega is very low, demonstrating that the corona for this star must be very weak or non-existent. However, as the pole of Vega is facing Earth and a polar coronal hole may be present, confirmation of a corona as the likely source of the X-rays detected from Vega (or the region very close to Vega) may be difficult as most of any coronal X-rays would not be emitted along the line of sight.\nUsing spectropolarimetry, a magnetic field has been detected on the surface of Vega by a team of astronomers at the Observatoire du Pic du Midi. This is the first such detection of a magnetic field on a spectral class A star that is not an Ap chemically peculiar star. The average line of sight component of this field has a strength of gauss (G). This is comparable to the mean magnetic field on the Sun. Magnetic fields of roughly 30 G have been reported for Vega, compared to about 1 G for the Sun. In 2015, bright starspots were detected on the star's surface\u2014the first such detection for a normal A-type star, and these features show evidence of rotational modulation with a period of 0.68\u00a0day.\nRotation.\nVega has a rotation period of 16.3 hours, much faster than the Sun's rotational period but similar to, and slightly slower than, those of Jupiter and Saturn. Because of that, Vega is significantly oblate like those two planets.\nWhen the radius of Vega was measured to high accuracy with an interferometer, it resulted in an unexpectedly large estimated value of times the radius of the Sun. This is 60% larger than the radius of the star Sirius, while stellar models indicated it should only be about 12% larger. However, this discrepancy can be explained if Vega is a rapidly rotating star that is being viewed from the direction of its pole of rotation. Observations by the CHARA array in 2005\u201306 confirmed this deduction.\nThe pole of Vega\u2014its axis of rotation\u2014is inclined no more than five degrees from the line-of-sight to the Earth. At the high end of estimates for the rotation velocity for Vega is along the equator, much higher than the observed (i.e. projected) rotational velocity because Vega is seen almost pole-on. This is 88% of the speed that would cause the star to start breaking up from centrifugal effects. This rapid rotation of Vega produces a pronounced equatorial bulge, so the radius of the equator is 19% larger than the polar radius, compared to just under 11% for Saturn, the most oblate of the Solar System's planets. The measured polar radius of this star is solar radii, while the equatorial radius is solar radii. From the Earth, this bulge is being viewed from the direction of its pole, producing the overly large radius estimate.\nThe local surface gravity at the poles is greater than at the equator, which produces a variation in effective temperature over the star: the polar temperature is near , while the equatorial temperature is about . This large temperature difference between the poles and the equator produces a strong gravity darkening effect. As viewed from the poles, this results in a darker (lower-intensity) limb than would normally be expected for a spherically symmetric star. The temperature gradient may also mean that Vega has a convection zone around the equator, while the remainder of the atmosphere is likely to be in almost pure radiative equilibrium. By the Von Zeipel theorem, the local luminosity is higher at the poles. As a result, if Vega were viewed along the plane of its equator instead of almost pole-on, then its overall brightness would be lower.\nAs Vega had long been used as a standard star for calibrating telescopes, the discovery that it is rapidly rotating may challenge some of the underlying assumptions that were based on it being spherically symmetric. With the viewing angle and rotation rate of Vega now better known, this will allow improved instrument calibrations.\nElement abundance.\nIn astronomy, those elements with higher atomic numbers than helium are termed \"metals\". The metallicity of Vega's photosphere is only about 32% of the abundance of heavy elements in the Sun's atmosphere. (Compare this, for example, to a threefold metallicity abundance in the similar star Sirius as compared to the Sun.) For comparison, the Sun has an abundance of elements heavier than helium of about ZSol\u00a0=\u00a0. Thus, in terms of abundances, only about 0.54% of Vega consists of elements heavier than helium. Nitrogen is slightly \"more\" abundant, oxygen is only marginally less abundant and sulfur abundance is about 50% of solar. On the other hand, Vega has only 10% to 30% of the solar abundance for most other major elements with barium and scandium below 10%.\nThe unusually low metallicity of Vega makes it a weak Lambda Bo\u00f6tis star. However, the reason for the existence of such chemically peculiar, spectral class A0\u2013F0 stars remains unclear. One possibility is that the chemical peculiarity may be the result of diffusion or mass loss, although stellar models show that this would normally only occur near the end of a star's hydrogen-burning lifespan. Another possibility is that the star formed from an interstellar medium of gas and dust that was unusually metal-poor.\nThe observed helium to hydrogen ratio in Vega is , which is about 40% lower than the Sun. This may be caused by the disappearance of a helium convection zone near the surface. Energy transfer is instead performed by the radiative process, which may be causing an abundance anomaly through diffusion.\nKinematics.\nThe radial velocity of Vega is the component of this star's motion along the line-of-sight to the Earth. Movement away from the Earth will cause the light from Vega to shift to a lower frequency (toward the red), or to a higher frequency (toward the blue) if the motion is toward the Earth. Thus the velocity can be measured from the amount of shift of the star's spectrum. Precise measurements of this blueshift give a value of . The minus sign indicates a relative motion toward the Earth.\nMotion transverse to the line of sight causes the position of Vega to shift with respect to the more distant background stars. Careful measurement of the star's position allows this angular movement, known as proper motion, to be calculated. Vega's proper motion is (mas) per year in right ascension\u2014the celestial equivalent of longitude\u2014and in declination, which is equivalent to a change in latitude. The net proper motion of Vega is , which results in angular movement of a degree every .\nIn the galactic coordinate system, the space velocity components of Vega are (U, V, W) = (, , ) km/s, for a net space velocity of . Although Vega is at present only the fifth-brightest star in the night sky, the star is slowly brightening as proper motion causes it to approach the Sun. Vega will make its closest approach in an estimated 264,000 years at a perihelion distance of .\nBased on this star's kinematic properties, it appears to belong to a stellar association called the Castor Moving Group. However, Vega may be much older than this group, so the membership remains uncertain. This group contains about 16 stars, including Alpha Librae, Alpha Cephei, Castor, Fomalhaut and Vega. All members of the group are moving in nearly the same direction with similar space velocities. Membership in a moving group implies a common origin for these stars in an open cluster that has since become gravitationally unbound. The estimated age of this moving group is , and they have an average space velocity of .\nPossible planetary system.\n! align=center| Companion\n! align=center| Mass\n! align=center| Semimajor axis\n! align=center| Orbital period\n! align=center| Eccentricity\n! align=center| Inclination\n! align=center| Radius\nInfrared excess.\nOne of the early results from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) was the discovery of excess infrared flux coming from Vega, beyond what would be expected from the star alone. This excess was measured at wavelengths of 25, 60 and , and came from within an angular radius of () centered on the star. At the measured distance of Vega, this corresponded to an actual radius of (AU), where an AU is the average radius of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. It was proposed that this radiation came from a field of orbiting particles with a dimension on the order of a millimetre, as anything smaller would eventually be removed from the system by radiation pressure or drawn into the star by means of Poynting\u2013Robertson drag. The latter is the result of radiation pressure creating an effective force that opposes the orbital motion of a dust particle, causing it to spiral inward. This effect is most pronounced for tiny particles that are closer to the star.\nSubsequent measurements of Vega at showed a lower than expected flux for the hypothesized particles, suggesting that they must instead be on the order of or less. To maintain this amount of dust in orbit around Vega, a continual source of replenishment would be required. A proposed mechanism for maintaining the dust was a disk of coalesced bodies that were in the process of collapsing to form a planet. Models fitted to the dust distribution around Vega indicate that it is a 120-astronomical-unit-radius circular disk viewed from nearly pole-on. In addition, there is a hole in the center of the disk with a radius of no less than .\nFollowing the discovery of an infrared excess around Vega, other stars have been found that display a similar anomaly that is attributable to dust emission. As of 2002, about 400 of these stars have been found, and they have come to be termed \"Vega-like\" or \"Vega-excess\" stars. It is believed that these may provide clues to the origin of the Solar System.\nDebris disks.\nBy 2005, the Spitzer Space Telescope had produced high-resolution infrared images of the dust around Vega. It was shown to extend out to 43\u2033 () at a wavelength of , 70\u2033 () at and () at . These much wider disks were found to be circular and free of clumps, with dust particles ranging from 1\u2013 in size. The estimated total mass of this dust is 3\u00d710-3 times the mass of the Earth (around 7.5 times more massive than the asteroid belt). Production of the dust would require collisions between asteroids in a population corresponding to the Kuiper Belt around the Sun. Thus the dust is more likely created by a debris disk around Vega, rather than from a protoplanetary disk as was earlier thought.\nThe inner boundary of the debris disk was estimated at , or 70\u2013. The disk of dust is produced as radiation pressure from Vega pushes debris from collisions of larger objects outward. However, continuous production of the amount of dust observed over the course of Vega's lifetime would require an enormous starting mass\u2014estimated as hundreds of times the mass of Jupiter. Hence it is more likely to have been produced as the result of a relatively recent breakup of a moderate-sized (or larger) comet or asteroid, which then further fragmented as the result of collisions between the smaller components and other bodies. This dusty disk would be relatively young on the time scale of the star's age, and it will eventually be removed unless other collision events supply more dust.\nObservations, first with the Palomar Testbed Interferometer by David Ciardi and Gerard van Belle in 2001 and then later confirmed with the CHARA array at Mt. Wilson in 2006 and the Infrared Optical Telescope Array at Mt. Hopkins in 2011, revealed evidence for an inner dust band around Vega. Originating within of the star, this exozodiacal dust may be evidence of dynamical perturbations within the system. This may be caused by an intense bombardment of comets or meteors, and may be evidence for the existence of a planetary system.\nThe disk was also observed with ALMA in 2020, the LMT in 2022 and with Hubble STIS and JWST MIRI in 2024. The ALMA image did resolve the outer disk for the first time. The Hubble observation is claimed as the first image of the disk in scattered light and found an outer halo made up of small dust grains. JWST observations also detected the Halo, the outer disk and for the first time the inner disk. The infrared observations also showed a gap at 60 AU for the first time. The dust interior of the outer disk is consistent with dust being dragged by the Poynting-Robertson effect. The inner edge of the inner disk is hidden behind the coronagraph, but it was inferred to be 3-5 AU from photometry. The star is also surrounded by hot infrared excess, located at the sub-AU region, leaving a second gap between the inner disk and the hot dust around the star. This hot infrared excess lies within about 0.2 AU or closer and is made up of small grains, like graphite and iron and manganese oxides, which was previously verified.\nPossible planets.\nObservations from the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope in 1997 revealed an \"elongated bright central region\" that peaked at 9\u2033 () to the northeast of Vega. This was hypothesized as either a perturbation of the dust disk by a planet or else an orbiting object that was surrounded by dust. However, images by the Keck telescope had ruled out a companion down to magnitude 16, which would correspond to a body with more than 12 times the mass of Jupiter. Astronomers at the Joint Astronomy Centre in Hawaii and at UCLA suggested that the image may indicate a planetary system still undergoing formation.\nDetermining the nature of the planet has not been straightforward; a 2002 paper hypothesizes that the clumps are caused by a roughly Jupiter-mass planet on an eccentric orbit. Dust would collect in orbits that have mean-motion resonances with this planet\u2014where their orbital periods form integer fractions with the period of the planet\u2014producing the resulting clumpiness.\nIn 2003, it was hypothesized that these clumps could be caused by a roughly Neptune-mass planet having migrated from 40 to over 56\u00a0million\u00a0years, an orbit large enough to allow the formation of smaller rocky planets closer to Vega. The migration of this planet would likely require gravitational interaction with a second, higher-mass planet in a smaller orbit.\nUsing a coronagraph on the Subaru Telescope in Hawaii in 2005, astronomers were able to further constrain the size of a planet orbiting Vega to no more than 5\u201310 times the mass of Jupiter. The issue of possible clumps in the debris disc was revisited in 2007 using newer, more sensitive instrumentation on the Plateau de Bure Interferometer. The observations showed that the debris ring is smooth and symmetric. No evidence was found of the blobs reported earlier, casting doubts on the hypothesized giant planet. The smooth structure has been confirmed in follow-up observations by Hughes et al. (2012) and the Herschel Space Telescope.\nAlthough a planet has yet to be directly observed around Vega, the presence of a planetary system cannot yet be ruled out. Thus there could be smaller, terrestrial planets orbiting closer to the star. The inclination of planetary orbits around Vega is likely to be closely aligned to the equatorial plane of this star.\nFrom the perspective of an observer on a hypothetical planet around Vega, the Sun would appear as a faint 4.3-magnitude star in the Columba constellation.\nIn 2021, a paper analyzing 10 years of spectra of Vega detected a candidate 2.43-day signal around Vega, statistically estimated to have only a 1% chance of being a false positive. Considering the amplitude of the signal, the authors estimated a minimum mass of Earth masses, but considering the very oblique rotation of Vega itself of only 6.2\u00b0 from Earth's perspective, the planet may be aligned to this plane as well, giving it an actual mass of Earth masses. The researchers also detected a faint -day signal which could translate to Earth masses ( at 6.2\u00b0 inclination) but is too faint to claim as a real signal with available data.\nObservations of the disk with JWST MIRI did find a very circular face-on disk. The morphology indicate that there is no planet more massive than Saturn beyond 10 AU. The disk has a gap at around 60 AU. Gap-opening planets are inferred for disks around other stars and the team tests this idea for Vega by running simulations. The simulations have shown that a planet with &lt; 6 M\ud83d\udf28 at 65 AU would introduce interior asymmetric structures that are not seen in the disk of Vega. Any gap-opening planet would need to be less massive. Additionally the inner edge of the inner disk was inferred to be 3-5 AU. Vega shows also evidence for hot infrared excess at the sub-AU region. The inner boundary of the warm debris might indicate that there is a Neptune-mass planet inside, shepherding it.\nEtymology and cultural significance.\nThe name Vega is believed to be derived from the Arabic term \"Al Nesr al Waki\" \u0627\u0644\u0646\u0633\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0648\u0627\u0642\u0639 which appeared in the Al Achsasi al Mouakket star catalogue and was translated into Latin as \"Vultur Cadens\", \"the falling eagle/vulture\". The constellation was represented as a vulture in ancient Egypt, and as an eagle or vulture in ancient India. The Arabic name then appeared in the western world in the \"Alfonsine tables\", which were drawn up between 1215 and 1270 by order of King Alfonso X. Medieval astrolabes of England and Western Europe used the names Wega and Alvaca, and depicted it and Altair as birds.\nAmong the northern Polynesian people, Vega was known as \"whetu o te tau\", the year star. For a period of history it marked the start of their new year when the ground would be prepared for planting. Eventually this function became denoted by the Pleiades. A Hawaiian name is Keho\u2018oea; in Native Hawaiian culture objects can have different names depending on their position in the sky, so it is also known as Kah\u014d\u2018eoa, Kaho\u2018ea or Keoe.\nThe Assyrians named this pole star Dayan-same, the \"Judge of Heaven\", while in Akkadian it was Tir-anna, \"Life of Heaven\". In Babylonian astronomy, Vega may have been one of the stars named Dilgan, \"the Messenger of Light\". To the ancient Greeks, the constellation Lyra was formed from the harp of Orpheus, with Vega as its handle. For the Roman Empire, the start of autumn was based upon the hour at which Vega set below the horizon.\nIn Chinese, (), meaning \"Weaving Girl (asterism)\", refers to an asterism consisting of Vega, \u03b5 Lyrae and \u03b61 Lyrae. Consequently, the Chinese name for Vega is (, ). In Chinese mythology, there is a love story of Qixi () in which Niulang (, Altair) and his two children (\u03b2 Aquilae and \u03b3 Aquilae) are separated from their mother Zhin\u00fc (, lit. \"weaver girl\", Vega) who is on the far side of the river, the Milky Way. However, one day per year on the seventh day of the seventh month of the Chinese lunisolar calendar, magpies make a bridge so that Niulang and Zhin\u00fc can be together again for a brief encounter. The Japanese Tanabata festival, in which Vega is known as \"Orihime\" (\u7e54\u59eb), is also based on this legend.\nIn Zoroastrianism, Vega was sometimes associated with Vanant, a minor divinity whose name means \"conqueror\".\nThe indigenous Boorong people of north-western Victoria, Australia, named it \"Neilloan\", \"the flying loan\".\nIn Hindu astronomy and astrology, Vega is represented by the nakshatra Abhijit(\u0905\u092d\u093f\u091c\u093f\u0924). In the \"Srimad Bhagavatam\", Shri Krishna tells Arjuna, that among the Nakshatras he is Abhijit, which remark indicates the auspiciousness of this Nakshatra.\nMedieval astrologers counted Vega as one of the Behenian stars and related it to chrysolite and winter savory. Cornelius Agrippa listed its kabbalistic sign under \"Vultur cadens\", a literal Latin translation of the Arabic name. Medieval star charts also listed the alternate names Waghi, Vagieh and Veka for this star.\nW. H. Auden's 1933 poem \"A Summer Night (to Geoffrey Hoyland)\" famously opens with the couplet, \"Out on the lawn I lie in bed,/Vega conspicuous overhead\". In the 1997 film \"Contact\", the Vega system is the source of alien communication.\nVega became the first star to have a car named after it with the French Facel Vega line of cars from 1954 onwards, and later on, in America, Chevrolet launched the Vega in 1971. Other vehicles named after Vega include the ESA's Vega launch system and the Lockheed Vega aircraft.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32713", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32713", "title": "Vietnam Veterans Memorial", "text": "US national memorial in Washington, D.C.\nThe Vietnam Veterans Memorial, commonly called the Vietnam Memorial, is a U.S. national memorial in Washington, D.C., honoring service members of the U.S. armed forces who served in the Vietnam War. The site is dominated by two black granite walls engraved with the names of those service members who died or remain missing as a result of their service in Vietnam and South East Asia during the war. The Memorial Wall was designed by American architect Maya Lin and is an example of minimalist architecture. The Wall, completed in 1982, has since been supplemented with the statue \"Three Soldiers\" in 1984 and the Vietnam Women's Memorial in 1993.\nThe memorial is in Constitution Gardens, adjacent to the National Mall and just northeast of the Lincoln Memorial. It is maintained by the National Park Service and receives around three million visitors each year. It was initially controversial for its lack of heroic ornamentation and iconography, but its reputation improved over time. In 2007, it was ranked tenth on the \"List of America's Favorite Architecture\" by the American Institute of Architects. As a national memorial, it is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nAppearance.\nMemorial Wall.\nThe memorial is composed of two adjoining walls. Each wall is long and is composed of 72 black granite panels that are polished to a high finish. Seventy of the panels on each wall are inscribed with the names of the men and women being honored. The walls taper from tall at their extremities to tall at the apex where they meet, their bottom edges descending below the level of the surrounding earth while their top edges stay level. As such, visitors walking the length of the memorial start at ground level, descend below it, and ascend back to ground level. This is symbolic of a \"wound that is closed and healing\" and exemplifies the Land art movement of the 1960s, which produced sculptures that sought to reconnect with the natural environment. The stone for the 144 panels was quarried in Bangalore, India.\nOne wall points to the Washington Monument, the other to the Lincoln Memorial, meeting at an angle of 125\u00b0 12\u2032. Each wall has 72 panels, 70 listing names (numbered 1E through 70E and 70W through 1W), and two very small blank panels at the extremities. A pathway for visitors extends along the base of the Wall.\nThe names on the Wall, originally numbering 57,939 when it was dedicated in 1982, are listed in the chronological order of the dates of casualty. Additional names have been added throughout the years since: as of \u00a02018[ [update]] there were 58,320 names. The number of names on the wall differs from other counts of U.S. Vietnam War deaths. Directories of the names and their locations are located on nearby podiums at both ends of the Memorial.\nThe memorial has had some unforeseen maintenance issues. In 1984, cracks were detected in the granite and, as a result, two of the panels were temporarily removed in 1986 for study. More cracks were later discovered in 2010. There are a number of hypotheses about the cause of the cracks, the most common being due to thermal cycling. In 1990, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund purchased several blank panels to use in case any were ever damaged; these were placed into storage at Quantico Marine Base. Two of the blank panels were shattered by the 2011 Virginia earthquake.\nNames.\nInscribed on the Memorial are the names of service members who were classified as dead, missing, or prisoner. The list includes names of individuals who died due to circumstances other than \"killed in action\", including murder, vehicle accidents, drowning, heart attack, animal attack, snake bites and others. The names are inscribed in Optima typeface, designed by Hermann Zapf. Information about rank, unit, or decorations is not provided on the Wall itself.\nThose who were confirmed as dead are denoted by a diamond shape next to the name, and those who are status unknown are denoted with a \"cross\" sign. When the death of one who was previously missing is confirmed, a diamond is superimposed over the cross. If a missing man were to return alive, which has never occurred to date, the cross is to be circumscribed by a circle.\nThe earliest date of eligibility for a name to be included on the Memorial is November 1, 1955, which corresponds to when President Eisenhower deployed the Military Assistance Advisory Group to train the Army of the Republic of Vietnam. The last date of eligibility is May 15, 1975, which corresponds to the final day of the \" Mayaguez\" incident. The names are listed in chronological order, starting at the apex on panel 1E on July 8, 1959, moving day by day to the end of the eastern wall at panel 70E, which ended on May 25, 1968, starting again at panel 70W at the end of the western wall, completing the list for May 25, 1968, and returning to the apex at panel 1W in 1975. There are some deaths that predate July 8, 1959, including the death of Richard B. Fitzgibbon Jr. in 1956.\nThere are circumstances that allow for a name to be added to the Memorial, but the death must be directly attributed to a wound received within the combat zone while on active duty. The determination of addition is made by the Department of Defense. In these cases, the name is added according to the date of injury\u2014not the date of death.\nThe names of 32 men were erroneously included in the memorial, and while those names remain on the wall, they have been removed from the databases and printed directories. The extra names resulted from a deliberate decision to err on the side of inclusiveness, with 38 questionable names being included. One person, whose name was added as late as 1992, had gone AWOL immediately upon his return to the United States after his second completed tour of duty. His survival only came to the attention of government authorities in 1996.\nThere are eight women's names included in the memorial\u2014Eleanor Grace Alexander, Pamela Dorothy Donovan, Carol Ann Drazba, Annie Ruth Graham, Elizabeth Ann Jones, Mary Therese Klinker, Sharon Ann Lane, and Hedwig Diane Orlowski. All were nurses.\n\"Three Servicemen\".\nA component of the Memorial, located a short distance from the Wall, is a bronze statue named \"Three Servicemen\" (sometimes called \"Three Soldiers\"). The work depicts three soldiers. Two are purposefully identifiable as European American and African American, while the third is intended to represent all other ethnic groups in America. In their final arrangement, the statue and the Wall appear to interact with one another, with the soldiers looking on in solemn tribute at the names of their fallen comrades. The distance between the two allows them to interact without affecting the design of the other.\nVietnam Women's Memorial.\nThe Vietnam Women's Memorial is dedicated to the women of the United States who served in the Vietnam War, most of whom were nurses. It serves as a reminder of the importance of women in the conflict. It depicts three uniformed women with a wounded soldier. It is located on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., a short distance south of The Wall, north of the Reflecting Pool. It was authorized by separate legislation from that of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.\nIn Memory memorial plaque.\nA memorial plaque, authorized by an Act of Congress (Pub. L.\u00a0), was dedicated on November 10, 2004, at the northeast corner of the plaza surrounding the Three Soldiers statue to honor veterans who died after the war as a result of injuries suffered in Vietnam, but who fall outside Department of Defense guidelines. The plaque is a carved block of black granite, , inscribed \"In memory of the men and women who served in the Vietnam War and later died as a result of their service. We honor and remember their sacrifice.\"\nRuth Coder Fitzgerald, the founder of The Vietnam War In Memory Memorial Plaque Project, worked for years to have the In Memory Memorial Plaque completed. The organization has been dissolved, but its web site is maintained by the Vietnam War Project at Texas Tech University.\nRitual.\nVisitors to the memorial began leaving sentimental items at the memorial at its opening. They continue leaving objects forty years after the dedication of the memorial. One story claims this practice began during construction when a Vietnam veteran threw the Purple Heart his brother received posthumously into the concrete of the memorial's foundation. Several thousand items are left at the memorial each year. The largest item left at the memorial was a sliding glass storm door with a full-size replica \"tiger cage\". The door was painted with a scene from Vietnam and the names of U.S. POWs and MIAs from the conflict.\nHistory.\nOn April 27, 1979, four years after the fall of Saigon, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, Inc. (VVMF) was incorporated as a non-profit organization to establish a memorial to honor the veterans of the Vietnam War. The impetus for the founding of VVMF fund came from a wounded Vietnam War veteran, Jan Scruggs, who was inspired by the film \"The Deer Hunter\". VVMF was joined by a volunteer cadre of Vietnam veterans, primarily former junior officers and enlisted men, among whom two emerged as principal leaders with Scruggs: West Point graduate John P. Wheeler III and Robert W. Doubek, a former Air Force intelligence officer. In recognition of their leadership, Scruggs, Wheeler, and Doubek were nominated for the Congressional Gold Medal in 1986. Eventually, $8.4\u00a0million was raised through private donations.\nOn July 1, 1980, a site consisting of two acres next to the Lincoln Memorial was chosen and authorized by Congress. The World War I Munitions Building previously occupied that area. VVMF decided to choose a design for the Memorial through a national design competition, with a first prize of $20,000. The competition was open to any American over 18 years of age, and by the end of the year 1980, 2,573 individuals and teams had registered for the competition, and by the deadline of March 30, 1981, 1,421 designs were submitted. The designs were displayed at an airport hangar at Andrews Air Force Base for the selection jury, in rows covering more than of floor space. Each entry was identified by number only. All entries were examined by each juror; the entries were narrowed down to 232, then to 39. Finally, the jury selected entry number 1026, which had been designed by Maya Lin.\nOpposition to design and compromise.\nThe selected design was controversial, in particular due to its black color, its lack of ornamentation, and its configuration below ground level. Among other attacks, it was called \"a black gash of shame and sorrow.\" Two prominent early supporters of the project, Ross Perot and James Webb, withdrew their support once they saw the design. Webb said, \"I never in my wildest dreams imagined such a nihilistic slab of stone.\" James Watt, secretary of the interior under President Ronald Reagan, delayed issuing a building permit for the Memorial due to the political opposition.\nSince its early years, criticism of the Memorial's design faded. In the words of Scruggs, \"It has become something of a shrine.\"\nNegative reactions to Maya Lin's design created a controversy; a compromise was reached by VVMF's agreement to add a flagstaff and a realist statue at the site. Consequently Frederick Hart (who designed the sculpture that was part of the third-place winner in the original design competition) was commissioned to produce a bronze figurative sculpture. Opponents of Lin's design wanted to place this sculpture of three soldiers at the apex of the two walls, to make the soldiers the focal point of the memorial and the Wall a mere backdrop. In the end, the sculpture was placed in an entry plaza. On October 13, 1982, the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts approved the addition of the flagstaff and the Hart sculptures. The statue \"Three Soldiers\" was dedicated in 1984.\nBuilding the memorial.\nOn March 11, 1982, the revised design was formally approved, and on March 26, 1982, ground was formally broken. Stone from Bangalore, India, mined in Chamarajanagar India was chosen because of its reflective quality; Cutting and fabrication of the panels were done in Barre, Vermont. The panels were then shipped to Memphis, Tennessee, where the names were inscribed. The inscriptions were done with a photoemulsion and sandblasting process. Typesetting of the original 57,939 names on the wall was performed by Datalantic in Atlanta, Georgia. The negatives used in the process are in storage at the Smithsonian Institution.\nThe memorial was dedicated on November 13, 1982, as part of a five-day ceremony that began on November 10, 1982, called the \"National Salute to Vietnam Veterans,\" which included a reading of names at the National Cathedral, unit reunions, an entertainers' show, a parade, the Memorial's dedication, and a service at the Cathedral.\nTimeline for those listed on the wall.\nSince 1982, over 400 names have been added to the memorial, but not necessarily in chronological order. Some were men who died in Vietnam but were left off the list due to clerical errors. Others died after 1982, and their deaths were determined by the Department of Defense to be the direct result of their Vietnam War service. For those who died during the war, their name is placed in a position that relates to their date of death. For those who died after the war, their name is placed in a position that relates to the date of their injury. Because space is usually not available in the exact right place, names are placed as close to their correct chronological position as possible, but usually not in the exact spot. The order could be corrected as panels are replaced.\nFurthermore, over 100 names have been identified as misspelled. In some cases, the correction could be done in place. In others, the name had to be chiseled again elsewhere, moving them out of chronological order. Others have remained in place, with the misspelling, at the request of their family.\nAddition of the Women's Memorial.\nThe Women's Memorial was designed by Glenna Goodacre for the women of the United States who served in the Vietnam War. Before Goodacre's design was selected, two design entries had been awarded as co-finalists \u2013 one a statue and the other a setting \u2013 however, the two designs were unable to be reconciled. Glenna Goodacre's entry received an honorable mention in the contest and she was asked to submit a modified maquette (design model). Goodacre's original design for the Women's Memorial statue included a standing figure of a nurse holding a Vietnamese baby, which although not intended as such, was deemed a political statement, and it was asked that this be removed. She replaced them with a figure of a kneeling woman holding an empty helmet. On November 11, 1993, the Vietnam Women's Memorial was dedicated. There is a smaller replica of that memorial at Vietnam Veterans Memorial State Park in Angel Fire, New Mexico.\nMemorial plaque.\nOn November 10, 2000, a memorial plaque, authorized by Pub. L.\u00a0, honoring veterans who died after the war as a direct result of injuries suffered in Vietnam, but who fall outside Department of Defense guidelines was dedicated. Ruth Coder Fitzgerald, the founder of The Vietnam War In Memory Memorial Plaque Project, worked for years and struggled against opposition to have the In Memory Memorial Plaque completed. The organization was disbanded, but their website is maintained by the Vietnam War Project at Texas Tech University.\nEducation center.\nIn 2003, after some years of lobbying, the National Park Service and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund won permission from Congress to build The Education Center at The Wall. A two-story museum, located below ground just west of the Maya Lin-designed memorial, was proposed to display the history of the Vietnam War and the multiple design competitions and artworks which make up the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Vietnam Women's Memorial, and the Memorial Plaque. The center would have also provided biographical details on and photographs of many of the 58,000 names listed on the Wall as well as the more than 6,600 servicemembers killed since 2001 fighting the war on terror. The $115-million museum would be jointly operated by the Park Service and the Fund. A ceremonial groundbreaking for the project occurred in November 2012, but insufficient fundraising led the Fund to cancel construction of the center in September 2018 and instead focus on digital education and outreach.\nVietnam Veterans Memorial Collection.\nItems left at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial are collected by National Park Service employees and transferred to the NPS Museum Resource Center, which catalogs and stores all items except perishable organic matter (such as fresh flowers) and unaltered U.S. flags. The flags are redistributed through various channels.\nFrom 1992 to 2003, selected items from the collection were placed on exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History as \"Personal Legacy: The Healing of a Nation\" including the Medal of Honor of Charles Liteky, who renounced it in 1986 by placing the medal at the memorial in an envelope addressed to then-president Ronald Reagan.\nInspired works.\nTraveling replicas.\nThere are several transportable replicas of the Vietnam Veteran's Memorial created so those who are not able to travel to Washington, D.C., would be able to simulate an experience of visiting the Wall.\nFixed replicas.\nLocated at 200 S. 9th Ave in Pensacola, Florida, the first permanent replica of the National Vietnam Veterans Memorial was unveiled on October 24, 1992. Now known as \"Wall South,\" the half-size replica bears the names of all Americans killed or missing in Southeast Asia and is updated each Mother's Day. It is the centerpiece of Veterans Memorial Park Pensacola, a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442-acre site overlooking Pensacola Bay, which also includes a World War I Memorial, a World War II Memorial, a Korean War Memorial, a Revolutionary War Memorial and a running series of plaques to honor local casualties from the Global War on Terror. There is also a Purple Heart Memorial, a Marine Corps Aviation Bell Tower and a monument to the submarine lifeguards who rescued Navy pilots in World War II. A Global War on Terror Memorial is planned to be completed in 2017 and will include an artifact from the World Trade Center as a component of the sculpture.\nLocated in Fox Park in Wildwood, New Jersey, The Wildwoods Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall was unveiled and dedicated on May 29, 2010. The memorial wall is an almost half-size granite replica of the National Vietnam Veterans Memorial and the only permanent memorial north of the nation's capital.\nPlans for the Vietnam War Memorial located 401 East Ninth Street in Winfield, Kansas began in 1987 when friends who had gathered for a class reunion wanted to find a way to honor their fallen classmates. The project quickly grew from honoring only Cowley County servicemen to representing all 777 servicemen and nurses from Kansas who lost their lives or are missing in action from the Vietnam War.\nLocated at Freedom Park in South Sioux City, Nebraska exists a half-scale replica of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall that duplicates the original design. Dedicated in 2014, the 250-foot wall is constructed with black granite mined from the same quarry in India as the original.\nLocated in Layton, Utah, the Layton Vietnam Memorial Wall at 437 N Wasatch Dr, 84041, contains the names of all 58,000 Americans who died in the war. According to Utah Vietnam Veterans of America, the wall is 80 percent of the original size of the memorial in Washington, D.C., and it is the only replica of its size west of the Mississippi. The memorial was officially opened and dedicated on July 14, 2018.\nLocated in Elizabethtown, Kentucky, opened in 2018. This Vietnam Veteran's Memorial Wall is 360 feet long, an 80 percent scale of the one in Washington D.C.\nMissouri's National Veterans Memorial located about 1 hour south of St. Louis, Missouri in Perryville, Missouri offers visitors an exact full-sized replica. The MNVM Board was adamant that this would be an exact replication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, character by character. Its mission is to pay tribute to all service men and women and their families and provide an environment for peaceful reflection. The memorial offers a welcome Center fully insulated from the elements, indoor military museum, scenic views, a gorgeous clear skyline and plenty of parking. All features are wheelchair accessible.\nLocated in Augusta, Georgia, opened in 2019, the Augusta-CSRA Vietnam War Veterans Memorial is not a replica but follows the principles set forth by the national monument of honoring those fallen in Vietnam with inscriptions of the names, 169 total, who made the supreme sacrifice in Vietnam.\nAs a memorial genre.\nThe first US memorial to an ongoing war, the Northwood Gratitude and Honor Memorial in Irvine, California, is modeled on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in that it includes a chronological list of the dead engraved in dark granite. As the memorialized wars (in Iraq and Afghanistan) have not concluded, the Northwood Gratitude and Honor Memorial will be updated yearly. It has space for about 8000 names, of which 5,714 were engraved as of the Dedication of the Memorial on November 14, 2010.\nCultural representations.\nThe Vietnam Veteran's Memorial Wall inspired over 60 songs, identified by the Vietnam War Song Project, showing how the war has been represented in subsequent decades, performed by professional musicians and Vietnam veterans. The songs present patriotic tributes to the names on the Wall, the perspective of families and friends, as well as recriminations and anti-war sentiment. One of the first songs released on record was \"The Wall\" by Britt Small &amp; Festival, who performed the song at the memorial in November 1982, and subsequently released as a 7\" single. This was followed by \"Who are the names on the Wall?\", by Vietnam veterans Michael J. Martin and Tim Holiday, also released in 1982. In 1983, contemporary folk artist Michael Jerling released \"Long Black Wall\" on the \"CooP Fast Folk Musical Magazine (Vol. 2, No. 4) \u2013 Political Song\", published by Fast Folk. Commercially successful songs include: \"More Than a Name on the Wall\" (1989) by The Statler Brothers, which peaked at #6 on the \"Billboard\" Hot Country Singles chart; \"The Big Parade\" (1989) by 10,000 Maniacs on the album Blind Man's Zoo, which reached #13 in the US \"Billboard\" chart; Guns N' Roses song \"Civil War\" (1991), which referenced the memorial, and reaching #4 in the US \"Billboard\" rock charts. Other well-known songs include \"The Wall\" (2014) by Bruce Springsteen on his album \"High Hopes\" and \"Xmas in February\" (1989) by Lou Reed, released on the album \"New York\".\nVandalism.\nThere have been hundreds of incidents of vandalism at the memorial wall. Some of the most notable cases are:\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32714", "revid": "50718293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32714", "title": "Vince Foster", "text": "American lawyer (1945\u20131993)\nVincent Walker Foster Jr. (January 15, 1945\u00a0\u2013 July 20, 1993) was an American attorney who served as deputy White House counsel during the first six months of the Clinton administration.\nFoster had been a partner at Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Arkansas, where, as \"The Washington Post\" later wrote, he rose to \"the pinnacle of the Arkansas legal establishment.\" In July 1993, he was found dead of a gunshot wound in Fort Marcy Park. Five official governmental investigations ruled his death a suicide, but several conspiracy theories emerged.\nEarly life and education.\nFoster was born in Hope, Arkansas, to Vincent W. Foster Sr. and Alice Mae Foster (1914\u20132012). His father became a successful real estate developer. Vincent had two sisters, Sheila and Sharon.\nVincent was a childhood friend of Bill Clinton, then known as Billy Blythe. Clinton, a year and a half younger than Foster, resided in an adjoining property to Foster's with his grandparents while his mother was often away studying nursing. Clinton later recalled, \"I lived with my grandparents in a modest little house across from Vince Foster's nice, big, white brick house.\" Another Clinton recollection was that Foster \"was kind to me and never lorded it over me the way so many older boys did with younger ones.\" Another childhood friend was Mack McLarty, who would one day become White House Chief of Staff for Clinton. In 1950, Clinton's mother remarried and they relocated to a different part of Hope. By several accounts, Foster and Clinton attended Miss Marie Purkins' School for Little Folks together, a private kindergarten, although Foster was a year ahead in school. Then, around late 1952, the Clintons moved away to Hot Springs. However, Clinton would often return to visit his grandparents in Hope during summers, weekends, and holidays and he maintained connections with the people there.\nFoster excelled as a student and athlete. At Hope High School, he became president of the student council, with McLarty serving as vice president. He graduated from Hope High School in 1963.\nFoster attended Davidson College, graduating with a bachelor's degree in psychology in 1967. His father wanted him to join the family real estate business, but instead, he opted to attend law school.\nAfter starting at Vanderbilt University Law School, he joined the Arkansas National Guard during the height of the Vietnam War to avoid the military draft. To be closer to his guard responsibilities, he transferred to the University of Arkansas School of Law in Fayetteville, Arkansas, where he was managing editor of the law review. He received his Juris Doctor in 1971, graduating first in his class. He scored the highest in his class on the Arkansas bar exam.\nMarriage and family.\nFoster met Elizabeth Braden, known as Lisa, during his sophomore year at Davidson; she was the daughter of an insurance broker from Nashville and was attending Sweet Briar College. They married on April 20, 1968, at St. Henry Catholic Church in Nashville. They had three children: Vincent III, Laura, and John.\nCareer.\nLawyer in Arkansas.\nIn 1971, Foster joined Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, Arkansas, and in 1974 was made partner, one of only nine in the firm at the time. He was the head of the Arkansas Bar Association committee that oversaw legal aid, and as such worked with legal aid clinic worker Hillary Rodham in successfully overcoming an unreasonable measuring requirement for indigent clients. Foster then initiated the hiring of Rodham at Rose Law Firm, where she became its first ever female associate (and later first female partner); Foster and fellow partner Webster Hubbell were instrumental in overcoming the reluctance of other partners to hire a woman. The hiring occurred soon after Bill Clinton was elected attorney general of Arkansas, which led Clinton and Rodham to move from Fayetteville to Little Rock. Foster and Rodham worked together on a number of cases. And as Bill Clinton's political career gained force, Foster supported him. They were also personal friends and Foster was the one who taught their daughter Chelsea Clinton how to swim.\nFoster practiced mostly corporate law, eventually earning nearly $300,000 a year. Known for his extensive preparation of cases ahead of time, including the creation of decision trees, Foster developed a reputation as one of the best trial litigators in Arkansas. Hillary Rodham Clinton's memoir calls Foster \"one of the best lawyers I've ever known,\" and compared him in style and substance to Gregory Peck's portrayal of Atticus Finch in the classic 1962 film \"To Kill a Mockingbird\". In Bill Clinton's memoir, he characterizes Foster as \"a tall, handsome, wise, good man.\" Writer Carl Bernstein has described Foster as \"tall, with impeccable manners and a formal mien ... elegant in perfectly tailored suits, and soft-spoken to the point of taciturnity.\" Writer Dan Moldea characterized him as \"a 'can-do' lawyer who worked best when under pressure.\" Phillip Carroll, the leading litigator at Rose Law Firm, once said of Foster, \"He was my ideal of a young lawyer.\" The \"ABA Journal\" reported that Foster was \"acknowledged by many as the soul of the firm\".\nHe appeared to experience only success at Rose Law; a partner later said, \"I never saw a professional setback. Never. Not even a tiny one.\" The firm grew five times its size during his time there. The Arkansas Bar Association gave him a number of awards and in June 1993 would name him as its Outstanding Lawyer of the Year. He was also listed in the \"Best Lawyers in America\" book. His wife Lisa described him as driven to prevail, staying up around the clock to prepare for big cases, believing he would lose the case even though he rarely did; she later viewed this as an early sign of depressed behavior.\nBy 1992, Vince Foster was, as \"The Washington Post\" later wrote, at \"the pinnacle of the Arkansas legal establishment.\" He was also an established figure in Little Rock society, serving as the chair of the board of the Arkansas Repertory Theatre and belonging to the exclusive Country Club of Little Rock.\nWhite House counsel.\nAfter Clinton's 1992 election, Foster joined Clinton's presidential transition team. Once Clinton was inaugurated, Foster joined his White House staff as Deputy White House Counsel in early 1993. This was despite Foster's initial reluctance to leave his Little Rock life behind and come to Washington. There he worked under the White House Counsel, Bernard W. Nussbaum, although Nussbaum would consider the pair to be \"co-senior partners\". He was also joined with two other Rose Law Firm partners, William H. Kennedy, III, who served as his associate counsel, and Webster Hubbell, who became Associate Attorney General. The Foster residence was a small rented house in Georgetown in Washington, D.C.\nFoster had difficulty making the transition to life and politics in Washington. Unlike some other Clinton-associated figures, he had no experience with campaigns or electoral politics. His wife and youngest son were not with him, having stayed behind in Arkansas so the son could complete his senior year of high school at Catholic High in Little Rock. His initial role was in vetting potential administration appointees. As one subject of the vetting process later said, \"I wondered why I was being interviewed by the guy who would be deputy counsel. Seemed his job was to find out how honest I was, and what level of ego I was bringing. It's a measure of how much the Clintons trusted him.\" But Foster found this involvement in vetting appointments to be causing him depression and anxiety. In particular, he blamed himself for the failed Zo\u00eb Baird nomination; he had thought that Baird had been justified in following her lawyer's advice regarding the payment of taxes on household employees, but he had failed to anticipate the political backlash that led to it becoming known as \"Nannygate\" and that blemished the early days of the administration. The equally unsuccessful Kimba Wood and Lani Guinier appointments were also under Foster's purview. He had to resign from the Country Club of Little Rock once its all-white membership became a political issue for others in the administration.\nAs Deputy Counsel, Foster was also involved in a range of other matters, including preparation of executive orders, analyzing the legal effect of various policies, examining international treaties, discussing the ramifications of authorizations for use of military force, and authorizing expenditures within the White House. Foster worked on placing the Clintons' financial holdings into a blind trust.\nHe handled the Clintons' Madison Guaranty and Industrial Development Corporation paperwork and also several Whitewater-related tax returns. He worked twelve-hour days, six or seven days a week, and although thin to begin with, began losing weight.\nOn May 8, 1993, Foster gave the commencement address at the University of Arkansas Law School, his alma mater, and said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOne faculty member listening to it recalled telling another that it was \"the most depressing graduation speech I had ever heard, in both content and manner.\" A friend of Foster's has said, \"Look, it's just crazy, right? You get one dent and it can never be fixed? In Washington, you get them all the time. You get twenty dents and you go to the body shop. Vince couldn't see that, apparently.\"\nDepression and death.\nFour days after the commencement speech, the White House travel office controversy erupted.\nFoster was the target of several critical \"Wall Street Journal\" editorials in June and July 1993, with titles such as \"Who is Vincent Foster?\" He became quite upset over the travel office matter and the possibility of a congressional hearing at which he might have been called to testify. Disliking the public spotlight and having continued weight loss and insomnia, he considered resigning his position but feared a personal humiliation upon returning to Arkansas.\nStruggling with depression, which after his death was assessed as clinical depression, Foster was prescribed the anti-depressant medication trazodone over the phone by his Arkansas doctor, starting with a low initial dosage. The next day, Foster was found dead in Fort Marcy Park, a federal park in Virginia. He was 48\u00a0years old. An autopsy determined that he was shot in the mouth and no other wounds were found on his body.\nA draft resignation letter was found torn into 27 pieces in his briefcase. The letter contained a list of grievances, including, \"The WSJ editors lie without consequence\" and saying, \"I was not meant for the job or the spotlight of public life in Washington. Here ruining people is considered sport.\"\nHis funeral mass was held at the St. Andrew's Cathedral in Little Rock. Bill Clinton gave a eulogy in which he recalled their boyhood times together and quoted a line from Leon Russell's \"A Song for You\": \"I love you in a place that has no space and time.\"\nFoster was buried in Memory Gardens Cemetery in his hometown of Hope. Foster was survived by his wife and three children.\nSubsequent investigations.\nFive official or governmental investigations into Foster's death all concluded that he died of suicide.\nIn 2004, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously in \"National Archives and Records Administration v. Favish\" that the pictures of the scene and autopsy should not be released.\nLegacy.\nFoster's death, occurring just six months into the new administration, is thought by some to have ended the optimism and remaining innocence of the White House staff. White House chief of staff and childhood friend Mack McLarty said that \"It was a deep cut. It clearly had a tremendous impact.\" Nussbaum speculated that if Foster had lived, he would have helped resist the calls to appoint independent counsels and the many investigations lumped under the Whitewater umbrella that occupied the administration and Clinton for the rest of his presidency might not have happened. As it did happen, how Hillary Clinton's chief of staff, Maggie Williams, in particular handled Foster's files and documents immediately after his death became an issue of much investigation itself.\nYears later, Bill Clinton expressed his continued anger about the Foster rumors and theories, clenching a fist as he spoke: \"I heard a lot of the right-wing talk show people ... and all the sleazy stuff they said. They didn't give a rip that he had killed himself or that his family was miserable or that they could break the hearts [of Foster's friends and family]. It was just another weapon to slug us with, to dehumanize us with.\"\nFoster's death also had an effect on Rose Law Firm, as many within the firm had expected Foster to become its leader once he returned from service in Washington. As one partner later said, \"In meetings of the partners, he didn't often take a vocal stand. ... But when he did, it almost always swayed the firm. When he left for Washington, people here spoke openly about the emotional vacuum.\" Colleagues speculated that Foster might have someday become president of the state bar association or a choice for a federal judgeship.\nBeginning in 1993, the Vince Foster Jr. Outstanding Lawyer Award was given out annually by the Pulaski County Bar Association to recognize members who contributed to the bar and advanced the legal profession. An endowed chair at the University of Arkansas School of Law, the Vincent Foster University Professor of Legal Ethics and Professional Responsibility, was created in his name. In 2015 a holder of the chair, Howard W. Brill, was appointed Chief Justice of the Arkansas Supreme Court.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "32716", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32716", "title": "VBScript", "text": "COM-based Visual Basic scripting language\nVBScript (Microsoft Visual Basic Scripting Edition) is a deprecated programming language for scripting on Microsoft Windows using Component Object Model (COM), based on classic Visual Basic and Active Scripting. It was popular with system administrators for managing computers and automating many aspects of computing environments, and has been installed by default in every desktop release of Microsoft Windows since Windows 98; in Windows Server since Windows NT 4.0 Option Pack; and optionally with Windows CE (depending on the device it is installed on).\nVBScript running environments include: Windows Script Host (WSH), Internet Explorer (IE), and Internet Information Services (IIS). The running environment is embeddable in other programs via the Microsoft Script Control (msscript.ocx).\nIn October 2023, Microsoft announced that VBScript was deprecated. In May 2024, a multi-phase deprecation schedule was announced with disabling it by default \"around 2027\" and removing it sometime later.\nHistory.\nVBScript began as part of the Microsoft Windows Script Technologies, launched in 1996. This technology (which also included JScript) was initially targeted at web developers. During a period of just over two years, VBScript advanced from version 1.0 to 2.0, and over that time it gained support from Windows system administrators seeking an automation tool more powerful than the batch language first developed in the early 1980s. On August 1, 1996, Internet Explorer was released with features that included VBScript.\nIn version 5.0, the functionality of VBScript was increased with new features including regular expressions; classes; the \"With\" statement; the \"Eval\", \"Execute\", and \"ExecuteGlobal\" functions to evaluate and execute script commands built during the execution of another script; a function-pointer system via GetRef, and Distributed COM (DCOM) support.\nIn version 5.5, \"SubMatches\" were added to the \"regular expression\" class in VBScript, to finally allow script authors to capture the text within the expression's groups. That capability had already been available in JScript.\nWith the advent of the .NET Framework, the scripting team decided to implement future support for VBScript within ASP.NET for web development, and therefore no new versions of the VBScript engine would be developed. It would henceforth be supported by Microsoft's \"Sustaining Engineering Team\", who are responsible for bug fixes and security enhancements. After announcing plans to remove support for VBScript, Microsoft suggested migrating to Windows PowerShell or JavaScript.\nEnvironments.\nClient-side web.\nIn a web page loaded by Internet Explorer, VBScript is similar in function to JavaScript. The VBScript code in the HTML is logic that interacts with the Document Object Model (DOM) of the page \u2013 allowing for functionality not possible in HTML alone. However, other web browsers such as Chrome, Firefox and Opera do not support VBScript. Therefore, when client-side scripting and cross-browser compatibility are required, developers usually choose JavaScript due to its wide cross-browser compatibility.\nActive server page.\nVBScript is used for server-side web page functionality via Active Server Pages (ASP). The ASP engine, asp.dll, invokes vbscript.dll to run VBScript scripts. VBScript that is embedded in an ASP page is contained within &lt;% and %&gt; context switches. The following example displays the current time in 24-hour format.\n &lt;% Option Explicit %&gt;\n &lt;!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC \"-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN\" \"http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/loose.dtd\"&gt;\n &lt;html&gt;\n &lt;head&gt;\n &lt;title&gt;VBScript Example&lt;/title&gt;\n &lt;/head&gt;\n &lt;body&gt;\n &lt;div&gt;&lt;% \n ' Grab current time from Now() function.\n ' An '=' sign occurring after a context switch (&lt;%) is shorthand \n ' for a call to the Write() method of the Response object.\n Dim timeValue : timeValue = Now %&gt;\n The time, in 24-hour format, is \n &lt;%=Hour(timeValue)%&gt;:&lt;%=Minute(timeValue)%&gt;:&lt;%=Second(timeValue)%&gt;.\n &lt;/div&gt;\n &lt;/body&gt;\n &lt;/html&gt;\nWindows script host.\nVBScript can run directly in the operating system via the Windows Script Host (WSH). A script file, usually with extension codice_1 can be run either via Wscript.exe for graphical user interface (GUI) or Cscript.exe for command line interface (CLI).\nWindows script file.\nA Windows Script File (WSF), styled after XML, can include multiple VBS files and is therefore a library of VBScript code that can be reused in a modular way. The files have extension codice_2 and can be executed using wscript.exe or cscript.exe, as with a codice_1 file.\nHTML Application.\nAn HTML Application (HTA) is styled after HTML. The HTML in the file is used to generate the user interface, and a scripting language such as VBScript is used for the program logic. The files have extension codice_4 and can be executed using mshta.exe.\nWindows Script Component.\nVBScript can also be used in a Windows Script Component, an ActiveX-enabled script class that can be invoked by other COM-enabled applications. These files have extension .wsc.\nFunctionality.\nLanguage features.\nThe VBScript language is modeled on classic Visual Basic. Notable features include:\nA \"procedure\" is the main construct in VBScript for separating code into smaller modules. VBScript distinguishes between a function, which can return a result in an assignment statement, and a subroutine, which cannot. Parameters are positional, and can be passed by value or by reference.\nControl structures include the usual iterative and conditional Do Loops, If-Then-Else statements, and Case statements, with some more complex variants, such as ElseIf and nested control structures.\nAs a memory aid in coding, and certainly for readability, there are a large number of constants, such as and for logical values, and for codes, and for color values, vbCR for the carriage return character, and many others.\nVariables have \"Variant\" type by default, but it is possible (and sometimes necessary) to force a particular type (integer, date, etc.) using conversion functions (, , etc.)\nUser interaction is provided through the functions codice_5 and codice_6 which provide a simple dialogue box format for messages and input. Both functions display prompting messages, with the former returning a standard response, and the latter returning one user-supplied text or numeric value. For more elaborate GUI interaction with controls, VBScript can be used in combination with HTML, for example, in an HTML Application. Event-driven forms are not supported as in Visual Basic or Visual Basic for Applications.\nNames are not case-sensitive. However, it is considered a best practice of VBScript style to be consistent and to capitalize judiciously.\nVBScript functionalities.\nWhen hosted by the Windows Script Host, VBScript provides numerous features which are common to scripting languages, but not available from Visual Basic 6.0. These features include:\nCScript, the command line runner, provides options for:\nAdditional functionality.\nFile system management, file modification, and streaming text operations are implemented with the Scripting Runtime Library codice_7. This provides objects such as FileSystemObject, File, and TextStream, which expose the Windows file system to the programmer.\nBinary file and memory I/O are provided by the \"ADODB.Stream\" class, which can also be used for string builders (to avoid excessive string concatenation, which can be costly), and to interconvert byte arrays and strings. Database access is made possible through ActiveX Data Objects (ADO), and the IIS Metabase can be manipulated using the GetObject() function with sufficient permissions (useful for creating and destroying sites and virtual directories). XML files and schemas can be manipulated with the Microsoft XML Library Application Programming Interfaces (msxml6.dll, msxml3.dll), which also can be used to retrieve content from the World Wide Web via the XMLHTTP and ServerXMLHTTP objects (class strings \"MSXML2.XMLHTTP.6.0\" and \"MSXML2.ServerXMLHTTP.6.0\", respectively).\nFunctionality can also be added through ActiveX technologies. Security concerns have led to many ActiveX controls being blacklisted in the Internet Explorer process by Microsoft, which deploys the killbit via monthly Windows security updates to disable vulnerable Microsoft and third party code.\nProgrammers can utilize the extensibility via COM (ActiveX) modules to specifically equip the Script Host and VBScript with required or desired functions. The \"VTool\" component, for instance, adds a number of dialog windows, binary file access, and other functionality.\nDevelopment tools.\nMicrosoft does not routinely make available an IDE (Integrated Development Environment) for VBScript, although the Microsoft Script Editor has been bundled with certain versions of Microsoft Office.\nFor debugging purposes the Microsoft Script Debugger can still be used in current Windows versions, even though the tool has not been updated in years. It allows the user to set break points in the VBScript code but the user interface is more than clumsy.\nThere are VBScript debuggers available from third-party sources, and many text editors offer syntax highlighting for the language.\nDuring execution, when an error occurs, the script host issues a message stating the type of error and the number of the offending line.\nUses.\nAlthough VBScript is a general-purpose scripting language, several particular areas of use are noteworthy. First, it used to be widely used among system administrators in the Microsoft environment, but it has since been vastly surpassed by PowerShell. Second, VBScript is the scripting language for OpenText UFT One, a test automation tool. A third area to note is the adoption of VBScript as the internal scripting language for some embedded applications, such as industrial operator interfaces and human machine interfaces. The hierarchical DBMS InterSystems Cach\u00e9 (which has its roots in the language MUMPS) also supports an implementation of VBScript, Cache BASIC, for programming stored code.\nVBScript omits several useful features of the full Visual Basic, such as strong typing, extended error trapping and the ability to pass a variable number of parameters to a subroutine. However, its use is relatively widespread because it is easy to learn and because those who implement code in the language need not pay royalties to Microsoft as long as the VBScript trade mark is acknowledged. When an organization licenses Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) from Microsoft, as companies such as Autodesk, StatSoft, Great Plains Accounting and Visio (subsequently acquired by Microsoft) have done, it is allowed to redistribute the full VBA code-writing and debugging environment with its product.\nVBScript is used in place of VBA as the macro language of Outlook 97.\nVBScript can be effectively used for automating day to day office tasks as well as monitoring in the Windows-based environment. It can also be used in collaboration with ADODB ActiveX Data Objects (ADODB) for effective database connectivity.\nVBScript can also be used to create malware and viruses, such as the ILOVEYOU worm that spread through email attachment in Outlook 97 that cost billions of dollars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32717", "revid": "21096798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32717", "title": "Vintage dance", "text": "Vintage dance is the authentic recreation of historical dance styles.\nVintage dancing styles include jazz, swing, blues, disco, and breakdancing.\nSocieties.\nSeveral vintage dance societies hold balls and events to promote and teach vintage dances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32718", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32718", "title": "Condorcet paradox", "text": "Self-contradiction of majority rule\nIn social choice theory, Condorcet's voting paradox is a fundamental discovery by the Marquis de Condorcet that majority rule is inherently self-contradictory. The result implies that it is logically impossible for any voting system to guarantee that a winner will have support from a majority of voters; for example, there can be rock-paper-scissors scenarios where a majority of voters will prefer A to B, B to C, and also C to A, even if every voter's individual preferences are rational and avoid self-contradiction. Examples of Condorcet's paradox are called Condorcet cycles or cyclic ties.\nIn such a cycle, every possible choice is rejected by the electorate in favor of another alternative, who is preferred by more than half of all voters. Thus, any attempt to ground social decision-making in majoritarianism must accept such self-contradictions (commonly called spoiler effects). Systems that attempt to do so, while minimizing the rate of such self-contradictions, are called Condorcet methods.\nCondorcet's paradox is a special case of Arrow's paradox, which shows that \"any\" kind of social decision-making process is either self-contradictory, a dictatorship, or incorporates information about the strength of different voters' preferences (e.g. cardinal utility or rated voting).\nHistory.\nCondorcet's paradox was first discovered by Catalan philosopher and theologian Ramon Llull in the 13th century, during his investigations into church governance, but his work was lost until the 21st century. The mathematician and political philosopher Marquis de Condorcet rediscovered the paradox in the late 18th century.\nCondorcet's discovery means he arguably identified the key result of Arrow's impossibility theorem, albeit under stronger conditions than required by Arrow: Condorcet cycles create situations where any ranked voting system that respects majorities must have a spoiler effect.\nExample.\nSuppose we have three candidates, A, B, and C, and that there are three voters with preferences as follows:\nIf C is chosen as the winner, it can be argued that B should win instead, since two voters (1 and 2) prefer B to C and only one voter (3) prefers C to B. However, by the same argument A is preferred to B, and C is preferred to A, by a margin of two to one on each occasion. Thus the society's preferences show cycling: A is preferred over B which is preferred over C which is preferred over A.\nAs a result, any attempt to appeal to the principle of majority rule will lead to logical self-contradiction. Regardless of which alternative we select, we can find another alternative that would be preferred by most voters.\nPractical scenario.\nThe voters in Cactus County prefer the incumbent county executive Alex of the Farmers' Party over rival Beatrice of the Solar Panel Party by about a 2-to-1 margin. This year a third candidate, Charlie, is running as an independent. Charlie is a wealthy and outspoken businessman, of whom the voters hold polarized views.\nThe voters divide into three groups:\nTherefore a majority of voters prefer Alex to Beatrice (A &gt; B), as they always have. A majority of voters are either Beatrice-lovers or Charlie-haters, so prefer Beatrice to Charlie (B &gt; C). And a majority of voters are either Charlie-lovers or Alex-haters, so prefer Charlie to Alex (C &gt; A). Combining the three preferences gives us A &gt; B &gt; C &gt; A, a Condorcet cycle.\nLikelihood.\nIt is possible to estimate the probability of the paradox by extrapolating from real election data, or using mathematical models of voter behavior, though the results depend strongly on which model is used.\nImpartial culture model.\nWe can calculate the probability of seeing the paradox for the special case where voter preferences are uniformly distributed among the candidates. (This is the \"impartial culture\" model, which is known to be a \"worst-case scenario\"\u2014most models show substantially lower probabilities of Condorcet cycles.)\nFor formula_1 voters providing a preference list of three candidates A, B, C, we write formula_2 (resp. formula_3, formula_4) the random variable equal to the number of voters who placed A in front of B (respectively B in front of C, C in front of A). The sought probability is formula_5 (we double because there is also the symmetric case A&gt; C&gt; B&gt; A). We show that, for odd formula_1, formula_7 where formula_8 which makes one need to know only the joint distribution of formula_2 and formula_3.\nIf we put formula_11, we show the relation which makes it possible to compute this distribution by recurrence: formula_12.\nThe following results are then obtained:\nThe sequence seems to be tending towards a finite limit.\nUsing the central limit theorem, we show that formula_13 tends to formula_14 where formula_15 is a variable following a Cauchy distribution, which gives formula_16 (constant ).\nThe asymptotic probability of encountering the Condorcet paradox is therefore formula_17 which gives the value 8.77%.\nSome results for the case of more than three candidates have been calculated and simulated. The simulated likelihood for an impartial culture model with 25 voters increases with the number of candidates:28\nThe likelihood of a Condorcet cycle for related models approach these values for three-candidate elections with large electorates:\nAll of these models are unrealistic, but can be investigated to establish an upper bound on the likelihood of a cycle.\nGroup coherence models.\nWhen modeled with more realistic voter preferences, Condorcet paradoxes in elections with a small number of candidates and a large number of voters become very rare.\nSpatial model.\nA study of three-candidate elections analyzed 12 different models of voter behavior, and found the spatial model of voting to be the most accurate to real-world ranked-ballot election data. Analyzing this spatial model, they found the likelihood of a cycle to decrease to zero as the number of voters increases, with likelihoods of 5% for 100 voters, 0.5% for 1000 voters, and 0.06% for 10,000 voters.\nAnother spatial model found likelihoods of 2% or less in all simulations of 201 voters and 5 candidates, whether two or four-dimensional, with or without correlation between dimensions, and with two different dispersions of candidates.31\nEmpirical studies.\nMany attempts have been made at finding empirical examples of the paradox. Empirical identification of a Condorcet paradox presupposes extensive data on the decision-makers' preferences over all alternatives\u2014something that is only very rarely available.\nWhile examples of the paradox seem to occur occasionally in small settings (e.g., parliaments) very few examples have been found in larger groups (e.g. electorates), although some have been identified.\nA summary of 37 individual studies, covering a total of 265 real-world elections, large and small, found 25 instances of a Condorcet paradox, for a total likelihood of 9.4% (and this may be a high estimate, since cases of the paradox are more likely to be reported on than cases without).\nAn analysis of 883 three-candidate elections extracted from 84 real-world ranked-ballot elections of the Electoral Reform Society found a Condorcet cycle likelihood of 0.7%. These derived elections had between 350 and 1,957 voters. A similar analysis of data from the 1970\u20132004 American National Election Studies thermometer scale surveys found a Condorcet cycle likelihood of 0.4%. These derived elections had between 759 and 2,521 \"voters\".\nAndrew Myers, who operates the Condorcet Internet Voting Service, analyzed 10,354 nonpolitical CIVS elections and found cycles in 17% of elections with at least 10 votes, with the figure dropping to 2.1% for elections with at least 100 votes, and 1.2% for \u2265300 votes.\nReal world instances.\nA database of 189 ranked United States elections from 2004 to 2022 contained only one Condorcet cycle: the 2021 Minneapolis City Council election in Ward 2, with a narrow circular tie between candidates of the Green Party (Cam Gordon), the Minnesota Democratic\u2013Farmer\u2013Labor Party (Yusra Arab), and an independent democratic socialist (Robin Wonsley). Voters' preferences were non-transitive: Arab was preferred over Gordon, Gordon over Wonsley, and Wonsley over Arab, creating a cyclical pattern with no clear winner. Additionally, the election exhibited a downward monotonicity paradox, as well as a paradox akin to Simpson\u2019s paradox.\nA second instance of a Condorcet cycle was found in the 2022 District 4 School Director election in Oakland, CA. Manigo was preferred to Hutchinson, Hutchinson to Resnick, and Resnick to Manigo. Like in Minneapolis, the margins were quite narrow: for instance, 11370 voters preferred Manigo to Hutchinson while 11322 preferred Hutchinson to Manigo.\nAnother instance of a Condorcet cycle was with the seat of Prahran in the 2014 Victorian state election, with a narrow circular tie between the Greens, Liberal, and Labor candidates. The Greens candidate, who was initially third on primary votes, defeated the Liberal candidate by less than 300 votes. However, if the contest had been between Labor and Liberal, the Liberal candidate would have won by 25 votes. While a Greens vs Labor count was not conducted, Liberal preferences tend to flow more towards Labor than Greens in other cases (including in the seat of Richmond in the same election), meaning that Labor would have very likely been preferred to the Greens. This means there was a circular pattern, with the Greens preferred over Liberal, who were preferred over Labor, who were preferred over the Greens.\nImplications.\nWhen a Condorcet method is used to determine an election, the voting paradox of cyclical societal preferences implies that the election has no Condorcet winner: no candidate who can win a one-on-one election against each other candidate. There will still be a smallest group of candidates, known as the Smith set, such that each candidate in the group can win a one-on-one election against each of the candidates outside the group. The several variants of the Condorcet method differ on how they resolve such ambiguities when they arise to determine a winner. The Condorcet methods which always elect someone from the Smith set when there is no Condorcet winner are known as Smith-efficient. Note that using only rankings, there is no fair and deterministic resolution to the trivial example given earlier because each candidate is in an exactly symmetrical situation.\nSituations having the voting paradox can cause voting mechanisms to violate the axiom of independence of irrelevant alternatives\u2014the choice of winner by a voting mechanism could be influenced by whether or not a losing candidate is available to be voted for.\nTwo-stage voting processes.\nOne important implication of the possible existence of the voting paradox in a practical situation is that in a paired voting process like those of standard parliamentary procedure, the eventual winner will depend on the way the majority votes are ordered. For example, say a popular bill is set to pass, before some other group offers an amendment; this amendment passes by majority vote. This may result in a majority of a legislature rejecting the bill as a whole, thus creating a paradox (where a popular amendment to a popular bill has made it unpopular). This logical inconsistency is the origin of the poison pill amendment, which deliberately engineers a false Condorcet cycle to kill a bill. Likewise, the order of votes in a legislature can be manipulated by the person arranging them to ensure their preferred outcome wins.\nDespite frequent objections by social choice theorists about the logically incoherent results of such procedures, and the existence of better alternatives for choosing between multiple versions of a bill, the procedure of pairwise majority-rule is widely-used and is codified into the by-laws or parliamentary procedures of almost every kind of deliberative assembly.\nSpoiler effects.\nCondorcet paradoxes imply that majoritarian methods fail independence of irrelevant alternatives. Label the three candidates in a race \"Rock\", \"Paper\", and \"Scissors\". In one-on-one races, Rock loses to Paper, Paper loses to Scissors, and Scissors loses to Rock. \nWithout loss of generality, say that Rock wins the election with a certain method. Then, Scissors is a spoiler candidate for Paper; if Scissors were to drop out, Paper would win the only one-on-one race (Paper defeats Rock). The same reasoning applies regardless of the winner.\nThis example also shows why Condorcet elections are rarely (if ever) spoiled; spoilers can \"only\" happen when there is no Condorcet winner. Condorcet cycles are rare in large elections, and the median voter theorem shows that cycles are impossible whenever candidates are arrayed on a left-right spectrum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32720", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32720", "title": "Vertiport (eVTOL)", "text": ""}
{"id": "32722", "revid": "50655915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32722", "title": "Virtua Fighter (video game)", "text": "1993 video game\n is a 1993 fighting game developed and published by Sega for arcades. It was developed for the Sega Model 1 arcade platform by AM2, a development group within Sega headed by Yu Suzuki. An early prototype version was location tested in Japan by August 1993, before the complete game was released worldwide in December 1993. It was the first arcade fighting game to feature fully 3D polygon graphics. The game was ported to Sega Saturn as a global launch title in 1994 and 1995, and also received a port to the Sega 32X.\nThe game was critically acclaimed and a major hit, becoming one of Sega's best-selling arcade games of all time with more than 40,000 arcade units sold while the Saturn versions sold over 1 million copies. \"Virtua Fighter\" was highly regarded for its in-depth 3D fighting engine and real-world fighting techniques, and has been revolutionary and highly influential in the evolution of the genre and video games in general. Its success led to the \"Virtua Fighter\" series, with its sequel \"Virtua Fighter 2\" released in 1994.\nIn 1995, an update titled Virtua Fighter Remix was developed and released by AM1, featuring drastic graphical improvements. This improved version was quickly ported to the Saturn console and later received a port to Windows. The game's remake, Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary, was released for the PlayStation 2 in 2003 as a standalone title in Japan and as a bonus in \"\" in North America.\nGameplay.\nThe \"Virtua\" label indicates that the onscreen action takes place in a 3D environment; however, movement is restricted to 2D. The graphics were made using wireframe and flat-shaded quad polygons. The game retains the fighting game staple of having multiple characters, each with their own distinctive moves.\nIn the game's single-player mode, the player faces all eight characters (including a duplicate of the chosen character) in a pre-determined order, followed by a fight with the game's boss, Dural. Each fight is a best-of-three match, and the player has three ways of winning: knocking out the opponent, forcing them out of the ring, or having more health left when time runs out.\nUnlike other fighting games of the early 1990s (such as \"Street Fighter II\" or \"Mortal Kombat\"), the game relies on a control stick and only three buttons, punch, kick and guard (block), although different situations and button combinations led to a vast variety of moves for each character. \nPlot.\nCharacters.\nAn Arab fighter named Majido \"Siba\" Abdul was planned, and his character model appeared on some \"Virtua Fighter\" arcade cabinets (though, in some cases, Akira's name was placed under his portrait). Siba was originally to be the protagonist of the franchise. He was ultimately dropped, but later appeared in \"Fighters Megamix\". Two other characters were also discovered. One was an early design of Akira Yuki, under an early name Takeru Ryushoji, who was shirtless and wore pants and shoes. The other was a military man named Jeffery \"Jeff\" Buckman., other fighters in the game that were planned to appear were the Koskol brothers Rekka (the eldest) Score (the middle) and Aeon (the youngest), these 6 fighters were part of an organization known as the \"Red Scorpions\", but was later scrapped.\nStory.\nOnce in the Sh\u014dwa period, the defunct Japanese army intended to approach Puyi, the last Emperor of the Qing Dynasty in their effort to take advantages. However, they were defeated by the Imperial guards who used the martial art called Hakkyoku-ken. During World War II, the Japanese army research the mysteries of Hakkyoku-ken to create supersoldiers, developing the ultimate martial art.\nApproximately half a century has passed since then, the ultimate World Fighting Tournament is about to start, and all kinds of fighters from around the world engage to determine the world's best. Behind the Tournament, however, there exists an intrigue designed by a sinister syndicate.\nDevelopment and release.\n\"Virtua Fighter\".\nThe game's development began in 1992, following the development of \"Virtua Racing\". \"Virtua Fighter\" was developed to run on Sega Model 1 arcade hardware, developed internally at Sega. According to Sega of Japan's publicity manager, Kurokawa, \"We deliberately didn't publicize all the [fighting] moves at the same time but instead revealed them to gamers one at a time by means of the Japanese videogame press.\" \"Virtua Fighter\" also used 3D motion capture technology. Before \"Virtua Fighter\", Sega AM3 simulated 3D using a creative method of sprite scaling on the 1993 arcade fighting game \"Dark Edge\".\nAccording to Suzuki, an issue during the game's development was performing fast division calculations for 3D operations. The only applications he was aware of performing fast enough divisions at the time were nuclear reactors and space rockets. The team \"were working away with craftsmanship equivalent to inscribing 100 words on a single grain of rice\" to achieve fast 3D division operations, according to Suzuki.\nAn early prototype version of the arcade game featured an Arab fighter called Siba. This early version did not have Akira Yuki, who was added later in development as a replacement for Siba, with Akira becoming the game's protagonist. This early prototype version was location tested in Japan and then demonstrated at the Amusement Machine Show (AM Show) in August 1993.\n\"Virtua Fighter\" was a launch game for the Sega Saturn, and served as the pack-in launch game in North America. Its Sega 32X version was developed by the same team responsible for the Genesis port of \"Virtua Racing\".\n\"Virtua Fighter Remix\".\n\"Virtua Fighter Remix\" was an update of the original \"Virtua Fighter\" with higher-polygon models, texture mapping, and some gameplay changes. It was given free to all registered Saturn owners in the United States via mail. It had an arcade release on the ST-V (an arcade platform based on the Sega Saturn) and later ported to Microsoft Windows as \"Virtua Fighter PC\". In Japan, \"Game Machine\" listed it on their August 1, 1995, issue as being the twenty-first most-successful arcade game of the month.\n\"Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary\".\nWith the 2003 PlayStation 2 release of \"Virtua Fighter 4: Evolution\" arriving in time for the series' tenth anniversary, a remake of \"Virtua Fighter\", \"Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary\", was released on the PlayStation 2. While the music, stages and low-polygon visual style were retained from the first game, the character roster, animations, mechanics and movesets were taken from \"Evolution\". In the previous PS2 release of \"Virtua Fighter 4\", a button code would make the player's character look like a \"Virtua Fighter\" model. In Japan, the game was included as part of a box set with a book called \"Virtua Fighter 10th Anniversary: Memory of a Decade\" and a DVD. The box set was released in November 2003 and was published by Enterbrain. In North America, the game was included in the home version of \"Virtua Fighter 4: Evolution\", and in Europe it was only available as a promotional item; it was not sold at retail.\nReception.\nArcade.\nSega began location testing an early prototype version in Japan prior to the game's demonstration at the Amusement Machine Show (AM Show) in August 1993. Sega reported it to be their highest-earning location test performance of all time, with each test machine earning a daily average of \u00a5 or $. At the 1993 AM Show, it was rated the \"hit of the show\" by many visitors.\nUpon the game's release in Japan, \"Game Machine\" listed \"Virtua Fighter\" as the country's most popular upright/cockpit arcade game of December 1993. It went on to become Japan's highest-grossing arcade game of 1994, and one of the country's highest-grossing arcade games of all time. According to \"Next Generation\" magazine in 1995, \"Virtua Fighter\" was \"the biggest game in Japan since \"Super Mario World\".\" In North America, \"RePlay\" reported \"Virtua Fighter\" to be the sixth most popular upright arcade game of February 1994; it went on to be one of America's top five highest-grossing arcade games of 1994. In the United Kingdom, it was the second top-grossing arcade game in London during early 1994 (below \"Ridge Racer\"), and went on to be one of the most popular coin-ops of the year.\n\"Virtua Fighter\" sold more than 40,000 arcade units worldwide by 1996, with each unit costing between $ and \u00a314,000 / $. \"Virtua Fighter\" and \"Virtua Fighter 2\" (1994) became Sega's best-selling arcade games of all time, surpassing their previous record holder \"Out Run\" (1986).\nFollowing its demonstration at the 1993 AM Show, \"Virtua Fighter\" received a positive industry reception. \"RePlay\" magazine called \"the adaptation of 3-D polygon graphics to video fighting games\" a \"sensational development that could define and revitalize this already-hot category.\" California Games CEO Pat Schroeder said \"Virtua Fighter\" \"was by far the dawn of a new era of games\" with praise for the \"computerized 3-D graphics with effects that are unreal\" and how it \"shows the fighting action\" from different angles. \"Edge\" magazine called \"Virtua Fighter\" \"a tantalising glimpse into the future of fighting games employing the same ground-breaking CG computer graphics system as \"Virtua Racing\".\" While criticizing the appearance of the \"excessively blocky polygonised people,\" \"Edge\" said \"the 3D scrolling, animation and movement are all silky-smooth and very realistic\" and that \"the fluid animation and imaginative camera angles quickly won the audience over.\" \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" hailed \"Virtua Fighter\" as a demonstration of \"just how far video games have come in the last eight years.\" \"EGM\" made particular note of the advanced graphics, how the camera moves along different axes depending on the fighters' location, the use of multiple viewpoints in the instant replay, the high quality of the gameplay, and the smoothness and realism of the animation.\nIn January 1994, Rik Skews of \"Computer and Video Games\" magazine, after playing for 1 hour, initially praised the \"brilliant 64-bit\" 3D graphics, animation and camera work but compared the gameplay unfavorably to \"Street Fighter II\". \"Computer and Video Games\" was later more positive towards the gameplay, stating in December 1994 that the game \"combined cutting edge arcade technology with motion capture techniques and some excellent gameplay design.\" \"Next Generation\" said in 1995 that it epitomized Yu Suzuki's \"skill of finding the perfect blend of state-of-the-art technology with solid gameplay\" in \"the cut-throat world\" of arcades.\nPorts.\nThe console port of \"Virtua Fighter\", which was very close to the arcade game, sold at a nearly 1:1 ratio with the Saturn hardware during the Japanese launch. The Future Publishing magazine \"Ultimate Future Games\" called \"Virtua Fighter\" the \"game that killed\" the 16-bit machines. The Saturn version sold 630,000 units in Japan, while \"Remix\" sold a further 437,036 units there in 1995, for a combined total of 1,067,036 units sold for the Saturn in Japan.\nOn release of the Saturn version, \"Sega Saturn Ts\u016bshin\" scored the game a 38 out of 40. \"Famicom Ts\u016bshin\"'s four critics would each score the same version a nine out of ten rating in December 1994. \"Computer and Video Games\" reviewed a Japanese import in December 1994, stating \"the last machine to generate so much interest in this office was the arrival of\" the Super Famicom with \"Super Mario World\". Steve James praised the \"superlative\" moves, \"amazingly crisp\" sound samples, and \"totally realistic\" action; Mark Patterson, while criticizing the high UK import price of \u00a3 ($), concluded with \"credit to Sega for producing an excellent machine, and even more to AM2 for its near-perfect conversion of this fantastic game.\" In a review of the Japanese release, \"GamePro\" praised the retention of the fighters, moves, varying camera angles, and controls of the arcade version, as well as the improved voice and sound effects and home version options, and concluded it to be \"one of the best games ever bundled with a system\". Their later review of the North American release was similarly laudatory, but remarked that \"Tekken\" and \"Battle Arena Toshinden\" for the soon-to-launch PlayStation were even better. \"Next Generation\", which also reviewed the game prior to the Saturn's USA launch, disagreed, contending that \"What \"Virtua Fighter\" lacks in \"[Battle Arena] Tohshinden\"'s immediate graphical punch, it makes up for in grinding longevity.\" They particularly praised the game's depth and realism, and summarized that \"The Saturn \"Virtua Fighter\" is, to all intents and purposes, the coin-op game brought home. And away from the arcade, under the harsh light of unhurried examination, its merits grow.\"\n\"Maximum\" gave it five out of five stars, calling it \"a stunningly close conversion that is quite possibly the best game available for the machine.\" They remarked that the innovations such as the 3D motion capture remained impressive, as well as the depth and variety of the character's gameplay application: \"every fighter has almost limitless scope for coming up with all-new attacks.\" They also praised the \"very clever mixture of superbly exaggerated sound effects coupled with a tangible, realistic impact for every blow.\" \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" were more subdued in their reaction, but two of their four reviewers commented that it was nearly identical to the arcade version. They scored it 31.5 out of 40 (average 7.875 out of 10). \"Edge\" rated the Saturn version 9/10, stating: \"Saturn \"Virtua Fighter\" has all the pulling power of the arcade version, including the swooping, gliding game camera, the stylish polygon characters, the totally convincing animation and the compulsive gameplay\u00a0... [The graphics] were impressive enough in the original, but on the Saturn, under the kind of intense scrutiny you can never give a game in the arcades, they emerge as simply astounding\u00a0... It's arguably the first true 'next generation' console game, fusing the best aspects of combat gameplay with groundbreaking animation and gorgeous sound\".\n\"Sega Saturn Magazine\" gave \"Virtua Fighter Remix\" five out of five stars, saying that it fixed the glitches and graphics of the original game while maintaining the already excellent gameplay. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" scored \"Remix\" 29 out of 40 (average 7.25 out of 10). The reviewers praised all the game's improvements, but most of them concluded that it was still not worth buying for players who already owned the original game. \"Maximum\" likewise praised the quality of the game and its low price tag, but felt it was not worth buying, with the release of the even better Saturn conversion of \"Virtua Fighter 2\" less than a month away. They scored it four out of five stars. The staff of \"Next Generation\" gave it five out of five stars, applauding the graphical improvements and glitch fixes. They commented: \"Perhaps never in videogame history has a problem such as \"Virtua Fighter\" been so quickly and thoroughly corrected. \"Virtua Fighter Remix\" contains all the great gameplay of the original without any of the weak spots.\" Scary Larry of \"GamePro\" gave the game a highly positive review for its graphical enhancements and retention of all the excellent gameplay of the original Saturn version. \"GamePro\" also ran two reader-submitted reviews for the game; King Kane argued that the graphical and audio improvements make the game worth trying even for those who are not fans of \"Virtua Fighter\", while Tricky Ricky argued that though the game is an impressive upgrade, the lack of changes to the gameplay make its appeal quickly fade. \"Famicom Ts\u016bshin\" scored \"Virtua Fighter Remix\" a 35 out of 40, and the Sega 32X version of the game a 30 out of 40. \"Next Generation\" reviewed the arcade version of the game, and stated that \"The drawback of all Titan games, including \"Remix\", is that the technology isn't as advanced, fast, or powerful as Model 2B [...] and these games are really like playing fast Saturn games in the arcade.\"\n\"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" scored the 32X version 30.5 out of 40 (average 7.625 out of 10), calling it an excellent conversion given the system it's on, but dated next to the graphically superior Saturn version and especially \"Virtua Fighter Remix\", both of which had already been released. \"GamePro\" also noted that the 32X version suffers from more slowdown and fewer polygons than the Saturn version, as well as \"tinny sound quality\", but praised the additional options not included in the Saturn version and rated it as an overall strong port. A critic for \"Next Generation\" similarly said that the 32X version is not as impressive looking as the Saturn version but has more options and fewer glitches, making it an overall excellent port. He argued that the game was not worth buying a 32X for, since the system was not powerful enough to handle ports of \"Virtua Fighter Remix\" or \"Virtua Fighter 2\" (which was soon to be released for the Saturn), but that it was an essential purchase for those who already own a 32X.\nIn 1995, \"Flux\" rated the arcade version 16th in its Top 100 Video Games. At the time, they called \"Virtua Fighter\": \"The most satisfying fighter in existence.\" In 1996, \"Computer Gaming World\" declared \"Virtua Fighter PC\" the 121st-best computer game ever released. In 1996, \"GamesMaster\" ranked \"Virtua Fighter\" eighth on their \"The GamesMaster Saturn Top 10.\"\nLegacy and impact.\n\"Virtua Fighter\" dispensed with sprite-based graphics, replacing them with flat-shaded polygons rendered in real-time, by the Model 1's 3D-rendering hardware, allowing for effects and technologies that were impossible in sprite-based fighters, such as characters that could move in three dimensions, and a dynamic camera that could zoom, pan and swoop dramatically around the arena. It has been credited with both introducing and popularizing the use of polygon-based 3D graphics in fighting games. \"Next Generation\" said in 1995 that \"Virtua Fighter\" was \"arguably the most significant game\" of the 1990s. \"1UP\" listed it as one of the 50 most important games of all time. They credited \"Virtua Fighter\" for creating the 3D fighting game genre, and more generally, demonstrating the potential of 3D polygon human characters (as the first to implement them in a useful way), showing the potential of realistic gameplay (introducing a character physics system and realistic character animations), and introducing fighting game concepts such as the ring-out and the block button.\nAt a time when fighting games were becoming increasingly focused on violence and shock value, the popularity of \"Virtua Fighter\" demonstrated that fighting games focused on gameplay were still commercially viable. Nintendo's Shigeru Miyamoto said that for several years after \"Virtua Fighter\" was released he was disinterested in making fighting games because he felt that \"I was beaten to the punch when \"Virtua Fighter\" came out\", and that any fighting game he produced would have been perceived as an attempt to copy \"Virtua Fighter\". Game designer Yasuyuki Oda remarked that he was impressed by this video game while working for SNK. In particular, \"Virtua Fighter\" garnered praise for its simple three-button control scheme, with the game's strategy coming from the intuitively observed differences between characters that felt and acted differently rather than the more ornate combos of two-dimensional competitors. \"Virtua Fighter\"'s fluid animation and relatively realistic depiction of distinct fighting styles gave its combatants a lifelike presence considered impossible to replicate with sprites.\n\"Virtua Fighter\" played a crucial role in popularizing 3D polygonal graphics. Some of the Sony Computer Entertainment (SCE) staff involved in the creation of the original PlayStation video game console credit \"Virtua Fighter\" as inspiration for the PlayStation's 3D graphics hardware. According to SCE's former producer Ryoji Akagawa and chairman Shigeo Maruyama, the PlayStation was originally being considered as a 2D focused hardware, and it was not until the success of \"Virtua Fighter\" in the arcades that they decided to design the PlayStation as a 3D focused hardware. Toby Gard also cited \"Virtua Fighter\" as an influence on the use of polygon characters\u2014and the creation of Lara Croft\u2014in \"Tomb Raider\": \"It became clear to me watching people play \"Virtua Fighter\", which was kind of the first big 3D-character console game, that even though there were only two female characters in the lineup, in almost every game I saw being played, someone was picking one of the two females.\" John Romero also cited \"Virtua Fighter\" as a major influence on the creation of 3D first-person shooter \"Quake\". Team Ico's Fumito Ueda also cited \"Virtua Fighter\" as an influence on his animation work.\nSee also.\nOther early 3D fighters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32723", "revid": "43283345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32723", "title": "Vernon Green", "text": "American musician\nVernon Green (May 1, 1937 \u2013 December 24, 2000) was the American leader of the rhythm and blues band The Medallions. He wrote the 1954 song \"The Letter\", which contained the nonsense lyric \"the puppetutes of love.\" According to an interview with Green, puppetutes was \"A term I coined to mean a secret paper-doll fantasy figure [thus puppet], who would be my everything and bear my children.\"\nGreen died on December 24, 2000, in Los Angeles, California, from complications of a stroke he suffered earlier that year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "32725", "revid": "336707508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32725", "title": "Vestigial-sideband modulation", "text": ""}
