{"id": "15942", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15942", "title": "John von Neumann", "text": "Hungarian and American mathematician and physicist (1903\u20131957)\nJohn von Neumann ( ; ; December 28, 1903\u00a0\u2013 February\u00a08, 1957) was a Hungarian and American mathematician, physicist, computer scientist and engineer. Von Neumann had perhaps the widest coverage of any mathematician of his time, integrating pure and applied sciences and making major contributions to many fields, including mathematics, physics, economics, computing, and statistics. He was a pioneer in building the mathematical framework of quantum physics, in the development of functional analysis, and in game theory, introducing or codifying concepts including cellular automata, the universal constructor and the digital computer. His analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA.\nDuring World War II, von Neumann worked on the Manhattan Project. He developed the mathematical models behind the explosive lenses used in the implosion-type nuclear weapon. Before and after the war, he consulted for many organizations including the Office of Scientific Research and Development, the Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project and the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. At the peak of his influence in the 1950s, he chaired a number of Defense Department committees including the Strategic Missile Evaluation Committee and the ICBM Scientific Advisory Committee. He was also a member of the influential Atomic Energy Commission in charge of all atomic energy development in the country. He played a key role alongside Bernard Schriever and Trevor Gardner in the design and development of the United States' first ICBM programs. At that time he was considered the nation's foremost expert on nuclear weaponry and the leading defense scientist at the U.S. Department of Defense.\nVon Neumann's contributions and intellectual ability drew praise from colleagues in physics, mathematics, and beyond. His accolades include a Medal of Freedom and a crater on the Moon named in his honor.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife and education.\nFamily background.\nVon Neumann was born in Budapest, Kingdom of Hungary (then part of Austria-Hungary), on December 28, 1903, to a wealthy, non-observant Jewish family. His birth name was Neumann J\u00e1nos Lajos. In Hungarian, the family name comes first, and his given names are equivalent to John Louis in English.\nHe was the eldest of three brothers; his two younger siblings were Mih\u00e1ly (Michael) and Mikl\u00f3s (Nicholas). His father Neumann Miksa (Max von Neumann) was a banker and held a doctorate in law. He had moved to Budapest from P\u00e9cs at the end of the 1880s. Miksa's father and grandfather were born in Ond (now part of Szerencs), Zempl\u00e9n County, northern Hungary. John's mother was Kann Margit (Margaret Kann); her parents were Kann J\u00e1kab and Meisels Katalin of the Meisels family. Three generations of the Kann family lived in spacious apartments above the Kann-Heller offices in Budapest; von Neumann's family occupied an 18-room apartment on the top floor.\nOn February 20, 1913, Emperor Franz Joseph elevated John's father to the Hungarian nobility for his service to the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The Neumann family thus acquired the hereditary appellation \"Margittai\", meaning \"of Margitta\" (today Marghita, Romania). The family had no connection with the town; the appellation was chosen in reference to Margaret, as was their chosen coat of arms depicting three marguerites. Neumann J\u00e1nos became margittai Neumann J\u00e1nos (John Neumann de Margitta), which he later changed to the German Johann von Neumann.\nChild prodigy.\nVon Neumann was a child prodigy. He, his brothers and his cousins were instructed by governesses. Von Neumann's father believed that knowledge of languages other than their native Hungarian was essential, so the children were tutored in English, French, German and Italian. According to a legend, by age eight, von Neumann was familiar with differential and integral calculus, and by twelve he had read Borel's \"La Th\u00e9orie des Fonctions\". He was also interested in history, reading Wilhelm Oncken's 46-volume world history series (\"General History in Monographs\"). One of the rooms in the apartment was converted into a library and reading room.\nVon Neumann entered the Lutheran Fasori Evang\u00e9likus Gimn\u00e1zium in 1914. Eugene Wigner was a year ahead of von Neumann at the school and soon became his friend.\nAlthough von Neumann's father insisted that he attend school at the grade level appropriate to his age, he agreed to hire private tutors to give von Neumann advanced instruction. At 15, he began to study advanced calculus under the analyst G\u00e1bor Szeg\u0151. On their first meeting, Szeg\u0151 was so astounded by von Neumann's mathematical talent and speed that, as recalled by his wife, he came back home with tears in his eyes. By 19, von Neumann had published two major mathematical papers, the second of which gave the modern definition of ordinal numbers, which superseded Georg Cantor's definition. At the conclusion of his education at the gymnasium, he applied for and won the E\u00f6tv\u00f6s Prize, a national award for mathematics.\nUniversity studies.\nAccording to his friend Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n, von Neumann's father wanted John to follow him into industry, and asked von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n to persuade his son not to take mathematics. Von Neumann and his father decided that the best career path was chemical engineering. This was not something that von Neumann had much knowledge of, so it was arranged for him to take a two-year, non-degree course in chemistry at the University of Berlin, after which he sat for the entrance exam to ETH Zurich, which he passed in September 1923. Simultaneously von Neumann entered P\u00e1zm\u00e1ny P\u00e9ter University, then known as the University of Budapest, as a Ph.D. candidate in mathematics. For his thesis, he produced an axiomatization of Cantor's set theory. In 1926, he graduated as a chemical engineer from ETH Zurich and simultaneously passed his final examinations \"summa cum laude\" for his Ph.D. in mathematics (with minors in experimental physics and chemistry) at the University of Budapest.\nHe then went to the University of G\u00f6ttingen on a grant from the Rockefeller Foundation to study mathematics under David Hilbert. Hermann Weyl remembers how in the winter of 1926\u20131927 von Neumann, Emmy Noether, and he would walk through \"the cold, wet, rain-wet streets of G\u00f6ttingen\" after class discussing hypercomplex number systems and their representations.\nCareer and private life.\nVon Neumann's habilitation was completed on December 13, 1927, and he began to give lectures as a \"Privatdozent\" at the University of Berlin in 1928. He was the youngest person elected \"Privatdozent\" in the university's history. He began writing nearly one major mathematics paper per month. In 1929, he briefly became a \"Privatdozent\" at the University of Hamburg, where the prospects of becoming a tenured professor were better, then in October of that year moved to Princeton University as a visiting lecturer in mathematical physics.\nVon Neumann was baptized a Catholic in 1930. Shortly afterward, he married Marietta K\u00f6vesi, who had studied economics at Budapest University. Von Neumann and Marietta had a daughter, Marina, born in 1935; she would become a professor. The couple divorced on November 2, 1937. On November 17, 1938, von Neumann married Kl\u00e1ra D\u00e1n.\nIn 1933 Von Neumann accepted a tenured professorship at the Institute for Advanced Study in New Jersey, when that institution's plan to appoint Hermann Weyl appeared to have failed. His mother, brothers and in-laws followed von Neumann to the United States in 1939. Von Neumann anglicized his name to John, keeping the German-aristocratic surname von Neumann. Von Neumann became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1937, and immediately tried to become a lieutenant in the U.S. Army's Officers Reserve Corps. He passed the exams but was rejected because of his age.\nKl\u00e1ra and John von Neumann were socially active within the local academic community. His white clapboard house on Westcott Road was one of Princeton's largest private residences. He always wore formal suits. He enjoyed Yiddish and \"off-color\" humor. Von Neumann did some of his best work in noisy, chaotic environments. In Princeton, he received complaints for playing extremely loud German march music. According to Churchill Eisenhart, von Neumann could attend parties until the early hours of the morning and then deliver a lecture at 8:30.\nHe was known for always being happy to provide others of all ability levels with scientific and mathematical advice. Wigner wrote that he perhaps supervised more work (in a casual sense) than any other modern mathematician. His daughter wrote that he was very concerned with his legacy in two aspects: his life and the durability of his intellectual contributions to the world.\nMany considered him an excellent chairman of committees, deferring rather easily on personal or organizational matters but pressing on technical ones. Herbert York described the many \"Von Neumann Committees\" that he participated in as \"remarkable in style as well as output\". The way the committees von Neumann chaired worked directly and intimately with the necessary military or corporate entities became a blueprint for all Air Force long-range missile programs. Many people who had known von Neumann were puzzled by his relationship to the military and to power structures in general. Stanis\u0142aw Ulam suspected that he had a hidden admiration for people or organizations that could influence the thoughts and decision making of others.\nHe also maintained his knowledge of languages learnt in his youth. He knew Hungarian, French, German and English fluently, and maintained a conversational level of Italian, Yiddish, Latin and Ancient Greek. His Spanish was less perfect. He had a passion for and encyclopedic knowledge of ancient history, and he enjoyed reading Ancient Greek historians in the original Greek. Ulam suspected they may have shaped his views on how future events could play out and how human nature and society worked in general.\nVon Neumann's closest friend in the United States was the mathematician Stanis\u0142aw Ulam. Von Neumann believed that much of his mathematical thought occurred intuitively; he would often go to sleep with a problem unsolved and know the answer upon waking up. Ulam noted that von Neumann's way of thinking might not be visual, but more aural. Ulam recalled, \"Quite independently of his liking for abstract wit, he had a strong appreciation (one might say almost a hunger) for the more earthy type of comedy and humor\".\nIllness and death.\nIn 1955, a mass was found near von Neumann's collarbone, which turned out to be cancer originating in the skeleton, pancreas or prostate. (While there is general agreement that the tumor had metastasised, sources differ on the location of the primary cancer.) The malignancy may have been caused by exposure to radiation at Los Alamos National Laboratory. As death neared he asked for a priest, though the priest later recalled that von Neumann found little comfort in receiving the last rites\u00a0\u2013 he remained terrified of death and unable to accept it. Of his religious views, von Neumann reportedly said, \"So long as there is the possibility of eternal damnation for nonbelievers it is more logical to be a believer at the end,\" referring to Pascal's wager. He confided to his mother, \"There probably has to be a God. Many things are easier to explain if there is than if there isn't.\"\nHe died Roman Catholic on February 8, 1957, aged 53, at Walter Reed Army Medical Hospital and was buried at Princeton Cemetery.\nMathematics.\nSet theory.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, efforts to base mathematics on naive set theory suffered a setback due to Russell's paradox (on the set of all sets that do not belong to themselves). The problem of an adequate axiomatization of set theory was resolved implicitly about twenty years later by Ernst Zermelo and Abraham Fraenkel. Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory provided a series of principles that allowed for the construction of the sets used in the everyday practice of mathematics, but did not explicitly exclude the possibility of the existence of a set that belongs to itself. In his 1925 doctoral thesis, von Neumann demonstrated two techniques to exclude such sets\u2014the \"axiom of foundation\" and the notion of \"class.\"\nThe axiom of foundation proposed that every set can be constructed from the bottom up in an ordered succession of steps by way of the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel principles. If one set belongs to another, then the first must necessarily come before the second in the succession. This excludes the possibility of a set belonging to itself. To demonstrate that the addition of this new axiom to the others did not produce contradictions, von Neumann introduced the \"method of inner models\", which became an essential demonstration instrument in set theory.\nThe second approach to the problem of sets belonging to themselves took as its base the notion of class, and defines a set as a class that belongs to other classes, while a \"proper class\" is defined as a class that does not belong to other classes. On the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel approach, the axioms impede the construction of a set of all sets that do not belong to themselves. In contrast, on von Neumann's approach, the class of all sets that do not belong to themselves can be constructed, but it is a \"proper class\", not a set.\nOverall, von Neumann's major achievement in set theory was an \"axiomatization of set theory and (connected with that) elegant theory of the ordinal and cardinal numbers as well as the first strict formulation of principles of definitions by the transfinite induction\".\nVon Neumann paradox.\nBuilding on the Hausdorff paradox of Felix Hausdorff (1914), Stefan Banach and Alfred Tarski in 1924 showed how to subdivide a three-dimensional ball into disjoint sets, then translate and rotate these sets to form two identical copies of the same ball; this is the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox. They also proved that a two-dimensional disk has no such paradoxical decomposition. But in 1929, von Neumann subdivided the disk into finitely many pieces and rearranged them into two disks, using area-preserving affine transformations instead of translations and rotations. The result depended on finding free groups of affine transformations, an important technique extended later by von Neumann in his work on measure theory.\nProof theory.\nWith the contributions of von Neumann to sets, the axiomatic system of the theory of sets avoided the contradictions of earlier systems and became usable as a foundation for mathematics, despite the lack of a proof of its consistency. The next question was whether it provided definitive answers to all mathematical questions that could be posed in it, or whether it might be improved by adding stronger axioms that could be used to prove a broader class of theorems.\nBy 1927, von Neumann was involving himself in discussions in G\u00f6ttingen on whether elementary arithmetic followed from Peano axioms. Building on the work of Ackermann, he began attempting to prove (using the finistic methods of Hilbert's school) the consistency of first-order arithmetic. He succeeded in proving the consistency of a fragment of arithmetic of natural numbers (through the use of restrictions on induction). He continued looking for a more general proof of the consistency of classical mathematics using methods from proof theory.\nA strongly negative answer to whether it was definitive arrived in September 1930 at the Second Conference on the Epistemology of the Exact Sciences, in which Kurt G\u00f6del announced his first theorem of incompleteness: the usual axiomatic systems are incomplete, in the sense that they cannot prove every truth expressible in their language. Moreover, every consistent extension of these systems necessarily remains incomplete. At the conference, von Neumann suggested to G\u00f6del that he should try to transform his results for undecidable propositions about integers.\nLess than a month later, von Neumann communicated to G\u00f6del an interesting consequence of his theorem: the usual axiomatic systems are unable to demonstrate their own consistency. G\u00f6del replied that he had already discovered this consequence, now known as his second incompleteness theorem, and that he would send a preprint of his article containing both results, which never appeared. Von Neumann acknowledged G\u00f6del's priority in his next letter. However, von Neumann's method of proof differed from G\u00f6del's, and he was also of the opinion that the second incompleteness theorem had dealt a much stronger blow to Hilbert's program than G\u00f6del thought it did. With this discovery, which drastically changed his views on mathematical rigor, von Neumann ceased research in the foundations of mathematics and metamathematics and instead spent time on problems connected with applications.\nErgodic theory.\nIn a series of papers published in 1932, von Neumann made foundational contributions to ergodic theory, a branch of mathematics that involves the states of dynamical systems with an invariant measure. Of the 1932 papers on ergodic theory, Paul Halmos wrote that even \"if von Neumann had never done anything else, they would have been sufficient to guarantee him mathematical immortality\". By then von Neumann had already written his articles on operator theory, and the application of this work was instrumental in his mean ergodic theorem.\nThe theorem is about arbitrary one-parameter unitary groups formula_1 and states that for every vector formula_2 in the Hilbert space, formula_3 exists in the sense of the metric defined by the Hilbert norm and is a vector formula_4 which is such that formula_5 for all formula_6. This was proven in the first paper. In the second paper, von Neumann argued that his results here were sufficient for physical applications relating to Boltzmann's ergodic hypothesis. He also pointed out that ergodicity had not yet been achieved and isolated this for future work.\nLater in the year he published another influential paper that began the systematic study of ergodicity. He gave and proved a decomposition theorem showing that the ergodic measure preserving actions of the real line are the fundamental building blocks from which all measure-preserving actions can be built. Several other key theorems are given and proven. The results in this paper and another in conjunction with Paul Halmos have significant applications in other areas of mathematics.\nMeasure theory.\nIn measure theory, the \"problem of measure\" for an n-dimensional Euclidean space R\"n\" may be stated as: \"does there exist a positive, normalized, invariant, and additive set function on the class of all subsets of R\"n\"?\" The work of Felix Hausdorff and Stefan Banach had implied that the problem of measure has a positive solution if \"n\" = 1 or \"n\" = 2 and a negative solution (because of the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox) in all other cases. Von Neumann's work argued that the \"problem is essentially group-theoretic in character\": the existence of a measure could be determined by looking at the properties of the transformation group of the given space. The positive solution for spaces of dimension at most two, and the negative solution for higher dimensions, comes from the fact that the Euclidean group is a solvable group for dimension at most two, and is not solvable for higher dimensions. \"Thus, according to von Neumann, it is the change of group that makes a difference, not the change of space.\" Around 1942 he told Dorothy Maharam how to prove that every complete \u03c3-finite measure space has a multiplicative lifting; he did not publish this proof and she later came up with a new one.\nIn a number of von Neumann's papers, the methods of argument he employed are considered even more significant than the results. In anticipation of his later study of dimension theory in algebras of operators, von Neumann used results on equivalence by finite decomposition, and reformulated the problem of measure in terms of functions. A major contribution von Neumann made to measure theory was the result of a paper written to answer a question of Haar regarding whether there existed an algebra of all bounded functions on the real number line such that they form \"a complete system of representatives of the classes of almost everywhere-equal measurable bounded functions\". He proved this in the positive, and in later papers with Stone discussed various generalizations and algebraic aspects of this problem. He also proved by new methods the existence of disintegrations for various general types of measures. Von Neumann also gave a new proof on the uniqueness of Haar measures by using the mean values of functions, although this method only worked for compact groups. He had to create entirely new techniques to apply this to locally compact groups. He also gave a new, ingenious proof for the Radon\u2013Nikodym theorem. His lecture notes on measure theory at the Institute for Advanced Study were an important source for knowledge on the topic in America at the time, and were later published.\nTopological groups.\nUsing his previous work on measure theory, von Neumann made several contributions to the theory of topological groups, beginning with a paper on almost periodic functions on groups, where von Neumann extended Bohr's theory of almost periodic functions to arbitrary groups. He continued this work with another paper in conjunction with Bochner that improved the theory of almost periodicity to include functions that took on elements of linear spaces as values rather than numbers. In 1938, he was awarded the B\u00f4cher Memorial Prize for his work in analysis in relation to these papers.\nIn a 1933 paper, he used the newly discovered Haar measure in the solution of Hilbert's fifth problem for the case of compact groups. The basic idea behind this was discovered several years earlier when von Neumann published a paper on the analytic properties of groups of linear transformations and found that closed subgroups of a general linear group are Lie groups. This was later extended by Cartan to arbitrary Lie groups in the form of the closed-subgroup theorem.\nFunctional analysis.\nVon Neumann was the first to axiomatically define an abstract Hilbert space. He defined it as a complex vector space with a Hermitian scalar product, with the corresponding norm being both separable and complete. In the same papers he also proved the general form of the Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality that had previously been known only in specific examples. He continued with the development of the spectral theory of operators in Hilbert space in three seminal papers between 1929 and 1932. This work cumulated in his \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\" which alongside two other books by Stone and Banach in the same year were the first monographs on Hilbert space theory. Previous work by others showed that a theory of weak topologies could not be obtained by using sequences. Von Neumann was the first to outline a program of how to overcome the difficulties, which resulted in him defining locally convex spaces and topological vector spaces for the first time. In addition several other topological properties he defined at the time (he was among the first mathematicians to apply new topological ideas from Hausdorff from Euclidean to Hilbert spaces) such as boundness and total boundness are still used today. For twenty years von Neumann was considered the 'undisputed master' of this area. These developments were primarily prompted by needs in quantum mechanics where von Neumann realized the need to extend the spectral theory of Hermitian operators from the bounded to the unbounded case. Other major achievements in these papers include a complete elucidation of spectral theory for normal operators, the first abstract presentation of the trace of a positive operator, a generalisation of Riesz's presentation of Hilbert's spectral theorems at the time, and the discovery of Hermitian operators in a Hilbert space, as distinct from self-adjoint operators, which enabled him to give a description of all Hermitian operators which extend a given Hermitian operator. He wrote a paper detailing how the usage of infinite matrices, common at the time in spectral theory, was inadequate as a representation for Hermitian operators. His work on operator theory lead to his most profound invention in pure mathematics, the study of von Neumann algebras and in general of operator algebras.\nHis later work on rings of operators lead to him revisiting his work on spectral theory and providing a new way of working through the geometric content by the use of direct integrals of Hilbert spaces. Like in his work on measure theory he proved several theorems that he did not find time to publish. He told Nachman Aronszajn and K. T. Smith that in the early 1930s he proved the existence of proper invariant subspaces for completely continuous operators in a Hilbert space while working on the invariant subspace problem.\nWith I. J. Schoenberg he wrote several items investigating translation invariant Hilbertian metrics on the real number line which resulted in their complete classification. Their motivation lie in various questions related to embedding metric spaces into Hilbert spaces.\nWith Pascual Jordan he wrote a short paper giving the first derivation of a given norm from an inner product by means of the parallelogram identity. His trace inequality is a key result of matrix theory used in matrix approximation problems. He also first presented the idea that the dual of a pre-norm is a norm in the first major paper discussing the theory of unitarily invariant norms and symmetric gauge functions (now known as symmetric absolute norms). This paper leads naturally to the study of symmetric operator ideals and is the beginning point for modern studies of symmetric operator spaces.\nLater with Robert Schatten he initiated the study of nuclear operators on Hilbert spaces, tensor products of Banach spaces, introduced and studied trace class operators, their ideals, and their duality with compact operators, and preduality with bounded operators. The generalization of this topic to the study of nuclear operators on Banach spaces was among the first achievements of Alexander Grothendieck. Previously in 1937 von Neumann published several results in this area, for example giving 1-parameter scale of different cross norms on formula_7 and proving several other results on what are now known as Schatten\u2013von Neumann ideals.\nOperator algebras.\nVon Neumann founded the study of rings of operators, through the von Neumann algebras (originally called W*-algebras). While his original ideas for rings of operators existed already in 1930, he did not begin studying them in depth until he met F. J. Murray several years later. A von Neumann algebra is a *-algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert space that is closed in the weak operator topology and contains the identity operator. The von Neumann bicommutant theorem shows that the analytic definition is equivalent to a purely algebraic definition as being equal to the bicommutant. After elucidating the study of the commutative algebra case, von Neumann embarked in 1936, with the partial collaboration of Murray, on the noncommutative case, the general study of factors classification of von Neumann algebras. The six major papers in which he developed that theory between 1936 and 1940 \"rank among the masterpieces of analysis in the twentieth century\"; they collect many foundational results and started several programs in operator algebra theory that mathematicians worked on for decades afterwards. An example is the classification of factors. In addition in 1938 he proved that every von Neumann algebra on a separable Hilbert space is a direct integral of factors; he did not find time to publish this result until 1949. Von Neumann algebras relate closely to a theory of noncommutative integration, something that von Neumann hinted to in his work but did not explicitly write out. Another important result on polar decomposition was published in 1932.\nLattice theory.\nBetween 1935 and 1937, von Neumann worked on lattice theory, the theory of partially ordered sets in which every two elements have a greatest lower bound and a least upper bound. As Garrett Birkhoff wrote, \"John von Neumann's brilliant mind blazed over lattice theory like a meteor\". Von Neumann combined traditional projective geometry with modern algebra (linear algebra, ring theory, lattice theory). Many previously geometric results could then be interpreted in the case of general modules over rings. His work laid the foundations for some of the modern work in projective geometry.\nHis biggest contribution was founding the field of continuous geometry. It followed his path-breaking work on rings of operators. In mathematics, continuous geometry is a substitute of complex projective geometry, where instead of the dimension of a subspace being in a discrete set formula_8 it can be an element of the unit interval formula_9. Earlier, Menger and Birkhoff had axiomatized complex projective geometry in terms of the properties of its lattice of linear subspaces. Von Neumann, following his work on rings of operators, weakened those axioms to describe a broader class of lattices, the continuous geometries.\nWhile the dimensions of the subspaces of projective geometries are a discrete set (the non-negative integers), the dimensions of the elements of a continuous geometry can range continuously across the unit interval formula_9. Von Neumann was motivated by his discovery of von Neumann algebras with a dimension function taking a continuous range of dimensions, and the first example of a continuous geometry other than projective space was the projections of the hyperfinite type II factor.\nIn more pure lattice theoretical work, he solved the difficult problem of characterizing the class of formula_11 (continuous-dimensional projective geometry over an arbitrary division ring formula_12) in abstract language of lattice theory. Von Neumann provided an abstract exploration of dimension in completed complemented modular topological lattices (properties that arise in the lattices of subspaces of inner product spaces): Dimension is determined, up to a positive linear transformation, by the following two properties. It is conserved by perspective mappings (\"perspectivities\") and ordered by inclusion. The deepest part of the proof concerns the equivalence of perspectivity with \"projectivity by decomposition\"\u2014of which a corollary is the transitivity of perspectivity.\nFor any integer formula_13 every formula_14-dimensional abstract projective geometry is isomorphic to the subspace-lattice of an formula_14-dimensional vector space formula_16 over a (unique) corresponding division ring formula_17. This is known as the Veblen\u2013Young theorem. Von Neumann extended this fundamental result in projective geometry to the continuous dimensional case. This coordinatization theorem stimulated considerable work in abstract projective geometry and lattice theory, much of which continued using von Neumann's techniques. Birkhoff described this theorem as follows: Any complemented modular lattice L having a \"basis\" of \"n\" \u2265 4 pairwise perspective elements, is isomorphic with the lattice \u211b(\"R\") of all principal right-ideals of a suitable regular ring R. This conclusion is the culmination of 140 pages of brilliant and incisive algebra involving entirely novel axioms. Anyone wishing to get an unforgettable impression of the razor edge of von Neumann's mind, need merely try to pursue this chain of exact reasoning for himself\u2014realizing that often five pages of it were written down before breakfast, seated at a living room writing-table in a bathrobe.\nThis work required the creation of regular rings. A von Neumann regular ring is a ring where for every formula_18, an element formula_19 exists such that formula_20. These rings came from and have connections to his work on von Neumann algebras, as well as AW*-algebras and various kinds of C*-algebras.\nMany smaller technical results were proven during the creation and proof of the above theorems, particularly regarding distributivity (such as infinite distributivity), von Neumann developing them as needed. He also developed a theory of valuations in lattices, and shared in developing the general theory of metric lattices.\nBirkhoff noted in his posthumous article on von Neumann that most of these results were developed in an intense two-year period of work, and that while his interests continued in lattice theory after 1937, they became peripheral and mainly occurred in letters to other mathematicians. A final contribution in 1940 was for a joint seminar he conducted with Birkhoff at the Institute for Advanced Study on the subject where he developed a theory of \u03c3-complete lattice ordered rings. He never wrote up the work for publication.\nMathematical statistics.\nVon Neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics. In 1941, he derived the exact distribution of the ratio of the mean square of successive differences to the sample variance for independent and identically normally distributed variables. This ratio was applied to the residuals from regression models and is commonly known as the Durbin\u2013Watson statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the errors are serially independent against the alternative that they follow a stationary first order autoregression.\nSubsequently, Denis Sargan and Alok Bhargava extended the results for testing whether the errors on a regression model follow a Gaussian random walk (\"i.e.\", possess a unit root) against the alternative that they are a stationary first order autoregression.\nOther work.\nIn his early years, von Neumann published several papers related to set-theoretical real analysis and number theory. In a paper from 1925, he proved that for any dense sequence of points in formula_9, there existed a rearrangement of those points that is uniformly distributed. In 1926 his sole publication was on Pr\u00fcfer's theory of ideal algebraic numbers where he found a new way of constructing them, thus extending Pr\u00fcfer's theory to the field of all algebraic numbers, and clarified their relation to p-adic numbers. \nIn 1928 he published two additional papers continuing with these themes. The first dealt with partitioning an interval into countably many congruent subsets. It solved a problem of Hugo Steinhaus asking whether an interval is formula_22-divisible. Von Neumann proved that indeed that all intervals, half-open, open, or closed are formula_22-divisible by translations (i.e. that these intervals can be decomposed into formula_22 subsets that are congruent by translation). His next paper dealt with giving a constructive proof without the axiom of choice that formula_25 algebraically independent reals exist. He proved that formula_26 are algebraically independent for formula_27. Consequently, there exists a perfect algebraically independent set of reals the size of the continuum. Other minor results from his early career include a proof of a maximum principle for the gradient of a minimizing function in the field of calculus of variations, and a small simplification of Hermann Minkowski's theorem for linear forms in geometric number theory.\nLater in his career together with Pascual Jordan and Eugene Wigner he wrote a foundational paper classifying all finite-dimensional formally real Jordan algebras and discovering the Albert algebras while attempting to look for a better mathematical formalism for quantum theory. In 1936 he attempted to further the program of replacing the axioms of his previous Hilbert space program with those of Jordan algebras in a paper investigating the infinite-dimensional case; he planned to write at least one further paper on the topic but never did. Nevertheless, these axioms formed the basis for further investigations of algebraic quantum mechanics started by Irving Segal.\nPhysics.\nQuantum mechanics.\nVon Neumann was the first to establish a rigorous mathematical framework for quantum mechanics, known as the Dirac\u2013von Neumann axioms, in his influential 1932 work \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\". After having completed the axiomatization of set theory, he began to confront the axiomatization of quantum mechanics. He realized in 1926 that a state of a quantum system could be represented by a point in a (complex) Hilbert space that, in general, could be infinite-dimensional even for a single particle. In this formalism of quantum mechanics, observable quantities such as position or momentum are represented as linear operators acting on the Hilbert space associated with the quantum system.\nThe \"physics\" of quantum mechanics was thereby reduced to the \"mathematics\" of Hilbert spaces and linear operators acting on them. For example, the uncertainty principle, according to which the determination of the position of a particle prevents the determination of its momentum and vice versa, is translated into the \"non-commutativity\" of the two corresponding operators. This new mathematical formulation included as special cases the formulations of both Heisenberg and Schr\u00f6dinger.\nVon Neumann's abstract treatment permitted him to confront the foundational issue of determinism versus non-determinism, and in the book he presented a proof that the statistical results of quantum mechanics could not possibly be averages of an underlying set of determined \"hidden variables\", as in classical statistical mechanics. In 1935, Grete Hermann published a paper arguing that the proof contained a conceptual error and was therefore invalid. Hermann's work was largely ignored until after John S. Bell made essentially the same argument in 1966. In 2010, Jeffrey Bub argued that Bell had misconstrued von Neumann's proof, and pointed out that the proof, though not valid for all hidden variable theories, does rule out a well-defined and important subset. Bub also suggests that von Neumann was aware of this limitation and did not claim that his proof completely ruled out hidden variable theories. The validity of Bub's argument is, in turn, disputed. Gleason's theorem of 1957 provided an argument against hidden variables along the lines of von Neumann's, but founded on assumptions seen as better motivated and more physically meaningful.\nVon Neumann's proof inaugurated a line of research that ultimately led, through Bell's theorem and the experiments of Alain Aspect in 1982, to the demonstration that quantum physics either requires a \"notion of reality\" substantially different from that of classical physics, or must include nonlocality in apparent violation of special relativity.\nIn a chapter of \"The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", von Neumann deeply analyzed the so-called measurement problem. He concluded that the entire physical universe could be made subject to the universal wave function. Since something \"outside the calculation\" was needed to collapse the wave function, von Neumann concluded that the collapse was caused by the consciousness of the experimenter. He argued that the mathematics of quantum mechanics allows the collapse of the wave function to be placed at any position in the causal chain from the measurement device to the \"subjective consciousness\" of the human observer. In other words, while the line between observer and observed could be drawn in different places, the theory only makes sense if an observer exists somewhere. Although the idea of consciousness causing collapse was accepted by Eugene Wigner, this interpretation never gained acceptance among the majority of physicists.\nThough theories of quantum mechanics continue to evolve, a basic framework for the mathematical formalism of problems in quantum mechanics underlying most approaches can be traced back to the mathematical formalisms and techniques first used by von Neumann. Discussions about interpretation of the theory, and extensions to it, are now mostly conducted on the basis of shared assumptions about the mathematical foundations.\nViewing von Neumann's work on quantum mechanics as a part of the fulfilment of Hilbert's sixth problem, mathematical physicist Arthur Wightman said in 1974 his axiomization of quantum theory was perhaps the most important axiomization of a physical theory to date. With his 1932 book, quantum mechanics became a mature theory in the sense it had a precise mathematical form, which allowed for clear answers to conceptual problems. Nevertheless, von Neumann in his later years felt he had failed in this aspect of his scientific work as despite all the mathematics he developed, he did not find a satisfactory mathematical framework for quantum theory as a whole.\nVon Neumann entropy.\nVon Neumann entropy is extensively used in different forms (conditional entropy, relative entropy, etc.) in the framework of quantum information theory. Entanglement measures are based upon some quantity directly related to the von Neumann entropy. Given a statistical ensemble of quantum mechanical systems with the density matrix formula_28, it is given by formula_29 Many of the same entropy measures in classical information theory can also be generalized to the quantum case, such as Holevo entropy and conditional quantum entropy. Quantum information theory is largely concerned with the interpretation and uses of von Neumann entropy, a cornerstone in the former's development; the Shannon entropy applies to classical information theory.\nDensity matrix.\nThe formalism of density operators and matrices was introduced by von Neumann in 1927 and independently, but less systematically by Lev Landau and Felix Bloch in 1927 and 1946 respectively. The density matrix allows the representation of probabilistic mixtures of quantum states (mixed states) in contrast to wavefunctions, which can only represent pure states.\nVon Neumann measurement scheme.\nThe von Neumann measurement scheme, the ancestor of quantum decoherence theory, represents measurements projectively by taking into account the measuring apparatus which is also treated as a quantum object. The 'projective measurement' scheme introduced by von Neumann led to the development of quantum decoherence theories.\nQuantum logic.\nVon Neumann first proposed a quantum logic in his 1932 treatise \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", where he noted that projections on a Hilbert space can be viewed as propositions about physical observables. The field of quantum logic was subsequently inaugurated in a 1936 paper by von Neumann and Garrett Birkhoff, the first to introduce quantum logics, wherein von Neumann and Birkhoff first proved that quantum mechanics requires a propositional calculus substantially different from all classical logics and rigorously isolated a new algebraic structure for quantum logics. The concept of creating a propositional calculus for quantum logic was first outlined in a short section in von Neumann's 1932 work, but in 1936, the need for the new propositional calculus was demonstrated through several proofs. For example, photons cannot pass through two successive filters that are polarized perpendicularly (e.g., horizontally and vertically), and therefore, \"a fortiori\", it cannot pass if a third filter polarized diagonally is added to the other two, either before or after them in the succession, but if the third filter is added \"between\" the other two, the photons will indeed pass through. This experimental fact is translatable into logic as the \"non-commutativity\" of conjunction formula_30. It was also demonstrated that the laws of distribution of classical logic, formula_31formula_32 and formula_33formula_34, are not valid for quantum theory.\nThe reason for this is that a quantum disjunction, unlike the case for classical disjunction, can be true even when both of the disjuncts are false and this is in turn attributable to the fact that it is frequently the case in quantum mechanics that a pair of alternatives are semantically determinate, while each of its members is necessarily indeterminate. Consequently, the distributive law of classical logic must be replaced with a weaker condition. Instead of a distributive lattice, propositions about a quantum system form an orthomodular lattice isomorphic to the lattice of subspaces of the Hilbert space associated with that system.\nNevertheless, he was never satisfied with his work on quantum logic. He intended it to be a joint synthesis of formal logic and probability theory and when he attempted to write up a paper for the Henry Joseph Lecture he gave at the Washington Philosophical Society in 1945 he found that he could not, especially given that he was busy with war work at the time. During his address at the 1954 International Congress of Mathematicians he gave this issue as one of the unsolved problems that future mathematicians could work on.\nFluid dynamics.\nDuring WWII, von Neumann made fundamental contributions in the field of fluid dynamics, including the classic flow solution to blast waves now called Taylor\u2013von Neumann\u2013Sedov blast wave after three scientists who devised it independently, and the co-discovery (independently by Yakov Borisovich Zel'dovich and Werner D\u00f6ring) of the ZND detonation model of explosives. During the 1930s, von Neumann became an authority on the mathematics of shaped charges.\nLater with Robert D. Richtmyer, von Neumann developed an algorithm defining \"artificial viscosity\" that improved the understanding of shock waves. When computers solved hydrodynamic or aerodynamic problems, they put too many computational grid points at regions of sharp discontinuity (shock waves). The mathematics of artificial viscosity smoothed the shock transition without sacrificing basic physics.\nVon Neumann soon applied computer modelling to the field, developing software for his ballistics research. During World War II, he approached R. H. Kent, the director of the US Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, with a computer program for calculating a one-dimensional model of 100 molecules to simulate a shock wave. Von Neumann gave a seminar on his program to an audience which included his friend Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n. After von Neumann had finished, von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n said \"Of course you realize Lagrange also used digital models to simulate continuum mechanics.\" Von Neumann had been unaware of Lagrange's .\nOther work.\nWhile not as prolific in physics as he was in mathematics, he nevertheless made several other notable contributions. His pioneering papers with Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar on the statistics of a fluctuating gravitational field generated by randomly distributed stars were considered a \"tour de force\". In this paper they developed a theory of two-body relaxation and used the Holtsmark distribution to model the dynamics of stellar systems. He wrote several other unpublished manuscripts on topics in stellar structure, some of which were included in Chandrasekhar's other works. In earlier work led by Oswald Veblen von Neumann helped develop basic ideas involving spinors that would lead to Roger Penrose's twistor theory. Much of this was done in seminars conducted at the IAS during the 1930s. From this work he wrote a paper with A. H. Taub and Veblen extending the Dirac equation to projective relativity, with a key focus on maintaining invariance with regards to coordinate, spin, and gauge transformations, as a part of early research into potential theories of quantum gravity in the 1930s. In the same time period he made several proposals to colleagues for dealing with the problems in the newly created quantum field theory and for quantizing spacetime; however, both his colleagues and he did not consider the ideas fruitful and did not pursue them. Nevertheless, he maintained at least some interest, in 1940 writing a manuscript on the Dirac equation in de Sitter space.\nEconomics.\nGame theory.\nVon Neumann founded the field of game theory as a mathematical discipline. He proved his minimax theorem in 1928. It establishes that in zero-sum games with perfect information (i.e., in which players know at each time all moves that have taken place so far), there exists a pair of strategies for both players that allows each to minimize their maximum losses. Such strategies are called \"optimal\". Von Neumann showed that their minimaxes are equal (in absolute value) and contrary (in sign). He improved and extended the minimax theorem to include games involving imperfect information and games with more than two players, publishing this result in his 1944 \"Theory of Games and Economic Behavior\", written with Oskar Morgenstern. The public interest in this work was such that \"The New York Times\" ran a front-page story. In this book, von Neumann declared that economic theory needed to use functional analysis, especially convex sets and the topological fixed-point theorem, rather than the traditional differential calculus, because the maximum-operator did not preserve differentiable functions.\nVon Neumann's functional-analytic techniques\u2014the use of duality pairings of real vector spaces to represent prices and quantities, the use of supporting and separating hyperplanes and convex sets, and fixed-point theory\u2014have been primary tools of mathematical economics ever since.\nMathematical economics.\nVon Neumann raised the mathematical level of economics in several influential publications. For his model of an expanding economy, he proved the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium using his generalization of the Brouwer fixed-point theorem. Von Neumann's model of an expanding economy considered the matrix pencil\u00a0\" A\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\u03bbB\" with nonnegative matrices\u00a0A and B; von Neumann sought probability vectors\u00a0\"p\" and\u00a0\"q\" and a positive number\u00a0\"\u03bb\" that would solve the complementarity equation formula_35 along with two inequality systems expressing economic efficiency. In this model, the (transposed) probability vector \"p\" represents the prices of the goods while the probability vector q represents the \"intensity\" at which the production process would run. The unique solution \"\u03bb\" represents the growth factor which is 1 plus the rate of growth of the economy; the rate of growth equals the interest rate.\nVon Neumann's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming, where his model uses only nonnegative matrices. The study of his model of an expanding economy continues to interest mathematical economists. This paper has been called the greatest paper in mathematical economics by several authors, who recognized its introduction of fixed-point theorems, linear inequalities, complementary slackness, and saddlepoint duality. In the proceedings of a conference on von Neumann's growth model, Paul Samuelson said that many mathematicians had developed methods useful to economists, but that von Neumann was unique in having made significant contributions to economic theory itself. The lasting importance of the work on general equilibria and the methodology of fixed point theorems is underscored by the awarding of Nobel prizes in 1972 to Kenneth Arrow, in 1983 to G\u00e9rard Debreu, and in 1994 to John Nash who used fixed point theorems to establish equilibria for non-cooperative games and for bargaining problems in his Ph.D. thesis. Arrow and Debreu also used linear programming, as did Nobel laureates Tjalling Koopmans, Leonid Kantorovich, Wassily Leontief, Paul Samuelson, Robert Dorfman, Robert Solow, and Leonid Hurwicz.\nVon Neumann's interest in the topic began while he was lecturing at Berlin in 1928 and 1929. He spent his summers in Budapest, as did the economist Nicholas Kaldor; Kaldor recommended that von Neumann read a book by the mathematical economist L\u00e9on Walras. Von Neumann noticed that Walras's General Equilibrium Theory and Walras's law, which led to systems of simultaneous linear equations, could produce the absurd result that profit could be maximized by producing and selling a negative quantity of a product. He replaced the equations by inequalities, introduced dynamic equilibria, among other things, and eventually produced his paper.\nLinear programming.\nBuilding on his results on matrix games and on his model of an expanding economy, von Neumann invented the theory of duality in linear programming when George Dantzig described his work in a few minutes, and an impatient von Neumann asked him to get to the point. Dantzig then listened dumbfounded while von Neumann provided an hourlong lecture on convex sets, fixed-point theory, and duality, conjecturing the equivalence between matrix games and linear programming.\nLater, von Neumann suggested a new method of linear programming, using the homogeneous linear system of Paul Gordan (1873), which was later popularized by Karmarkar's algorithm. Von Neumann's method used a pivoting algorithm between simplices, with the pivoting decision determined by a nonnegative least squares subproblem with a convexity constraint (projecting the zero-vector onto the convex hull of the active simplex). Von Neumann's algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming.\nComputer science.\nVon Neumann was a founding figure in computing, with significant contributions to computing hardware design, to theoretical computer science, to scientific computing, and to the philosophy of computer science.\nHardware.\nVon Neumann consulted for the Army's Ballistic Research Laboratory, most notably on the ENIAC project, as a member of its Scientific Advisory Committee. Although the single-memory, stored-program architecture is commonly called von Neumann architecture, the architecture was based on the work of J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, inventors of ENIAC and its successor, EDVAC.\nWhile consulting for the EDVAC project at the University of Pennsylvania, von Neumann wrote an incomplete \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\". The paper, whose premature distribution nullified the patent claims of Eckert and Mauchly, described a computer that stored both its data and its program in the same address space, unlike the earliest computers which stored their programs separately on paper tape or plugboards. This architecture became the basis of most modern computer designs.\nNext, von Neumann designed the IAS machine at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. He arranged its financing, and the components were designed and built at the RCA Research Laboratory nearby. Von Neumann recommended that the IBM 701, nicknamed \"the defense computer\", include a magnetic drum. It was a faster version of the IAS machine and formed the basis for the commercially successful IBM 704.\nAlgorithms.\nVon Neumann was the inventor, in 1945, of the merge sort algorithm, in which the first and second halves of an array are each sorted recursively and then merged.\nAs part of von Neumann's hydrogen bomb work, he and Stanis\u0142aw Ulam developed simulations for hydrodynamic computations. He also contributed to the development of the Monte Carlo method, which used random numbers to approximate the solutions to complicated problems.\nVon Neumann's algorithm for simulating a fair coin with a biased coin is used in the \"software whitening\" stage of some hardware random number generators. Because obtaining \"truly\" random numbers was impractical, von Neumann developed a form of pseudorandomness, using the middle-square method. He justified this crude method as faster than any other method at his disposal, writing that \"Anyone who considers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is, of course, in a state of sin.\" He also noted that when this method went awry it did so obviously, unlike other methods which could be subtly incorrect.\nStochastic computing was introduced by von Neumann in 1953, but could not be implemented until advances in computing of the 1960s. Around 1950 he was also among the first to talk about the time complexity of computations, which eventually evolved into the field of computational complexity theory.\nCellular automata, DNA and the universal constructor.\nVon Neumann's mathematical analysis of the structure of self-replication preceded the discovery of the structure of DNA. Ulam and von Neumann are also generally credited with creating the field of cellular automata, beginning in the 1940s, as a simplified mathematical model of biological systems.\nIn lectures in 1948 and 1949, von Neumann proposed a kinematic self-reproducing automaton. By 1952, he was treating the problem more abstractly. He designed an elaborate 2D cellular automaton that would automatically make a copy of its initial configuration of cells. The Von Neumann universal constructor based on the von Neumann cellular automaton was fleshed out in his posthumous \"Theory of Self Reproducing Automata\".\nThe von Neumann neighborhood, in which each cell in a two-dimensional grid has the four orthogonally adjacent grid cells as neighbors, continues to be used for other cellular automata.\nScientific computing and numerical analysis.\nConsidered to be possibly \"the most influential researcher in scientific computing of all time\", von Neumann made several contributions to the field, both technically and administratively. He developed the Von Neumann stability analysis procedure, still commonly used to avoid errors from building up in numerical methods for linear partial differential equations. His paper with Herman Goldstine in 1947 was the first to describe backward error analysis, although implicitly. He was also one of the first to write about the Jacobi method. At Los Alamos, he wrote several classified reports on solving problems of gas dynamics numerically. However, he was frustrated by the lack of progress with analytic methods for these nonlinear problems. As a result, he turned towards computational methods. Under his influence Los Alamos became the leader in computational science during the 1950s and early 1960s.\nFrom this work von Neumann realized that computation was not just a tool to brute force the solution to a problem numerically, but could also provide insight for solving problems analytically, and that there was an enormous variety of scientific and engineering problems towards which computers would be useful, most significant of which were nonlinear problems. In June 1945 at the First Canadian Mathematical Congress he gave his first talk on general ideas of how to solve problems, particularly of fluid dynamics numerically. He also described how wind tunnels were actually analog computers, and how digital computers would replace them and bring a new era of fluid dynamics. Garrett Birkhoff described it as \"an unforgettable sales pitch\". He expanded this talk with Goldstine into the manuscript \"On the Principles of Large Scale Computing Machines\" and used it to promote the support of scientific computing. His papers also developed the concepts of inverting matrices, random matrices and automated relaxation methods for solving elliptic boundary value problems.\nWeather systems and global warming.\nAs part of his research into possible applications of computers, von Neumann became interested in weather prediction, noting similarities between the problems in the field and those he had worked on during the Manhattan Project. In 1946 von Neumann founded the \"Meteorological Project\" at the Institute for Advanced Study, securing funding for his project from the Weather Bureau, the US Air Force and US Navy weather services. With Carl-Gustaf Rossby, considered the leading theoretical meteorologist at the time, he gathered a group of twenty meteorologists to work on various problems in the field. However, given his other postwar work he was not able to devote enough time to proper leadership of the project and little was accomplished.\nThis changed when a young Jule Gregory Charney took up co-leadership of the project from Rossby. By 1950 von Neumann and Charney wrote the world's first climate modelling software, and used it to perform the world's first numerical weather forecasts on the ENIAC computer that von Neumann had arranged to be used; von Neumann and his team published the results as \"Numerical Integration of the Barotropic Vorticity Equation\". Together they played a leading role in efforts to integrate sea-air exchanges of energy and moisture into the study of climate. Though primitive, news of the ENIAC forecasts quickly spread around the world and a number of parallel projects in other locations were initiated.\nIn 1955 von Neumann, Charney and their collaborators convinced their funders to open the Joint Numerical Weather Prediction Unit (JNWPU) in Suitland, Maryland, which began routine real-time weather forecasting. Next up, von Neumann proposed a research program for climate modeling: The approach is to first try short-range forecasts, then long-range forecasts of those properties of the circulation that can perpetuate themselves over arbitrarily long periods of time, and only finally to attempt forecast for medium-long time periods which are too long to treat by simple hydrodynamic theory and too short to treat by the general principle of equilibrium theory. Positive results of Norman A. Phillips in 1955 prompted immediate reaction and von Neumann organized a conference at Princeton on \"Application of Numerical Integration Techniques to the Problem of the General Circulation\". Once again he strategically organized the program as a predictive one to ensure continued support from the Weather Bureau and the military, leading to the creation of the General Circulation Research Section (now the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory) next to the JNWPU. He continued work both on technical issues of modelling and in ensuring continuing funding for these projects.\nDuring the late 19th century, Svante Arrhenius suggested that human activity could cause global warming by adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. In 1955, von Neumann observed that this may already have begun: \"Carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by industry's burning of coal and oil \u2013 more than half of it during the last generation \u2013 may have changed the atmosphere's composition sufficiently to account for a general warming of the world by about one degree Fahrenheit.\" His research into weather systems and meteorological prediction led him to propose manipulating the environment by spreading colorants on the polar ice caps to enhance absorption of solar radiation (by reducing the albedo). However, he urged caution in any program of atmosphere modification: What \"could\" be done, of course, is no index to what \"should\" be done... In fact, to evaluate the ultimate consequences of either a general cooling or a general heating would be a complex matter. Changes would affect the level of the seas, and hence the habitability of the continental coastal shelves; the evaporation of the seas, and hence general precipitation and glaciation levels; and so on... But there is little doubt that one \"could\" carry out the necessary analyses needed to predict the results, intervene on any desired scale, and ultimately achieve rather fantastic results. He also warned that weather and climate control could have military uses, telling Congress in 1956 that they could pose an even bigger risk than ICBMs.\nTechnological singularity hypothesis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The technology that is now developing and that will dominate the next decades is in conflict with traditional, and, in the main, momentarily still valid, geographical and political units and concepts. This is a maturing crisis of technology... The most hopeful answer is that the human species has been subjected to similar tests before and it seems to have a congenital ability to come through, after varying amounts of trouble.\"\n\u2014von Neumann, 1955\nThe first use of the concept of a in the technological context is attributed to von Neumann, who according to Ulam discussed the \"ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue.\" This concept was later fleshed out in the 1970 book \"Future Shock\" by Alvin Toffler.\nDefense work.\nManhattan Project.\nBeginning in the late 1930s, von Neumann developed an expertise in explosions\u2014phenomena that are difficult to model mathematically. During this period, he was the leading authority of the mathematics of shaped charges, leading him to a large number of military consultancies and consequently his involvement in the Manhattan Project. The involvement included frequent trips to the project's secret research facilities at the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico.\nVon Neumann made his principal contribution to the atomic bomb in the concept and design of the explosive lenses that were needed to compress the plutonium core of the Fat Man weapon that was later dropped on Nagasaki. While von Neumann did not originate the \"implosion\" concept, he was one of its most persistent proponents, encouraging its continued development against the instincts of many of his colleagues, who felt such a design to be unworkable. He also eventually came up with the idea of using more powerful shaped charges and less fissionable material to greatly increase the speed of \"assembly\".\nWhen it turned out that there would not be enough uranium-235 to make more than one bomb, the implosive lens project was greatly expanded and von Neumann's idea was implemented. Implosion was the only method that could be used with the plutonium-239 that was available from the Hanford Site. He established the design of the explosive lenses required, but there remained concerns about \"edge effects\" and imperfections in the explosives. His calculations showed that implosion would work if it did not depart by more than 5% from spherical symmetry. After a series of failed attempts with models, this was achieved by George Kistiakowsky, and the construction of the Trinity bomb was completed in July 1945.\nIn a visit to Los Alamos in September 1944, von Neumann showed that the pressure increase from explosion shock wave reflection from solid objects was greater than previously believed if the angle of incidence of the shock wave was between 90\u00b0 and some limiting angle. As a result, it was determined that the effectiveness of an atomic bomb would be enhanced with detonation some kilometers above the target, rather than at ground level.\nVon Neumann was included in the target selection committee that was responsible for choosing the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as the first targets of the atomic bomb. Von Neumann oversaw computations related to the expected size of the bomb blasts, estimated death tolls, and the distance above the ground at which the bombs should be detonated for optimum shock wave propagation. The cultural capital Kyoto was von Neumann's first choice, a selection seconded by Manhattan Project leader General Leslie Groves. However, this target was dismissed by Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson.\nOn July 16, 1945, von Neumann and numerous other Manhattan Project personnel were eyewitnesses to the first test of an atomic bomb detonation, which was code-named Trinity. The event was conducted as a test of the implosion method device, at the Alamogordo Bombing Range in New Mexico. Based on his observation alone, von Neumann estimated the test had resulted in a blast equivalent to but Enrico Fermi produced a more accurate estimate of 10 kilotons by dropping scraps of torn-up paper as the shock wave passed his location and watching how far they scattered. The actual power of the explosion had been between 20 and 22 kilotons. It was in von Neumann's 1944 papers that the expression \"kilotons\" appeared for the first time.\nVon Neumann continued unperturbed in his work and became, along with Edward Teller, one of those who sustained the hydrogen bomb project. He collaborated with Klaus Fuchs on further development of the bomb, and in 1946 the two filed a secret patent outlining a scheme for using a fission bomb to compress fusion fuel to initiate nuclear fusion. The Fuchs\u2013von Neumann patent used radiation implosion, but not in the same way as is used in what became the final hydrogen bomb design, the Teller\u2013Ulam design. Their work was, however, incorporated into the \"George\" shot of Operation Greenhouse, which was instructive in testing out concepts that went into the final design. The Fuchs\u2013von Neumann work was passed on to the Soviet Union by Fuchs as part of his nuclear espionage, but it was not used in the Soviets' own, independent development of the Teller\u2013Ulam design. The historian Jeremy Bernstein has pointed out that ironically, \"John von Neumann and Klaus Fuchs, produced a brilliant invention in 1946 that could have changed the whole course of the development of the hydrogen bomb, but was not fully understood until after the bomb had been successfully made.\"\nFor his wartime services, von Neumann was awarded the Navy Distinguished Civilian Service Award in July 1946, and the Medal for Merit in October 1946.\nPost-war work.\nIn 1950, von Neumann became a consultant to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group, whose function was to advise the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the United States Secretary of Defense on the development and use of new technologies. He also became an adviser to the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project, which was responsible for the military aspects on nuclear weapons. Over the following two years, he became a consultant across the US government. This included the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), a member of the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission, a consultant to the newly established Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and a member of the Scientific Advisory Group of the United States Air Force During this time he became a \"superstar\" defense scientist at the Pentagon. His authority was considered infallible at the highest levels of the US government and military.\nDuring several meetings of the advisory board of the US Air Force, von Neumann and Edward Teller predicted that by 1960 the US would be able to build a hydrogen bomb light enough to fit on top of a rocket. In 1953 Bernard Schriever, who was present at the meeting, paid a personal visit to von Neumann at Princeton to confirm this possibility. Schriever enlisted Trevor Gardner, who in turn visited von Neumann several weeks later to fully understand the future possibilities before beginning his campaign for such a weapon in Washington. Now either chairing or serving on several boards dealing with strategic missiles and nuclear weaponry, von Neumann was able to inject several crucial arguments regarding potential Soviet advancements in both these areas and in strategic defenses against American bombers into government reports to argue for the creation of ICBMs. Gardner on several occasions brought von Neumann to meetings with the US Department of Defense to discuss with various senior officials his reports. Several design decisions in these reports such as inertial guidance mechanisms would form the basis for all ICBMs thereafter. By 1954, von Neumann was also regularly testifying to various Congressional military subcommittees to ensure continued support for the ICBM program.\nHowever, this was not enough. To have the ICBM program run at full throttle they needed direct action by the President of the United States. They convinced President Eisenhower in a direct meeting in July 1955, which resulted in a presidential directive on September 13, 1955. It stated that \"there would be the gravest repercussions on the national security and on the cohesion of the free world\" if the Soviet Union developed the ICBM before the US and therefore designated the ICBM project \"a research and development program of the highest priority above all others.\" The Secretary of Defense was ordered to commence the project with \"maximum urgency\". Evidence would later show that the Soviets indeed were already testing their own intermediate-range ballistic missiles at the time. Von Neumann would continue to meet the President, including at his home in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, and other high-level government officials as a key advisor on ICBMs until his death.\nAtomic Energy Commission.\nIn 1955, von Neumann became a commissioner of the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), which at the time was the highest official position available to scientists in the government. (While his appointment formally required that he sever all his other consulting contracts, an exemption was made for von Neumann to continue working with several critical military committees after the Air Force and several key senators raised concerns.) He used this position to further the production of compact hydrogen bombs suitable for intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) delivery. He involved himself in correcting the severe shortage of tritium and lithium 6 needed for these weapons, and he argued against settling for the intermediate-range missiles that the Army wanted. He was adamant that H-bombs delivered deep into enemy territory by an ICBM would be the most effective weapon possible, and that the relative inaccuracy of the missile would not be a problem with an H-bomb. He said the Russians would probably be building a similar weapon system, which turned out to be the case. While Lewis Strauss was away in the second half of 1955 von Neumann took over as acting chairman of the commission.\nIn his final years before his death from cancer, von Neumann headed the United States government's top-secret ICBM committee, which would sometimes meet in his home. Its purpose was to decide on the feasibility of building an ICBM large enough to carry a thermonuclear weapon. Von Neumann had long argued that while the technical obstacles were sizable, they could be overcome. The SM-65 Atlas passed its first fully functional test in 1959, two years after his death. The more advanced Titan rockets were deployed in 1962. Both had been proposed in the ICBM committees von Neumann chaired. The feasibility of the ICBMs owed as much to improved, smaller warheads that did not have guidance or heat resistance issues as it did to developments in rocketry, and his understanding of the former made his advice invaluable.\nVon Neumann entered government service primarily because he felt that, if freedom and civilization were to survive, it would have to be because the United States would triumph over totalitarianism from Nazism, Fascism and Soviet Communism. During a Senate committee hearing he described his political ideology as \"violently anti-communist, and much more militaristic than the norm\".\nPersonality.\nWork habits.\nHerman Goldstine commented on von Neumann's ability to intuit hidden errors and remember old material perfectly. When he had difficulties he would not labor on them; instead, he would go home and sleep on it and come back later with a solution. This style, 'taking the path of least resistance', sometimes meant that he could go off on tangents. It also meant that if the difficulty was great from the very beginning, he would simply switch to another problem, not trying to find weak spots from which he could break through. At times he could be ignorant of the standard mathematical literature, finding it easier to rederive basic information he needed rather than chase references.\nAfter World War II began, he became extremely busy with both academic and military commitments. His habit of not writing up talks or publishing results worsened. He did not find it easy to discuss a topic formally in writing unless it was already mature in his mind; if it was not, he would, in his own words, \"develop the worst traits of pedantism and inefficiency\".\nMathematical range.\nThe mathematician Jean Dieudonn\u00e9 said that von Neumann \"may have been the last representative of a once-flourishing and numerous group, the great mathematicians who were equally at home in pure and applied mathematics and who throughout their careers maintained a steady production in both directions\". According to Dieudonn\u00e9, his specific genius was in analysis and \"combinatorics\", with combinatorics being understood in a very wide sense that described his ability to organize and axiomize complex works that previously seemed to have little connection with mathematics. His style in analysis followed the German school, based on foundations in linear algebra and general topology. While von Neumann had an encyclopedic background, his range in pure mathematics was not as wide as Poincar\u00e9, Hilbert or even Weyl: von Neumann never did significant work in number theory, algebraic topology, algebraic geometry or differential geometry. However, in applied mathematics his work equalled that of Gauss, Cauchy or Poincar\u00e9.\nAccording to Wigner, \"Nobody knows all science, not even von Neumann did. But as for mathematics, he contributed to every part of it except number theory and topology. That is, I think, something unique.\" Halmos noted that while von Neumann knew lots of mathematics, the most notable gaps were in algebraic topology and number theory; he recalled an incident where von Neumann failed to recognize the topological definition of a torus. Von Neumann admitted to Herman Goldstine that he had no facility at all in topology and he was never comfortable with it, with Goldstine later bringing this up when comparing him to Hermann Weyl, who he thought was deeper and broader.\nIn his biography of von Neumann, Salomon Bochner wrote that much of von Neumann's works in pure mathematics involved finite and infinite dimensional vector spaces, which at the time, covered much of the total area of mathematics. However he pointed out this still did not cover an important part of the mathematical landscape, in particular, anything that involved geometry \"in the global sense\", topics such as topology, differential geometry and harmonic integrals, algebraic geometry and other such fields. Von Neumann rarely worked in these fields and, as Bochner saw it, had little affinity for them.\nIn one of von Neumann's last articles, he lamented that pure mathematicians could no longer attain deep knowledge of even a fraction of the field. In the early 1940s, Ulam had concocted for him a doctoral-style examination to find weaknesses in his knowledge; von Neumann was unable to answer satisfactorily a question each in differential geometry, number theory, and algebra. They concluded that doctoral exams might have \"little permanent meaning\". However, when Weyl turned down an offer to write a history of mathematics of the 20th century, arguing that no one person could do it, Ulam thought von Neumann could have aspired to do so.\nPreferred problem-solving techniques.\nUlam remarked that most mathematicians could master one technique that they then used repeatedly, whereas von Neumann had mastered three:\nAlthough he was commonly described as an analyst, he once classified himself an algebraist, and his style often displayed a mix of algebraic technique and set-theoretical intuition. He loved obsessive detail and had no issues with excess repetition or overly explicit notation. An example of this was a paper of his on rings of operators, where he extended the normal functional notation, formula_36 to formula_37. However, this process ended up being repeated several times, where the final result were equations such as formula_38. The 1936 paper became known to students as \"von Neumann's onion\" because the equations \"needed to be peeled before they could be digested\". Overall, although his writings were clear and powerful, they were not clean or elegant. Although powerful technically, his primary concern was more with the clear and viable formation of fundamental issues and questions of science rather than just the solution of mathematical puzzles.\nAccording to Ulam, von Neumann surprised physicists by doing dimensional estimates and algebraic computations in his head with fluency Ulam likened to blindfold chess. His impression was that von Neumann analyzed physical situations by abstract logical deduction rather than concrete visualization.\nLecture style.\nGoldstine compared his lectures to being on glass, smooth and lucid. By comparison, Goldstine thought his scientific articles were written in a much harsher manner, and with much less insight. Halmos described his lectures as \"dazzling\", with his speech clear, rapid, precise and all encompassing. Like Goldstine, he also described how everything seemed \"so easy and natural\" in lectures but puzzling on later reflection. He was a quick speaker: Banesh Hoffmann found it very difficult to take notes, even in shorthand, and Albert Tucker said that people often had to ask von Neumann questions to slow him down so they could think through the ideas he was presenting. Von Neumann knew about this and was grateful for his audience telling him when he was going too quickly. Although he did spend time preparing for lectures, he rarely used notes, instead jotting down points of what he would discuss and for how long.\nEidetic memory.\nVon Neumann was also noted for his eidetic memory, particularly of the symbolic kind. Herman Goldstine writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of his remarkable abilities was his power of absolute recall. As far as I could tell, von Neumann was able on once reading a book or article to quote it back verbatim; moreover, he could do it years later without hesitation. He could also translate it at no diminution in speed from its original language into English. On one occasion I tested his ability by asking him to tell me how \"A Tale of Two Cities\" started. Whereupon, without any pause, he immediately began to recite the first chapter and continued until asked to stop after about ten or fifteen minutes.\nVon Neumann was reportedly able to memorize the pages of telephone directories. He entertained friends by asking them to randomly call out page numbers; he then recited the names, addresses and numbers therein. Stanis\u0142aw Ulam believed that von Neumann's memory was auditory rather than visual.\nMathematical quickness.\nVon Neumann's mathematical fluency, calculation speed, and general problem-solving ability were widely noted by his peers. Paul Halmos called his speed \"awe-inspiring.\" Lothar Wolfgang Nordheim described him as the \"fastest mind I ever met\". Enrico Fermi told physicist Herbert L. Anderson: \"You know, Herb, Johnny can do calculations in his head ten times as fast as I can! And I can do them ten times as fast as you can, Herb, so you can see how impressive Johnny is!\" Edward Teller admitted that he \"never could keep up with him\", and Israel Halperin described trying to keep up as like riding a \"tricycle chasing a racing car.\"\nHe had an unusual ability to solve novel problems quickly. George P\u00f3lya, whose lectures at ETH Z\u00fcrich von Neumann attended as a student, said, \"Johnny was the only student I was ever afraid of. If in the course of a lecture I stated an unsolved problem, the chances were he'd come to me at the end of the lecture with the complete solution scribbled on a slip of paper.\" When George Dantzig brought von Neumann an unsolved problem in linear programming \"as I would to an ordinary mortal\", on which there had been no published literature, he was astonished when von Neumann said \"Oh, that!\", before offhandedly giving a lecture of over an hour, explaining how to solve the problem using the hitherto unconceived theory of duality.\nA story about von Neumann's encounter with the famous fly puzzle has entered mathematical folklore. In this puzzle, two bicycles begin 20 miles apart, and each travels toward the other at 10 miles per hour until they collide; meanwhile, a fly travels continuously back and forth between the bicycles at 15 miles per hour until it is squashed in the collision. The questioner asks how far the fly traveled in total; the \"trick\" for a quick answer is to realize that the fly's individual transits do not matter, only that it has been traveling at 15 miles per hour for one hour. As Eugene Wigner tells it, Max Born posed the riddle to von Neumann. The other scientists to whom he had posed it had laboriously computed the distance, so when von Neumann was immediately ready with the correct answer of 15 miles, Born observed that he must have guessed the trick. \"What trick?\" von Neumann replied. \"All I did was sum the geometric series.\"\nSelf-doubts.\nRota wrote that von Neumann had \"deep-seated and recurring self-doubts\". John L. Kelley reminisced in 1989 that \"Johnny von Neumann has said that he will be forgotten while Kurt G\u00f6del is remembered with Pythagoras, but the rest of us viewed Johnny with awe.\" Ulam suggests that some of his self-doubts with regard for his own creativity may have come from the fact he had not discovered several important ideas that others had, even though he was more than capable of doing so, giving the incompleteness theorems and Birkhoff's pointwise ergodic theorem as examples. Von Neumann had a virtuosity in following complicated reasoning and had supreme insights, yet he perhaps felt he did not have the gift for seemingly irrational proofs and theorems or intuitive insights. Ulam describes how during one of his stays at Princeton while von Neumann was working on rings of operators, continuous geometries and quantum logic he felt that von Neumann was not convinced of the importance of his work, and only when finding some ingenious technical trick or new approach did he take some pleasure in it. However, according to Rota, von Neumann still had an \"incomparably stronger technique\" compared to his friend, despite describing Ulam as the more creative mathematician.\nLegacy.\nAccolades.\nNobel Laureate Hans Bethe said \"I have sometimes wondered whether a brain like von Neumann's does not indicate a species superior to that of man\". Edward Teller observed \"von Neumann would carry on a conversation with my 3-year-old son, and the two of them would talk as equals, and I sometimes wondered if he used the same principle when he talked to the rest of us.\" Peter Lax wrote \"Von Neumann was addicted to thinking, and in particular to thinking about mathematics\". Eugene Wigner said, \"He understood mathematical problems not only in their initial aspect, but in their full complexity.\" Claude Shannon called him \"the smartest person I've ever met\", a common opinion. Jacob Bronowski wrote \"He was the cleverest man I ever knew, without exception. And he was a genius, in the sense that a genius is a man who has \"two\" great ideas\". In 2006, Tom Siegfried wrote that \"If any one person in the previous century personified the word \"polymath\", it was von Neumann\" and that \"His contributions to physics, mathematics, computer science, and economics rank him as one of the all-time intellectual giants of each field.\"\nWigner noted the extraordinary mind that von Neumann had, and described von Neumann as having a mind faster than anyone he knew, stating that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have known a great many intelligent people in my life. I knew Max Planck, Max von Laue, and Werner Heisenberg. Paul Dirac was my brother-in-law; Leo Szilard and Edward Teller have been among my closest friends; and Albert Einstein was a good friend, too. And I have known many of the brightest younger scientists. But none of them had a mind as quick and acute as Jancsi von Neumann. I have often remarked this in the presence of those men, and no one ever disputed me.\"It seems fair to say that if the influence of a scientist is interpreted broadly enough to include impact on fields beyond science proper, then John von Neumann was probably the most influential mathematician who ever lived,\" wrote Mikl\u00f3s R\u00e9dei. Lax stated that von Neumann would have won a Nobel Prize in Economics had he lived longer, and that \"if there were Nobel Prizes in computer science and mathematics, he would have been honored by these, too.\" Gian-Carlo Rota wrote that von Neumann \"was the first to have a vision of the boundless possibilities of computing, and he had the resolve to gather the considerable intellectual and engineering resources that led to the construction of the first large computer\" and consequently that \"No other mathematician in this century has had as deep and lasting an influence on the course of civilization.\" He is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential mathematicians and scientists of the 20th century. As a result of his wide reaching influence and contributions to many fields, he is widely considered a polymath.\nNeurophysiologist Leon Harmon described him in a similar manner, calling him the only \"true genius\" he had ever met: \"von Neumann's mind was all-encompassing. He could solve problems in any domain. ... And his mind was always working, always restless.\" While consulting for non-academic projects von Neumann's combination of outstanding scientific ability and practicality gave him a high credibility with military officers, engineers, and industrialists that no other scientist could match. In nuclear missilery he was considered \"the clearly dominant advisory figure\" according to Herbert York. Economist Nicholas Kaldor said he was \"unquestionably the nearest thing to a genius I have ever encountered.\" Likewise, Paul Samuelson wrote, \"We economists are grateful for von Neumann's genius. It is not for us to calculate whether he was a Gauss, or a Poincar\u00e9, or a Hilbert. He was the incomparable Johnny von Neumann. He darted briefly into our domain and it has never been the same since.\"\nHonors and awards.\nEvents and awards named in recognition of von Neumann include the annual John von Neumann Theory Prize of the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences, IEEE John von Neumann Medal, and the John von Neumann Prize of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Both the crater von Neumann on the Moon and the asteroid 22824 von Neumann are named in his honor.\nVon Neumann received awards including the Medal for Merit in 1947, the Medal of Freedom in 1956, and the Enrico Fermi Award also in 1956. He was elected a member of multiple honorary societies, including the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences, and he held eight honorary doctorates. On May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service issued the \"American Scientists\" commemorative postage stamp series, designed by artist Victor Stabin. The scientists depicted were von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, Josiah Willard Gibbs, and Richard Feynman.\nJohn von Neumann University was established in Kecskem\u00e9t, Hungary in 2016, as a successor to Kecskem\u00e9t College.\nSelected works.\nVon Neumann's first published paper was \"On the position of zeroes of certain minimum polynomials\", co-authored with Michael Fekete and published when von Neumann was 18. At 19, his solo paper \"On the introduction of transfinite numbers\" was published. He expanded his second solo paper, \"An axiomatization of set theory\", to create his PhD thesis. His first book, \"Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics\", was published in 1932. Following this, von Neumann switched from publishing in German to publishing in English, and his publications became more selective and expanded beyond pure mathematics. His 1942 \"Theory of Detonation Waves\" contributed to military research, his work on computing began with the unpublished 1946 \"On the principles of large scale computing machines\", and his publications on weather prediction began with the 1950 \"Numerical integration of the barotropic vorticity equation\". Alongside his later papers were informal essays targeted at colleagues and the general public, such as his 1947 \"The Mathematician\", described as a \"farewell to pure mathematics\", and his 1955 \"Can we survive technology?\", which considered a bleak future including nuclear warfare and deliberate climate change. His complete works have been compiled into a six-volume set.\nPersonal life.\nHe married Mariette K\u00f6vesi in 1930, and they divorced in 1937. The couple had one daughter, Marina von Neumann Whitman. She was an academic economist, the first woman to serve on the President's Council of Economic Advisers (1972\u20131973), and served as Vice President of Public Affairs at General Motors (1979\u20131992)\u2014making her the highest-ranking woman in the U.S. auto industry at the time. She was also Professor Emerita at the University of Michigan.\nHe later married Klara Dan (m. 1938\u20131957); she helped program the ENIAC and MANIAC computers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Books\nPopular periodicals\nJournals"}
{"id": "15943", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15943", "title": "John Newton", "text": "Anglican cleric, hymn-writer, and abolitionist (1725\u20131807)\nJohn Newton (; 4 August\u00a0[O.S. 24 July]\u00a01725 \u2013 21 December 1807) was an English evangelical Anglican cleric and slavery abolitionist. He had previously been a captain of slave ships and an investor in the slave trade. He served as a sailor in the Royal Navy (after forced recruitment) and was himself enslaved for a time in West Africa. He is noted for being author of the hymns \"Amazing Grace\" and \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken\".\nNewton went to sea at a young age and worked on slave ships in the Atlantic slave trade for several years. In 1745, he himself became a slave of Princess Peye, a woman of the Sherbro people in what is now Sierra Leone. He was rescued, returned to sea and the trade, and captained several slave ships. After retiring from active sea-faring, he continued to invest in the slave trade. Some years after experiencing a conversion to Christianity during his rescue, Newton renounced his trade and became a prominent supporter of abolitionism. Now an evangelical, he was ordained as a Church of England cleric and served as parish priest at Olney, Buckinghamshire, for two decades and wrote hymns.\nNewton lived to see the British Empire's abolition of the African slave trade in 1807, just months before his death.\nEarly life.\nJohn Newton was born in Wapping, London, in 1725, the son of John Newton the Elder, a shipmaster in the Mediterranean service, and Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Scatliff). Elizabeth was the only daughter of Simon Scatliff, an instrument maker from London. Elizabeth was brought up as a Nonconformist. She died of tuberculosis (then called consumption) in July 1732, about two weeks before her son's seventh birthday. Newton spent two years at a boarding school, before going to live at Aveley in Essex, the home of his father's new wife.\nAt age eleven he first went to sea with his father. Newton sailed six voyages before his father retired in 1742. At that time, Newton's father made plans for him to work at a sugarcane plantation in Jamaica. Instead, Newton signed on with a merchant ship sailing to the Mediterranean Sea.\nImpressment into naval service.\nIn 1743, while going to visit friends, Newton was pressed into the Royal Navy. He became a midshipman aboard HMS \"Harwich\". At one point Newton tried to desert and was punished in front of the crew. Stripped to the waist and tied to the grating, he received a flogging and was reduced to the rank of a common seaman.\nFollowing that disgrace and humiliation, Newton initially contemplated murdering the captain and committing suicide by throwing himself overboard. He recovered, both physically and mentally. Later, while \"Harwich\" was en route to India, he transferred to \"Pegasus\", a slave ship bound for West Africa. In what was known as the \"triangular trade\", the ship carried goods to Africa and traded them for slaves to be shipped to the colonies in the Caribbean and North America.\nEnslavement and rescue.\nNewton did not get along with the crew of \"Pegasus\". In 1745, they left him in West Africa with Amos Clowe, a slave dealer. Clowe took Newton to the coast and gave him to his wife, Princess Peye of the Sherbro people. According to Newton, she abused and mistreated him just as much as she did her other slaves. Newton later recounted this period as the time he was \"once an infidel and libertine, a servant of slaves in West Africa.\"\nEarly in 1748, he was rescued by a sea captain who had been asked by Newton's father to search for him, and returned to England on the merchant ship \"Greyhound\", which was carrying beeswax and dyer's wood, now referred to as camwood.\nChristian conversion.\nIn 1748, during his return voyage to England aboard the ship \"Greyhound\", Newton had a Christian conversion. He awoke to find the ship caught in a severe storm off the coast of County Donegal, Ireland and about to sink. In response, Newton began praying for God's mercy, after which the storm began to die down. After four weeks at sea, the \"Greyhound\" made it to port in Lough Swilly (Ireland). This experience marked the beginning of his conversion to Christianity.\nHe began to read the Bible and other Christian literature. By the time he reached Great Britain, he had accepted the doctrines of evangelical Christianity. The date was 21 March 1748, an anniversary he marked for the rest of his life. From that point on, he avoided profanity, gambling and drinking. Although he continued to work in the slave trade, he had gained sympathy for the slaves during his time in Africa. He later said that his true conversion did not happen until some time later: he wrote in 1764 \"I cannot consider myself to have been a believer in the full sense of the word, until a considerable time afterwards.\"\nSlave trading.\nNewton returned in 1748 to Liverpool, a major port for the Triangular Trade. Partly due to the influence of his father's friend Joseph Manesty, he obtained a position as first mate aboard the slave ship \"Brownlow,\" bound for the West Indies via the coast of Guinea. After his return to England in 1750, he made three voyages as captain of the slave ships \"Duke of Argyle\" (1750) and \"African\" (1752\u201353 and 1753\u201354). After suffering a severe stroke in 1754, he gave up seafaring, while continuing to invest in Manesty's slaving operations.\nAfter Newton moved to the City of London as rector of St Mary Woolnoth Church, he contributed to the work of the Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade, formed in 1787. During this time he wrote \"\".. In it he states, \"So much light has been thrown upon the subject, by many able pens; and so many respectable persons have already engaged to use their utmost influence, for the suppression of a traffic, which contradicts the feelings of humanity; that it is hoped, this stain of our National character will soon be wiped out.\"\nMarriage and family.\nOn 12 February 1750, Newton married his childhood sweetheart, Mary Catlett, at St. Margaret's Church, Rochester.\nNewton adopted his two orphaned nieces, Elizabeth Cunningham and Eliza Catlett, both from the Catlett side of the family. Newton's niece Alys Newton later married Mehul, a prince from India.\nAnglican priest.\nIn 1755, Newton was appointed as tide surveyor (a tax collector) of the Port of Liverpool, again through the influence of Manesty. In his spare time, he studied Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac, preparing for serious religious study. He became well known as an evangelical lay minister. In 1757, he applied to be ordained as a priest in the Church of England, but it was more than seven years before he was eventually accepted.\nDuring this period, he also applied to the Independents and Presbyterians. He mailed applications directly to the Bishops of Chester and Lincoln and the Archbishops of Canterbury and York.\nEventually, in 1764, he was introduced by Thomas Haweis to The 2nd Earl of Dartmouth, who was influential in recommending Newton to William Markham, Bishop of Chester. Haweis suggested Newton for the living of Olney, Buckinghamshire. On 29 April 1764 Newton received deacon's orders, and finally was ordained as a priest on 17 June.\nAs curate of Olney, Newton was partly sponsored by John Thornton, a wealthy merchant and evangelical philanthropist. He supplemented Newton's stipend of \u00a360 a year with \u00a3200 a year \"for hospitality and to help the poor\". Newton soon became well known for his pastoral care, as much as for his beliefs. His friendship with Dissenters and evangelical clergy led to his being respected by Anglicans and Nonconformists alike. He spent sixteen years at Olney. His preaching was so popular that the congregation added a gallery to the church to accommodate the many persons who flocked to hear him.\nSome five years later, in 1772, Thomas Scott took up the curacy of the neighbouring parishes of Stoke Goldington and Weston Underwood. Newton was instrumental in converting Scott from a cynical 'career priest' to a true believer, a conversion which Scott related in his spiritual autobiography \"The Force of Truth\" (1779). Later Scott became a biblical commentator and co-founder of the Church Missionary Society.\nIn 1779, Newton was invited by John Thornton to become Rector of St Mary Woolnoth, Lombard Street, London, where he officiated until his death. The church had been built by Nicholas Hawksmoor in 1727 in the fashionable Baroque style. Newton was one of only two evangelical Anglican priests in the capital, and he soon found himself gaining in popularity amongst the growing evangelical party. He was a strong supporter of evangelicalism in the Church of England. He remained a friend of Dissenters (such as Methodists post-Wesley, and Baptists) as well as Anglicans.\nYoung churchmen and people struggling with faith sought his advice, including such well-known social figures as the writer and philanthropist Hannah More, and the young William Wilberforce, a member of parliament (MP) who had recently suffered a crisis of conscience and religious conversion while contemplating leaving politics. The younger man consulted with Newton, who encouraged Wilberforce to stay in Parliament and \"serve God where he was\".\nIn 1792, Newton was presented with the degree of Doctor of Divinity by the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University).\nWriter and hymnist.\nIn 1767, William Cowper, the poet, moved to Olney. He worshipped in Newton's church, and collaborated with the priest on a volume of hymns; it was published as \"Olney Hymns\" in 1779. This work had a great influence on English hymnology. The volume included Newton's well-known hymns: \"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken\", \"How Sweet the Name of Jesus Sounds!\", and \"Faith's Review and Expectation\", which has come to be known by its opening phrase, \"Amazing Grace\".\nMany of Newton's (as well as Cowper's) hymns are preserved in the \"Sacred Harp,\" a hymnal used in the American South during the Second Great Awakening. Hymns were scored according to the tonal scale for shape note singing. Easily learnt and incorporating singers into four-part harmony, shape note music was widely used by evangelical preachers to reach new congregants.\nIn 1776, Newton contributed a preface to an annotated version of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\".\nNewton also contributed to the Cheap Repository Tracts. He wrote an autobiography entitled \"An Authentic Narrative of Some Remarkable And Interesting Particulars in the Life of ------ Communicated, in a Series of Letters, to the Reverend T. Haweis, Rector of Aldwinckle, And by him, at the request of friends, now made public\", which he published anonymously in 1764 with a Preface by Haweis. It was later described as \"written in an easy style, distinguished by great natural shrewdness, and sanctified by the Lord God and prayer\".\nAbolitionist.\nIn 1788, 34 years after he had retired from the slave trade, Newton broke a long silence on the subject with the publication of a forceful pamphlet \"Thoughts Upon the Slave Trade\", in which he described the horrific conditions of the slave ships during the Middle Passage. He apologised for \"a confession, which\u00a0... comes too late\u00a0... It will always be a subject of humiliating reflection to me, that I was once an active instrument in a business at which my heart now shudders.\" He had copies sent to every MP, and the pamphlet sold so well that it swiftly required reprinting.\nNewton became an ally of William Wilberforce, leader of the Parliamentary campaign to abolish the African slave trade. He lived to see the British passage of the Slave Trade Act 1807, which enacted this event.\nNewton came to believe that during the first five of his nine years as a slave trader he had not been a Christian in the full sense of the term. In 1763 he wrote: \"I was greatly deficient in many respects\u00a0... I cannot consider myself to have been a believer in the full sense of the word, until a considerable time afterwards.\"\nFinal years.\nNewton's wife Mary Catlett died in 1790, after which he published \"Letters to a Wife\" (1793), in which he expressed his grief. Plagued by ill health and failing eyesight, Newton died on 21 December 1807 in London. He was buried beside his wife in St. Mary Woolnoth in London. Both were reinterred at the Church of Saints Peter and Paul, Olney in 1893.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15944", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15944", "title": "Jet engine", "text": "Aircraft engine that produces thrust by emitting a jet of gas\nA jet engine is a type of reaction engine, discharging a fast-moving jet of heated gas (usually air) that generates thrust by jet propulsion. While this broad definition may include rocket, water jet, and hybrid propulsion, the term jet engine typically refers to an internal combustion air-breathing jet engine such as a turbojet, turbofan, ramjet, pulse jet, or scramjet. In general, jet engines are internal combustion engines.\nAir-breathing jet engines typically feature a rotating air compressor powered by a turbine, with the leftover power providing thrust through the propelling nozzle\u2014this process is known as the Brayton thermodynamic cycle. Jet aircraft use such engines for long-distance travel. Early jet aircraft used turbojet engines that were relatively inefficient for subsonic flight. Most modern subsonic jet aircraft use more complex high-bypass turbofan engines. They give higher speed and greater fuel efficiency than piston and propeller aeroengines over long distances. A few air-breathing engines made for high-speed applications (ramjets and scramjets) use the ram effect of the vehicle's speed instead of a mechanical compressor.\nThe thrust of a typical jetliner engine went from (de Havilland Ghost turbojet) in the 1950s to (General Electric GE90 turbofan) in the 1990s, and their reliability went from 40 in-flight shutdowns per 100,000 engine flight hours to less than 1 per 100,000 in the late 1990s. This, combined with greatly decreased fuel consumption, permitted routine transatlantic flight by twin-engined airliners by the turn of the century, where previously a similar journey would have required multiple fuel stops.\nHistory.\nThe principle of the jet engine is not new; however, the technical advances necessary to make the idea work did not come to fruition until the 20th century.\nA rudimentary demonstration of jet power dates back to the aeolipile, a device described by Hero of Alexandria in 1st-century Egypt. This device directed steam power through two nozzles to cause a sphere to spin rapidly on its axis. It was seen as a curiosity. Meanwhile, practical applications of the turbine can be seen in the water wheel and the windmill. \nHistorians have further traced the theoretical origin of the principles of jet engines to traditional Chinese firework and rocket propulsion systems. Such devices' use for flight is documented in the story of Ottoman soldier Lag\u00e2ri Hasan \u00c7elebi, who reportedly achieved flight using a cone-shaped rocket in 1633.\nThe earliest attempts at airbreathing jet engines were hybrid designs in which an external power source first compressed air, which was then mixed with fuel and burned for jet thrust. The Italian Caproni Campini N.1, and the Japanese Tsu-11 engine intended to power Ohka kamikaze planes towards the end of World War II were unsuccessful.\nEven before the start of World War II, engineers were beginning to realize that engines driving propellers were approaching limits due to issues related to propeller efficiency, which declined as blade tips approached the speed of sound. If aircraft performance were to increase beyond such a barrier, a different propulsion mechanism was necessary. This was the motivation behind the development of the gas turbine engine, the most common form of jet engine.\nThe key to a practical jet engine was the gas turbine, extracting power from the engine itself to drive the compressor. The gas turbine was not a new idea: the patent for a stationary turbine was granted to John Barber in England in 1791. The first gas turbine to successfully run self-sustaining was built in 1903 by Norwegian engineer \u00c6gidius Elling. Such engines did not reach manufacture due to issues of safety, reliability, weight and, especially, sustained operation.\nThe first patent for using a gas turbine to power an aircraft was filed in 1921 by Maxime Guillaume. His engine was an axial-flow turbojet, but was never constructed, as it would have required considerable advances over the state of the art in compressors. Alan Arnold Griffith published \"An Aerodynamic Theory of Turbine Design\" in 1926 leading to experimental work at the RAE.\nIn 1928, RAF College Cranwell cadet Frank Whittle formally submitted his ideas for a turbojet to his superiors. In October 1929, he developed his ideas further. On 16 January 1930, in England, Whittle submitted his first patent (granted in 1932). The patent showed a two-stage axial compressor feeding a single-sided centrifugal compressor. Practical axial compressors were made possible by ideas from A.A.Griffith in a seminal paper in 1926 (\"An Aerodynamic Theory of Turbine Design\"). Whittle would later concentrate on the simpler centrifugal compressor only. Whittle was unable to interest the government in his invention, and development continued at a slow pace.\nIn Spain, pilot and engineer Virgilio Leret Ruiz was granted a patent for a jet engine design in March 1935. Republican president Manuel Aza\u00f1a arranged for initial construction at the Hispano-Suiza aircraft factory in Madrid in 1936, but Leret was executed months later by Francoist Moroccan troops after unsuccessfully defending his seaplane base on the first days of the Spanish Civil War. His plans, hidden from Francoists, were secretly given to the British embassy in Madrid a few years later by his wife, Carlota O'Neill, upon her release from prison. \nIn 1935, Hans von Ohain started work on a similar design to Whittle's in Germany, both compressor and turbine being radial, on opposite sides of the same disc, initially unaware of Whittle's work. Von Ohain's first device was strictly experimental and could run only under external power, but he was able to demonstrate the basic concept. Ohain was then introduced to Ernst Heinkel, one of the larger aircraft industrialists of the day, who immediately saw the promise of the design. Heinkel had recently purchased the Hirth engine company, and Ohain and his master machinist Max Hahn were set up there as a new division of the Hirth company. They had their first HeS 1 centrifugal engine running by September 1937. Unlike Whittle's design, Ohain used hydrogen as fuel, supplied under external pressure. Their subsequent designs culminated in the gasoline-fuelled HeS 3 of , which was fitted to Heinkel's simple and compact He 178 airframe and flown by Erich Warsitz in the early morning of August 27, 1939, from Rostock-Marienehe aerodrome, an impressively short time for development. The He 178 was the world's first jet plane. Heinkel applied for a US patent covering the Aircraft Power Plant by Hans Joachim Pabst von Ohain on May 31, 1939; patent number US2256198, with M Hahn referenced as inventor. Von Ohain's design, an axial-flow engine, as opposed to Whittle's centrifugal flow engine, was eventually adopted by most manufacturers by the 1950s.\nAustrian Anselm Franz of Junkers' engine division (\"Junkers Motoren\" or \"Jumo\") introduced the axial-flow compressor in their jet engine. Jumo was assigned the next engine number in the RLM 109-0xx numbering sequence for gas turbine aircraft powerplants, \"004\", and the result was the Jumo 004 engine. After many lesser technical difficulties were solved, mass production of this engine started in 1944 as a powerplant for the world's first jet-fighter aircraft, the Messerschmitt Me 262 (and later the world's first jet-bomber aircraft, the Arado Ar 234). A variety of reasons conspired to delay the engine's availability, causing the fighter to arrive too late to improve Germany's position in World War II, however this was the first jet engine to be used in service.\nMeanwhile, in Britain the Gloster E28/39 had its maiden flight on 15 May 1941 and the Gloster Meteor finally entered service with the RAF in July 1944. These were powered by turbojet engines from Power Jets Ltd., set up by Frank Whittle. The first two operational turbojet aircraft, the Messerschmitt Me 262 and then the Gloster Meteor entered service within three months of each other in 1944; the Me 262 in April and the Gloster Meteor in July. The Meteor only saw around 15 aircraft enter World War II action, while up to 1400 Me 262 were produced, with 300 entering combat, delivering the first ground attacks and air combat victories of jet planes.\nFollowing the end of the war the German jet aircraft and jet engines were extensively studied by the victorious allies and contributed to work on early Soviet and US jet fighters. The legacy of the axial-flow engine is seen in the fact that practically all jet engines on fixed-wing aircraft have had some inspiration from this design.\nBy the 1950s, the jet engine was almost universal in combat aircraft, with the exception of cargo, liaison and other specialty types. By this point, some of the British designs were already cleared for civilian use, and had appeared on early models like the de Havilland Comet and Avro Canada Jetliner. By the 1960s, all large civilian aircraft were also jet powered, leaving the piston engine in low-cost niche roles such as cargo flights.\nThe efficiency of turbojet engines was still rather worse than piston engines, but by the 1970s, with the advent of high-bypass turbofan jet engines (an innovation not foreseen by the early commentators such as Edgar Buckingham, at high speeds and high altitudes that seemed absurd to them), fuel efficiency was about the same as the best piston and propeller engines.\nUses.\nJet engines power jet aircraft, cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles. In the form of rocket engines they power model rocketry, spaceflight, and military missiles.\nJet engines have propelled high speed cars, particularly drag racers, with the all-time record held by a rocket car. A turbofan powered car, ThrustSSC, currently holds the land speed record.\nJet engine designs are frequently modified for non-aircraft applications, as industrial gas turbines or marine powerplants. These are used in electrical power generation, for powering water, natural gas, or oil pumps, and providing propulsion for ships and locomotives. Industrial gas turbines can create up to 50,000 shaft horsepower. Many of these engines are derived from older military turbojets such as the Pratt &amp; Whitney J57 and J75 models. There is also a derivative of the P&amp;W JT8D low-bypass turbofan that creates up to 35,000 horsepower (HP)\nJet engines are also sometimes developed into, or share certain components such as engine cores, with turboshaft and turboprop engines, which are forms of gas turbine engines that are typically used to power helicopters and some propeller-driven aircraft.\nTypes of jet engine.\nThere are a large number of different types of jet engines, all of which achieve forward thrust from the principle of \"jet propulsion\".\nAirbreathing.\nCommonly aircraft are propelled by airbreathing jet engines. Most airbreathing jet engines that are in use are turbofan jet engines, which give good efficiency at speeds just below the speed of sound.\nTurbojet.\nA turbojet engine is a gas turbine engine that works by compressing air with an inlet and a compressor (axial, centrifugal, or both), mixing fuel with the compressed air, burning the mixture in the combustor, and then passing the hot, high pressure air through a turbine and a nozzle. The compressor is powered by the turbine, which extracts energy from the expanding gas passing through it. The engine converts internal energy in the fuel to increased momentum of the gas flowing through the engine, producing thrust. All the air entering the compressor is passed through the combustor, and turbine, unlike the turbofan engine described below. \nTurbofan.\nTurbofans differ from turbojets in that they have an additional fan at the front of the engine, which accelerates air in a duct bypassing the core gas turbine engine. Turbofans are the dominant engine type for medium and long-range airliners.\nTurbofans are usually more efficient than turbojets at subsonic speeds, but at high speeds their large frontal area generates more drag. Therefore, in supersonic flight, and in military and other aircraft where other considerations have a higher priority than fuel efficiency, fans tend to be smaller or absent.\nBecause of these distinctions, turbofan engine designs are often categorized as low-bypass or high-bypass, depending upon the amount of air which bypasses the core of the engine. Low-bypass turbofans have a bypass ratio of around 2:1 or less.\nPropfan.\nA propfan engine is a type of airbreathing jet engine which combines aspects of turboprop and turbofan. Its design consists of a central gas turbine which drives open-air contra-rotating propellers. Unlike turboprop engines, in which the propeller and the engine are considered two separate products, the propfan\u2019s gas generator and its unshrouded propeller module are heavily integrated and are considered to be a single product. Additionally, the propfan\u2019s short, heavily twisted variable pitch blades closely remember the ducted fan blades of turbofan engines.\nPropfans are designed to offer the speed and performance of turbofan engines with fuel efficiency of turboprops. However, due to low fuel costs and high cabin noise, early propfan projects were abandoned. Very few aircraft have flown with propfans, with the Antonov An-70 being the first and only aircraft to fly while being powered solely by propfan engines.\nAdvanced technology engine.\nThe term Advanced technology engine refers to the modern generation of jet engines. The principle is that a turbine engine will function more efficiently if the various sets of turbines can revolve at their individual optimum speeds, instead of at the same speed. The true advanced technology engine has a triple spool, meaning that instead of having a single drive shaft, there are three, in order that the three sets of blades may revolve at different speeds. An interim state is a twin-spool engine, allowing only two different speeds for the turbines.\nRam compression.\nRam compression jet engines are airbreathing engines similar to gas turbine engines in so far as they both use the Brayton cycle. Gas turbine and ram compression engines differ, however, in how they compress the incoming airflow. Whereas gas turbine engines use axial or centrifugal compressors to compress incoming air, ram engines rely only on air compressed in the inlet or diffuser. A ram engine thus requires a substantial initial forward airspeed before it can function. Ramjets are considered the simplest type of air breathing jet engine because they have no moving parts in the engine proper, only in the accessories.\nScramjets differ mainly in the fact that the air does not slow to subsonic speeds. Rather, they use supersonic combustion. They are efficient at even higher speed. Very few have been built or flown.\nOther types of jet propulsion.\nRocket.\nThe rocket engine uses the same basic physical principles of thrust as a form of reaction engine, but is distinct from the jet engine in that it does not require atmospheric air to provide oxygen; the rocket carries all components of the reaction mass. However some definitions treat it as a form of jet propulsion.\nBecause rockets do not breathe air, this allows them to operate at arbitrary altitudes and in space.\nThis type of engine is used for launching satellites, space exploration and crewed access, and permitted landing on the Moon in 1969.\nRocket engines are used for high altitude flights, or anywhere where very high accelerations are needed since rocket engines themselves have a very high thrust-to-weight ratio.\nHowever, the high exhaust speed and the heavier, oxidizer-rich propellant results in far more propellant use than turbofans. Even so, at extremely high speeds they become energy-efficient.\nAn approximate equation for the net thrust of a rocket engine is:\nformula_1\nWhere formula_2 is the net thrust, formula_3 is the specific impulse, formula_4 is a standard gravity, formula_5 is the propellant flow in kg/s, formula_6 is the cross-sectional area at the exit of the exhaust nozzle, and formula_7 is the atmospheric pressure.\nHybrid.\nCombined-cycle engines simultaneously use two or more different principles of jet propulsion.\nWater jet.\nA water jet, or pump-jet, is a marine propulsion system that uses a jet of water. The mechanical arrangement may be a ducted propeller with nozzle, or a centrifugal compressor and nozzle. The pump-jet must be driven by a separate engine such as a Diesel or gas turbine.\nGeneral physical principles.\nAll jet engines are reaction engines that generate thrust by emitting a jet of fluid rearwards at relatively high speed. The forces on the inside of the engine needed to create this jet give a strong thrust on the engine which pushes the craft forwards.\nJet engines make their jet from propellant stored in tanks that are attached to the engine (as in a 'rocket') as well as in duct engines (those commonly used on aircraft) by ingesting an external fluid (very typically air) and expelling it at higher speed.\nPropelling nozzle.\nA propelling nozzle produces a high velocity exhaust jet. Propelling nozzles turn internal and pressure energy into high velocity kinetic energy. The total pressure and temperature don't change through the nozzle but their static values drop as the gas speeds up.\nThe velocity of the air entering the nozzle is low, about Mach 0.4, a prerequisite for minimizing pressure losses in the duct leading to the nozzle. The temperature entering the nozzle may be as low as sea level ambient for a fan nozzle in the cold air at cruise altitudes. It may be as high as the 1000 Kelvin exhaust gas temperature for a supersonic afterburning engine or 2200\u00a0K with afterburner lit. The pressure entering the nozzle may vary from 1.5 times the pressure outside the nozzle, for a single stage fan, to 30 times for the fastest manned aircraft at Mach 3+.\nConvergent nozzles are only able to accelerate the gas up to local sonic (Mach 1) conditions. To reach high flight speeds, even greater exhaust velocities are required, and so a convergent-divergent nozzle is needed on high-speed aircraft.\nThe engine thrust is highest if the static pressure of the gas reaches the ambient value as it leaves the nozzle. This only happens if the nozzle exit area is the correct value for the nozzle pressure ratio (npr). Since the npr changes with engine thrust setting and flight speed this is seldom the case. Also at supersonic speeds the divergent area is less than required to give complete internal expansion to ambient pressure as a trade-off with external body drag. Whitford gives the F-16 as an example. Other underexpanded examples were the XB-70 and SR-71.\nThe nozzle size, together with the area of the turbine nozzles, determines the operating pressure of the compressor.\nEnergy efficiency relating to aircraft jet engines.\nThis overview highlights where energy losses occur in complete jet aircraft powerplants or engine installations.\nA jet engine at rest, as on a test stand, sucks in fuel and generates thrust. How well it does this is judged by how much fuel it uses and what force is required to restrain it. This is a measure of its efficiency. If something deteriorates inside the engine (known as performance deterioration) it will be less efficient and this will show when the fuel produces less thrust. If a change is made to an internal part which allows the air/combustion gases to flow more smoothly the engine will be more efficient and use less fuel. A standard definition is used to assess how different things change engine efficiency and also to allow comparisons to be made between different engines. This definition is called specific fuel consumption, or how much fuel is needed to produce one unit of thrust. For example, it will be known for a particular engine design that if some bumps in a bypass duct are smoothed out the air will flow more smoothly giving a pressure loss reduction of x% and y% less fuel will be needed to get the take-off thrust, for example. This understanding comes under the engineering discipline Jet engine performance. How efficiency is affected by forward speed and by supplying energy to aircraft systems is mentioned later.\nThe efficiency of the engine is controlled primarily by the operating conditions inside the engine which are the pressure produced by the compressor and the temperature of the combustion gases at the first set of rotating turbine blades. The pressure is the highest air pressure in the engine. The turbine rotor temperature is not the highest in the engine but is the highest at which energy transfer takes place ( higher temperatures occur in the combustor). The above pressure and temperature are shown on a Thermodynamic cycle diagram.\nThe efficiency is further modified by how smoothly the air and the combustion gases flow through the engine, how well the flow is aligned (known as incidence angle) with the moving and stationary passages in the compressors and turbines. Non-optimum angles, as well as non-optimum passage and blade shapes can cause thickening and separation of Boundary layers and formation of Shock waves. It is important to slow the flow (lower speed means less pressure losses or Pressure drop) when it travels through ducts connecting the different parts. How well the individual components contribute to turning fuel into thrust is quantified by measures like efficiencies for the compressors, turbines and combustor and pressure losses for the ducts. These are shown as lines on a Thermodynamic cycle diagram.\nThe engine efficiency, or thermal efficiency, known as formula_8. is dependent on the Thermodynamic cycle parameters, maximum pressure and temperature, and on component efficiencies, formula_9, formula_10 and formula_11 and duct pressure losses.\nThe engine needs compressed air for itself just to run successfully. This air comes from its own compressor and is called secondary air. It does not contribute to making thrust so makes the engine less efficient. It is used to preserve the mechanical integrity of the engine, to stop parts overheating and to prevent oil escaping from bearings for example. Only some of this air taken from the compressors returns to the turbine flow to contribute to thrust production. Any reduction in the amount needed improves the engine efficiency. Again, it will be known for a particular engine design that a reduced requirement for cooling flow of x% will reduce the specific fuel consumption by y%. In other words, less fuel will be required to give take-off thrust, for example. The engine is more efficient.\nAll of the above considerations are basic to the engine running on its own and, at the same time, doing nothing useful, i.e. it is not moving an aircraft or supplying energy for the aircraft's electrical, hydraulic and air systems. In the aircraft the engine gives away some of its thrust-producing potential, or fuel, to power these systems. These requirements, which cause installation losses, reduce its efficiency. It is using some fuel that does not contribute to the engine's thrust.\nFinally, when the aircraft is flying the propelling jet itself contains wasted kinetic energy after it has left the engine. This is quantified by the term propulsive, or Froude, efficiency formula_12 and may be reduced by redesigning the engine to give it bypass flow and a lower speed for the propelling jet, for example as a turboprop or turbofan engine. At the same time forward speed increases the formula_8 by increasing the Overall pressure ratio.\nThe overall efficiency of the engine at flight speed is defined as formula_14.\nThe formula_15 at flight speed depends on how well the intake compresses the air before it is handed over to the engine compressors. The intake compression ratio, which can be as high as 32:1 at Mach 3, adds to that of the engine compressor to give the Overall pressure ratio and formula_8 for the Thermodynamic cycle. How well it does this is defined by its pressure recovery or measure of the losses in the intake. Mach 3 manned flight has provided an interesting illustration of how these losses can increase dramatically in an instant. The North American XB-70 Valkyrie and Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird at Mach 3 each had pressure recoveries of about 0.8, due to relatively low losses during the compression process, i.e. through systems of multiple shocks. During an 'unstart' the efficient shock system would be replaced by a very inefficient single shock beyond the inlet and an intake pressure recovery of about 0.3 and a correspondingly low pressure ratio.\nThe propelling nozzle at speeds above about Mach 2 usually has extra internal thrust losses because the exit area is not big enough as a trade-off with external afterbody drag.\nAlthough a bypass engine improves propulsive efficiency it incurs losses of its own inside the engine itself. Machinery has to be added to transfer energy from the gas generator to a bypass airflow. The low loss from the propelling nozzle of a turbojet is added to with extra losses due to inefficiencies in the added turbine and fan. These may be included in a transmission, or transfer, efficiency formula_17. However, these losses are more than made up by the improvement in propulsive efficiency. There are also extra pressure losses in the bypass duct and an extra propelling nozzle.\nWith the advent of turbofans with their loss-making machinery what goes on inside the engine has been separated by Bennett, for example, between gas generator and transfer machinery giving formula_18.\nThe energy efficiency (formula_15) of jet engines installed in vehicles has two main components:\nEven though overall energy efficiency formula_15 is:\nformula_23\nfor all jet engines the \"propulsive efficiency\" is highest as the exhaust jet velocity gets closer to the vehicle speed as this gives the smallest residual kinetic energy. For an airbreathing engine an exhaust velocity equal to the vehicle velocity, or a formula_12 equal to one, gives zero thrust with no net momentum change. The formula for air-breathing engines moving at speed formula_25 with an exhaust velocity formula_26, and neglecting fuel flow, is:\nformula_27\nAnd for a rocket:\nformula_28\nIn addition to propulsive efficiency, another factor is \"cycle efficiency\"; a jet engine is a form of heat engine. Heat engine efficiency is determined by the ratio of temperatures reached in the engine to that exhausted at the nozzle. This has improved constantly over time as new materials have been introduced to allow higher maximum cycle temperatures. For example, composite materials, combining metals with ceramics, have been developed for HP turbine blades, which run at the maximum cycle temperature. The efficiency is also limited by the overall pressure ratio that can be achieved. Cycle efficiency is highest in rocket engines (~60+%), as they can achieve extremely high combustion temperatures. Cycle efficiency in turbojet and similar is nearer to 30%, due to much lower peak cycle temperatures.\nThe combustion efficiency of most aircraft gas turbine engines at sea level takeoff conditions\nis almost 100%. It decreases nonlinearly to 98% at altitude cruise conditions. Air-fuel ratio ranges from 50:1 to 130:1. For any type of combustion chamber there is a \"rich\" and \"weak limit\" to the air-fuel ratio, beyond which the flame is extinguished. The range of air-fuel ratio between the rich and weak limits is reduced with an increase of air velocity. If the\nincreasing air mass flow reduces the fuel ratio below certain value, flame extinction occurs.\nConsumption of fuel or propellant.\nA closely related (but different) concept to energy efficiency is the rate of consumption of propellant mass. Propellant consumption in jet engines is measured by specific fuel consumption, specific impulse, or effective exhaust velocity. They all measure the same thing. Specific impulse and effective exhaust velocity are strictly proportional, whereas specific fuel consumption is inversely proportional to the others.\nFor air-breathing engines such as turbojets, energy efficiency and propellant (fuel) efficiency are much the same thing, since the propellant is a fuel and the source of energy. In rocketry, the propellant is also the exhaust, and this means that a high energy propellant gives better propellant efficiency but can in some cases actually give \"lower\" energy efficiency.\nIt can be seen in the table (just below) that the subsonic turbofans such as General Electric's CF6 turbofan use a lot less fuel to generate thrust for a second than did the Concorde's Rolls-Royce/Snecma Olympus 593 turbojet. However, since energy is force times distance and the distance per second was greater for the Concorde, the actual power generated by the engine for the same amount of fuel was higher for the Concorde at Mach 2 than the CF6. Thus, the Concorde's engines were more efficient in terms of energy per distance traveled.\nThrust-to-weight ratio.\nThe thrust-to-weight ratio of jet engines with similar configurations varies with scale, but is mostly a function of engine construction technology. For a given engine, the lighter the engine, the better the thrust-to-weight is, the less fuel is used to compensate for drag due to the lift needed to carry the engine weight, or to accelerate the mass of the engine.\nAs can be seen in the following table, rocket engines generally achieve much higher thrust-to-weight ratios than duct engines such as turbojet and turbofan engines. This is primarily because rockets almost universally use dense liquid or solid reaction mass which gives a much smaller volume and hence the pressurization system that supplies the nozzle is much smaller and lighter for the same performance. Duct engines have to deal with air which is two to three orders of magnitude less dense and this gives pressures over much larger areas, which in turn results in more engineering materials being needed to hold the engine together and for the air compressor.\nComparison of types.\nPropeller engines handle larger air mass flows, and give them smaller acceleration, than jet engines. Since the increase in air speed is small, at high flight speeds the thrust available to propeller-driven aeroplanes is small. However, at low speeds, these engines benefit from relatively high propulsive efficiency.\nOn the other hand, turbojets accelerate a much smaller mass flow of intake air and burned fuel, but they then reject it at very high speed. When a de Laval nozzle is used to accelerate a hot engine exhaust, the outlet velocity may be locally supersonic. Turbojets are particularly suitable for aircraft travelling at very high speeds.\nTurbofans have a mixed exhaust consisting of the bypass air and the hot combustion product gas from the core engine. The amount of air that bypasses the core engine compared to the amount flowing into the engine determines what is called a turbofan's bypass ratio (BPR).\nWhile a turbojet engine uses all of the engine's output to produce thrust in the form of a hot high-velocity exhaust gas jet, a turbofan's cool low-velocity bypass air yields between 30% and 70% of the total thrust produced by a turbofan system.\nThe net thrust (FN) generated by a turbofan can also be expanded as:\nformula_29\nwhere:\nRocket engines have extremely high exhaust velocity and thus are best suited for high speeds (hypersonic) and great altitudes. At any given throttle, the thrust and efficiency of a rocket motor improves slightly with increasing altitude (because the back-pressure falls thus increasing net thrust at the nozzle exit plane), whereas with a turbojet (or turbofan) the falling density of the air entering the intake (and the hot gases leaving the nozzle) causes the net thrust to decrease with increasing altitude. Rocket engines are more efficient than even scramjets above roughly Mach 15.\nAltitude and speed.\nWith the exception of scramjets, jet engines, deprived of their inlet systems can only accept air at around half the speed of sound. The inlet system's job for transonic and supersonic aircraft is to slow the air and perform some of the compression.\nThe limit on maximum altitude for engines is set by flammability \u2013 at very high altitudes the air becomes too thin to burn, or after compression, too hot. For turbojet engines altitudes of about 40\u00a0km appear to be possible, whereas for ramjet engines 55\u00a0km may be achievable. Scramjets may theoretically manage 75\u00a0km. Rocket engines of course have no upper limit.\nAt more modest altitudes, flying faster compresses the air at the front of the engine, and this greatly heats the air. The upper limit is usually thought to be about Mach 5\u20138, as above about Mach 5.5, the atmospheric nitrogen tends to react due to the high temperatures at the inlet and this consumes significant energy. The exception to this is scramjets which may be able to achieve about Mach 15 or more, as they avoid slowing the air, and rockets again have no particular speed limit.\nNoise.\nThe noise emitted by a jet engine has many sources. These include, in the case of gas turbine engines, the fan, compressor, combustor, turbine and propelling jet/s.\nThe propelling jet produces jet noise which is caused by the violent mixing action of the high speed jet with the surrounding air. In the subsonic case the noise is produced by eddies and in the supersonic case by Mach waves. The sound power radiated from a jet varies with the jet velocity raised to the eighth power for velocities up to and varies with the velocity cubed above . Thus, the lower speed exhaust jets emitted from engines such as high bypass turbofans are the quietest, whereas the fastest jets, such as rockets, turbojets, and ramjets, are the loudest. For commercial jet aircraft the jet noise has reduced from the turbojet through bypass engines to turbofans as a result of a progressive reduction in propelling jet velocities. For example, the JT8D, a bypass engine, has a jet velocity of whereas the JT9D, a turbofan, has jet velocities of (cold) and (hot).\nThe advent of the turbofan replaced the very distinctive jet noise with another sound known as \"buzz saw\" noise. The origin is the shockwaves originating at the supersonic fan blade tip at takeoff thrust.\nCooling.\nAdequate heat transfer away from the working parts of the jet engine is critical to maintaining strength of engine materials and ensuring long life for the engine.\nAfter 2016, research is ongoing in the development of transpiration cooling techniques to jet engine components.\nOperation.\nIn a jet engine, each major rotating section usually has a separate gauge devoted to monitoring its speed of rotation. \nDepending on the make and model, a jet engine may have an N1 gauge that monitors the low-pressure compressor section and/or fan speed in turbofan engines. The gas generator section may be monitored by an N2 gauge, while triple spool engines may have an N3 gauge as well. Each engine section rotates at many thousands RPM. Their gauges therefore are calibrated in percent of a nominal speed rather than actual RPM, for ease of display and interpretation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15946", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15946", "title": "J. Frederick George", "text": ""}
{"id": "15947", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15947", "title": "July 16", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 16 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15948", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15948", "title": "Jack L. Chalker", "text": "American science fiction and fantasy author (1944\u20132005)\nJack Laurence Chalker (December 17, 1944 \u2013 February 11, 2005) was an American science fiction author. Chalker was also a Baltimore City Schools history teacher in Maryland for 12 years, retiring during 1978 to write full-time. He also was a member of the Washington Science Fiction Association and was involved in the founding of the Baltimore Science Fiction Society.\nCareer and family life.\nChalker was born and raised in Baltimore, Maryland. Some of his books said that he was born in Norfolk, Virginia although he later claimed that was a mistake; he attended high school at the Baltimore City College. Chalker earned a BA degree in English from Towson University in Towson, Maryland, where he was a theater critic for the school newspaper, \"The Towerlight\". During 2003, Towson University named Chalker their Liberal Arts Alumnus of the Year. He received a Master of Arts in Liberal Studies from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.\nChalker intended to become a lawyer, but financial problems caused him to become a teacher instead. He taught history and geography in the Baltimore City Public Schools from 1966 to 1978, most notably at Baltimore City College and the now defunct Southwestern Senior High School. Chalker lectured on science fiction and technology at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, and numerous universities.\nChalker was a member of the Maryland Air National Guard's 135th Special Operations Group, where he was a member of the group information office. He was deployed into Baltimore during the Baltimore riot of 1968.\nChalker was married in 1978 and had two children, David, a game designer, and Samantha, a computer security consultant.\nChalker's hobbies included esoteric audio, travel, and working on science-fiction convention committees. He also had a great interest in ferryboats; at his fianc\u00e9e's suggestion, their marriage was performed on the Roaring Bull boat, part of the Millersburg Ferry, in the middle of the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania.\nScience fiction.\nChalker joined the Washington Science Fiction Association in 1958, and in 1963, he and two friends founded the Baltimore Science Fiction Society. Chalker attended every World Science Fiction Convention, except one, from 1965 until 2004. \nChalker contributed a chapter to \"The New H. P. Lovecraft Bibliography\" in 1962; he published his first novel, \"A Jungle of Stars\", in 1976. \nHe founded an amateur SF journal, \"Mirage\", in 1960. He ran the fanzine until 1971 (a finalist nominee for the 1963 Hugo Award for Best Fanzine), producing ten issues. Another journal, \"Interjection\", was published 1968\u20131987 in association with the Fantasy Amateur Press Association. Chalker also initiated a publishing house, Mirage Press, Ltd., for releasing nonfiction and bibliographic works concerning science fiction and fantasy.\nChalker's awards included the Daedalus Award (1983), The Gold Medal of the West Coast Review of Books (1984), Skylark Award (1980), and the Hamilton-Brackett Memorial Award (1979). He was twice a nominee for the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer and for the Hugo Award twice. Chalker was posthumously awarded the Phoenix Award by the Southern Fandom Confederation on April 9, 2005.\nChalker was a three-term treasurer of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. Chalker was also the co-author (with Mark Owings) of \"The Science Fantasy Publishers\" (third edition during 1991, updated annually), published by Mirage Press, Ltd, a bibliographic guide to genre small press publishers which was a Hugo Award nominee during 1992. The Maryland Young Writers Contest, sponsored by the Baltimore Science Fiction Society, was renamed \"'The Jack L. Chalker Young Writers Contest\" effective April 8, 2006.\nNovels.\nChalker is best known for his \"Well World\" series of novels, but he also wrote many other novels (most, but not all, part of a series, or large novels which were split into 'series' by the publishers), and at least nine short stories.\nMany of Chalker's works involve some physical transformation of the main characters. For instance, in the \"Well World\" novels, immigrants to the Well World are transformed from their original form to become a member of one of the 1,560 sentient species that inhabit that artificial planet. Another example would be that the \"Wonderland Gambit\" series resembles traditional Buddhist jataka-type reincarnation stories set in a science fiction environment. Samantha Chalker announced that \"Wonderland Gambit\" might be made into a movie, but supposedly its close resemblance to \"The Matrix\" resulted in the project being canceled.\nAt the time of his death, Chalker left one unfinished novel, \"Chameleon\". He was planning to write another novel, \"Ripsaw\", after \"Chameleon\".\nIllness and death.\nOn September 18, 2003, during Hurricane Isabel, Chalker passed out and was taken to a hospital where he was diagnosed with a coronary occlusion. He was later released, but was severely weakened. On December 6, 2004, he was again taken to hospital with breathing problems and disorientation, and was diagnosed with a skin infection. Chalker was hospitalized in critical condition, then upgraded to stable condition on December 9, although he did not regain consciousness until December 15. After several more weeks in deteriorating condition and in a persistent vegetative state, with several transfers to different hospitals, Chalker died on February 11, 2005, of kidney failure and sepsis at Bon Secours Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland.\nSome of Chalker's remains are interred in the family plot at Loudon Park Cemetery in Baltimore. The remainder were distributed off the ferry between Hainan Island and the Chinese mainland, a ferry in Vietnam, White's Ferry on the Potomac River in Virginia on Father's Day 2007, and on author H. P. Lovecraft's grave in Providence, Rhode Island on December 17, 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15949", "revid": "1317999918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15949", "title": "James Blish", "text": "American science fiction and fantasy author (1921\u20131975)\nJames Benjamin \"Jimmy\" Blish (\u00a0\u2013 ) was an American science fiction and fantasy writer. He is best known for his \"Cities in Flight\" novels and his series of \"Star Trek\" novelizations written with his wife, J. A. Lawrence. His novel \"A Case of Conscience\" won the Hugo Award. He is credited with creating the term \"gas giant\" to refer to large planetary bodies.\nHis first published stories appeared in \"Super Science Stories\" and \"Amazing Stories\".\nBlish wrote literary criticism of science fiction using the pen name William Atheling Jr. His other pen names included Donald Laverty, John MacDougal, and Arthur Lloyd Merlyn.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife.\nBlish was born on May 23, 1921, at East Orange, New Jersey. While in high school, Blish self-published a fanzine, called \"The Planeteer\", using a hectograph. The fanzine ran for six issues. \nBlish was a member of the Futurians.\nBlish attended meetings of the Futurian Science Fiction Society in New York City during this period.\nFuturian members Damon Knight and Cyril M. Kornbluth became close friends. However, Blish's relationships with other members were often bitter. A personal target was fellow member Judith Merril, with whom he would debate politics. Merril would frequently dismiss Blish's self-description of being a \"book fascist\". She wrote in \"Better to Have Loved\" (2002), \"Of course [Blish] was not fascist, antisemitic, or any of those terrible things, but every time he used the phrase, I saw red.\"\nBlish studied microbiology at Rutgers University, graduating in 1942. He was drafted into Army service, and he served briefly as a medical laboratory technician. The United States Army discharged him for refusing orders to clean a grease trap in 1944. Following discharge, Blish entered Columbia University as a master's student of zoology. He did not complete the program, opting to write fiction full-time.\nIn 1947, he married Virginia Kidd, a fellow Futurian. They divorced in 1963. Blish then married artist J. A. Lawrence in 1964, moving to England that same year.\nFrom 1962 to 1968, Blish worked for the Tobacco Institute as a writer and critic. Much of his work for the institute went uncredited.\nBlish died on July 30, 1975, from complications related to lung cancer. He was buried in Holywell Cemetery, Oxford. \nThe Bodleian Library at Oxford is the custodian of Blish's papers. The library also has a complete catalog of Blish's published works.\nCareer.\nThroughout the 1940s, Blish published most of his stories in the few pulp magazines still in circulation. His first story was sold to fellow Futurian Frederik Pohl for \"Super Science Stories\" (1940), called \"Emergency Refueling\". Other stories were published intermittently, but with little circulation. Blish's \"Chaos, Co-Ordinated\", co-written with Robert A. W. Lowndes, was sold to \"Astounding Science Fiction\", appearing in the October 1946 issue, earning Blish national circulation for the first time.\nPantropy (1942\u20131956).\nBlish was what Andrew Liptack called a \"practical writer\". He would revisit, revise, and often expand on previously written stories. An example is \"Sunken Universe\" published in \"Super Science Stories\" in 1942. The story reappeared in \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" as \"Surface Tension\", in an altered form in 1952. The premise emphasized Blish's understanding of microbiology, and featured microscopic humans engineered to live on a hostile planet's shallow pools of water. The story proved to be among Blish's more popular and was anthologized in the first volume of Robert Silverberg's \"The Science Fiction Hall of Fame\". It was also anthologized in \"The Big Book of Science Fiction\" (2016), edited by Ann and Jeff VanderMeer.\nThe idea of human colonists engineered to thrive in alien environments - for which Blish coined the term \"pantropy\" - continued in \"The Thing in the Attic\" in 1954, and \"Watershed\" the following year. The fourth entry, \"A Time to Survive\", was published by \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\" in 1957. The stories were collected, edited together, and published as the fix-up \"The Seedling Stars\" (1956), by Gnome Press. John Clute said all of Blish's \"deeply felt work\" explored \"confronting the Faustian (or Frankensteinian) man\".\n\"Cities in Flight\" (1950\u20131958).\n\"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" asserts that not until the 1950s, and the Okie sequence of stories beginning their run, \"did it become clear [Blish] would become a [science fiction] writer of unusual depth\". The stories were loosely based on the Okie migration following the Dust Bowl of the 1930s, and were influenced by Oswald Spengler's two-part \"Der Untergang des Abendlandes\" (\"The Decline of the West\")\".\"\nThe stories detail the life of the Okies, humans who migrate throughout space looking for work in vast city-ships, powered by spindizzies, a type of anti-gravity engine. The premise and plot reflected Blish's feelings on the state of western civilization, and his personal politics. The first two stories, \"Okie\", and \"Bindlestiff\", were published in 1950, by \"Astounding\". \"Sargasso of Lost Cities\" appeared in \"Two Complete Science-Adventure Books\" in April 1953. \"Earthman, Come Home\" followed a few months later, published by \"Astounding\". In 1955, Blish collected the four stories together into an omnibus titled \"Earthman, Come Home\", published by Putnam.\nMore stories followed: In 1956, \"They Shall Have Stars\", which edited together \"Bridge\" and \"At Death's End\", and in 1958, Blish published \"The Triumph of Time\". Four years later, he published a new Okies novel, \"A Life for the Stars\". The Okies sequence was edited together and published as \"Cities In Flight\" (1970).\nClute notes, \"the brilliance of \"Cities in Flight\" does not lie in the assemblage of its parts, but in the momentum of the ideas embodied in it (albeit sometimes obscurely).\"\n\"After Such Knowledge\" (1958\u20131971).\nBlish continued to rework older stories, and did so for one of his best known works, \"A Case of Conscience\" (1958). The novel originated as a novella, originally published in an issue of \"If\", in 1953. The story follows a Jesuit priest, Ramon Ruiz-Sanchez, who visits the planet Lithia as a technical member of an expedition. While on the planet they discover a race of bipedal reptilians that have perfected morality in what Ruiz-Sanchez says is \"the absence of God\", and theological complications ensue. The book is one of the first major works in the genre to explore religion and its implications. It was the first of a series including \"Doctor Mirabilis\" (1964) -- during whose preparatory research Blish taught himself Latin, to assist reading historic documents [cite: personal conversations with JB] -- and the two-part story \"Black Easter\" (1968) and \"The Day After Judgment\" (1971). The latter two were collected as \"The Devil's Day\" (1980). An omnibus of all four entries in the series was published by Legend in 1991, titled \"After Such Knowledge\" (a reference to T.S.Eliot: \"After such knowledge, what forgiveness?\" [cite: personal conversations with JB]).\n\"A Case of Conscience\" won the 1959 Hugo Award for Best Novel, and was collected as part of Library of America's omnibus \"American Science Fiction: Five Classic Novels 1956-1958\".\n\"Star Trek\" (1967\u20131977).\nBantam Books commissioned Blish to adapt episodes of \"\". The adapted short stories were generally based on draft scripts and contained different plot elements from the aired television episodes.\nThe stories were collected into twelve volumes and published as a title series of the same name from 1967 to 1977. The adaptations were largely written by Blish; however, his declining health during this period proved problematic. His wife, J. A. Lawrence, wrote a number of installments. Her work remained uncredited until the final volume, \"Star Trek 12\", published in 1977, two years after Blish's death.\nThe first original novel for adults based on the television series, \"Spock Must Die!\" (1970), was also written by Blish, and he planned to release more. According to Lawrence, two episodes featuring popular character Harry Mudd, \"I, Mudd\" and \"Mudd's Women\", were held back by Blish for adaptation to be included in the follow-up to \"Spock Must Die!\". However, Blish died before a novel could be completed. Lawrence did eventually adapt the two episodes, as \"Mudd's Angels\" (1978), which included an original novella \"The Business, as Usual, During Altercations\" by Lawrence. In her introduction to \"Star Trek 12\", Lawrence states that Blish \"did indeed write\" adaptations of the two episodes. The introduction to \"Mudd's Angels\" acknowledges this, stating that Blish left the two stories in various stages of completion and they were finished by Lawrence; Blish does not receive author credit on the book.\nBlish credited his financial stability later in life to the \"Star Trek\" commission and the advance he received for \"Spock Must Die!\".\nLiterary criticism and legacy.\nBlish was among the first literary critics of science fiction, and he judged works in the genre by the standards applied to \"serious\" literature. He took to task his fellow authors for deficiencies, such as bad grammar and a misunderstanding of scientific concepts, and the magazine editors who accepted and published such material without editorial intervention. His criticism was published in \"fanzines\" in the 1950s under the pseudonym William Atheling Jr.\nThe essays were collected in \"The Issue at Hand\" (1964) and \"More Issues at Hand\" (1970). Reviewing \"The Issue at Hand\", Algis Budrys said that Atheling had, along with Damon Knight, \"transformed the reviewer's trade in this field\". He described the persona of Atheling as \"acidulous, assertive, categorical, conscientious and occasionally idiosyncratic\".\nBlish was a fan of the works of James Branch Cabell, and for a time edited \"Kalki\", the journal of the Cabell Society.\nIn his works of science fiction, Blish developed many ideas and terms which have influenced other writers and on occasion have been adopted more widely, such as faster-than-light communication via the Dirac communicator, introduced in the short story \"Beep\" (1954). The Dirac is comparable to Ursula K. Le Guin's ansible.\nBlish is also credited with coining the term gas giant, first used in the story \"Solar Plexus\", collected in the anthology \"Beyond Human Ken\", edited by Judith Merril. The story was originally published in 1941, but it did not contain the term. Blish reworked the story, changing the description of a large magnetic field to \"a magnetic field of some strength nearby, one that didn't belong to the invisible \"gas giant\" revolving half a million miles away\".\nHonors, awards and recognition.\nThe British Science Fiction Foundation inaugurated the James Blish Award for science fiction criticism in 1977, recognizing Brian W. Aldiss. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2002.\nBibliography.\nBlish's work was published by a variety of publishers in the United Kingdom and the United States, often with variations between editions, and with different titles. Blish also expanded and re-published his older work on numerous occasions. His works continued to be re-published after his death.\nVery few of Blish's first editions were assigned ISBN numbers.\nShort fiction and novellas (1935\u20131986).\nNovels published in complete form, or serialized, in fiction magazines are included for completeness, and to avoid confusion.\n\u03b2 Novelette, \u03b5 Novella, \u03b3 Novel.\n\"The Planeteer\" (1935\u20131936).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Future\" (1941\u20131953).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Astounding Science Fiction\" (1946\u20131957).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Thrilling Wonder Stories\" (1948\u20131950).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Galaxy Science Fiction\" (1952\u20131970).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Worlds of If\" (1953\u20131968).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"The Magazine of Science Fiction and Fantasy\" (1953\u20131980).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15950", "revid": "49842254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15950", "title": "James Madison", "text": "Founding Father, U.S. president from 1809 to 1817\nJames Madison (March 16, 1751 [O.S. March 5, 1750]\u00a0\u2013 June 28, 1836) was an American statesman, diplomat, and Founding Father who served as the fourth president of the United States from 1809 to 1817. Madison was popularly acclaimed as the \"Father of the Constitution\" for his pivotal role in drafting and promoting the Constitution of the United States and the Bill of Rights.\nMadison was born into a prominent slave-owning planter family in Virginia. In 1774, strongly opposed to British taxation, Madison joined with the Patriots. He was a member of both the Virginia House of Delegates and the Continental Congress during and after the American Revolutionary War. Dissatisfied with the weak national government established by the Articles of Confederation, he helped organize the Constitutional Convention, which produced a new constitution designed to strengthen republican government against democratic assembly. Madison's Virginia Plan was the basis for the convention's deliberations. He became one of the leaders in the movement to ratify the Constitution and joined Alexander Hamilton and John Jay in writing \"The Federalist Papers\", a series of pro-ratification essays that remain prominent among works of political science in American history. \nMadison emerged as an important leader in the House of Representatives and was a close adviser to President George Washington. During the early 1790s, Madison opposed the economic program and the accompanying centralization of power favored by Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton. Alongside Thomas Jefferson, he organized the Democratic\u2013Republican Party in opposition to Hamilton's Federalist Party. Madison served as Jefferson's Secretary of State from 1801 to 1809, during which time he helped convince Jefferson to submit the Louisiana Purchase Treaty for approval by the Senate.\nMadison was elected president in 1808. Motivated by a desire to acquire land held by Britain, Spain, and Native Americans, and after diplomatic protests with a trade embargo failed to end British seizures of American-shipped goods, Madison led the United States into the War of 1812. Madison was re-elected in the 1812 election, which was held during wartime. The war convinced Madison of the necessity of a stronger federal government. Although the war ended inconclusively in 1815, many Americans viewed it as a successful \"second war of independence\" against Britain which bolstered Madison's popularity. He presided over the creation of the Second Bank of the United States and the enactment of the protective Tariff of 1816. The United States acquired \n of land through treaties or war from Native American tribes during Madison's presidency. \nRetiring from public office at the end of his presidency in 1817, Madison returned to his plantation, Montpelier, where he died in 1836. Madison was a slave owner; he freed one slave in 1783 to prevent a slave rebellion at Montpelier but did not free any in his will. Historians regard Madison as one of the most significant Founding Fathers of the United States, and have generally ranked him as an above-average president, although they are critical of his endorsement of slavery and his leadership during the War of 1812. Madison's name is commemorated in many landmarks across the nation, with prominent examples including Madison Square Garden, James Madison University, the James Madison Memorial Building, the capital city of Wisconsin, and the .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nJames Madison was born on March 16, 1751 (March 5, 1750, Old Style), at the Belle Grove plantation near Port Conway in the Colony of Virginia, to James Madison Sr. and Eleanor Madison. His family had lived in Virginia since the mid-17th century. Madison's maternal grandfather, Francis Conway, was a prominent planter and tobacco merchant. His father was a tobacco planter who grew up on a plantation, then called Mount Pleasant, which he inherited upon reaching adulthood. With an estimated 100 slaves and a plantation, Madison's father was among the largest landowners in Virginia's Piedmont.\nIn the early 1760s, the Madison family moved into a newly built house that they named Montpelier. Madison was the oldest of twelve children, with seven brothers and four sisters, though only six lived to adulthood: brothers Francis, Ambrose, and William, and sisters Nelly, Sarah, and Frances. Ambrose helped to manage Montpelier for his father and older brother until he died in 1793.\nFrom ages 11 to 16, Madison studied under Donald Robertson, a tutor for several prominent Southern families. Madison learned mathematics, geography, and modern and classical languages, becoming exceptionally proficient in Latin. At age 16, Madison returned to Montpelier, where he studied under the Reverend Thomas Martin to prepare for college. Unlike most college-bound Virginians of his day, Madison did not attend the College of William and Mary, as the lowland Williamsburg climate\u2014thought to be more likely to harbor infectious disease\u2014might have impacted his health. Instead, in 1769, he enrolled at the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University).\nHis college studies included Latin, Greek, theology, and the works of the Enlightenment, and emphasized speech and debate. Madison was a leading member of the American Whig\u2013Cliosophic Society, which competed on campus with a political counterpart, the Cliosophic Society. During his time at Princeton, Madison's closest friend was future Attorney General William Bradford. Along with classmate Aaron Burr, Madison completed the college's three-year Bachelor of Arts degree in two years, graduating in 1771. He had contemplated either entering the clergy or practicing law after graduation, but instead, he remained at Princeton to study Hebrew and political philosophy under the college's president, John Witherspoon. He returned home to Montpelier in early 1772.\nMadison's ideas on philosophy and morality were profoundly shaped by Witherspoon, who converted him to the philosophy, values, and modes of thinking of the Age of Enlightenment. Biographer Terence Ball wrote that at Princeton, Madison &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"was immersed in the liberalism of the Enlightenment, and converted to eighteenth-century political radicalism. From then on James Madison's theories would advance the rights of happiness of man, and his most active efforts would serve devotedly the cause of civil and political liberty.\"\nAfter returning to Montpelier, without a chosen career, Madison tutored his younger siblings. He began to study law books in 1773, asking his friend Bradford, a law apprentice, to send him a plan of study. Madison had acquired an understanding of legal publications by 1783. He saw himself as a law student but not as a lawyer. Madison did not apprentice himself to a lawyer and never joined the bar. Following the Revolutionary War, he spent time at Montpelier studying ancient democracies in preparation for the Constitutional Convention. Madison suffered from episodes of mental exhaustion and illness with associated nervousness, which often caused short-term incapacity after periods of stress. The descriptions of Madison's sudden attacks are consistent with today's understanding of epilepsy. He enjoyed good physical health until his final years.\nAmerican Revolution and Articles of Confederation.\nIn 1765, the British Parliament passed the Stamp Act, which caused strong opposition by the colonists and initiated a conflict that would culminate in the American Revolution. The American Revolutionary War broke out on April 19, 1775. The colonists formed three prominent factions: Loyalists, who continued to support King George III; a significant neutral faction without firm commitments to either Loyalists or Patriots; and the Patriots, whom Madison joined, under the leadership of the Continental Congress. Madison believed that Parliament had overstepped its bounds by attempting to tax the American colonies, and he sympathized with those who resisted British rule. Historically, debate about the consecration of bishops was ongoing, and eventual legislation was passed in the British Parliament (subsequently called the Consecration of Bishops Abroad Act 1786) to allow bishops to be consecrated for an American church outside of allegiance to the British Crown. The new Anglican churches began incorporating more active forms of polity in their own self-government, collective decision-making, and self-supported financing; these measures would be consistent with the separation of religious and secular identities. Madison believed these measures to be insufficient, and favored disestablishing the Anglican Church in Virginia; he thought that tolerance of an established religion was detrimental not only to freedom of religion but also because it encouraged excessive deference to any authority that might be asserted by an established church.\nAfter returning to Montpelier in 1774, Madison took a seat on the local Committee of Safety, a pro-revolution group that oversaw the local Patriot militia. In October 1775, he was commissioned as the colonel of the Orange County militia, serving as his father's second-in-command until he was elected as a delegate to the Fifth Virginia Convention, which was tasked with producing Virginia's first constitution. Although Madison never fought in the Revolutionary War, he rose to prominence in Virginia politics as a wartime leader. At the Virginia constitutional convention, he convinced delegates to alter the Virginia Declaration of Rights, originally drafted on May 20, 1776, to provide for \"equal entitlement\", rather than mere \"tolerance\", in the exercise of religion. With the enactment of the Virginia constitution, Madison became part of the Virginia House of Delegates, and he was subsequently elected to the Virginia governor's Council of State, where he became a close ally of Governor Thomas Jefferson. On July 4, 1776, the United States Declaration of Independence was formally printed.\nMadison participated in the debates concerning the Articles of Confederation in November 1777, contributing to the discussion of religious freedom that affected the drafting of the Articles, though his signature was not required for adopting the Articles of Confederation. Madison had proposed liberalizing the article on religious freedom, but the larger Virginia Convention stripped the proposed constitution of the more radical language of \"free expression\" of faith to the less controversial mention of highlighting \"tolerance\" within religion. Madison again served on the Council of State, from 1777 to 1779, when he was elected to the Second Continental Congress, the governing body of the United States.\nDuring Madison's term in Congress from 1780 to 1783, the U.S. faced a difficult war against Great Britain, along with runaway inflation, financial troubles, and a lack of cooperation between the different levels of government. According to historian J. C. A. Stagg, Madison worked to become an expert on financial issues, emerging as a legislative workhorse and a master of parliamentary coalition building. Frustrated by the failure of the states to supply needed requisitions, Madison proposed to amend the Articles of Confederation to grant Congress the power to independently raise revenue through tariffs on imports. Although General George Washington, Congressman Alexander Hamilton, and other leaders also favored the tariff amendment, it failed to win the ratification of all thirteen states. While a member of Congress, Madison was an ardent supporter of a close alliance between the United States and France. As an advocate of westward expansion, he insisted that the new nation must ensure its right to navigation on the Mississippi River and control of all lands east of it in the Treaty of Paris, which ended the Revolutionary War. Following his term in Congress, Madison won election to the Virginia House of Delegates in 1784.\nRatification of the Constitution.\nAs a member of the Virginia House of Delegates, Madison continued to advocate for religious freedom, and, along with Jefferson, drafted the Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom. That amendment, which guaranteed freedom of religion and disestablished the Church of England, was passed in 1786. Madison also became a land speculator, purchasing land along the Mohawk River in partnership with another Jefferson prot\u00e9g\u00e9, James Monroe. Throughout the 1780s, Madison became increasingly concerned about the states' disunity and the central government's weakness. He believed that direct democracy caused social decay and that a Republican government would be effective against partisanship and factionalism. He was particularly troubled by laws that legalized paper money and denied diplomatic immunity to ambassadors from other countries. Madison was also concerned about the lack of ability in Congress to capably create foreign policy, protect American trade, and foster the settlement of the lands between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. As Madison wrote, \"a crisis had arrived which was to decide whether the American experiment was to be a blessing to the world, or to blast for ever the hopes which the republican cause had inspired.\" Madison committed to an intense study of law and political theory and also was influenced by Enlightenment texts sent by Jefferson from France. Madison especially sought out works on international law and the constitutions of \"ancient and modern confederacies\" such as the Dutch Republic, the Swiss Confederation, and the Achaean League. He came to believe that the United States could improve upon past republican experiments by its size which geographically combined 13 colonies; with so many competing interests, Madison hoped to minimize the abuses of majority rule. Additionally, navigation rights to the major trade routes accessed by the Mississippi River highly concerned Madison. He opposed the proposal by John Jay that the United States concede claims to the river for 25 years, and, according to historian Ralph Ketcham, Madison's desire to fight the proposal was a major motivation in his return to Congress in 1787.\nLeading up to the 1787 ratification debates for the Constitution, Madison worked with other members of the Virginia delegation, especially Edmund Randolph and George Mason, to create and present the Virginia Plan, an outline for a new federal constitution. It called for three branches of government (legislative, executive, and judicial), a bicameral Congress (consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives) apportioned by population, and a federal Council of Revision that would have the right to veto laws passed by Congress. The Virginia Plan did not explicitly lay out the structure of the executive branch, but Madison himself favored a strong single executive. Many delegates were surprised to learn that the plan called for the abrogation of the Articles and the creation of a new constitution, to be ratified by special conventions in each state, rather than by the state legislatures. With the assent of prominent attendees such as Washington and Benjamin Franklin, the delegates agreed in a secret session that the abrogation of the Articles and the creation of a new constitution was a plausible option and began scheduling the process of debating its ratification in the individual states. As a compromise between small and large states, large states got a proportional House, while the small states got equal representation in the Senate.\nAfter the Philadelphia Convention ended in September 1787, Madison convinced his fellow congressmen to remain neutral in the ratification debate and allow each state to vote on the Constitution. Those who supported the Constitution were called Federalists; that included Madison. Opponents of the Constitution, known as Anti-Federalists, began a public campaign against ratification. In response, starting in October 1787, Hamilton and John Jay, both Federalists, began publishing a series of pro-ratification newspaper articles in New York. After Jay dropped out of the project, Hamilton approached Madison, who was in New York on congressional business, to write some of the essays. The essays were published under the pseudonym of Publius. The trio produced 85 essays known as \"The Federalist Papers\". The 85 essays were divided into two parts: 36 letters against the Articles of Confederation, and 49 letters that favored the new Constitution. The articles were also published in book form and used by the supporters of the Constitution in the ratifying conventions. Federalist No. 10, Madison's first contribution to \"The Federalist Papers\", became highly regarded in the 20th century for its advocacy of representative democracy. In it, Madison describes the dangers posed by the majority factions and argues that their effects can be limited through the formation of a large republic. He theorizes that in large republics the large number of factions that emerge will control their influence because no single faction can become a majority. In Federalist No. 51, he explains how the separation of powers between three branches of the federal government, as well as between state governments and the federal government, establishes a system of checks and balances that ensures that no one institution would become too powerful.\nAs the Virginia ratification convention began, Madison focused on winning the support of the relatively small number of undecided delegates. His long correspondence with Randolph paid off at the convention, as Randolph announced that he would support unconditional ratification of the Constitution, with amendments to be proposed after ratification. Though former Virginia governor Patrick Henry gave several persuasive speeches arguing against ratification, Madison's expertise on the subject he had long argued for allowed him to respond with rational arguments to Henry's anti-Federalist appeals. Madison was also a defender of federal veto rights and, according to historian Ron Chernow \"pleaded at the Constitutional Convention that the federal government should possess a veto over state laws\". In his final speech to the ratifying convention, Madison implored his fellow delegates to ratify the Constitution as it had been written, arguing that failure to do so would lead to the collapse of the entire ratification effort, as each state would seek favorable amendments. On June 25, 1788, the convention voted 89\u201379 in favor of ratification. The vote came a week after New Hampshire became the ninth state to ratify, securing the Constitution's adoption and a new form of government. The following January, Washington was elected the nation's first president.\nCongressman and party leader (1789\u20131801).\nElection to Congress.\nAfter Virginia ratified the constitution, Madison returned to New York and resumed his duties in the Congress of the Confederation. Madison unsuccessfully ran for the U.S. Senate in Virginia in 1788. After Madison was defeated in his bid for the Senate, and with concerns for both his political career and the possibility that Patrick Henry and his allies would arrange for a second constitutional convention, Madison ran for the House of Representatives. Henry and the Anti-Federalists were in firm control of the General Assembly in the autumn of 1788. At Henry's behest, the Virginia legislature designed to deny Madison a seat by gerrymandering congressional districts. Henry and his supporters ensured Orange County was in a district heavily populated with Anti-Federalists, roughly three to one, to oppose Madison. Henry also recruited James Monroe, a strong challenger to Madison. Locked in a difficult race against Monroe, Madison promised to support a series of constitutional amendments to protect individual liberties. In an open letter, Madison wrote that, while he had opposed requiring alterations to the Constitution before ratification, he now believed that \"amendments, if pursued with a proper moderation and in a proper mode ... may serve the double purpose of satisfying the minds of well-meaning opponents, and of providing additional guards in favor of liberty.\" Madison's promise paid off, as in Virginia's 5th district election, he gained a seat in Congress with 57 percent of the vote.\nMadison became a key adviser to Washington, who valued Madison's understanding of the Constitution. Madison helped Washington write his first inaugural address and also prepared the official House response to Washington's speech. He played a significant role in establishing and staffing the three Cabinet departments, and his influence helped Thomas Jefferson become the first Secretary of State. At the start of the first Congress, he introduced a tariff bill similar to the one he had advocated for under the Articles of the Confederation, and Congress established a federal tariff on imports by enacting the Tariff of 1789. The following year, Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton introduced an ambitious economic program that called for the federal assumption of state debts and the funding of that debt through the issuance of federal securities. Hamilton's plan favored Northern speculators and was disadvantageous to states, such as Virginia, that had already paid off most of their debt; Madison emerged as one of the principal congressional opponents of the plan. After prolonged legislative deadlock, Madison, Jefferson, and Hamilton agreed to the Compromise of 1790, which provided for the enactment of Hamilton's assumption plan, as part of the Funding Act of 1790. In return, Congress passed the Residence Act, which established the federal capital district of Washington, D.C.\nBill of Rights.\nDuring the first Congress, Madison took the lead in advocating for several constitutional amendments to the Bill of Rights. His primary goals were to fulfill his 1789 campaign pledge and to prevent the calling of a second constitutional convention, but he also hoped to safeguard the rights and liberties of the people against broad actions of Congress and individual states. He believed that the enumeration of specific rights would fix those rights in the public mind and encourage judges to protect them. After studying more than two hundred amendments that had been proposed at the state ratifying conventions, Madison introduced the Bill of Rights on June 8, 1789. His amendments contained numerous restrictions on the federal government and would protect, among other things, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and the right to peaceful assembly. While most of his proposed amendments were drawn from the ratifying conventions, Madison was largely responsible for proposals to guarantee freedom of the press, protect property from government seizure, and ensure jury trials. He also proposed an amendment to prevent states from abridging \"equal rights of conscience, or freedom of the press, or the trial by jury in criminal cases\".\nTo prevent a permanent standing federal army, Madison proposed the Second Amendment, which gave state-regulated militia groups and private citizens, the \"right to bear arms\". Madison and the Republicans desired a free government to be established by the consent of the governed, rather than by national military force.\nMadison's Bill of Rights faced little opposition; he had largely co-opted the Anti-Federalist goal of amending the Constitution but had avoided proposing amendments that would alienate supporters of the Constitution. His amendments were mostly adopted by the House of Representatives as proposed, but the Senate made several changes. Madison's proposal to apply parts of the Bill of Rights to the states was eliminated, as was his change to the Constitution's preamble which he thought would be enhanced by including a prefatory paragraph indicating that governmental power is vested by the people. He was disappointed that the Bill of Rights did not include protections against actions by state governments, but the passage of the document mollified some critics of the original constitution and shored up his support in Virginia. Ten amendments were finally ratified on December 15, 1791, becoming known in their final form as the Bill of Rights.\nFounding the Democratic\u2013Republican Party.\nAfter 1790, the Washington administration became polarized into two main factions. One faction, led by Jefferson and Madison, broadly represented Southern interests and sought close relations with France. This faction became the Democratic-Republican Party opposition to Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton. The other faction, led by Hamilton and the Federalists, broadly represented Northern financial interests and favored close relations with Britain. In 1791, Hamilton introduced a plan that called for the establishment of a national bank to provide loans to emerging industries and oversee the money supply. Madison and the Democratic-Republican Party fought back against Hamilton's attempt to expand the power of the Federal Government with the formation of a national bank; Madison argued that under the Constitution, Congress did not have the power to create a federally empowered national bank. Despite Madison's opposition, Congress passed a bill to create the First Bank of the United States, which Washington signed into law in February 1791. As Hamilton implemented his economic program and Washington continued to enjoy immense prestige as president, Madison became increasingly concerned that Hamilton would seek to abolish the federal republic in favor of a centralized monarchy.\nWhen Hamilton submitted his \"Report on Manufactures\", which called for federal action to stimulate the development of a diversified economy, Madison once again challenged Hamilton's proposal. Along with Jefferson, Madison helped Philip Freneau establish the \"National Gazette\", a Philadelphia newspaper that attacked Hamilton's proposals. In an essay in the newspaper in September 1792, Madison wrote that the country had divided into two factions: his faction, which believed \"that mankind are capable of governing themselves\", and Hamilton's faction, which allegedly sought the establishment of an aristocratic monarchy and was biased in favor of the wealthy. Those opposed to Hamilton's economic policies, including many former Anti-Federalists, continued to strengthen the ranks of the Democratic\u2013Republican Party, while those who supported the administration's policies supported Hamilton's Federalist Party. In the 1792 presidential election, both major parties supported Washington for re-election, but the Democratic\u2013Republicans sought to unseat Vice President John Adams. Because the Constitution's rules essentially precluded Jefferson from challenging Adams, the party backed New York Governor George Clinton for the vice presidency, but Adams still won.\nWith Jefferson out of office after 1793, Madison became the de facto leader of the Democratic\u2013Republican Party. When Britain and France went to war in 1793, the U.S. needed to determine which side to support. While the differences between the Democratic\u2013Republicans and the Federalists had previously centered on economic matters, foreign policy became an increasingly important issue, as Madison and Jefferson favored France and Hamilton favored Britain. War with Britain became imminent in 1794 after the British seized hundreds of American ships that were trading with French colonies. Madison believed that a trade war with Britain would probably succeed, and would allow Americans to assert their independence fully. The British West Indies, Madison maintained, could not live without American foodstuffs, but Americans could easily do without British manufacturers. Similarly, Madison argued that British industry was highly dependent on the demand of American consumers and would suffer heavily if this market was denied to the British. Washington secured friendly trade relations with Britain through the Jay Treaty of 1794. Madison and his Democratic\u2013Republican allies were outraged by the treaty; the Democratic\u2013Republican Robert R. Livingston wrote to Madison that the treaty \"sacrifices every essential interest and prostrates the honor of our country\". Madison's strong opposition to the treaty led to a permanent break with Washington, ending their friendship.\nMarriage and family.\nOn September 15, 1794, Madison married Dolley Payne Todd, the 26-year-old widow of John Todd, a Quaker farmer who died during a yellow fever epidemic. Earlier that year, Madison and Dolley Todd had been formally introduced at Madison's request by Aaron Burr. Burr had become friends with her when staying at the same Philadelphia boardinghouse. The two quickly became romantically engaged and prepared for a wedding that summer, but Todd suffered recurring illnesses because of her exposure to yellow fever in Philadelphia. They eventually traveled to Harewood in Virginia for their wedding. Only a few close family members attended, and Winchester reverend Alexander Balmain presided. Dolley became a renowned figure in Washington, D.C., and excelled at hosting. She subsequently helped to establish the modern image of the first lady of the United States as an individual who has a leading role in the social affairs of the nation.\nThroughout his life, Madison maintained a close relationship with his father, James Sr. At age 50, Madison inherited the large plantation of Montpelier and other possessions, including his father's slaves. While Madison never had children with Dolley, he adopted her one surviving son, John Payne Todd (known as Payne), after the couple's marriage. Some of his colleagues, such as Monroe and Burr, believed Madison's lack of offspring weighed on his thoughts, though he never spoke of any distress. Oral history has suggested Madison may have fathered a child with his enslaved half-sister, a cook named Coreen, but researchers were unable to gather the DNA evidence needed to determine the validity of the accusation.\nAdams presidency.\nWashington chose to retire after serving two terms and, in advance of the 1796 presidential election, Madison helped convince Jefferson to run for the presidency. Despite Madison's efforts, Federalist candidate John Adams defeated Jefferson, taking a narrow majority of the electoral vote. Under the rules of the Electoral College then in place, Jefferson became vice president because he finished with the second-most electoral votes. Madison, meanwhile, had declined to seek re-election to the House, and he returned to Montpelier. On Jefferson's advice, Adams considered appointing Madison to an American delegation charged with ending French attacks on American shipping, but Adams's cabinet members strongly opposed the idea.\nThough he was out of office, Madison remained a prominent Democratic\u2013Republican leader in opposition to the Adams administration. Madison and Jefferson believed that the Federalists were using the Quasi-War with France to justify the violation of constitutional rights by passing the Alien and Sedition Acts, and they increasingly came to view Adams as a monarchist. Both Madison and Jefferson expressed the belief that natural rights were non-negotiable even in war. Madison believed that the Alien and Sedition Acts formed a dangerous precedent, by giving the government the power to look past the natural rights of its people in the name of national security. In response to the Alien and Sedition Acts, Jefferson argued that the states had the power to nullify federal law on the basis of the Constitution being a compact among the states. Madison rejected this view of nullification and urged that states respond to unjust federal laws through interposition, a process by which a state legislature declared a law to be unconstitutional but did not take steps to actively prevent its enforcement. Jefferson's doctrine of nullification was widely rejected, and the incident damaged the Democratic\u2013Republican Party as attention was shifted from the Alien and Sedition Acts to the unpopular nullification doctrine.\nIn 1799, Madison was elected to the Virginia legislature. At the same time, Madison planned for Jefferson's campaign in the 1800 presidential election. Madison issued the Report of 1800, which attacked the Alien and Sedition Acts as unconstitutional. That report held that Congress was limited to legislating on its enumerated powers and that punishment for sedition violated freedom of speech and freedom of the press. Jefferson embraced the report, and it became the unofficial Democratic\u2013Republican platform for the 1800 election. With the Federalists divided between supporters of Hamilton and Adams, and with news of the end of the Quasi-War not reaching the United States until after the election, Jefferson and his running mate, Aaron Burr, defeated Adams.\nSecretary of State (1801\u20131809).\nMadison was one of two major influences in Jefferson's cabinet, the other being Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin. Madison was appointed Secretary of State despite lacking foreign policy experience. An introspective individual, he received assistance from his wife, relying deeply on her in dealing with the social pressures of being a public figure both in his own Cabinet appointment as Secretary of State and afterward. As the ascent of Napoleon in France had dulled Democratic\u2013Republican enthusiasm for the French cause, Madison sought a neutral position in the ongoing Coalition Wars between France and Britain. Domestically, the Jefferson administration and the Democratic\u2013Republican Congress rolled back many Federalist policies; Congress quickly repealed the Alien and Sedition Act, abolished internal taxes, and reduced the size of the army and navy. Gallatin, however, convinced Jefferson to retain the First Bank of the United States. Though the Federalist political power was rapidly fading at the national level, Chief Justice John Marshall ensured that Federalist ideology retained an important presence in the judiciary. In the case of \"Marbury v. Madison\", Marshall simultaneously ruled that Madison had unjustly refused to deliver federal commissions to individuals who had been appointed by the previous administration, but that the Supreme Court did not have jurisdiction over the case. Most importantly, Marshall's opinion established the principle of judicial review.\nJefferson was sympathetic to the westward expansion of Americans who had settled as far west as the Mississippi River, supported by his concern for the sparse regional demographics in the far west compared to the more populated eastern states, the far west being inhabited almost exclusively by Native Americans. Jefferson promoted such western expansion and hoped to acquire the Spanish territory of Louisiana, west of the Mississippi River, for expansionist purposes. Early in Jefferson's presidency, the administration learned that Spain planned to retrocede the Louisiana territory to France, raising fears of French encroachment on U.S. territory. In 1802, Jefferson and Madison sent Monroe to France to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans, which controlled access to the Mississippi River and thus was immensely important to the farmers of the American frontier. Rather than merely selling New Orleans, Napoleon's government offered to sell the entire territory of Louisiana. Despite lacking explicit authorization from Jefferson, Monroe, along with Livingston, whom Jefferson had appointed as America's minister to France, negotiated the Louisiana Purchase, in which France sold more than\n of land in exchange for $15 million ().\nDespite the time-sensitive nature of negotiations with the French, Jefferson was concerned about the constitutionality of the Louisiana Purchase, and he privately favored introducing a constitutional amendment explicitly authorizing Congress to acquire new territories. Madison convinced Jefferson to refrain from proposing the amendment, and the administration ultimately submitted the Louisiana Purchase Treaty for approval by the Senate, without an accompanying constitutional amendment. Unlike Jefferson, Madison had no doubts of its constitutionality because agreements between nations (such as the Louisiana Purchase) are treaties, and treaties are specifically authorized by the Constitution. The President negotiated the treaty, the Senate quickly ratified it, and the House, with equal alacrity, passed enabling legislation, as specified in the Constitution.\nEarly in his tenure, Jefferson was able to maintain cordial relations with both France and Britain, but relations with Britain deteriorated after 1805. The British ended their policy of tolerance towards American shipping and began seizing American goods headed for French ports. They also impressed American sailors, some of whom had originally defected from the British navy, but some of whom had never been British subjects. In response to the attacks, Congress passed the Non-importation Act, which restricted many, but not all, British imports. Tensions with Britain were heightened due to the \"Chesapeake\u2013Leopard\" affair, a June 1807 naval confrontation between American and British naval forces, while the French also began attacking American shipping. Madison believed that economic pressure could force the British to end their seizure of American shipped goods, and he and Jefferson convinced Congress to pass the Embargo Act of 1807, which banned all exports to foreign nations. The embargo proved ineffective, unpopular, and difficult to enforce, especially in New England. In March 1809, Congress replaced the embargo with the Non-Intercourse Act, which allowed trade with nations other than Britain and France.\n1808 presidential election.\nSpeculation regarding Madison's potential succession to Jefferson commenced early in Jefferson's first term. Madison's status in the party was damaged by his association with the embargo, which was unpopular throughout the country and especially in the Northeast. With the Federalists collapsing as a national party after 1800, the chief opposition to Madison's candidacy came from other members of the Democratic\u2013Republican Party. Madison became the target of attacks from Congressman John Randolph, a leader of a faction of the party known as the tertium quids.\nRandolph recruited Monroe, who had felt betrayed by the administration's rejection of the proposed Monroe\u2013Pinkney Treaty with Britain, to challenge Madison for leadership of the party. Many Northerners, meanwhile, hoped that Vice President Clinton could unseat Madison as Jefferson's successor. Despite this opposition, Madison won his party's presidential nomination at the January 1808 congressional nominating caucus. The Federalist Party mustered little strength outside New England, and Madison easily defeated Federalist candidate Charles Cotesworth Pinckney in the general election.\nPresidency (1809\u20131817).\nInauguration and cabinet.\nMadison's inauguration took place on March 4, 1809, in the House chamber of the U.S. Capitol. Chief Justice Marshall administered the presidential oath of office to Madison while outgoing President Jefferson watched. Vice President George Clinton was sworn in for a second term, making him the first U.S. vice president to serve under two presidents. Unlike Jefferson, who enjoyed relatively unified support, Madison encountered political opposition from former political allies such as Monroe and Clinton. Additionally, the Federalist Party was resurgent due to opposition to the embargo. Aside from his planned nomination of Gallatin for Secretary of State, the remaining members of Madison's Cabinet were chosen merely to promote political harmony, and, according to historians Ketcham and Rutland, were largely unremarkable or incompetent. Due to the resistance of Monroe and Clinton, Madison immediately faced opposition to his planned nomination of Secretary of the Treasury Gallatin as Secretary of State. Madison eventually opted \"not\" to nominate Gallatin, keeping him in the Treasury Department.\nMadison settled instead on Robert Smith to be the Secretary of State. However, for the next two years, Madison performed most of the duties of the Secretary of State due to Smith's incompetence. After bitter intra-party contention, Madison finally replaced Smith with Monroe in April 1811. With a Cabinet full of those he distrusted, Madison rarely called Cabinet meetings and instead frequently consulted with Gallatin alone. Early in his presidency, Madison sought to continue Jefferson's policies of low taxes and a reduction of the national debt. In 1811, Congress allowed the charter of the First Bank of the United States to lapse after Madison declined to take a strong stance on the issue.\nWar of 1812.\nPrelude to war.\nCongress had repealed the Embargo Act of 1807 shortly before Madison became president, but troubles with the British and French continued. Madison settled on a new strategy that was designed to pit the British and French against each other, offering to trade with whichever country would end their attacks against American shipping. The gambit almost succeeded, but negotiations with the British collapsed in mid-1809. Seeking to drive a wedge between the Americans and the British, Napoleon offered to end French attacks on American shipping so long as the United States punished any countries that did not similarly end restrictions on trade. Madison accepted Napoleon's proposal in the hope that it would convince the British to finally end their policy of commercial warfare. Notwithstanding, the British refused to change their policies, and the French reneged on their promise and continued to attack American shipping.\nWith sanctions and other policies having failed, Madison determined that war with Britain was the only remaining option. Many Americans called for a \"second war of independence\" to restore honor and stature to their new nation, and an angry public elected a \"war hawk\" Congress, led by Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun. With Britain already engaged in the Napoleonic Wars, many Americans including Madison believed that the United States could easily capture Canada, using it as a bargaining chip for other disputes or simply retaining control of it. On June 1, 1812, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war, stating that the United States could no longer tolerate Britain's \"state of war against the United States\". The declaration of war was passed along sectional and party lines, with opposition to the declaration coming from Federalists and from some Democratic\u2013Republicans in the Northeast. In the years prior to the war, Jefferson and Madison had reduced the size of the military, leaving the country with a military force consisting mostly of poorly trained militia members. Madison asked Congress to quickly put the country \"into an armor and an attitude demanded by the crisis\", specifically recommending expansion of the army and navy.\nMilitary actions.\nGiven the circumstances involving Napoleon in Europe, Madison initially believed the war would result in a swift American victory. Madison ordered three landed military spearhead incursions into Canada, beginning from Fort Detroit, aimed to loosening British control around American-held Fort Niagara and destroying the British supply lines from Montreal. These actions were intended to gain leverage for concessions to protect American shipping in the Atlantic. Without a standing army, Madison counted on regular state militias to rally to the flag and invade Canada; however, governors in the Northeast failed to cooperate. The British army was more organized, utilized professional soldiers, and fostered an alliance with Native American tribes led by Tecumseh. On August 16, during the British siege of Detroit, Major General William Hull panicked after the British fired on the fort and killed two American officers. Terrified of a Native American massacre, drinking heavily, Hull quickly ordered a white tablecloth out a window and unconditionally surrendered Fort Detroit and his entire army to British Major-General Sir Isaac Brock. Hull, later, was court-martialed for cowardice, but Madison intervened and saved him from execution. On October 13, a separate force from the United States was defeated at Queenston Heights, although Brock was killed. Commanding General Henry Dearborn, hampered by mutinous New England infantry, retreated to winter quarters near Albany, failing to destroy Montreal's vulnerable British supply lines. Lacking adequate revenue to fund the war, the Madison administration was forced to rely on high-interest loans provided by bankers in New York City and Philadelphia.\nIn the 1812 presidential election, held during the early stages of the war, Madison was re-nominated without opposition. A dissident group of New York Democratic-Republicans nominated DeWitt Clinton, the lieutenant governor of New York and a nephew of the recently deceased Vice President George Clinton, to oppose Madison in the 1812 election. This faction of Democratic-Republicans hoped to unseat the president by forging a coalition among Democratic-Republicans opposed to the impending war, as well as those party faithful angry with Madison for not moving more decisively toward war, northerners weary of the Virginia dynasty and southern control of the White House, and many New Englanders wanted Madison replaced. Dismayed by their prospects of beating Madison, a group of top Federalists met with Clinton's supporters to discuss a strategy for unification. Difficult as it was for them to join forces, they nominated Clinton for President and Jared Ingersoll, a Philadelphia lawyer, for vice president. Hoping to shore up his support in the Northeast, where the War of 1812 was unpopular, Madison selected Governor Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts as his running mate, though Gerry would only survive two years after the election due to old age. Despite the maneuverings of Clinton and the Federalists, Madison won re-election, though by the narrowest margin of any election since that of 1800 in the popular vote, as later supported by the electoral vote as well. He received 128 electoral votes to 89 for Clinton. With Clinton winning most of the Northeast, Madison won Pennsylvania in addition to having swept the South and the West, which ensured his victory.\nAfter the disastrous start to the war, Madison accepted Russia's invitation to arbitrate and sent a delegation led by Gallatin and John Quincy Adams (the son of former President John Adams) to Europe to negotiate a peace treaty. While Madison worked to end the war, the United States experienced some impressive naval successes, by the and other warships, that boosted American morale. Victorious in the Battle of Lake Erie, the U.S. crippled the supply and reinforcement of British military forces in the western theater of the war. General William Henry Harrison defeated the forces of the British and of Tecumseh's confederacy at the Battle of the Thames. The death of Tecumseh in that battle marked the permanent end of armed Native American resistance in the Old Northwest and any hope of a united Indian nation. In March 1814, Major General Andrew Jackson broke the resistance of the British-allied Muscogee Creek in the Old Southwest with his victory at the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. Despite these successes, the British continued to repel American attempts to invade Canada, and a British force captured Fort Niagara and burned the American city of Buffalo in late 1813.\nOn August 24, 1814, the British landed a large force on the shores of Chesapeake Bay and routed General William Winder's army at the Battle of Bladensburg. Madison, who had earlier inspected Winder's army, escaped British capture by fleeing to Virginia, though the British captured Washington and burned many of its public buildings, including the White House. Dolley bravely secured the portrait of George Washington, before she abandoned the White House, escaped British capture, and fled to Virginia. The charred remains of the capital signified a humiliating defeat for James Madison and America. On August 27, Madison returned to Washington to view the carnage of the city. Dolley returned to the capital the following day. On September 8, the Madisons moved into the Octagon House. The British army next advanced on Baltimore, but the U.S. repelled the British attack in the Battle of Baltimore, and the British army departed from the Chesapeake region in September. That same month, U.S. forces repelled a British invasion from Canada with a victory at the Battle of Plattsburgh. The British public began to turn against the war in North America, and British leaders started to look for a quick exit from the conflict.\nIn January 1815, Jackson's troops defeated the British at the Battle of New Orleans. Just over a month later, Madison learned that his negotiators had finalized the Treaty of Ghent on December 24, 1814, which ended the war. Madison promptly sent the treaty to the Senate, which ratified it on February 16, 1815. Although the overall outcome of the war resulted in a standoff, the rapid succession of events at the war's conclusion, including the burning of the capital, the Battle of New Orleans, and the Treaty of Ghent, made it seem as though American bravery at New Orleans had compelled the British to surrender. This perspective, although inaccurate, significantly contributed to enhancing Madison's reputation as president. Napoleon's defeat at the June 1815 Battle of Waterloo marked a definitive end to the Napoleonic Wars and thus concluded the hostile seizure of American shipping by British and French forces.\nPostwar period and decline of the Federalist opposition.\nThe postwar period of Madison's second term saw the transition into the \"Era of Good Feelings\" between mid-1815 and 1817, with the Federalists experiencing a further decline in influence. During the war, delegates from the New England states held the Hartford Convention, where they asked for several amendments to the Constitution. Though the Hartford Convention did not explicitly call for the secession of New England, the Convention became an adverse political millstone around the Federalist Party as general American sentiment had moved towards a celebrated unity among the states in what they saw as a successful \"second war of independence\" from Britain.\nMadison hastened the decline of the Federalists by adopting several programs he had previously opposed. Recognizing the difficulties of financing the war and the necessity of an institution to regulate American currency, Madison proposed the re-establishment of a national bank. He also called for a tariff designed to protect American goods from foreign competition, and a constitutional amendment authorizing the federal government to fund the construction of local internal improvements such as roads and canals. Madison's initiatives to now act on behalf of a national bank appeared to reverse his earlier opposition to Hamilton and were opposed by strict constructionists such as John Randolph, who stated that Madison's proposals now \"out-Hamiltons Alexander Hamilton\". Responding to Madison's proposals, the 14th Congress compiled one of the most productive legislative records up to that point in history. Congress granted the Second Bank of the United States a twenty-year charter and passed the Tariff of 1816, which set high import duties for all goods that were produced outside the United States. Madison approved federal spending on the Cumberland Road, which provided a link to the country's western lands. Congress did not pass a constitutional amendment authorizing national expenditures for local purposes (as Madison proposed). As a reprimand to Congress, on his last act before leaving office, Madison vetoed the internal improvements Bonus Bill of 1817, arguing that it was not within the enumerated powers of the Constitution.\nNative American policy.\nUpon becoming president, Madison said the federal government's duty was to convert Native Americans by the \"participation of the improvements of which the human mind and manners are susceptible in a civilized state\". In 1809, General Harrison began to push for a treaty to open more land for white American settlement. The Miami, Wea, and Kickapoo were vehemently opposed to selling any more land around the Wabash River. Harrison decided, against the wishes of Madison, to first conclude a treaty with the tribes who were willing to sell and use those treaties to help influence those who held out. In September 1809, Harrison invited the Potawatomie, Delaware, Eel Rivers, and Miami to a meeting in Fort Wayne. Harrison promised large subsidies and direct payments to the tribes if they would cede the other lands under discussion. On September 30, 1809, Madison agreed to the Treaty of Fort Wayne, negotiated and signed by Indiana Territory's Governor Harrison. In the treaty, the Native American tribes were compensated $5,200 () in goods and $500 in cash (), with $250 in annual payments (), in return for the cession of 3\u00a0million acres of land (approximately 12,140 square kilometers) with incentivized subsidies paid to individual tribes for exerting their influence over less cooperative tribes. The treaty angered Shawnee leader Tecumseh, who said, \"Sell a country! Why not sell the air, the clouds and the great sea, as well as the earth?\"\nLike Jefferson, Madison had a paternalistic attitude toward Native Americans, encouraging them to become farmers. Madison believed the adoption of European-style agriculture would help Native Americans assimilate the values of British\u2013U.S. civilization. As pioneers and settlers moved West into large tracts of Cherokee, Choctaw, Creek, and Chickasaw territory, Madison ordered the U.S. Army to protect Native American lands from intrusion by settlers. This was done to the chagrin of his military commander Andrew Jackson, who wanted Madison to ignore Native Americans pleas to stop the invasion of their lands. Tensions continued to mount between the United States and Tecumseh over the 1809 Treaty of Fort Wayne, which ultimately led to Tecumseh's alliance with the British and the Battle of Tippecanoe, on November 7, 1811, in the Northwest Territory. The divisions among the Native American leaders were bitter and before leaving the discussions, Tecumseh informed Harrison that unless the terms of the negotiated treaty were largely nullified, he would seek an alliance with the British.\nThe situation continued to escalate, eventually leading to the outbreak of hostilities between Tecumseh's followers and American settlers later that year. Tensions continued to rise, leading to the Battle of Tippecanoe during a period sometimes called Tecumseh's War. Tecumseh was defeated and Native Americans were pushed off their tribal lands, replaced entirely by white settlers. In addition to the Battle of the Thames and the Battle of Horseshoe Bend, other wars with Native Americans included the Peoria War, and the Creek War. Negotiated by Jackson, in the aftermath of the Creek War, the Treaty of Fort Jackson of August 9, 1814, added approximately 23\u00a0million acres of land (93,000 square kilometers) to Georgia and Alabama. Privately, Madison did not believe Native Americans could be fully assimilated to the values of Euro-American culture and may have been unwilling to make \"the transition from the hunter, or even the herdsman state, to the agriculture\". Madison feared that Native Americans had too great an influence on the settlers they interacted with, who in his view were \"irresistibly attracted by that complete liberty, that freedom from bonds, obligations, duties, that absence of care and anxiety which characterize the savage state\". In March 1816, Madison's Secretary of War William Crawford advocated for the government to encourage intermarriages between Native Americans and Whites as a way of assimilating the former. This prompted public outrage and exacerbated anti-Indigenous bigotry among White Americans, as seen in hostile letters sent to Madison, who remained publicly silent on the issue.\nElection of 1816.\nIn the 1816 presidential election, Madison and Jefferson both favored the candidacy of Secretary of State James Monroe, who defeated Secretary of War William H. Crawford in the party's congressional nominating caucus. As the Federalist Party continued to collapse, Monroe easily defeated Federalist candidate, New York Senator Rufus King, in the 1816 election. Madison left office as a popular president; former president Adams wrote that Madison had \"acquired more glory, and established more union, than all his three predecessors, Washington, Adams, and Jefferson, put together\".\nPost-presidency (1817\u20131836).\nWhen Madison left office in 1817 at age 65, he retired to Montpelier. As with both Washington and Jefferson, Madison left the presidency poorer than when he came in. His plantation experienced a steady financial collapse, due to price declines in tobacco and his stepson's mismanagement. In his retirement, Madison occasionally became involved in public affairs, advising Andrew Jackson and other presidents. He remained out of the public debate over the Missouri Compromise, though he privately complained about the North's opposition to the extension of slavery. Madison had warm relations with all four of the major candidates in the 1824 presidential election, but, like Jefferson, largely stayed out of the race. During Jackson's presidency, Madison publicly disavowed the Nullification movement and argued that no state had the right to secede. Madison also helped Jefferson establish the University of Virginia. In 1826, after the death of Jefferson, Madison was appointed as the second rector of the university. He retained the position as college chancellor for ten years until his death in 1836.\nIn 1829, at the age of 78, Madison was chosen as a representative to the Virginia Constitutional Convention for revision of the commonwealth's constitution. It was his last appearance as a statesman. Apportionment of adequate representation was the central issue at the convention for the western districts of Virginia. The increased population in the Piedmont and western parts of the state were not proportionately represented in the legislature. Western reformers also wanted to extend suffrage to all white men, in place of the prevailing property ownership requirement. Madison made modest gains but was disappointed at the failure of Virginians to extend suffrage to all white men.\nIn his later years, Madison became highly concerned about his historical legacy. He resorted to modifying letters and other documents in his possession, changing days and dates, and adding and deleting words and sentences. By his late seventies, Madison's self-editing of his own archived letters and older materials had become almost an obsession. As an example, he edited a letter written to Jefferson criticizing Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette; Madison not only inked out original passages but in other correspondence he even forged Jefferson's handwriting. Historian Drew R. McCoy wrote: During the final six years of his life, amid a sea of personal [financial] troubles that were threatening to engulf him\u00a0... At times mental agitation issued in physical collapse. For the better part of a year in 1831 and 1832 he was bedridden, if not silenced\u00a0... Literally sick with anxiety, he began to despair of his ability to make himself understood by his fellow citizens.\nDeath.\nMadison's health slowly deteriorated through the 1830s. He died of congestive heart failure at Montpelier on the morning of June 28, 1836, at the age of 85. According to one common account of his final moments, he was given his breakfast, which he tried eating but was unable to swallow. His favorite niece, Nellie Madison Willis, who sat by to keep him company, asked him, \"What is the matter, Uncle James?\" Madison died immediately after he replied, \"Nothing more than a change of mind, my dear.\" He was buried in the family cemetery at Montpelier. He was one of the last prominent members of the Revolutionary War generation to die. His last will and testament left significant sums to the American Colonization Society, Princeton, and the University of Virginia, as well as $30,000 ($897,000 in 2021) to his wife, Dolley. Left with a smaller sum than James had intended, Dolley suffered financial troubles until her death in 1849. In the 1840s Dolley sold Montpelier, its remaining slaves, and the furnishings to pay off outstanding debts. Paul Jennings, one of Madison's younger slaves, later recalled in his memoir,\nIn the last days of her life, before Congress purchased her husband's papers, she was in a state of absolute poverty, and I think sometimes suffered for the necessaries of life. While I was a servant to Mr. Webster, he often sent me to her with a market-basket full of provisions, and told me whenever I saw anything in the house that I thought she was in need of, to take it to her. I often did this, and occasionally gave her small sums from my own pocket, though I had years before bought my freedom of her.\nPolitical and religious views.\nFederalism.\nDuring his first stint in Congress in the 1780s, Madison came to favor amending the Articles of Confederation to provide for a stronger central government. In the 1790s, he led the opposition to Hamilton's centralizing policies and the Alien and Sedition Acts. Madison's support of the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions in the 1790s has been referred to as \"a breathtaking evolution for a man who had pleaded at the Constitutional Convention that the federal government should possess a veto over state laws\".\nOther historians disagree and see Madison's political philosophy as remarkably consistent. Perhaps more importantly, they point out that Madison's loyalty was to the Constitution, not to his personal preferences. Madison had advocated in the debates of the Constitutional Convention that the proposed federal government have veto power over state laws, but he was willing to follow the Constitution as it was adopted and ratified, rather than what he might have wished that it said. Madison had written in Federalist #45 that the proposed federal government would have powers that were \"few and defined\" (as enumerated in Article I of the Constitution). He felt strongly that to interpret it otherwise would be a breach of faith with \"We the People\" who had ratified the Constitution based on that understanding.\nMadison, who was the author of the Bill of Rights, was also faithfully following the 10th Amendment, which says that all \"powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.\"\nReligion.\nAlthough baptized as an Anglican and educated by Presbyterian clergymen, young Madison was an avid reader of English deist tracts. As an adult, Madison paid little attention to religious matters. Though most historians have found little indication of his religious leanings after he left college, some scholars suggest he leaned toward deism. Others maintain that Madison accepted Christian tenets and formed his outlook on life with a Christian worldview. Regardless of his own religious beliefs, Madison believed in religious liberty, and he advocated for Virginia's disestablishment of state-sponsored religious institutions. He also opposed the appointment of chaplains for Congress and the armed forces, arguing that such appointments produce religious exclusion as well as political disharmony.\nSlavery.\nThroughout his life, Madison's views on slavery were conflicted. He was born into a plantation society that relied on slave labor, and both sides of his family profited from tobacco farming. While he viewed slavery as essential to the Southern economy, he was troubled by the instability of a society that depended on a large slave population. Madison also believed slavery was incompatible with American Revolutionary principles, though he owned over one hundred African American slaves. According to historian Paris Spies-Gans, Madison's anti-slavery thought was strongest \"at the height of Revolutionary politics. But by the early 1800s, when in a position to truly impact policy, he failed to follow through on these views.\" Spies-Gans concluded, \"[u]ltimately, Madison's personal dependence on slavery led him to question his own, once enlightened, definition of liberty itself.\"\nMadison grew up on Montpelier, which like other southern plantations depended on slave labor. When Madison left for college on August 10, 1769, he arrived at Princeton accompanied by Sawney, an enslaved man charged with handling Madison's expenses and with relaying messages to his family back home. In 1783, fearing the possibility of a slave rebellion at Montpelier, Madison emancipated one slave, Billey, selling him into a seven-year apprentice contract. After his manumission, Billey changed his name to William Gardner and became a shipping agent, representing Madison in Philadelphia. Madison inherited Montpelier and its more than one hundred slaves after his father died in 1801. That same year, Madison moved to Washington D.C., running Montpelier from afar making no effort to free his slaves. After his election to the presidency in 1808, Madison brought his slaves to the White House. During the 1820s and 1830s, Madison sold some of his land and slaves to repay debt. In 1836, at the time of Madison's death, he owned 36 taxable slaves. In his will, Madison gave his remaining slaves to his wife Dolley, and charged her not to sell the slaves without their permission. To pay off debts, Dolley later sold the slaves without their permission.\nMadison was known from his farm papers for advocating the humane treatment of his slaves. He instructed an overseer to \"treat the Negroes with all the humanity and kindness consistent with their necessary subordination and work.\" Madison also ensured that his slaves had milk cows and meals for their daily food. By the 1790s, Sawney, while enslaved, was an overseer of part of the plantation. Some slaves at Montpelier could read. Paul Jennings was a slave of the Madisons for 48 years and worked as Madison's footman at the White House. In his memoir, \"A Colored Man's Reminiscences of James Madison\", published in 1865, Jennings said that he \"never knew [Madison] to strike a slave, although he had over one hundred; neither would he allow an overseer to do it.\" Jennings condemned slavery but called James Madison \"one of the best men that ever lived\", and Dolley Madison \"a remarkably fine woman.\" Historian Elizabeth Dowling Taylor said Madison was a \"garden-variety slaveholder\" who avoided excessive cruelty. Slaves worked six days a week, dawn to dusk, with Sundays off.\nMadison called slavery \"the most oppressive dominion\" that ever existed, and according to historian Ralph Ketcham he had a \"lifelong abhorrence\" for the institution. In 1785 Madison spoke in the Virginia Assembly favoring a bill that Thomas Jefferson had proposed for the gradual abolition of slavery, and he also helped defeat a bill designed to outlaw the manumission of individual slaves. As a slaveholder, Madison was aware that owning slaves was not consistent with revolutionary values, but, as a pragmatist, this sort of self-contradiction was a common feature in his political career. Historian Drew R. McCoy said that Madison's antislavery principles were indeed \"impeccable\". Ketcham wrote, \"[a]lthough Madison abhorred slavery, he nonetheless \u00a0... depend[ed] all his life on a slave system that he could never square with his republican beliefs.\" There is no evidence Madison thought black people were inherently inferior. Madison believed blacks and whites were unlikely to co-exist peacefully due to \"the prejudices of the whites\" as well as feelings on both sides \"inspired by their former relation as oppressors and oppressed.\" As such, he became interested in the idea of freedmen establishing colonies in Africa and later served as the president of the American Colonization Society, which relocated former slaves to Liberia. Madison believed that this solution offered a gradual, long-term, but potentially feasible means of eradicating slavery in the United States, but that peaceful co-existence between the two racial groups could eventually be achieved in the long run.\nMadison initially opposed the Constitution's 20-year protection of the foreign slave trade, but he eventually accepted it as a necessary compromise to get the South to ratify the document. He also proposed that apportionment in the House of Representatives be according to each state's free and enslaved population, eventually leading to the adoption of the Three-fifths Compromise. Madison supported the extension of slavery into the West during the Missouri crisis of 1819\u20131821, asserting that the spread of slavery would not lead to more slaves, but rather diminish their generative increase through dispersing them, thus substantially improving their condition, accelerating emancipation, easing racial tensions, and increasing \"partial manumissions\". Madison thought of slaves as \"wayward (but still educable) students in need of regular guidance.\"\nLegacy.\nRegarded as one of the Founding Fathers of the United States, Madison had a wide influence on the founding of the nation and upon the early development of American constitutional government and foreign policy. Historian J.C.A. Stagg writes that \"in some ways\u2014because he was on the winning side of every important issue facing the young nation from 1776 to 1816\u2014Madison was the most successful and possibly the most influential of all the Founding Fathers.\" Though he helped found a major political party and served as the fourth president, his legacy has largely been defined by his contributions to the Constitution; even in his own life he was hailed as the \"Father of the Constitution\". Law professor Noah Feldman writes that Madison \"invented and theorized the modern ideal of an expanded, federal constitution that combines local self-government with an overarching national order\". Feldman adds that Madison's \"model of liberty-protecting constitutional government\" is \"the most influential American idea in global political history\". Various rankings of historians and political scientists tend to rank Madison as an above average president with a 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranking Madison as the twelfth best president.\nVarious historians have criticized Madison's tenure as president. In 1968, Henry Steele Commager and Richard B. Morris said the conventional view of Madison was of an \"incapable President\" who \"mismanaged an unnecessary war\". A 2006 poll of historians ranked Madison's failure to prevent the War of 1812 as the sixth-worst mistake made by a sitting president. Regarding Madison's consistency and adaptability of policy-making during his many years of political activity, historian Gordon S. Wood says that Lance Banning, as in his \"Sacred Fire of Liberty\" (1995), is the \"only present-day scholar to maintain that Madison did not change his views in the 1790s\". During and after the War of 1812, Madison came to support several of the policies that he opposed in the 1790s, including the national bank, a strong navy, and taxes. Wood notes that many historians struggle to understand Madison, but Wood looks at him in the terms of Madison's times\u2014as a nationalist but one with a different conception of nationalism from that of the Federalists. Gary Rosen uses other approaches to suggest Madison's consistency. Historian Garry Wills wrote, \"Madison's claim on our admiration does not rest on a perfect consistency, any more than it rests on his presidency. He has other virtues. \u00a0... As a framer and defender of the Constitution he had no peer. \u00a0... No man could do everything for the country\u2014not even Washington. Madison did more than most, and did some things better than any. That was quite enough.\"\nMontpelier, the Madison family's plantation, has been designated a National Historic Landmark. The James Madison Memorial Building is part of the United States Library of Congress and serves as the official memorial to Madison. In 1986, Congress created the James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation as part of the bicentennial celebration of the Constitution. Other memorials include Madison, Wisconsin and Madison County, Alabama which were both named for Madison, as were Madison Square Garden, James Madison University, and the USS \"James Madison\". In 2021, the Madison Metropolitan School District renamed James Madison Memorial High School following community opposition to commemorating someone who used slave labor. Madison has appeared on United States currency, including the five thousand dollar bill (no longer in production since 1969). In 2023, an example of the $5,000 Federal Reserve Madison Note sold at Heritage Auctions for $300,000.\nIn popular culture.\nMadison, portrayed by Burgess Meredith, is a key protagonist in the 1946 film \"Magnificent Doll\", a fictionalized account of Dolley Madison's romantic life. Madison is also portrayed in the Broadway musical \"Hamilton\", played by Joshua Henry in the original 2013 Vassar version and then revised by Okieriete Onaodowan for the 2015 Broadway opening. Onaodowan won a Grammy Award for his portrayal of Madison. On July 3, 2020, Disney+ released the film \"Hamilton\", a professional recording of the Broadway stage production performed by the original cast.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "15954", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15954", "title": "January 24", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 24 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15956", "revid": "3096637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15956", "title": "Journal of the Travellers Aid Society", "text": "Science-fiction role-playing magazine\nJournal of the Travellers' Aid Society is a role-playing game magazine devoted to Traveller, commonly abbreviated JTAS.\nHistory.\nLoren K. Wiseman created a magazine in 1979 to support \"Traveller\", with Game Designers' Workshop publishing \"The Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" (JTAS), which Wiseman would continue to develop as its editor. J. Andrew Keith wrote so much material for \"JTAS\" that he used the pseudonyms John Marshal and Keith Douglass (although a reader performed a word-use analysis of these articles and realized that the same person wrote them all). Marc Miller decided that, rather than using modern dates for the magazine, each issue would instead be based on the in-game calendar of the Imperium, which advanced roughly 90 days for each quarterly issue. \"JTAS\" #2 (1979) began to include in-universe excerpts from the fictional 'Traveller News Service', which talked about 'current' events going on in the Imperium; that issue was dated 274\u20131105, and included two news excerpts from Regina sector, which were dated 097-1105 and 101\u20131105 on the Imperium calendar. \"JTAS\" #9 (1981) contributed to the development of the \"Traveller\" metaplot by detailing the beginning of a war with the alien Zhodani species. The original run of the magazine ended with \"The Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" #24 (1984), but GDW replaced it with the magazine \"Challenge\", continuing the numbering from \"JTAS\" with issue #25 (1986) but included material for all games published by GDW rather than just \"Traveller\".\nImperium Games published \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" #25 in 1996, and published just the next issue of the \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" as their final issue in 1997.\nSteve Jackson Games obtained a license for the \"Traveller\" setting, so they brought back \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" as an online magazine in 2000.\nMongoose Publishing produced six volumes of \"Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society\" in 2020 as part of their \"Traveller\" licence. \"Journal of the Traveller\u2019s Aid Society, Volume I\" is 128 pages long and contains two adventures.\nName.\nThe Journal of the Travellers Aid Society takes its name from the fictional Travellers' Aid Society (TAS) that was first mentioned in the original incarnation of the Traveller game published by Game Designers Workshop [GDW]. In the original Traveller game, it was not too uncommon for characters to obtain membership in the TAS during character creation. The idea of the TAS is that it is an organization that exists to support what are basically 'transients,' or 'wanderers' ['Travellers' in the game's terminology] around the galaxy. It does so by maintaining low-cost hostels at many of the large starports, and, most importantly, by maintaining its 'rating system,' which warns of the dangers inherent in visiting certain worlds. Under this system, a world which should be approached with caution is denoted an 'Amber Zone,' and a world that should not be approached at all is denoted a 'Red Zone.'\nx\u00a7\nIssues.\nFar Future Enterprises.\nThese are collections of the earlier GDW publications.\nReception.\nThe \"Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\" won the H.G. Wells award for Best Magazine Covering Roleplaying of 1979.\nWilliam A. Barton reviewed the \"Merchant Prince\" supplement from \"Journal of the Travellers Aid Society\" #12 in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 53. Barton commented that \"Although it probably won't totally supplant \"Merchants &amp; Merchandise\" as \"the\" book for generating merchant characters, \"Merchant Prince\" is a well-conceived and viable alternative to M&amp;M. Its inclusion in the \"Journal\" makes it a special bargain. I recommend it to every \"Traveller\" player, especially those who find the merchant life the most appealing.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15957", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15957", "title": "Jeanne of Arc", "text": ""}
{"id": "15958", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15958", "title": "Transcribing JHVH", "text": ""}
{"id": "15960", "revid": "50963065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15960", "title": "Judicial Committee of the Privy Council", "text": "Judicial body in the United Kingdom\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (JCPC) is the highest court of appeal for the Crown Dependencies, the British Overseas Territories, some Commonwealth countries and a few institutions in the United Kingdom. Established on 14 August 1833 to hear appeals formerly heard by the King-in-Council, the Privy Council formerly acted as the court of last resort for the entire British Empire, except for the United Kingdom itself.\nFormally a statutory committee of His Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, the Judicial Committee consists of senior judges who are Privy Councillors; they are predominantly justices of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom and senior judges from the Commonwealth of Nations. Although it is often simply referred to as the \"Privy Council\", the Judicial Committee is only one constituent part of the Council. In Commonwealth realms which retain the JCPC as the final court of appeal, appeals are nominally made to \"His Majesty in Council\" (i.e. the British monarch as formally advised by his privy counsellors), who then refers the case to the Judicial Committee for \"advice\". In republics in the Commonwealth of Nations which retain the JCPC as their final court of appeal, appeals are made directly to the Judicial Committee itself. The panel of judges (typically five in number) hearing a particular case is known as \"the Board\". The report of the Board is, by convention, always accepted by the King-in-Council as judgment.\nHistory.\nThe origins of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council can be traced back to the , or royal council. In theory, the king was the fount of justice, and petitions for redress of wrongs arising from his courts were addressed to him. That power was gradually taken over by Parliament (which evolved out of the ) within England, but the King-in-Council (which also evolved out of the \"\") retained jurisdiction to hear petitions from the King's non-English possessions, such as the Channel Islands and, later on, from England's colonies.\nThe task of hearing appeals was given to a series of short-lived committees of the Privy Council. In 1679, appellate jurisdiction was given to the Board of Trade, before being transferred to a standing Appeals Committee of the Privy Council in 1696. The Appeals Committee of the Privy Council was one of the earliest judicial bodies which exercised the power of judicial review, in a series of cases from the American colonies which raised questions about the constitutionality of colonial statutes, measured against the royal charters which set out the powers of the colonial governments.\nBy the early nineteenth century, the growth of the British Empire, which had greatly expanded the appellate jurisdiction of the Privy Council (despite the loss of appeals from the American colonies), had put great strains on the existing arrangements. In particular, the Appeals Committee had to hear cases arising from a variety of different legal systems in the colonies, such as Hindu law, with which its members were unfamiliar. Another serious problem was that the Appeals Committee was technically a committee of the whole of the entire Privy Council, of which a minimum of three were required for a quorum. Since many members of the Privy Council were not lawyers, all members of the Appeals Committee had equal votes, and there was no requirement that any of the Privy Counsellors actually hearing a particular appeal had to be a lawyer, it became possible for certain parties to appeal to secure desired judgments by persuading nonlawyer Privy Counsellors to attend the hearings on their appeals. For these reasons, the Appeals Committee fell into disrepute among better-informed lawyers and judges in the colonies.\nIn 1833, at the instigation of Lord Brougham, the Lord Chancellor, Parliament passed the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Judicial Committee Act 1833 (3 &amp; 4 Will. 4. c. 41). The act established the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, a statutory committee of the Privy Council that would hear appeals to the King-in-Council. In addition to colonial appeals, later legislation gave the Judicial Committee appellate jurisdiction over a range of miscellaneous matters, such as patents, ecclesiastical matters, and prize suits. At its height, the Judicial Committee was said to be the court of final appeal for over a quarter of the world.\nIn the twentieth century, the jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council shrank considerably, as British dominions established their own courts of final appeal and as British colonies became independent, although many retained appeals to the Privy Council post-independence. Canada abolished Privy Council appeals in 1949, India and South Africa in 1950, Australia in 1986, and New Zealand in 2003. Currently, eleven Commonwealth countries outside of the United Kingdom retain Privy Council appeals, in addition to various British and New Zealand territories. The Judicial Committee also retains jurisdiction over a small number of domestic matters in the United Kingdom, reduced by the creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom in 2009.\nJurisdiction.\nDomestic jurisdiction.\nThe United Kingdom does not have a single highest national court; the Judicial Committee is the highest court of appeal in some cases, while in most others the highest court of appeal is the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. (In Scotland the highest court in criminal cases is the High Court of Justiciary; the Supreme Court is the highest court in civil cases and matters arising from Scottish devolution, the latter previously having been dealt with by the Judicial Committee.)\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council has jurisdiction in the following domestic matters:\nAdditionally, the government may (through the King) refer any issue to the committee for \"consideration and report\" under section 4 of the Judicial Committee Act 1833.\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is the court of final appeal for the Church of England. It hears appeals from the Arches Court of Canterbury and the Chancery Court of York, except on matters of doctrine, ritual or ceremony, which go to the Court of Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved. By the Church Discipline Act 1840 (3 &amp; 4 Vict. c. 86) and the Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876 all archbishops and bishops of the Church of England became eligible to be members of the Judicial Committee.\nPrior to the coming into force of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, the Privy Council was the court of last resort for devolution issues. On 1 October 2009 this jurisdiction was transferred to the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.\nAuthority of Privy Council decisions in domestic British courts.\nJudgments of the Judicial Committee are not generally binding on courts within the United Kingdom, having only persuasive authority, but are binding on all courts within any other Commonwealth country which still allows for appeals to the Judicial Committee. Where a binding precedent of the UK Supreme Court, or of the House of Lords, or of the Court of Appeal conflicts with that of a decision of the Judicial Committee on English law, English courts are required to follow the domestic decision over that of the Judicial Committee except when the Judicial Committee has in its decision expressly directed the domestic court to follow its new decision. However, given the overlap between the membership of the Judicial Committee and of the Supreme Court, the decisions of the former are extremely persuasive and usually followed.\nOverseas jurisdiction.\nThe Judicial Committee holds jurisdiction in appeals from the following 32 jurisdictions (including eleven independent nations):\nJurisdiction removed.\nJudicial appeal of final resort has been assumed by other bodies in some current and former Commonwealth countries:\nThe following countries or territories did not retain the jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee at the time of independence or of the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom: Burma (1948), Israel (1948), Somaliland (1960), Cyprus (1960), Zanzibar (1963), Zambia (1964), Rhodesia (1965), South Yemen (1967), Swaziland (1968), Papua New Guinea (1975), Seychelles (1976), Solomon Islands (1978), Vanuatu (1980), Hong Kong (1997).\nComposition.\nMembers.\nThe following are members of the Judicial Committee:\nThe bulk of the Committee's work is done by the Supreme Court Justices, who are paid to work full-time in both the Supreme Court and the Privy Council. Overseas judges may not sit when certain UK domestic matters are being heard, but will often sit when appeals from their own countries are being heard.\nRegistrars.\nUntil 1904 the Registrar of the Admiralty court was also Registrar to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in ecclesiastical and maritime causes.\nProcedure.\nMost appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council are formally appeals to \"His Majesty in Council\". Appeals from Brunei are formally to the Sultan and Yang di-Pertuan, while appeals from republics within the Commonwealth are directly to the Judicial Committee. Appeals are generally by leave of the local Court of Appeal, although the Judicial Committee retains discretionary power to grant leave to appeal as well.\nAfter hearing an appeal, the panel of judges which heard the case (known as \"the Board\") issues its decision in writing. For appeals to His Majesty in Council, the Board submits its decision to the King as advice for his consideration. By convention, the advice is always accepted by the King and given effect via an Order in Council.\nHistorically, the Judicial Committee could only give a unanimous report, but since the Judicial Committee (Dissenting Opinions) Order 1966, dissenting opinions have been allowed.\nThe Judicial Committee is not bound by its own previous decisions, but may depart from them in exceptional circumstances if following its previous decisions would be unjust or contrary to public policy.\nLocation.\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council is based in London. From its establishment to 2009, it mainly met in the Privy Council Chamber in Downing Street, although increase in the Judicial Committee's business in the twentieth century required it to sit simultaneously in several panels, which met elsewhere. The Chamber, designed by John Soane, was often criticised for its interior design, and was extensively remodelled in 1845 by Sir Charles Barry. On 1 October 2009, the Judicial Committee moved to the former Middlesex Guildhall building, which had been refurbished in 2007 to provide a home for both the JCPC and the newly created Supreme Court of the United Kingdom. In this renovated building, Court 3 is used for Privy Council sittings.\nIn recent years, the Judicial Committee has occasionally sat outside of London. Between 2005 and 2010 it sat twice in Mauritius and three times in the Bahamas.\nDecline in Commonwealth appeals.\nInitially, all Commonwealth realms and their territories maintained a right of appeal to the Privy Council. Many of those Commonwealth countries that became republics, or which had indigenous monarchies, preserved the Judicial Committee's jurisdiction by agreement with the United Kingdom. However, retention of a right of appeal to a court located overseas, made up mostly of British judges who may be out of tune with local values, has often come to be seen as incompatible with notions of an independent nation's sovereign status, and so a number of Commonwealth members have ended the right of appeal from their jurisdiction. The Balfour Declaration of 1926, while not considered to be \"lex scripta\", severely limited the conditions under which the Judicial Committee might hear cases:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From these discussions it was clear that it was no part of the policy of His Majesty's Government in Great Britain that questions affecting judicial appeals should be determined otherwise than in accordance with the wishes of the part of the Empire primarily affected\nAustralia.\nIn 1901, the Constitution of Australia limited appeals from the new federal High Court of Australia to the Privy Council, by prohibiting appeals on constitutional matters unless leave is granted by the High Court on \"inter se\" questions. Appeals on non-constitutional matters were not prohibited, but the federal Parliament of Australia had the power to legislate to limit them. The right of appeal from federal courts (including territory supreme courts) was abolished through the Privy Council (Limitation of Appeals) Act 1968. Appeals from state courts, a continuation of the right to appeal decisions of colonial courts before 1901, continued, until they were also abolished by the Australia Act 1986, which was enacted by both the UK and Australian parliaments, on the request of all the state governments. The Australian Constitution retains the provision allowing the High Court of Australia to permit appeals to the Privy Council on \"inter se\" questions. However, the only time such permission was given was in 1912 and the High Court has stated that it will not grant it again, since the jurisdiction to do so \"has long since been spent\", and it is obsolete.\nCanada.\nCanada created its own Supreme Court in 1875 and abolished appeals to the Privy Council in criminal cases in 1933. Despite this, some decisions by the Supreme Court of Canada went on to appeal in the JCPC, including notably the Persons Case (\"Edwards v Canada (AG)\"), which affirmed that women had always been \"qualified persons\" under the British North America Act, 1867 (Canada's Constitution) eligible to sit in the Senate of Canada. In this case, it also used a metaphor in the \"obiter dicta\", later reinterpreted and employed by the Supreme Court of Canada in the 1980s to establish what came to be known as the \"living tree doctrine\" in Canadian Constitutional law, which says that a constitution is organic and must be read in a broad and liberal manner so as to adapt it to changing times.\nIn 1949, all appeals to the Privy Council were abolished, but prior to this, there were several factors that served to limit the effectiveness of measures to reduce appeals:\n\"Nadan\", together with the King\u2013Byng Affair, was a major irritant for Canada and provoked the discussion at the 1926 Imperial Conference which led to the Balfour Declaration, which declared the United Kingdom and the dominions to be\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... autonomous Communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another in any aspect of their domestic or external affairs, though united by a common allegiance to the Crown, and freely associated as members of the British Commonwealth of Nations.\nWith that Declaration and its statutory confirmation in the Statute of Westminster 1931 (Imp, 22\u201323 Geo 5, c.4) the impediment to abolishing appeals to the Privy Council, whether or not it had been legitimate, was comprehensively removed. Criminal appeals to the Privy Council were ended in 1933. Moves to extend the abolition to civil matters were shelved during the growing international crisis of the 1930s but re-tabled after the Second World War, and civil appeals ended in 1949, with an amendment of the Supreme Court Act. Cases begun before 1949 were still allowed to appeal after 1949, and the final case to make it to the Council was not until 1959 with the case of \"Ponoka-Calmar Oils v Wakefield\".\nThe JCPC played a controversial role in the evolution of Canadian federalism in that, whereas some Fathers of Confederation in negotiating the union of the British North American colonies against the backdrop of the American Civil War wished to ensure a strong central government vis-\u00e0-vis relatively weak provinces, appeals to the JCPC in constitutional matters progressively shifted the balance in favour of the provinces. While a few commentators have suggested that Canadian First Nations retain the right to appeal to the Privy Council because their treaties predate their relationship to Canada, the JCPC has not entertained any such appeal since 1867 and the dominant view is that no such appeal right exists.\nCaribbean Community.\nThe nations of the Caribbean Community voted in 2001 to abolish the right of appeal to the Privy Council in favour of a Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ). Some debate between member countries and also the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council had repeatedly delayed the court's date of inauguration. As of 2005, Barbados replaced the process of appeals to Her Majesty in Council with the CCJ, which had then come into operation. The Co-operative Republic of Guyana also enacted local legislation allowing the CCJ to have jurisdiction over their sovereign final court of appeals system. Belize acceded to the Appellate Jurisdiction of the CCJ on 1 June 2010. As it stands, a few other CARICOM states appear to be ready for the abolition of appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the immediate future. The government of Jamaica in particular had come close and attempted to abolish appeals to the Judicial Committee without the support of the opposition in Parliament; however, it was ruled by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council that the procedure used in Jamaica to bypass the opposition was incorrect and unconstitutional. Another attempt will also be forthcoming.\nCaribbean governments have been coming under increased pressure from their electorates to devise ways to override previous rulings by the JCPC such as \"Pratt v A-G\" (Jamaica, 1993), \"R v Hughes\" (Saint Lucia, 2002), \"Fox v R\" (Saint Kitts and Nevis, 2002), \"Reyes v R\" (2002, Belize), \"Boyce v R\" (Barbados, 2004), and \"Matthew v S\" (Trinidad and Tobago, 2004), all of which are Privy Council judgments concerning the death penalty in the Caribbean region.\nThe then President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers, has voiced displeasure with Caribbean and other Commonwealth countries continuing to rely on the British JCPC. During an interview Lord Phillips was quoted by the \"Financial Times\" as saying that \"'in an ideal world' Commonwealth countries\u2014including those in the Caribbean\u2014would stop using the Privy Council and set up their own final courts of appeal instead\".\nOn 18 December 2006, the Judicial Committee made history when for the first time in more than 170 years it ventured outside London, holding a five-day sitting in the Bahamas. Lords Bingham, Brown, Carswell, and Scott, and Baroness Hale of Richmond, travelled to the Bahamas for the special sitting at the invitation of Dame Joan Sawyer, then the President of the Court of Appeal of the Bahamas; the Committee returned to the Bahamas in December 2007 for a second sitting. On the latter occasion, Lords Hope, Rodger, Walker, and Mance, and Sir Christopher Rose, heard several cases. At the end of the sitting, Lord Hope indicated that there may be future sittings of the Committee in the Bahamas, and the Committee has indeed sat in the Bahamas again, in 2009.\nThe 2018 Antiguan constitutional referendum saw the proposal to replace the JCPC with the CCJ rejected by a 52.04% majority.\nOn 28 February 2023, the parliament of Saint Lucia approved the Constitution of St Lucia Amendment Bill 2023, which would replace the JCPC with the CCJ.\nAn injunction against Saint Lucia's accession to the CCJ was filed on 3 March 2023 against the bill in the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court in the High Court of Justice of Saint Lucia, and is currently pending.\nSri Lanka (Ceylon).\nSri Lanka, formerly Ceylon, abolished appeals to the Privy Council under the Court of Appeal Act, 1971, which came into effect on 15 November 1971. Previously, the Privy Council had ruled in \"Ibralebbe v The Queen\" that it remained the highest court of appeal in Ceylon notwithstanding the country's independence as a dominion in 1948.\nThe Gambia.\nThe Gambia retained the right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council under the Gambia Independence Act 1964, even after The Gambia became a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations in April 1970 under Sir Dawda Jawara. Appeals were still taken to the JCPC from 1994 to 1998, when Yahya Jammeh, the then dictator and President of the Gambia decided to restructure the Gambian judiciary under the 1997 Constitution of the Gambia to replace the JCPC with the Supreme Court of the Gambia.\nThe last case from The Gambia to the JCPC was \"West Coast Air Limited v. Gambia Civil Aviation Authority and Others\" UKPC 39 (15 September 1998).\nGrenada.\nGrenadian appeals to the Privy Council were temporarily abolished from 1979 until 1991, as a result of the Grenadian Revolution, which brought Prime Minister Maurice Bishop to power. People's Law 84 was enacted to this effect. In 1985, \"Mitchell v DPP\" affirmed Grenada's right to unilaterally abolish appeals to the Privy Council. In 1991, Grenada restored the JCPC's jurisdiction.\nIn 2016, there was a proposal in the 2016 Grenadian constitutional referendum to terminate appeals from Grenada to the JCPC and to replace the JCPC with the Caribbean Court of Justice. This was rejected by a 56.73% majority, which means the JCPC remains Grenada's highest court.\nAnother referendum, the 2018 Grenadian constitutional referendum also rejected terminating appeals to the JCPC by a 55.2% majority.\nGuyana.\nGuyana retained the right of appeal to the Privy Council until the government of Prime Minister Forbes Burnham passed the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (Termination of Appeals) Act 1970 and the Constitution (Amendment) Act 1973.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong's court system changed following the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to China on 1 July 1997, with the Court of Final Appeal serving as the highest judicial authority of the Special Administrative Region (SAR), and (pursuant to Article 158 of the Basic Law, the constitutional instrument of the SAR) the power of final interpretation vested not in the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong but in the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress of China, which, unlike the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, is a political, legislative body rather than an independent and impartial tribunal of last resort.\nDecisions of the Privy Council on Hong Kong appeals before 1 July 1997 remain binding on the courts of Hong Kong. This accords with the principle of continuity of the legal system enshrined in Article 8 of the Basic Law. Decisions of the Privy Council on non-Hong Kong appeals are of persuasive authority only. Such decisions were not binding on the courts in Hong Kong under the doctrine of precedent before 1 July 1997 and are not binding today. Decisions of the House of Lords before 1 July 1997 stand in a similar position. It is of the greatest importance that the courts of Hong Kong should derive assistance from overseas jurisprudence, particularly from the final appellate courts of other common law jurisdictions. This is recognised by Article 84 of the Basic Law.\nIndia.\nIndia retained the right of appeal from the Federal Court of India to the Privy Council after the establishment of the Dominion of India. Following the replacement of the Federal Court with the Supreme Court of India in January 1950, the Abolition of Privy Council Jurisdiction Act 1949 came into effect, ending the right of appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.\nIrish Free State.\nThe right of appeal to the Privy Council was provided for in the Constitution of the Irish Free State until its abolition in 1933 by an Act of the Oireachtas of the Irish Free State, amending said constitution.\nIn \"Moore v Attorney-General of the Irish Free State\" the right of the Oireachtas to abolish appeals to the Privy Council was challenged as a violation of the 1921 Anglo-Irish Treaty. The then Attorney General for England and Wales (Sir Thomas Inskip) is reported to have warned the then Attorney-General of the Irish Free State (Conor Maguire) that the Irish Free State had no right to abolish appeals to the Privy Council. The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council itself ruled that the Irish Free State Government had that right under the Statute of Westminster 1931 (Imp.).\nJamaica.\nIn May 2015, the Jamaican House of Representatives approved, with the necessary two-thirds majority, bills to end legal appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and make the Caribbean Court of Justice Jamaica's final court of appeal. The reform will be debated by the Jamaican Senate; however, the government needed the support of at least one opposition Senator for the measures to be approved by the required two-thirds majority. The 2016 general election was called before the reforms could be brought to the Senate for a final vote. The Jamaican Labour Party, which opposed the changes, won the election and has promised to hold a referendum on the issue.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia abolished appeals to the Privy Council in criminal and constitutional matters in 1978, and in civil matters in 1984.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand was the last of the original dominions to remove appeals to the Privy Council from its legal system. Proposals to abolish appeals to the Privy Council in New Zealand were first put forward in the early 1980s.\nThe Privy Council's respect for local decisions was noted by Lord Brightman in 1985 in regard to the possible adoption of a New Zealand decision, in the case of \"Archer v. Cutler\" (1980), as a precedent, where he stated that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If \"Archer v. Cutler\" is properly to be regarded as a decision based on considerations peculiar to New Zealand, it is highly improbable that their Lordships would think it right to impose their own interpretation of the law, thereby contradicting the unanimous conclusions of the High Court and the Court of Appeal of New Zealand on a matter of local significance. If, however, the principle of \"Archer v. Cutler\", if it be correct, must be regarded as having general application throughout all jurisdictions based on the common law, because it does not depend on local considerations, their Lordships could not properly treat the unanimous view of the courts of New Zealand as being necessarily decisive.\nIn October 2003, with respect to all cases heard by the Court of Appeal of New Zealand, New Zealand law was changed to abolish appeals to the Privy Council, after the end of 2003. The old system was replaced by the Supreme Court of New Zealand. In 2008, Prime Minister John Key ruled out any abolition of the Supreme Court and return to the Privy Council.\nHowever, judgment on the last appeal from New Zealand to be heard by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council was not delivered until 3 March 2015.\nNewfoundland.\nNewfoundland was one of the original Dominions, recognised in the Balfour Declaration and the Statute of Westminster 1931. Like the other Dominions, an appeal lay from the Newfoundland courts to the Judicial Committee.\nIn 1949, Newfoundland joined Canada as the tenth province. Like other provinces, an appeal continued to lie from the Newfoundland courts to the Judicial Committee. In late 1949, the federal Parliament abolished appeals to the Judicial Committee from courts in Canada, making the Supreme Court of Canada the final court of appeal. Cases started prior to the abolition could still be appealed to the Judicial Committee, but it does not appear that there were any cases from Newfoundland to the Judicial Committee after 1949.\nPakistan.\nThe Dominion of Pakistan retained the right of appeal to the Privy Council from the Federal Court of Pakistan until the Privy Council (Abolition of Jurisdiction) Act, 1950 was passed. The Federal Court of Pakistan remained the highest court until 1956, when the Supreme Court of Pakistan was established.\nRhodesia.\nDespite the Rhodesian Constitution of 1965 coming into effect as a result of the Unilateral Declaration of Independence, appeals continued to be accepted by the Privy Council as late as 1969 due to the fact that under international law, Rhodesia remained a British colony until gaining its independence as Zimbabwe in April 1980.\nSingapore.\nSingapore abolished Privy Council appeals in all cases save those involving the death penalty, or in civil cases where the parties had agreed to such a right of appeal, in 1989. The remaining rights of appeal were abolished in April 1994.\nOne notable case in Singapore where an appeal against the death sentence was allowed by the Privy Council was a murder case that occurred in Pulau Ubin between 22 and 23 April 1972. In this case, Mohamed Yasin bin Hussein, who was 19 at the time of the murder, was sentenced to death by the High Court for murdering and raping a 58-year-old woman named Poon Sai Imm, while his 25-year-old accomplice Harun bin Ripin went to ransack the elderly woman's house for items to rob (Harun, who also stood trial for murder together with Yasin, was instead sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment and received 12 strokes of the cane for a lesser charge of robbery at night). The Privy Council found that there was no evidence to show that Yasin had intended to cause death or any fatal bodily injury when he caused the fatal rib fractures on Poon while raping the struggling victim. As such, they found him guilty of committing a rash/negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide and sentenced him to two years' imprisonment. Following this appeal, Yasin was brought back to court to be charged with rape, and he was eventually jailed for another eight years for the attempted rape of the victim.\nAnother notable case heard by the Privy Council was the case of Haw Tua Tau, a hawker who was sentenced to death in 1978 for the double murder of two hawkers, Phoon Ah Leong and his mother Hu Yuen Keng. After his appeal was dismissed, Haw was granted special leave to appeal to the Privy Council against his sentence and conviction, but his appeal was dismissed by the Privy Council, which issued a landmark ruling that decreed the prosecution shall be allowed to present its case against an accused in court, as long as there is sufficient evidence to back a charge against the accused and hence present a case for the accused to answer. After losing his final appeal, Haw was eventually hanged in 1982 for the hawker killings.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth Africa abolished the right of appeal to the Privy Council from the Appellate Division of the then Supreme Court of South Africa in 1950 under the terms of the Privy Council Appeals Act, 1950.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15962", "revid": "48270802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15962", "title": "J\u00f6tunheimr", "text": "Land or lands inhabited by j\u00f6tnar in Nordic Mythology\nThe terms J\u00f6tunheimr (in Old Norse orthography: J\u01ebtunheimr ; often anglicised as Jotunheim) or J\u00f6tunheimar refer to either a land or multiple lands respectively in Nordic mythology inhabited by the j\u00f6tnar (relatives of the gods, in English sometimes inaccurately called \"giants\"). \n are typically, but not exclusively, presented in Eddic sources as prosperous lands located to the north and are commonly separated from the lands inhabited by gods and humans by barriers that cannot be traversed by usual means.\nEtymology.\n is a compound word formed from and , meaning a 'home' or 'world'. When attested in Eddic sources, the word is typically found in its plural form, ('-lands').\nAttestations.\nPoetic Edda.\n are mentioned in three poems of the Poetic Edda. In the beginning of V\u00f6lusp\u00e1, the coming of three women out of marks the end of the Age of Gold for the gods. Towards the end of the poem, in the section describing the onset of Ragnar\u00f6k, they are mentioned as follows:\nIn the prose prologue Sk\u00edrnism\u00e1l, while sitting on Hli\u00f0skj\u00e1lf, Freyr sees Ger\u00f0r, the daughter of Gymir, in and falls in love with her. A further prose section then describes that he gives his servant Sk\u00edrnir his horse and sends him to her home at Gymisgar\u00f0ar in , which he reaches after travelling through wet mountains, a flickering flame and darkness. After his journey, Sk\u00edrnir meets Ger\u00f0r and her family living in a hall and tending to animals in the daylight, protected by a fence and dogs. Upon his return, Freyr asks in a stanza of the tidings from , to which his servant replies that she will meet him in nine nights at Barri.\nIn \u00derymskvi\u00f0a, Loki uses Freyja's fja\u00f0rhamr to fly to \u00derymr's home in to find Thor's hammer. The tells the god that he will only return the hammer in exchange for Freyja's hand in marriage. When she refuses to go to , Thor goes in her place, disguised in a wedding veil, with Loki as his handmaid. In this account, \u00derymr's estate is presented as wealthy, with him holding dogs on golden leashes and telling that has cattle with golden horns in his stables and many jewels, with Freyja being the only thing he lacked.\nGylfaginning.\n are referenced throughout Gylfaginning such as when Gefjun takes four oxen, who were her sons with a , out of the to the north and uses them to plough land out of Sweden, forming Zealand. and are also described as living in such as the father of Night, Narfi and Angrbo\u00f0a, the mother of Fenrir. Beings may also come out from to interact with others, such as the wright who, with the help of his horse Sva\u00f0ilfari, builds fortifications for the gods to protect them from .\nSk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l.\nSk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l tells of how Loki was once coerced into helping the \u00dejazi abduct I\u00f0unn who carried her northwards, back to his home in named \u00derymheimr. Using Freyja's fja\u00f0rhamr, Loki became a hawk and flew to \u00dejazi's home while the was away, having rowed out to sea. Upon reaching I\u00f0unn, Loki turned her into a nut and flew away with her in his talons. \u00dejazi later finds out that I\u00f0unn is gone and he chases after them as an eagle, but is killed as he reached Asgard when he flies into a fire that the gods made.\nLater in Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l, Odin rides to on Sleipnir where he meets the made of stone Hrungnir and wagers that no horse there was as good as his. Angered, Hrungnir chases Odin back to Asgard on his horse Gullfaxi whereupon the gods invite him to drink with them. Becoming drunk, he boasts that he will perform a number of acts including carrying Valhall to and abduct both Sif and Freyja. When the gods tired of his bragging, they called for Thor. Hrungnir claimed that as he was unarmed, Thor would gain no honour from killing him and so challenged him to a fight in , at his home Grj\u00f3t\u00fanagar\u00f0ar. Thor later meets him there and kills him with Mj\u00f6lnir, which on its way to Hrungnir, hits the hone that the was fighting with, shattering it. One of the pieces flies into Thor's head, becoming stuck. To remove it, he went to the v\u00f6lva Gr\u00f3a, who began a to loosen it. While she was singing, Thor told her that he had carried her husband Aurvandil as he travelled southwards out of and that he would soon be with her. In her excitement, she forgot the and the shard remained lodged in Thor's head.\nPosition in cosmology.\n, along with other lands such as Hel, constitute \"the otherworld\" in Eddic sources that is either journeyed to or from, often leading to a confrontation that forms the basis for the narrative. There is no single location that are found in Nordic cosmology however, instead being travelled to by a number of different directions and often separated from the lands of humans and gods by a barrier that is difficult to cross such as bodies of water, fells, fire or forests. \n are typically found in the North and East, with explicit references to locating them in the North, however in Gylfaginning, Snorri Sturluson writes that after the killing of Ymir, the gods gave the shores around the world to the to settle, suggesting a worldview in which Midgard is located centrally and that the dwell in the periphery, likely in contrast with how contemporary Icelanders would have viewed wilderness. Later in Gylfaginning, Thor journeys with Loki, Thj\u00e1lfi and R\u00f6skva to which is located to the east and over the deep sea. They then travel through a great forest before eventually reaching the hall of \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki. Sometimes are positioned in specific geographical locations such as \u00c6gir on the island of L\u00e6s\u00f8. \nIt has been proposed that rather than being conceived of as a physical land that can be located geographically relative to the regions of the world inhabited by humans, should be seen as connected to other realms by a number of passageways that cannot be traversed by ordinary means, and may seem contradictory from a naturalistic viewpoint in that a single location could be reached from a start point in a number of distinct directions. In this model, the would not be located in these opposing directions, only the passageways by which they are reached. It has been further noted that in Eddic sources, it seems that are located to some extent in all directions and that they can be reached if one travels sufficiently far away from the area inhabited by people. From this, it has been suggested that it may be an intrinsic quality of as the \"other\" that they cannot be restricted to a single location, however, not all these lands inhabited by are explicitly described as being .\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15963", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15963", "title": "Johann Friedrich Agricola", "text": "German composer, organist, singer, pedagogue, and writer\nJohann Friedrich Agricola (4 January 1720 \u2013 2 December 1774) was a German composer, organist, singer, pedagogue, and writer on music. He sometimes wrote under the pseudonym Flavio Anicio Olibrio.\nBiography.\nAgricola was born in Dobitschen, Thuringia.\nLeipzig.\nWhile a student of law at Leipzig (1738\u201341) he studied music under Johann Sebastian Bach.\nBerlin.\nIn 1741 Agricola went to Berlin, where he studied musical composition under Johann Joachim Quantz. He was soon generally recognized as one of the most skillful organists of his time. The success of his comic opera, \"Il filosofo convinto in amore\", performed at Potsdam in 1750, led to an appointment as court composer to Frederick the Great. In 1759, on the death of Carl Heinrich Graun, he was appointed conductor of the royal orchestra. He married the noted court operatic soprano Benedetta Emilia Molteni, despite the king's prohibition of court employees marrying each other. Because of this trespass, the king reduced Molteni's and Agricola's combined salaries to a single annual salary of 1,000 \"Thalers\" (Agricola's annual salary alone had been 1,500 \"Thalers\"). Agricola died in Berlin at age 54.\nLegacy.\nAgricola wrote a number of Italian operas, as well as \"Lieder,\" chorale preludes, various other keyboard pieces and church music, especially oratorios and cantatas. His reputation chiefly rests, however, on his theoretical and critical writings on musical subjects.\nAuthor.\nIn 1754 he co-authored, with Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, J. S. Bach's obituary. His 1757 \"Anleitung zur Singekunst\" (\"Introduction to the Art of Singing\") is a translation of Pier Francesco Tosi's 1723 treatise \"Opinioni de' cantori antichi e moderni\" with Agricola's own extensive comments. He edited and added extensive commentary to the 1768 (posthumous) edition of Jakob Adlung's \"Musica mechanica organoedi\" (http://). His annotations are considered an important source of information on J. S. Bach's views on the fortepiano designs of Gottfried Silbermann, on the lute-harpsichord, and on organ building.\nCopyist.\nAgricola is also noted in Bach studies as one of the copyists for both books of the Well-Tempered Clavier and the St. Matthew Passion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
{"id": "15965", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15965", "title": "James Hutton", "text": "Scottish geologist (1726\u20131797)\nJames Hutton (; 3 June O.S. 1726 \u2013 26 March 1797) was a Scottish geologist, agriculturalist, chemical manufacturer, naturalist and physician. Often referred to as the \"Father of Modern Geology,\" he played a key role in establishing geology as a modern science.\nHutton advanced the idea that the physical world's remote history can be inferred from evidence in present-day rocks. Through his study of features in the landscape and coastlines of his native Scottish Lowlands, such as Salisbury Crags or Siccar Point, he developed the theory that geological features could not be static but underwent continuing transformation over indefinitely long periods of time. From this he argued, in agreement with many other early geologists, that the Earth could not be young. He was one of the earliest proponents of what in the 1830s became known as uniformitarianism, the science which explains features of the Earth's crust as the outcome of continuing natural processes over the long geologic time scale. Hutton also put forward a thesis for a 'system of the habitable Earth' proposed as a deistic mechanism designed to keep the world eternally suitable for humans, an early attempt to formulate what today might be called one kind of anthropic principle.\nSome reflections similar to those of Hutton can be found in publications of his contemporaries, such as the French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc de Buffon, but it is chiefly Hutton's pioneering work that established the field.\nEarly life and career.\nHutton was born in Edinburgh on 3 June O.S. 1726, as one of five children of Sarah Balfour and William Hutton, a merchant who was Edinburgh City Treasurer. Hutton's father died in 1729, when he was three.\nHe was educated at the High School of Edinburgh where he was particularly interested in mathematics and chemistry, then when he was 14 he attended the University of Edinburgh as a \"student of humanity\", studying the classics. He was apprenticed to the lawyer George Chalmers WS when he was 17, but took more interest in chemical experiments than legal work. At the age of 18, he became a physician's assistant, and attended lectures in medicine at the University of Edinburgh.\nAfter a two-year stay in Paris, James Hutton arrived in Leiden in 1749, where he enrolled at the University of Leiden on 14 August 1749, at the home of the then rector magnificus Joachim Schwartz to obtain a doctorate in medicine. He stayed with the widow Van der Tas (n\u00e9e Judith Bouvat) at the Langebrug, which corresponds to the current address Langebrug 101 in Leiden. His supervisor was Professor Frederik Winter, who was not only a professor at Leiden University, but also court physician to the Stadholder. The Latin manuscript of Hutton's dissertation also contained 92 theses, two of which were successfully defended in public by James Hutton on 3 September 1749. On 12 September 1749, James Hutton obtained his doctorate in medicine from Leiden University with a physico-medical thesis entitled \"Sanguine et Circulatione Microcosmi.\" The thesis was printed by Wilhelmus Boot, book printer in Leiden. It is believed that James Hutton returned to Britain shortly after his promotion.\nAfter his degree Hutton went to London, then in mid-1750 returned to Edinburgh and resumed chemical experiments with close friend, John Davie. Their work on production of sal ammoniac from soot led to their partnership in a profitable chemical works, manufacturing the crystalline salt which was used for dyeing, metalworking and as smelling salts and had been available only from natural sources and had to be imported from Egypt. Hutton owned and rented out properties in Edinburgh, employing a factor to manage this business.\nFarming and geology.\nHutton inherited from his father the Berwickshire farms of \"Slighhouses\", a lowland farm which had been in the family since 1713, and the hill farm of \"Nether Monynut\". In the early 1750s he moved to \"Slighhouses\" and set about making improvements, introducing farming practices from other parts of Britain and experimenting with plant and animal husbandry. He recorded his ideas and innovations in an unpublished treatise on \"The Elements of Agriculture\".\nThis developed his interest in meteorology and geology. In a 1753 letter he wrote that he had \"become very fond of studying the surface of the earth, and was looking with anxious curiosity into every pit or ditch or bed of a river that fell in his way\". Clearing and draining his farm provided ample opportunities. The mathematician John Playfair described Hutton as having noticed that \"a vast proportion of the present rocks are composed of materials afforded by the destruction of bodies, animal, vegetable and mineral, of more ancient formation\". His theoretical ideas began to come together in 1760. While his farming activities continued, in 1764 he went on a geological tour of the north of Scotland with George Maxwell-Clerk, ancestor of the famous James Clerk Maxwell.\nEdinburgh and canal building.\nIn 1768, Hutton returned to Edinburgh, letting his farms to tenants but continuing to take an interest in farm improvements and research which included experiments carried out at \"Slighhouses\". He developed a red dye made from the roots of the madder plant.\nHe had a house built in 1770 at St John's Hill, Edinburgh, overlooking Salisbury Crags. This later became the Balfour family home and, in 1840, the birthplace of the psychiatrist James Crichton-Browne. Hutton was one of the most influential participants in the Scottish Enlightenment, and fell in with numerous first-class minds in the sciences including mathematician John Playfair, philosopher David Hume and economist Adam Smith. Hutton held no position in the University of Edinburgh and communicated his scientific findings through the Royal Society of Edinburgh. He was particularly friendly with physician and chemist Joseph Black, and together with Adam Smith they founded the \"Oyster Club\" for weekly meetings.\nBetween 1767 and 1774 Hutton had close involvement with the construction of the Forth and Clyde canal, making full use of his geological knowledge, both as a shareholder and as a member of the committee of management, and attended meetings including extended site inspections of all the works. At this time he is listed as living on Bernard Street in Leith. In 1777 he published a pamphlet on \"Considerations on the Nature, Quality and Distinctions of Coal and Culm\" which successfully helped to obtain relief from excise duty on carrying small coal.\nIn 1783, he was a joint founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.\nLater life and death.\nFrom 1791 Hutton suffered extreme pain from stones in the bladder and gave up field work to concentrate on finishing his books. A dangerous and painful operation failed to resolve his illness. He died in Edinburgh and was buried in the vault of Andrew Balfour, opposite the vault of his friend Joseph Black, in the now sealed south-west section of Greyfriars Kirkyard in Edinburgh, commonly known as the Covenanter's Prison.\nHutton did not marry and had no legitimate children. Around 1747, he had a son by a Miss Edington, and though he gave his child, James Smeaton Hutton, financial assistance, he had little to do with the boy, who went on to become a post-office clerk in London.\nTheory of rock formations.\nHutton developed several hypotheses to explain the rock formations he saw around him, but according to Playfair he \"was in no haste to publish his theory; for he was one of those who are much more delighted with the contemplation of truth, than with the praise of having discovered it\". After some 25 years of work, his \"Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of the Laws observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration of Land upon the Globe\" was read to meetings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in two parts, the first by his friend Joseph Black on 7 March 1785, and the second by himself on 4 April 1785. Hutton subsequently read an abstract of his dissertation \"Concerning the System of the Earth, its Duration and Stability\" to Society meeting on 4 July 1785, which he had printed and circulated privately. In it, he outlined his theory as follows;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The solid parts of the present land appear in general, to have been composed of the productions of the sea, and of other materials similar to those now found upon the shores. Hence we find reason to conclude:\n1st, That the land on which we rest is not simple and original, but that it is a composition, and had been formed by the operation of second causes.\n2nd, That before the present land was made, there had subsisted a world composed of sea and land, in which were tides and currents, with such operations at the bottom of the sea as now take place. And,\nLastly, That while the present land was forming at the bottom of the ocean, the former land maintained plants and animals; at least the sea was then inhabited by animals, in a similar manner as it is at present.\nHence we are led to conclude, that the greater part of our land, if not the whole had been produced by operations natural to this globe; but that in order to make this land a permanent body, resisting the operations of the waters, two things had been required;\n1st, The consolidation of masses formed by collections of loose or incoherent materials;\n2ndly, The elevation of those consolidated masses from the bottom of the sea, the place where they were collected, to the stations in which they now remain above the level of the ocean.\nSearch for evidence.\nIn the summer of 1785 at Glen Tilt and other sites in the Cairngorm mountains in the Scottish Highlands, Hutton found granite penetrating metamorphic schists, in a way which indicated that the granite had been molten at the time. This was Hutton's first geological field trip and he was invited by the Duke of Atholl to his hunting lodge, Forest Lodge. The exposures at the Dail-an-eas Bridge demonstrated to him that granite formed from the cooling of molten rock rather than it precipitating out of water as others at the time believed, and therefore the granite must be younger than the schists. Hutton presented his theory of the earth on 4 March and 7 April 1785, at the Royal Society of Edinburgh.\nHe went on to find a similar penetration of volcanic rock through sedimentary rock in Edinburgh, at Salisbury Crags, adjoining Arthur's Seat \u2013 this area of the Crags is now known as Hutton's Section. He found other examples in Galloway in 1786, and on the Isle of Arran in 1787.\nThe existence of angular unconformities had been noted by Nicolas Steno and by French geologists including Horace-B\u00e9n\u00e9dict de Saussure, who interpreted them in terms of Neptunism as \"primary formations\". Hutton wanted to examine such formations himself to see \"particular marks\" of the relationship between the rock layers. On the 1787 trip to the Isle of Arran he found his first example of Hutton's Unconformity to the north of Newton Point near Lochranza, but the limited view meant that the condition of the underlying strata was not clear enough for him, and he incorrectly thought that the strata were conformable at a depth below the exposed outcrop.\nLater in 1787 Hutton noted what is now known as the Hutton or \"Great\" Unconformity at Inchbonny, Jedburgh, in layers of sedimentary rock. As shown in the illustrations to the right, layers of greywacke in the lower layers of the cliff face are tilted almost vertically, and above an intervening layer of conglomerate lie horizontal layers of Old Red Sandstone. He later wrote of how he \"rejoiced at my good fortune in stumbling upon an object so interesting in the natural history of the earth, and which I had been long looking for in vain.\" That year, he found the same sequence in Teviotdale.\nIn the Spring of 1788 he set off with John Playfair to the Berwickshire coast and found more examples of this sequence in the valleys of the Tour and Pease Burns near Cockburnspath. They then took a boat trip from Dunglass Burn east along the coast with the geologist Sir James Hall of Dunglass. They found the sequence in the cliff below St. Helens, then just to the east at Siccar Point found what Hutton called \"a beautiful picture of this junction washed bare by the sea\". Playfair later commented about the experience, \"the mind seemed to grow giddy by looking so far into the abyss of time\". Continuing along the coast, they made more discoveries including sections of the vertical beds showing strong ripple marks which gave Hutton \"great satisfaction\" as a confirmation of his supposition that these beds had been laid horizontally in water. He also found conglomerate at altitudes that demonstrated the extent of erosion of the strata, and said of this that \"we never should have dreamed of meeting with what we now perceived\".\nHutton reasoned that there must have been innumerable cycles, each involving deposition on the seabed, uplift with tilting and erosion then undersea again for further layers to be deposited. On the belief that this was due to the same geological forces operating in the past as the very slow geological forces seen operating at the present day, the thicknesses of exposed rock layers implied to him enormous stretches of time.\nPublication.\nThough Hutton circulated privately a printed version of the abstract of his Theory (\"Concerning the System of the Earth, its Duration, and Stability\") which he read at a meeting of the Royal Society of Edinburgh on 4 July 1785; the full account of his theory as read at 7 March 1785 and 4 April 1785 meetings did not appear in print until 1788. It was titled \"Theory of the Earth; or an Investigation of the Laws observable in the Composition, Dissolution, and Restoration of Land upon the Globe\" and appeared in \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh\", vol. I, Part II, pp.\u00a0209\u2013304, plates I and II, published 1788. He put forward the view that \"from what has actually been, we have data for concluding with regard to that which is to happen thereafter.\" This restated the Scottish Enlightenment concept which David Hume had put in 1777 as \"all inferences from experience suppose\u00a0... that the future will resemble the past\", and Charles Lyell memorably rephrased in the 1830s as \"the present is the key to the past\". Hutton's 1788 paper concludes; \"The result, therefore, of our present enquiry is, that we find no vestige of a beginning,\u2013no prospect of an end.\" His memorably phrased closing statement has long been celebrated. (It was quoted in the 1989 song \"No Control\" by songwriter and professor Greg Graffin.)\nFollowing criticism, especially the arguments from Richard Kirwan who thought Hutton's ideas were atheistic and not logical, Hutton published a two volume version of his theory in 1795, consisting of the 1788 version of his theory (with slight additions) along with a lot of material drawn from shorter papers Hutton already had to hand on various subjects such as the origin of granite. It included a review of alternative theories, such as those of Thomas Burnet and Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon.\nThe whole was entitled \"An Investigation of the Principles of Knowledge and of the Progress of Reason, from Sense to Science and Philosophy\" when the third volume was completed in 1794. Its 2,138 pages prompted Playfair to remark that \"The great size of the book, and the obscurity which may justly be objected to many parts of it, have probably prevented it from being received as it deserves.\"\nOpposing theories.\nHis new theories placed him into opposition with the then-popular Neptunist theories of the German geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner, that all rocks had precipitated out of a single enormous flood. Hutton proposed that the interior of the Earth was hot, and that this heat was the engine which drove the creation of new rock: land was eroded by air and water and deposited as layers in the sea; heat then consolidated the sediment into stone, and uplifted it into new lands. This theory was dubbed \"Plutonist\" in contrast to the flood-oriented theory.\nAs well as combating the Neptunists, he also accepted the growing consensus on the concept of deep time for scientific purposes. Rather than accepting that the earth was no more than a few thousand years old, he maintained that the Earth must be much older, with a history extending indefinitely into the distant past. His main line of argument was that the tremendous displacements and changes he was seeing did not happen in a short period of time by means of catastrophe, but that processes still happening on the Earth in the present day had caused them. As these processes were very gradual, the Earth needed to be ancient, to allow time for the changes. Contemporary investigations had shown that the geologic record required vast time, but no good way of assigning actual years was found for over a century (Rudwick, \"Bursting the Limits of Time\"). Hutton's idea of infinite cycles with humans present throughout is quite different from modern geology, with a definite time of formation and directional change through time, but his supporting evidence for the long-term effects of geological processes was valuable in the development of historical geology.\nAcceptance of geological theories.\nIt has been claimed that the prose of \"Principles of Knowledge\" was so obscure that it also impeded the acceptance of Hutton's geological theories. Restatements of his geological ideas (though not his thoughts on evolution) by John Playfair in 1802 and then Charles Lyell in the 1830s popularised the concept of an infinitely repeating cycle, though Lyell tended to dismiss Hutton's views as giving too much credence to catastrophic changes.\nOther contributions.\nMeteorology.\nIt was not merely the earth to which Hutton directed his attention. He had long studied the changes of the atmosphere. The same volume in which his \"Theory of the Earth\" appeared contained also a \"Theory of Rain\". He contended that the amount of moisture which the air can retain in solution increases with temperature, and, therefore, that on the mixture of two masses of air of different temperatures a portion of the moisture must be condensed and appear in visible form. He investigated the available data regarding rainfall and climate in different regions of the globe, and came to the conclusion that the rainfall is regulated by the humidity of the air on the one hand, and mixing of different air currents in the higher atmosphere on the other.\nEvolution.\nHutton also advocated uniformitarianism for living creatures \u00a0\u2013 evolution, in a sense\u00a0\u2013 and even suggested natural selection as a possible mechanism affecting them:\n...if an organised body is not in the situation and circumstances best adapted to its sustenance and propagation, then, in conceiving an indefinite variety among the individuals of that species, we must be assured, that, on the one hand, those which depart most from the best adapted constitution, will be the most liable to perish, while, on the other hand, those organised bodies, which most approach to the best constitution for the present circumstances, will be best adapted to continue, in preserving themselves and multiplying the individuals of their race.\u00a0\u2013 \"Investigation of the Principles of Knowledge\", volume 2.\nHutton gave the example that where dogs survived through \"swiftness of foot and quickness of sight... the most defective in respect of those necessary qualities, would be the most subject to perish, and that those who employed them in greatest perfection... would be those who would remain, to preserve themselves, and to continue the race\". Equally, if an acute sense of smell became \"more necessary to the sustenance of the animal... the same principle [would] change the qualities of the animal, and.. produce a race of well scented hounds, instead of those who catch their prey by swiftness\". The same \"principle of variation\" would influence \"every species of plant, whether growing in a forest or a meadow\". He came to his ideas as the result of experiments in plant and animal breeding, some of which he outlined in an unpublished manuscript, the \"Elements of Agriculture\". He distinguished between heritable variation as the result of breeding, and non-heritable variations caused by environmental differences such as soil and climate.\nThough he saw his \"principle of variation\" as explaining the development of varieties, Hutton rejected the idea that evolution might originate species as a \"romantic fantasy\", according to palaeoclimatologist Paul Pearson. Influenced by deism, Hutton thought the mechanism allowed species to form varieties better adapted to particular conditions and provided evidence of benevolent design in nature. Studies of Charles Darwin's notebooks have shown that Darwin arrived separately at the idea of natural selection which he set out in his 1859 book \"On the Origin of Species\", but it has been speculated that he had some half-forgotten memory from his time as a student in Edinburgh of ideas of selection in nature as set out by Hutton, and by William Charles Wells and Patrick Matthew who had both been associated with the city before publishing their ideas on the topic early in the 19th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15966", "revid": "49712780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15966", "title": "Jakob Abbadie", "text": "French Protestant minister and writer\nJakob Abbadie (; c.\u20091654\u00a0\u2013 25 September 1727), also known as Jacques or James Abbadie, was a French Protestant minister and writer. He became Dean of Killaloe, in Ireland.\nLife.\nJacques Abbadie was born at Nay, B\u00e9arn, probably in 1654, although 1657 and 1658 have been given; he is \"most probably the Jacques Abbadie who was the third child of Violente de Fortaner and Pierre Abbadie, baptized on 27 April 1654.\" Samuel Smiles stated that he was \"the scion of a distinguished B\u00e9arnese family\"; although it is probable that the poverty of his parents would have excluded him from a learned career if some of the leading Protestants of the district had not charged themselves with the expenses of his education, which was begun under M. Jean de la Placette, the minister of Nay, He studied at Puylaurens, the Academy of Saumur, and the Academy of Sedan, receiving the degree of doctor in theology, it is said, at the age of seventeen. An obituary notice, however, which appeared in the \"Daily Courant\" for 5 October 1727, says: \"He was not above twenty-two when he undertook of himself his admirable treatise on the \"Truth of the Christian Religion\"\".\nAbout the same time he was sent for by Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, to be minister of the French church at Berlin; the electoral summons found Abbadie at Paris, and it was conveyed through the Count d'Espense, who had been commissioned by his master to make the selection. The congregation of refugees, small enough at first to be accommodated in an apartment of the Count d'Espense's residence, grew gradually from increased emigration to Brandenburg, caused by the revocation of the edict of Nantes in 1685. The elector ordered the ancient chapel of his palace to be prepared for the congregation, and the services were frequently attended by the younger members of his family. Abbadie's arrival in Berlin has been variously assigned to the years 1680 and 1681. During seven or eight years he used his increasing favour with the elector to relieve the distress of the refugees from France, and especially from his native province of B\u00e9arn. Abbadie continued to occupy his pastorate at Berlin until the death of the great elector, which took place 29 April 1688.\nHe then accompanied Marshal Schomberg to England in 1688, and the following year became minister of the French Church of the Savoy, London. In the autumn of 1689 he went to Ireland with the marshal.\nAfter the Battle of the Boyne, Abbadie returned to London. He subsequently published a revised version of the French translation of the English liturgy used at this church, with an epistle dedicatory to George I. He was often appointed to deliver occasional discourses, both in London and Dublin, but his lack of facility in English prevented his preferment in England, and also excluded him from the deanery of St. Patrick's, Dublin, to which William III wished to promote him. Abbadie's health suffered from devotion to his duties in the Savoy and from the English climate. He therefore settled in Ireland, and in 1699 the deanery of Killaloe was conferred on him by the king. whose favour he had attracted by a vindication of the Revolution of 1688.\nThe remainder of Abbadie's life was spent in writing and preaching, and in the performance\u2014not too sedulous, for he was frequently absent from his benefice\u2014of the ordinary duties of his office, varied by visits to England and to Holland, where most of his books were printed. Abbadie visited Holland to see his \"La V\u00e9rit\u00e9\" through the press, and stayed more than three years in Amsterdam, 1720\u201323, during the preparation of \"Le Triomphe\" and other works. He returned to Ireland in 1723. Abbadie's income as dean of Killaloe was so small that he could not afford a literary amanuensis; and Hugh Boulter, archbishop of Armagh, having appealed in vain to Lord Carteret, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, on Abbadie's behalf, gave him a letter of introduction to Dr. Edmund Gibson, bishop of London, and Abbadie left Ireland. He established himself at Marylebone. He died at his lodgings at Marylebone on Monday, 25 September 1727, aged 73.\nWorks.\nAbbadie is best known by his religious treatises, several of which were translated from the original French into other languages and had a wide circulation throughout Europe. The most important of these are \"Traite de la verit\u00e9 de la religion chr\u00e9tienne\" (1684); its continuation, \"Trait\u00e9 de la divinit\u00e9 de Jesus-Christ\" (1689); and \"L'Art de se connaitre soi-meme\" (1692).\nWhile at Berlin, he made several visits to the Netherlands, in 1684, 1686, and 1688, chiefly for the purpose of superintending the printing of several of his works, including the \"Trait\u00e9 de la V\u00e9rit\u00e9\", Rotterdam, 1684. The book went through a vast number of editions and was translated into several languages, an English version, by Henry Lussan, appearing in 1694. Completed by a third volume, the \"Trait\u00e9 de la Divinit\u00e9 de N\u00f4tre Seigneur J\u00e9sus-Christ\", it appeared at Rotterdam, 1689. An English translation, entitled \"A Sovereign Antidote against Arian Poyson\", appeared in London, 1719, and again \"revised, corrected, and, in a few places, abridged\", by Abraham Booth, under the title of \"The Deity of Jesus Christ essential to the Christian Religion\", 1777. The entire apology for Christianity formed by the three volumes of the \"Trait\u00e9\", which combated severally the heresies of atheism, deism, and Socinianism, was received with praise. \"La V\u00e9rit\u00e9 de la Religion Chr\u00e9tienne R\u00e9form\u00e9e\" (1717) was a controversial treatise which in its four parts attacks the characteristic doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church; it was translated into English, for the use of the Roman Catholics of his diocese of Dromore, by Dr. Ralph Lambert, afterwards bishop of Meath. The work was completed in 1723 in \"Le Triomphe de la Providence et de la Religion; ou, l'Ouverture des sept Seaux par le Fils de Dieu, o\u00f9 l'on trouvera la premi\u00e8re partie de l'Apocalypse clairement expliqu\u00e9e par ce qu'il y a de plus connu dans l'Histoire et de moins contest\u00e9 dans la Parole de Dieu. Avec une nouvelle et tr\u00e8s-sensible D\u00e9monstration de la V\u00e9rit\u00e9 de la Religion Chr\u00e9tienne\".\nIt was in the Irish camp with Schomberg that Abbadie commenced one of his most successful works, which was published at Rotterdam in 1692, as \"L'Art de se conno\u00eetre soi-m\u00eame; ou, La Recherche des Sources de la Morale\", and went through many editions and amplifications. Translations of this work into other languages include a popular English version by the Rev. Thomas Woodcock, \"The Art of Knowing One-self\", 1694. The last 50 pages of this 274-page work deals with pride, which he divided into five branches: love of esteem, presumptuousness, vanity, ambition and arrogance.\nAmong the early writings of Abbadie were four \"Sermons sur divers Textes de l'Ecriture\", 1680; \"R\u00e9flexions sur la Pr\u00e9sence r\u00e9elle du Corps de J\u00e9sus-Christ dans l'Eucharistie\", 1685; and two highly adulatory addresses on persons in high stations, entitled respectively \"Pan\u00e9gyrique de Monseigneur l'Electeur de Brandebourg\", 1684; and \"Pan\u00e9gyrique de Marie Stuart, Reine d'Angleterre, d'Ecosse, de France, et d'Irlande, de glorieuse et immortelle m\u00e9moire, d\u00e9c\u00e9d\u00e9e \u00e0 Kensington le 28 d\u00e9cembre 1694\", 1695, also published in England as \"A Panegyric on our late Sovereign Lady\", 1695. These four productions, with other occasional sermons, were in 1760 republished collectively, in three volumes, at Amsterdam, and preceded by an \"Essai historique sur la Vie et les Ouvrages de M. Abbadie\". The pamphlet on the Eucharist was also reprinted at Toulouse, in 1835, under the title of \"Quatre Lettres sur la Trans-substantiation\", and appeared in an English translation, by John W. Hamersley, as the \"Chemical Change in the Eucharist\", 1867.\n\"D\u00e9fense de la Nation Britannique\", 1693 was an elaborate defence of the Glorious Revolution, written in answer to Pierre Bayle's \"Avis important aux R\u00e9fugi\u00e9s\", 1690. He gave a funeral oration on Queen Mary. Abbadie had also written, at the request of the king, \"Histoire de la derni\u00e8re Conspiration d'Angleterre\", 1696, a history of the conspiracy of 1696, which was reprinted in Holland and translated into English, and for which the Earl of Portland and Secretary Sir William Trumbull placed original documents at the author's disposal. This work helped Abbadie's preferment. After its production, \"his majesty sent him to Ireland, with an order to the lords justices to confer upon him some dignity in the church, which order was complied with by his promotion to the deanery of Killalow\" (\"Daily Courant,\" 5 October 1727).\nHe revised his works for a complete edition in four volumes, in which were also to be included two unpublished treatises, \"Nouvelle Mani\u00e8re de prouver l'Immortalit\u00e9 de l'Ame\", and \"Notes sur le Commentaire philosophique de M. Bayle\". No trace of them could be found after his death.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15967", "revid": "50624705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15967", "title": "Jerry Lewis", "text": "American comedian, actor and filmmaker (1926\u20132017)\nJerry Lewis (born Joseph Levitch; March 16, 1926\u00a0\u2013 August 20, 2017) was an American comedian, actor, singer, filmmaker and humanitarian. Under his famous nickname \"The King of Comedy\", across his seven-decade career, he is regarded as one of the greatest comedians of the 20th century. \nRising to prominence with singer Dean Martin, billed as Martin and Lewis, in 1946, the two did a series of sixteen buddy-comedy films, their televised run on \"The Colgate Comedy Hour\", live stage performances, guest spots on other shows and a radio series until their split in 1956, after ten years. Lewis continued on his own in thirty-five motion pictures from 1957 to 1984, guest hosted \"The Tonight Show\" a record fifty-two times, while helming his own nightly series and performed closely with Sammy Davis Jr. While as its honorary national chairman, Lewis raised funds for the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA) through his annual Labor Day telecast \"The Jerry Lewis MDA Telethon\", a live event which raised $2.6 billion, aired Sunday night into Monday evening. \nPerforming in concert stages, nightclubs, audio recordings, on radio and appeared in at least 117 film and television productions, Lewis was honored two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame and France awarded him the Legion of Honor.\nEarly life and education.\nLewis was born as Joseph Levitch on March 16, 1926, in Newark, New Jersey, to a Jewish family. His parents were Daniel \"Danny\" Levitch (1902\u20131980), a master of ceremonies and vaudevillian who performed under the stage name Danny Lewis, whose parents immigrated to the United States from the Russian Empire to New York, and Rachael \"Rae\" Levitch (n\u00e9e Brodsky; 1904\u20131982), a WOR radio pianist and Danny's music director, from Warsaw. Reports about his birth name are conflicting; in Lewis' 1982 autobiography, he claimed his birth name was Joseph, after his maternal grandfather, but his birth certificate, the 1930 U. S. Census, and the 1940 U. S. Census all named him as Jerome. Reports about the hospital where he was born conflict as well; biographer Shawn Levy claims Lewis was born at Clinton Private Hospital and others report it as Newark Beth Israel Hospital. Other aspects of his early life conflict with accounts made by family members, burial records, and vital records.\nIn his teenage years, Lewis was known for pulling pranks in his neighborhood, including sneaking into kitchens to steal fried chicken and pies. He was expelled from Weequahic High School in the ninth grade and dropped out of Irvington High School in the tenth grade. Lewis said that he ceased using the names Joseph and Joey as an adult to avoid being confused with Joe E. Lewis and Joe Louis. By age 15, Lewis had developed his \"Record Act\", miming lyrics to songs while a phonograph played offstage. He landed a gig at a burlesque house in Buffalo, but his performance fell flat and he was unable to book any more shows.\nTo make ends meet, Lewis worked as a soda jerk and a theater usher for Suzanne Pleshette's father, Gene Pleshette, at the Paramount Theatre as well as at Loew's Capitol Theatre, both in New York City. A veteran burlesque comedian, Max Coleman, who had worked with Lewis' father years before, persuaded him to try again. Irving Kaye, a Borscht Belt comedian, saw Lewis' mime act at Brown's Hotel in Loch Sheldrake, New York, the following summer, and the audience was so enthusiastic that Kaye became Lewis' manager and guardian for Borscht Belt appearances. During World War II, Lewis was rejected from military service because of a heart murmur.\nCareer.\nTeaming with Dean Martin.\nIn 1945, Lewis was 19 when he met singer Dean Martin, then 27, at the Glass Hat Club in New York City, where the two performed until they debuted at Atlantic City's 500 Club as Martin and Lewis on July 25, 1946. The duo gained attention as a double act with Martin serving as the straight man to Lewis's zany antics. The inclusion of ad-libbed improvisational segments in their planned routines added a unique quality to their act and separated them from previous comedy duos.\nLewis and Martin quickly rose to national prominence, first with their popular nightclub act, then as stars of their radio program \"The Martin and Lewis Show.\" The two made their television debut on CBS' \"Toast of the Town\" (later renamed as \"The Ed Sullivan Show\") June 20, 1948.\nIn 1950, they signed with NBC to be one of a series of weekly rotating hosts of \"The Colgate Comedy Hour,\" a live Sunday evening broadcast. Lewis, writer for the team's nightclub act, hired Norman Lear and Ed Simmons as regular writers for their \"Comedy Hour\" material. By 1951, with an appearance at the Paramount Theatre in New York, they were a hit. The duo began their film careers at Paramount Pictures as ensemble players, in \"My Friend Irma\" (1949) and its sequel \"My Friend Irma Goes West\" (1950). Followed by their own series of 14 new movies, \"At War with the Army\" (1950), \"That's My Boy\" (1951), \"Sailor Beware\" (1952), \"Jumping Jacks\" (1952), \"The Stooge\" (1952), \"Scared Stiff\" (1953), \"The Caddy\" (1953), \"Money from Home\" (1953), \"Living It Up\" (1954), \"3 Ring Circus\" (1954), \"You're Never Too Young\" (1955), \"Artists and Models\" (1955), \"Pardners\" (1956) and \"Hollywood or Bust\" (1956). The two appeared on the \"Olympic Fund Telethon\" and cameoed in \"Road to Bali\" (1952).\nCrosby and Hope would do the same in \"Scared Stiff\" a year later. Attesting to the duo's popularity, DC Comics published \"The Adventures of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis\" from 1952 to 1957. The team appeared on \"What's My Line?\" in 1954, the 27th annual Academy Awards in 1955, \"The Steve Allen Show\" and \"The Today Show\" in 1956. Martin's participation became an embarrassment in 1954 when \"Look\" magazine published a publicity photo of the team for the magazine cover but cropped Martin out.\nThe duo did their final live nightclub act together at the Copacabana on July 24, 1956. Both Lewis and Martin went on to have successful solo careers, but neither would comment on the split nor consider a reunion. Martin surprised Lewis on his appearance on \"The Eddie Fisher Show\" on September 30, 1958, appeared together at the 1959 Academy Awards closing, reunited several times publicly and sometimes privately according to interviews they gave to magazines.\nSolo performances and live shows.\nAfter ending his partnership with Martin in 1956, Lewis and his wife Patty took a vacation in Las Vegas to consider the direction of his career. He felt his life was in a crisis state: \"I was unable to put one foot in front of the other with any confidence. I was completely unnerved to be alone.\" While there, he received an urgent request from his friend Sid Luft, who was Judy Garland's husband and manager, saying that she couldn't perform that night in Las Vegas because of strep throat, and asking Lewis to fill in. Lewis had not sung alone on stage since he was five years old, twenty-five years before.\nHe delivered jokes and clowned with the audience while Garland sat off-stage, watching. He then sang a rendition of a song he had learned as a child, \"Rock-a-Bye Your Baby with a Dixie Melody\" along with \"Come Rain or Come Shine.\" Lewis recalled, \"When I was done, the place exploded. I walked off the stage knowing I could make it on my own.\" At his wife's urging, Lewis used his own money to record the songs on a single. Decca Records heard it, liked it and insisted he record an album for them. The single of \"Rock-a-Bye Your Baby\" went to No. 10 and the album \"Jerry Lewis Just Sings\" went to No. 3 on the \"Billboard\" charts, staying near the top for four months and selling a million and a half copies.\nWith the success of that album, he recorded additional albums \"More Jerry Lewis\" (an EP of songs from this release was released as \"Somebody Loves Me\"), and \"Jerry Lewis Sings Big Songs for Little People\" (later reissued with fewer tracks as \"Jerry Lewis Sings for Children\"). Non-album singles were released, and \"It All Depends On You\" hit the charts in April and May 1957, but peaked at only No. 68. Further singles were recorded and released by Lewis into the mid-1960s. But these were not Lewis's first forays into recording, nor his first appearance on the hit charts. During his partnership with Martin, they made several recordings together, charting at No. 22 in 1948 with the 1920s \"That Certain Party\" and later mostly re-recording songs highlighted in their films.\nIn late 1956, Lewis began performing regularly at the Sands Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas, which marked a turning point in his life and career. The Sands signed him for five years to perform six weeks each year and paid him the same amount they had paid Martin and Lewis as a team. Live performances became a staple of Lewis's career and over the years he performed at casinos, theaters, and state fairs. In February 1957, Lewis followed Garland at the Palace Theater in New York and Martin called on the phone during this period to wish him the best of luck. \"I've never been happier\", said Lewis. \"I have peace of mind for the first time.\" Lewis established himself as a solo act, starting with the first of six appearances on \"What's My Line?\" from 1956 to 1966, then guest starred on \"The Tennessee Ernie Ford Show\", \"Tonight Starring Jack Paar\" and \"The Ed Sullivan Show\".\nIn January 1957, Lewis did a number of solo specials for NBC and starred in his adaptation of \"The Jazz Singer\" for \"Startime\", then hosted the Academy Awards three times, in 1956, 1957 and 1959. The third telecast, which ran twenty minutes short, forced him to improvise to fill time.\nLewis remained at Paramount and started off with his first solo film \"The Delicate Delinquent\" (1957) then starred in \"The Sad Sack\" (1957). Frank Tashlin, whose background as a \"Looney Tunes\" cartoon director (for Warner Bros.) suited Lewis's brand of humor and came on board. The pair did new films, first with \"Rock-A-Bye Baby\" (1958) and then \"The Geisha Boy\" (1958). Billy Wilder asked Lewis to play the lead role of an uptight jazz musician, who winds up on the run from a mob in \"Some Like It Hot,\" but he turned it down. Lewis then appeared in \"Don't Give Up The Ship\" (1959) and cameoed in \"Li'l Abner\" (1959).\nA 1959 contract between Paramount and Jerry Lewis Productions specified a payment of $10\u00a0million plus 60% of the profits for 14 films over seven years. This made Lewis the highest paid individual Hollywood talent to date and was unprecedented in that he had unlimited creative control, including final cut and the return of film rights after 30 years. Lewis's clout and box office were so strong that Barney Balaban, head of production at Paramount, told the press, \"If Jerry wants to burn down the studio I'll give him the match!\"\nParamount films and filmmaking.\nLewis ended his association with Hal Wallis, their last joint venture being \"Visit to a Small Planet\" (1960). His next film was \"Cinderfella\" (1960), directed by Frank Tashlin; it was supposed to be Lewis's summer release, but Paramount withheld it in preparation for a Christmas 1960 release. Paramount, needing a quickie movie for its summer 1960 schedule, insisted that Lewis must produce one.\nThis resulted in Lewis's sudden transformation from movie clown to all-around filmmaker. He produced, directed, co-wrote, and starred in \"The Bellboy\" (1960). Using the Fontainebleau Hotel in Miami as his setting\u2014on a small budget, with a very tight shooting schedule\u2014Lewis shot the film during the day and performed at the hotel in the evenings. Bill Richmond collaborated with him on many of the episodic blackouts and sight gags. The film presented a new approach for the usually frenetic and highly vocal comedian: in \"The Bellboy\" Lewis doesn't speak at all\u2014he only whistles\u2014until a punchline at the very end of the film.\nThis was really a time-saving device; by concentrating on visual action, Lewis could film the scenes faster without bothering to remember written dialogue. Another time-saver was his innovative use of \"video assist\"\u2014instant video playback, which allowed Lewis to review each scene on videotape immediately after filming it, thus eliminating film-laboratory delays and expenses. Trade reviewer Pete Harrison noted the sight gags but felt that Lewis was not a true pantomime artist: \"As a mute, there are only brief moments of his work coming close to Chaplin, Jacques Tati, or Harpo Marx. Lewis, always laughed at, fails to win the viewer's heart.\"\nLewis later revealed that Paramount was not happy about financing a \"silent movie\" and withdrew backing. Lewis used his own funds to cover the movie's $950,000 budget. \"The Bellboy\" turned out to be a hit, ranking with his better successes. \"Variety\"'s Gene Arneel reported independent producer Hall Bartlett's observation, \"Lewis is the only star whose pictures all turn out in the black.\"\nLewis continued to direct more films that he co-wrote with Bill Richmond, including \"The Ladies Man\" (1961), where Lewis constructed a three-story dollhouse-like set spanning two sound stages, with the set equipped with state-of-the-art lighting and sound, eliminating the need for boom microphones in each room. His next movie \"The Errand Boy\" (1961), used the same formula as \"The Bellboy\", with Lewis turned loose in a movie studio for blackouts and sight gags.\nLewis was also somewhat active in television. NBC released him from a long-term contract in 1960; the official reason given was that Lewis was devoting more time to his motion pictures. A more probable reason was the difficulty in finding a weekly television vehicle for Lewis. (NBC did announce two series in development, \"Permanent Waves\" and \"The Comedy Concert.\")\nLewis's TV appearances were usually guest shots. He appeared in \"The Wacky World of Jerry Lewis,\" \"Celebrity Golf,\" \"The Garry Moore Show,\" \"The Soupy Sales Show,\" \"It's Only Money\" (1962) and guest hosted \"The Tonight Show\" during the transition from Jack Paar to Johnny Carson in 1962, and his appearance on the show scored the highest ratings thus far in late night, surpassing other guest hosts and Paar.\nThe three major networks began a bidding war, wooing Lewis for his own talk show. Lewis then directed, co-wrote and starred in \"The Nutty Professor\" (1963). A parody of \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,\" it featured him as Professor Kelp, a socially inept scientist who invents a serum that turns him into a handsome but obnoxious ladies' man. It is often considered to be Lewis's best film.\nIn 1963, he had a cameo in \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\" (1963), fully starred in \"Who's Minding the Store?\" (1963) and hosted \"The Jerry Lewis Show,\" a lavish 13-week, big-budget show which aired on ABC from September to December in 1963. Lewis next starred in \"The Patsy\" (1964), his satire about the Hollywood star-making industry and \"The Disorderly Orderly\" (1964), the only film executive produced by Lewis and his final collaboration with Tashlin.\nFollowing a cameo on \"The Joey Bishop Show\", he starred in \"The Family Jewels\" (1965) about a young heiress who must choose among six uncles, one of whom is up to no good and out to harm the girl's beloved bodyguard who practically raised her. The six uncles and the bodyguard were all played by Lewis.\nIn 1965, Lewis went on \"The David Susskind Show,\" starred in his final Paramount-released film \"Boeing Boeing\" (1965), in which he received a Golden Globe nomination, then guest appeared on \"Ben Casey,\" \"The Andy Williams Show\" and \"Hullabaloo\" with son Gary Lewis. Lewis left Paramount in 1966, after 17 years, as the studio was undergoing a corporate shakeup, with the industrial conglomerate Gulf + Western taking over the company. Gulf + Western, scrutinizing the balance sheets, noted the diminishing box office returns of Lewis's recent pictures and did not renew his contract.\nColumbia and other projects.\nUndaunted, Lewis signed with Columbia Pictures, where he tried to reinvent himself with more serious roles and starred in a string of new box-office successes: \"Three on a Couch\" (1966), also during this period, he appeared in \"Way...Way Out\" (1966) for 20th Century-Fox, then \"The Big Mouth\" (1967), \"Don't Raise the Bridge, Lower the River\" (1968) and \"Hook, Line &amp; Sinker\" (1969).\nLewis continued to make television appearances: \"The Merv Griffin Show\", \"The Sammy Davis Jr. Show,\" \"Batman,\" \"Rowan &amp; Martin's Laugh-In,\" \"Password,\" a pilot called \"Sheriff Who\", a second version of \"The Jerry Lewis Show\" (this time as a one-hour variety show for NBC, which ran from 1967 to 1969), and \"The Danny Thomas Hour\".\nHe also appeared on \"Playboy After Dark,\" \"Jimmy Durante's The Lennon Sisters Hour,\" \"The Red Skelton Show,\" \"The Jack Benny Birthday Special,\" \"The Mike Douglas Show\", \"The Sonny &amp; Cher Comedy Hour,\" \"The Hollywood Palace,\" \"The Engelbert Humperdinck Show,\" \"The Irv Kupcinet Show\" and \"The Linkletter Show\". Behind the scenes, he directed an episode of \"The Bold Ones\" and directed the Peter Lawford and Sammy Davis, Jr. comedy \"One More Time\" (1970), a sequel to Richard Donner's \"Salt and Pepper\" (1968).\nLewis would leave Columbia after his agreement with the studio lapsed, leaving him to produce his next movie independently. \"Which Way to the Front?\" (1970) was a World War II military comedy starring Lewis as a wealthy playboy who wants to enlist in the armed forces. Rejected, he forms his own volunteer army and infiltrates the enemy forces on the Italian front. The cast included many of Lewis's cronies, including Jan Murray, Steve Franken, Kathleen Freeman, Kenneth MacDonald, Joe Besser, and (in a broad caricature of Adolf Hitler) Sidney Miller. The film received only a limited release by Warner Bros., and was not well received by the critics or the public. Lewis would later guest appeared on the NBC special \"The Klowns\".\n\"The Day the Clown Cried\" (1972), a drama directed by and starring Lewis and set in a Nazi concentration camp, received only brief exposure. The film was rarely discussed by him, but he said that litigation over post-production finances and copyright prevented its completion and widespread theatrical release. He also said a factor for the film's burial was that he was not proud of the effort. It was the earliest attempt by an American film director to address the subject of The Holocaust. Following this, Lewis took a break from the movie business for several years.\nHis television appearances during this period included \"Good Morning America,\" \"The Dick Cavett Show,\" \"NBC Follies,\" \"Celebrity Sportsman,\" \"Cher,\" \"Dinah!,\" \"Tony Orlando and Dawn.\" As Lewis continued to annually emcee his telethons, one of the most memorable was the 1976 show, where on that broadcast, unrehearsed, Sinatra offered to bring an old friend on stage. From the wings came Dean Martin, as the audience cheered. Lewis was stunned by the surprise, but he embraced Martin and they exchanged jokes for several minutes.\nIn 1976, producer Alexander H. Cohen signed Lewis to star in a revival of Olsen and Johnson's musical-comedy revue \"Hellzapoppin\". \"I do think that to succeed today, a comedy revue requires a larger-than-life comic\", Cohen told syndicated columnist Jack O'Brian. \"That is why I have engaged Jerry Lewis to star in the new production of \"Hellzapoppin\", which I'm preparing for the coming season.\" Cohen had revived \"Hellzapoppin\" as a TV special in 1972, and was impressed by the contributions of Lynn Redgrave; he signed her to appear opposite Lewis. This was Lewis's first Broadway show, and was so eagerly awaited that NBC-TV promised Cohen $1,000,000 for the rights to broadcast the opening night live on national television.\nOut-of-town tryouts were staged in Washington, D.C., Baltimore, and Boston to excellent business but mixed reviews. There was turmoil behind the scenes, as comedy star Lewis dominated the production and had serious arguments with producer Cohen, co-star Redgrave, and writer-adaptor Abe Burrows. \"Lewis and Miss Redgrave had been having a much-publicized feud\", according to an account in the \"Pittsburgh Press\". \"He would neither rehearse nor perform any songs with her, reports said.\" The backstage chaos extended to several sudden cast changes during the Boston run.\nOn January 18, 1977, NBC executives flew to Boston to see the show, and their reactions were so negative that Cohen closed the show immediately and canceled both the Broadway engagement and the TV spectacular, forfeiting the million-dollar payment from NBC. \"It's not ready for Broadway and cannot be made so in three remaining weeks before the opening\", Cohen said. Cohen's spokesman subsequently announced that the stars would be replaced: \"Recasting means recasting, and that's it.\"\nLater productions.\nIn 1979, \"That's Life\", a senior citizen's take on \"Animal House\", was to be Lewis's next film and to star Ruth Gordon, Danny Thomas and Al Lewis. Filming was set to begin, but stopped after a week, due to lack of funds. Then carried on with \"Circus of the Stars\", \"Pink Lady and Jeff\", \"Hardly Working\" (1981), \"The King of Comedy\" (1982), \"Late Night with David Letterman\", \"Star Search\", \"Cracking Up\" (1983), \"Slapstick (Of Another Kind)\" (1984) and the two France-released films \"The Defective Detective\" (1984) and \"How Did You Get In? We Didn't See You Leave\" (1984), both which had their distribution under Lewis's control.\n Following a syndicated talk show for Metromedia, Lewis directed an episode of \"Brothers\", appeared at the very first Comic Relief in 1986, where he was the only performer to receive a standing ovation, appeared for \"Classic Treasures\", \"Fight for Life\" (1987), an ABC televised movie, appeared on \"Las Vegas at 75: All-Star Tribute\", hosted \"America's All-Time Favorite Movies\" and came on \"Speaking of Everything\". While guest starring in five episodes of \"Wiseguy\", its filming schedule forced Lewis to miss the Museum of the Moving Image's opening with a retrospective of his work.\nLewis then attended Martin's 72nd birthday at Bally's in Las Vegas, wheeling out a cake, sang \"Happy Birthday\" to him and joked, \"Why we broke up, I'll never know.\" Then starred in \"Cookie\" (1989), directed episodes of \"Super Force\" in 1990 and \"Good Grief\" in 1991 and appeared in \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992), \"The Arsenio Hall Show\", \"Inside The Comedy Mind\", \"Mad About You\", \"Arizona Dream\" (1993), \"Funny Bones\" (1995), a stage revival run of \"Damn Yankees\" and an interview on \"Inside the Actors Studio\".\nMore projects Lewis appeared in were \"The Simpsons\", \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\", \"\", \"The Nutty Professor II\" (2008), \"The Talk\", \"Max Rose\" (2013), \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\", \"The Trust\" (2016) and \"Comedians in Cars Getting Coffee\".\nStyle and reception.\nComedic style.\nLewis \"single-handedly created a style of humor that was half anarchy, half excruciation. Even comics who never took a pratfall in their careers owe something to the self-deprecation Jerry introduced into American show business.\" &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJerry Lewis was the most profoundly creative comedian of his generation and arguably one of the two or three most influential comedians born anywhere in this century.\n\"The King of Comedy\", 1996\n His comedy style was physically uninhibited, expressive, and potentially volatile. He was known especially for his distinctive voice, facial expressions, pratfalls, and physical stunts. His improvisations and ad-libbing, especially in nightclubs and early television were revolutionary among performers. It was \"marked by a raw, edgy energy that would distinguish him within the comedy landscape.\" Will Sloan, of \"Flavorwire\" wrote, \"In the late '40s and early '50s, nobody had ever seen a comedian as wild as Jerry Lewis.\" Placed in the context of the conservative era, his antics were radical and liberating, paving the way for future comedians Steve Martin, Richard Pryor, Andy Kaufman, Paul Reubens, and Jim Carrey. Carrey wrote: \"Through his comedy, Jerry would stretch the boundaries of reality so far that it was an act of anarchy ... I learned from Jerry\", and \"I am because he was.\"\nActing the bumbling everyman, Lewis used tightly choreographed, sophisticated sight gags, physical routines, verbal double-talk and malapropisms. \"You cannot help but notice Lewis's incredible sense of control in regards to performing\u2014they may have looked at times like the ravings of a madman but his best work had a genuine grace and finesse behind it that would put most comedic performers of any era to shame.\" They are \"choreographed as exactly as any ballet, each movement and gesture coming on natural beats and conforming to the overall rhythmic form which is headed to a spectacular finale: absolute catastrophe.\"\nAlthough Lewis made it no secret that he was Jewish, he was criticized for hiding his Jewish heritage. In several of his films\u2014both with Martin and solo\u2014Lewis's Jewish identity is hinted at in passing, and was never made a defining characteristic of his onscreen persona. Aside from the 1959 television movie \"The Jazz Singer\" and the unreleased 1972 film \"The Day the Clown Cried\", Lewis never appeared in a film or film role that had any ties to his Jewish heritage. When asked about this lack of Jewish portrayal in a 1984 interview, Lewis stated, \"I never hid it, but I wouldn't announce it and I wouldn't exploit it. Plus the fact it had no room in the visual direction I was taking in my work.\"\nLewis's physical movements in films received some criticism because he was perceived as imitating or mocking those with a physical disability.\u00a0Through the years, the disability that has been attached to his comedic persona has not been physical, but mental. Neuroticism and schizophrenia have been a part of Lewis's persona since his partnership with Dean Martin; however, it was in his solo career that these disabilities became important to the plots of his films and the characters. In films such as \"The Ladies Man\" (1961), \"The Disorderly Orderly\" (1964), \"The Patsy\" (1964) and \"Cracking Up\" (1983), there is either neuroticism, schizophrenia, or both that drive the plot. Lewis was able to explore and dissect the psychological side of his persona, which provided a depth to the character and the films that was not present in his previous efforts.\nDirectorial technique.\nDuring the 1960 production of \"The Bellboy,\" Lewis pioneered the technique of using video cameras and multiple closed circuit monitors, which allowed him to review his performance instantly. This was necessary since he was acting as well as directing. His techniques and methods of filmmaking, documented in his book and his USC class, enabled him to complete most of his films on time and under budget since reshoots could take place immediately instead of waiting for the dailies.\n\"Man in Motion,\" a featurette for \"Three on a Couch\", features the video system, named \"Jerry's Noisy Toy\" and shows Lewis receiving the Golden Light Technical Achievement award for its development. Lewis stated he worked with the head of Sony to produce the prototype. While he initiated its practice and use, and was instrumental in its development, he did not hold a patent.\nLewis screened Spielberg's early film \"Amblin\"' and told his students, \"That's what filmmaking is all about.\" The class covered all topics related to filmmaking, including pre and post production, marketing and distribution and filming comedy with rhythm and timing. His 1971 book \"The Total Film Maker\", was based on 480 hours of his class lectures. Lewis also traveled to medical schools for seminars on laughter and healing with Clifford Kuhn and also did corporate and college lectures, motivational speaking and promoted the pain-treatment company Medtronic.\nExposure in France.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Americans are the people who, when the French decided that Jerry Lewis was a genius, never stopped to ask why, but immediately branded France a nation of idiots.\" \u2014Biographer Jeanine Basinger in \"Silent Stars\" (1999). \nWhile Lewis was popular in France for his duo films with Dean Martin and his solo comedy films, his reputation and stature increased after the Paramount contract, when he began to exert total control over all aspects of his films. His involvement in directing, writing, editing and art direction coincided with the rise of auteur theory in French intellectual film criticism and the French New Wave movement. He earned consistent praise from French critics in the influential magazines \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" and \"Positif,\" where he was hailed as an ingenious auteur.\nHis singular \"mise-en-sc\u00e8ne,\" and skill behind the camera, were aligned with Howard Hawks, Alfred Hitchcock and Satyajit Ray. Appreciated too, was the complexity of his also being in front of the camera. The new French criticism viewed cinema as an art form unto itself, and comedy as part of this art. Lewis is then fitted into a historical context and seen as not only worthy of critique, but as an innovator and satirist of his time. Jean-Pierre Coursodon states in a 1975 \"Film Comment\" article, \"The merit of the French critics, auteurist excesses notwithstanding, was their willingness to look at what Lewis was doing as a filmmaker for what it was, rather than with some preconception of what film comedy should be.\"\nCurricula at universities or art schools, film studies and film theory were not yet avant-garde in early 1960s America. Mainstream movie reviewers such as Pauline Kael, were dismissive of auteur theory, and others, seeing only absurdist comedy, criticized Lewis for his ambition and \"castigated him for his self-indulgence\" and egotism. Despite this criticism being often held by American film critics, admiration for Lewis and his comedy continued to grow in France.\nAppreciation of Lewis by \"the French\" became something of a stereotype and was often the object of jokes in American pop culture. \"That Americans can't see Jerry Lewis's genius is bewildering\", says N. T. Binh, a French film magazine critic. Such bewilderment was the basis of the book \"Why the French Love Jerry Lewis.\"\nActing credits and accolades.\nLewis received numerous honorary awards including the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences's Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award in 2008, the Academy of Television Arts &amp; Sciences' Governor's Award in 2005, and the Venice International Film Festival's Career Golden Lion in 1999. He was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Best Comedian or Comedienne in 1952 and the Best Actor in a Comedy or Musical Film for his performance in \"Boeing, Boeing\" (1965). For his Broadway debut, he received a Theatre World Award nomination. Lewis was nominated for ten Golden Laurel Awards winning twice. Lewis also received a nomination for the Razzie Award for Worst Actor for his performance in \"Slapstick of Another Kind\" (1985), as well as two Stinker Award nominations for Worst Director and Worst Actor for \"Hardly Working\" (1981).\nCharity activism with MDA.\nAfter meeting with Paul Cohen, founder of the Muscular Dystrophy Association (MDA), Lewis and Martin made their first appeal in early December 1951 on the finale of \"The Colgate Comedy Hour\", followed by another in 1952. Lewis fought Rocky Marciano in a boxing bout for MDA's fund drive in 1954. In 1956, the duo hosted MDA's first telethon from June 29 to June 30, until the end of their comedy act on July 25 and Lewis becoming MDA's national chairman soon after. Two Thanksgiving specials were helmed in 1957 and 1959.\n\"The Jerry Lewis MDA Labor Day Telethon\" made its premiere in late 1966. Since its first broadcast on one station that year, the annual telethon aired live every Labor Day weekend for 44 years over five decades, originating from different locations including New York, Las Vegas, Hollywood and Chicago, becoming the most watched and most successful fundraising event in the history of television.\nThe telethon (a portmanteau of television and marathon) was the first to: raise over $1\u00a0million, in 1966; be shown entirely in color, in 1967; become a networked telethon, in 1968; go coast-to-coast, in 1970; be seen outside the continental U.S., in 1972. It raised the largest sum ever in a single event for humanitarian purposes, in 1974; had the greatest amount ever pledged to a televised charitable event, in 1980 (from the \"Guinness Book of World Records\"); was the first to be seen by 100 million people, in 1985; celebrated its 25th anniversary, in 1990; saw its highest pledge in history, in 1992; and was the first seen worldwide via internet simulcast, in 1998.\nBy 1990, societal views of disabled individuals and the telethon format had shifted. Lewis's and the telethon's methods were criticized by disability rights activists who believed the show was \"designed to evoke pity rather than empower the disabled.\" The activists said the telethon perpetuated prejudices and stereotypes, that Lewis treated those he said he was helping with little respect, and that he used offensive language when describing them. Lewis rebutted the criticism and defended his methods saying, \"If you don't tug at their heartstrings, then you're on the air for nothing.\"\nDuring Lewis's lifetime, MDA-funded scientists discovered the causes of most of the diseases in the Muscular Dystrophy Association's program, developing treatments, therapies and standards of care that have allowed many people living with these diseases to live longer and grow stronger. Lewis received a Nobel Peace Prize nomination, a Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Medical Association, a Governors Award and the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award.\nOn August 3, 2011, MDA announced that Lewis would no longer host its telethons and that he was no longer associated with MDA. The 2011 telethon (which originally was to be Lewis's 46th and final show with MDA) featured a tribute to Lewis. In May 2015, MDA said it was discontinuing its telethon in view of \"the new realities of television viewing and philanthropic giving.\"\nIn early 2016, at MDA's brand relaunch event at Carnegie Hall in New York City, Lewis broke a five-year silence during a special taped message, marking his first (and as it turned out, his final) appearance in support of MDA since his final telethon in 2010 and the end of his tenure as national chairman in 2011.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nLewis wed Patti Palmer (n\u00e9e Esther Grace Calonico; 1921\u20132021), a singer with Ted Fio Rito, on October 3, 1944. They had six sons together; five biological: Gary (born 1945), Scott (born 1956), Christopher (born 1957), Anthony (born 1959) and Joseph (1964\u20132009); and one adopted: Ronald (born 1949). It was an interfaith marriage; Lewis was Jewish and Palmer was Catholic.\nWhile married to Palmer, Lewis likely fathered a daughter, Suzan (born 1952) with Lynn Dixon Kleinman. DNA testing indicated an 88.7 percent probability that Suzan is related to Lewis' acknowledged son Gary. Lewis openly pursued relationships with other women and gave unapologetic interviews about his infidelity, revealing his affairs with Marilyn Monroe and Marlene Dietrich to \"People\" in 2011. Palmer filed for divorce from Lewis in 1980, after 35 years of marriage, citing Lewis's extravagant spending and infidelity on his part, and it was finalized in 1983. All of Lewis's children and grandchildren from his marriage to Palmer were excluded from inheriting any part of his estate. His eldest son, Gary, publicly called his father a \"mean and evil person\" and said that Lewis never showed him or his siblings any love or care.\nLewis's second wife was Sandra \"SanDee\" Pitnick, a University of North Carolina School of the Arts professionally trained ballerina and stewardess, who met Lewis after winning a bit part in a dancing scene on his film \"Hardly Working\". They wed on February 13, 1983, in Key Biscayne, Florida, adopted a daughter, Danielle (born 1992), and were married for 34 years until Lewis's death on August 20, 2017.\nInterests and habits.\nAfter opening a camera shop in 1950, Lewis agreed to lend his name to \"Jerry Lewis Cinemas\" in 1969, offered by National Cinema Corporation, as a franchise business opportunity for those interested in theatrical movie exhibition. Jerry Lewis Cinemas stated that their theaters could be operated by a staff of as few as two with the aid of automation and support provided by the franchiser in booking film and other aspects of film exhibition. A forerunner of the smaller rooms typical of later multi-screen complexes, a Jerry Lewis Cinema was billed in franchising ads as a \"mini-theatre\" with a seating capacity of between 200 and 350.\nIn addition to Lewis's name, each Jerry Lewis Cinema bore a sign with a cartoon logo of Lewis in profile. Initially 158 territories were franchised, with a buy-in fee of $10,000 or $15,000 depending on the territory, for what was called an \"individual exhibitor.\" For $50,000, Jerry Lewis Cinemas offered an opportunity known as an \"area directorship\", in which investors controlled franchising opportunities in a territory as well as their own cinemas. The success of the chain was hampered by a policy of only booking second-run, family-friendly films. Eventually the policy was changed, and the Jerry Lewis Cinemas were allowed to show more competitive movies. But after a decade the chain failed and both Lewis and National Cinema Corporation declared bankruptcy in 1980.\nIn 1973, Lewis appeared on the 1st Annual 20-hour Highway Safety Foundation Telethon, then in 1990, wrote and directed \"Boy\", a short film for UNICEF's \"How Are The Children?\" anthology, meeting up with seven-year-old Lochie Graham in 2010, who shared his idea for \"Jerry's House\", a place for vulnerable and traumatized children and in 2016, would lend his name and star power to Criss Angel's HELP (Heal Every Life Possible) charity event.\nLewis had a habit of referring to himself in the third person.\nPolitical views.\nLewis kept a low political profile for many years, having taken advice reportedly given to him by President John F. Kennedy, who told him, \"Don't get into anything political. Don't do that because they will usurp your energy.\" Nevertheless, he campaigned and performed on behalf of both JFK and Robert F. Kennedy, and was a supporter of the civil rights movement. For his 1957 NBC special, Lewis held his ground when southern affiliates objected to his friendship with Sammy Davis, Jr. In a 1971 \"Movie Mirror\" magazine article, Lewis spoke out against the Vietnam War. He vowed to leave the country rather than send another of his sons.\nLewis observed that political speeches should not be at the Oscars. He stated, \"I think we are the most dedicated industry in the world. And I think that we have to present ourselves that night as hard-working, caring and important people to the industry. We need to get more self-respect as an industry.\" In a 2004 interview with \"The Guardian\", Lewis was asked what he was least proud of, to which he answered, \"Politics.\"\nHe mocked citizens' lack of pride in their country, stating, \"President Bush is my president. I will not say anything negative about the president of the United States. I don't do that. And I don't allow my children to do that. Likewise, when I come to England don't you do any jokes about 'Mum' to me. That is the Queen of England, you moron. Do you know how tough a job it is to be the Queen of England?\"\nIn a December 2015 interview on EWTN's \"World Over\" with Raymond Arroyo, Lewis expressed opposition to the United States letting in Syrian refugees, saying, \"No one has worked harder for the human condition than I have, but they're not part of the human condition if 11 guys in that group of 10,000 are ISIS. How can I take that chance?\" In the same interview, he criticized President Barack Obama for not being prepared for ISIS, while expressing support for Donald Trump, saying he would make a good president because he was a good \"showman.\" He also added that he admired Ronald Reagan's presidency.\nStalking incident.\nIn February 1994, a man named Gary Benson was revealed to have been stalking Lewis and his family. Benson subsequently served four years in prison.\nAllegations of sexual assault.\nIn February 2022, \"Vanity Fair\" reported that several of Lewis's co-stars from the 1960s had come forward to share allegations of sexual assault, harassment, and verbal abuse. Those whose accounts were made public included Karen Sharpe, Hope Holiday, Anna Maria Alberghetti, and Lainie Kazan.\nIllness and death.\nLewis suffered from a number of chronic health problems, illnesses and addictions related both to aging and a back injury sustained in a comedic pratfall. The fall has been stated as being either from a piano while performing at the Sands Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip on March 20, 1965, or during an appearance on \"The Andy Williams Show\". In its aftermath, Lewis became addicted to the painkiller Percodan for thirteen years. He said he had been off the drug since 1978. In April 2002, Lewis had a Medtronic \"Synergy\" neurostimulator implanted in his back, which helped reduce the discomfort. He was one of the company's leading spokesmen.\nLewis suffered numerous heart problems throughout his life; he revealed in the 2011 documentary \"Method to the Madness of Jerry Lewis\" that he suffered his first heart attack at age 34 while filming \"Cinderfella\" in 1960. In December 1982, at age 56, he suffered his second heart attack and that same month underwent open-heart double-bypass surgery. En route to San Diego from New York City on a cross-country commercial airline flight on June 11, 2006, Lewis suffered his third heart attack at age 80. It was discovered that he had pneumonia, as well as a severely damaged heart. He underwent a cardiac catheterization days after the heart attack, and two stents were inserted into one of his coronary arteries, which was 90 percent blocked. The surgery resulted in increased blood flow to his heart and allowed him to continue his rebound from earlier lung problems. Having the cardiac catheterization required him to cancel several major events from his schedule, but he fully recuperated in a matter of weeks.\nIn 1999, Lewis's Australian tour was cut short when he had to be hospitalized in Darwin with viral meningitis. He was ill for more than five months. It was reported in the Australian press that he had failed to pay his medical bills. However, Lewis maintained that the payment confusion was the fault of his health insurer. The resulting negative publicity caused him to sue his insurer for US$100\u00a0million.\nIn addition to his decades-long heart problems, Lewis had prostate cancer, type 1 diabetes, and pulmonary fibrosis. In the late 1990s, Lewis was treated with prednisone for pulmonary fibrosis, which caused considerable weight gain and a startling change in his appearance. In September 2001, Lewis was unable to perform at a planned London charity event at the London Palladium. He was the headlining act, and was introduced, but did not appear onstage. He had suddenly become unwell, apparently with cardiac problems.\nHe was subsequently taken to a hospital. Some months thereafter, Lewis began an arduous, months-long therapy that weaned him off prednisone, and he lost much of the weight gained while on the drug. The treatment enabled him to return to work. On June 12, 2012, he was treated and released from a hospital after collapsing from hypoglycemia at a New York Friars Club event. This forced him to cancel a show in Sydney. In an October 2016 interview with \"Inside Edition\", Lewis acknowledged that he might not star in any more films, given his advanced age, while admitting, through tears, that he was afraid of dying, as it would leave his wife and daughter alone. In June 2017, Lewis was hospitalized at a Las Vegas hospital for a urinary tract infection.\nLewis died at his home in Las Vegas, Nevada, on August 20, 2017, at the age of 91. The cause was end-stage cardiac disease and peripheral artery disease. Lewis was cremated. In his will, he left his estate to his second wife of 34 years, SanDee Pitnick, and their daughter, and explicitly disinherited his children from his first marriage.\nControversies.\nIn 1998, at the Aspen U.S. Comedy Arts Festival, when asked which women comics he admired, Lewis answered, \"I don't like any female comedians. A woman doing comedy doesn't offend me but sets me back a bit. I, as a viewer, have trouble with it. I think of her as a producing machine that brings babies in the world.\" He went on to praise Lucille Ball as \"brilliant\" and said Carol Burnett is \"the greatest female entrepreneur of comedy.\" On other occasions, Lewis expressed admiration for female comedians Totie Fields, Phyllis Diller, Kathleen Freeman, Elayne Boosler, Whoopi Goldberg, and Tina Fey.\nDuring the 2007 MDA Telethon, Lewis used the slur \"fag\" in a joke, for which he apologized. Lewis used the same word the following year on Australian television.\nIn a 2022 \"Vanity Fair\" article, actresses Karen Sharpe, Hope Holiday, Ren\u00e9e Taylor, Jill St. John, Anna Maria Alberghetti and Lainie Kazan accused Lewis of sexual assault and harassment. According to Sharpe, Lewis assaulted her during a wardrobe fitting, while Holiday alleged Lewis locked her in his dressing room, then began talking graphically and masturbating in front of her. Alberghetti and Kazan alleged Lewis sexually harassed them. Comedian Amy Schumer also alleged that she had to physically resist Lewis trying to lower her onto the stage to perform a mock sex act at a 2014 Friars Roast.\nTributes and legacy.\nFrom the late 1940s to the mid-1960s, Lewis was considered a significant force in American popular culture.\" He influenced generations of comedians, comedy writers, performers and filmmakers. After his death, actors such as Jim Carrey and Jeffrey Tambor paid tribute. Carl Reiner wrote, \"All comedians watch other comedians, and every generation of comedians going back to those who watched Jerry on the \"Colgate Comedy Hour\" were influenced by Jerry. They say that mankind goes back to the first guy ... which everyone tries to copy. In comedy that guy was Jerry Lewis.\"\nSome critics have argued that Lewis' career as a director is underappreciated. Richard Brody of \"The New Yorker\" said Lewis was \"one of the most original, inventive, ... profound directors of the time\" and \"one of the most skilled and original comic performers, verbal and physical, ever to appear on screen.\" Dave Kehr, a film critic and film curator for the Museum of Modern Art, wrote in \"The New York Times\" that Lewis was \"one of the great American filmmakers.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs a filmmaker who insisted on the personal side of his work\u2014who was producer, writer, director, star, and over-all boss of his productions in the interest of his artistic conception and passion\u2014he was an auteur by temperament and in practice long before the word traveled Stateside.\n\"The New Yorker\", 2017\nThere have been numerous retrospectives of Lewis's films in the U.S. and abroad, most notably \"Jerry Lewis: A Film and Television Retrospective\" at Museum of the Moving Image, the 2013 Viennale, the 2016 Melbourne International Film Festival, \"The Innovator: Jerry Lewis at Paramount\" at American Cinematheque in Los Angeles, \"Happy Birthday Mr. Lewis: The Kid Turns 90\" at MoMA in New York City, and \"Jerry Lewis, cin\u00e9aste\" at the French Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que in 2023.\nIn 2017, Lewis with others inaugurated and founded Legionnaires of Laughter and Legacy Awards, and the first Legacy Award held in Downtown, New York. On August 21, 2017, multiple hotel marquees on the Las Vegas Strip honored Lewis with a coordinated video display of images of his career as a Las Vegas performer and resident.\nIn popular culture.\nBetween 1952 and 1957, DC Comics published a 40-issue comic book series with Martin &amp; Lewis as the main protagonists, titled \"The Adventures of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis\". They continued the series under the new title \"The Adventures of Jerry Lewis\" after the team split up, running until issue #124 in 1971.\nIn \"The Simpsons\", the character of Professor Frink is based on Lewis's Julius Kelp from \"The Nutty Professor.\" Lewis himself would later voice the character's father in the episode \"Treehouse of Horror XIV.\" In \"Animaniacs\", Lewis is parodied in the form of a recurring character named Mr. Director (voiced by series writer Paul Rugg), who initially appears as a comedy director whose appearance and mannerisms are based around those of Lewis, complete with frequent exclamations of faux-Yiddish. While he is typically depicted as a caricature of Lewis, on some occasions Mr. Director has also been seen as a caricature of Marlon Brando and as a birthday clown, although still retaining the voice and mannerisms inspired by Lewis.\nIn \"Family Guy\", Peter recreates Lewis's 'chairman of the board' scene from \"The Errand Boy\". Additionally, when questioned of his knowledge of the French language, the character Quagmire claims that he is loved in France: cutting to a scene in which a French audience enthusiastically watch a comedy film starring Quagmire which parodies several of Lewis' films. Comedian, actor and friend of Lewis, Martin Short, satirized him on the series \"SCTV\" in the sketches \"The Nutty Lab Assistant\", \"Martin Scorsese presents Jerry Lewis Live on the Champs Elysees!\", \"The Tender Fella\", and \"Scenes From an Idiots Marriage\", as well as on \"Saturday Night Live\"'s \"Celebrity Jeopardy!.\"\nAlso on \"SNL\", the Martin and Lewis reunion on the 1976 MDA Telethon is reported by Chevy Chase on \"Weekend Update\". Comedians Eddie Murphy and Joe Piscopo both parodied Lewis when he hosted SNL in 1983. Comedian and actor Jim Carrey satirized Lewis on \"In Living Color\" in the sketch \"Jheri's Kids Telethon.\" Carrey had an uncredited cameo playing Lewis in the series \"Buffalo Bill\" on the episode \"Jerry Lewis Week.\" He also played Lewis, with impersonator Rich Little as Dean Martin, on stage. Actor Sean Hayes portrayed Lewis in the made-for-TV movie \"Martin and Lewis\", with Jeremy Northam as Dean Martin. Actor Kevin Bacon plays the Lewis character in the 2005 film \"Where The Truth Lies,\" based on a fictionalized version of Martin and Lewis.\nJohn Saleeby, writer for \"National Lampoon\" has a humor piece \"Ten Things You Should Know About Jerry Lewis.\" In the animated cartoon \"Popeye's 20th Anniversary\", Martin and Lewis are portrayed on the dais. The animated series \"Animaniacs\" satirized Lewis in several episodes. The voice and boyish, naive cartoon character SpongeBob SquarePants is partially based on Lewis, with particular inspiration from his film \"The Bellboy\". In 1998, The MTV animated show \"Celebrity Deathmatch\" had a clay-animated fight to the death between Dean Martin and Lewis. In a 1975 re-issue of \"MAD Magazine\" the contents of Lewis's wallet is satirized in their on-going feature \"Celebrities' Wallets.\"\nSimilarly, varied musicians have mentioned Lewis in song lyrics including, Ice Cube, The Dead Milkmen, Queen Latifah, and Frank Zappa. The hip hop music band Beastie Boys have an unreleased single \"The Jerry Lewis\", which they mention, and danced to, on stage in Asheville, North Carolina in 2009. In their film \"Paul's Boutique\u2014A Visual Companion\", clips from \"The Nutty Professor\" play to . Over the years, countless actors and performers have regularly impersonated or portrayed Lewis in various tribute shows, most notably Nicholas Arnold, Tony Lewis, David Wolf, and Matt Macis.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15968", "revid": "1872772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15968", "title": "July 29", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 29 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15969", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15969", "title": "Jean Louis Rodolphe Agassiz", "text": ""}
{"id": "15970", "revid": "14462949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15970", "title": "Johannes Agricola", "text": "German Protestant Reformer (1494\u20131566)\nJohann or Johannes Agricola (originally Schneider, then Schnitter; 20 April 1494 \u2013 22 September 1566) was a German Protestant Reformer during the Protestant Reformation. He was a follower and friend of Martin Luther, who became his antagonist in the matter of the binding obligation of the law on Christians.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAgricola was born at Eisleben, whence he is sometimes called Magister Islebius. He studied at Wittenberg, where he soon gained the friendship of Martin Luther. In 1519 he accompanied Luther to the great assembly of German divines at Leipzig, and acted as recording secretary. After teaching for some time in Wittenberg, he went to Frankfurt in 1525 to establish the Protestant mode of worship. He had resided there only a month when he was called to Eisleben, where he remained until 1526 as teacher in the school of St Andrew, and preacher in the Nicolai church.\nControversy.\nIn 1536 he was recalled to teach in Wittenberg, and was welcomed by Luther. Almost immediately, however, a controversy, which had been begun ten years before and been temporarily silenced, broke out more violently than ever. Agricola was the first to teach the views which Luther was the first to stigmatize by the name Antinomian, maintaining that while non-Christians were still held to the Mosaic law, Christians were entirely free from it, being under the gospel alone. (See also: Law and Gospel). The controversy made the two theologians break apart.\nPhilip Melanchthon taught that it was necessary to do good works, but they were an outgrowth of faith and not the reason for receiving forgiveness. Agricola felt that Melanchthon's view of the law was at odds with Luther's. Agricola felt there was no need for the law after justification, possibly ignoring the idea that someone could still fall from faith. This may be closer to the Calvinistic view of \"Once saved, always saved\".\nRestoration and later life.\nAs a consequence of the bitter controversy with Luther, in 1540 Agricola left Wittenberg secretly for Berlin, where he published a letter addressed to Frederick III, Elector of Saxony, which was generally interpreted as a recantation of his prior views. Luther, however, seems not to have so accepted it, and Agricola remained at Berlin.\nJoachim II Hector, Elector of Brandenburg, having taken Agricola into his favour, appointed him court preacher and general superintendent. He held both offices until his death in 1566, and his career in Brandenburg was one of great activity and influence.\nAlong with Julius von Pflug, bishop of Naumburg-Zeitz, and Michael Helding, titular bishop of Sidon, he prepared the Augsburg Interim of 1548, a proposed settlement under which Protestants would accept all Catholic authority, being permitted to retain the Protestant teaching on communion under both kinds and married clergy, but otherwise compelled to accept Catholic doctrine and practice, including the rejection of justification by faith alone. From that time, he was an outcast among Protestant theologians. It was an irony that one of the most radical Reformers ended his life viewed as having capitulated to Catholics.\nHe endeavored in vain to appease the Adiaphoristic controversy.\nHe died during an epidemic of plague on 22 September 1566 in Berlin.\nWritings.\nAgricola wrote a number of theological works. He was among the first to make a commentated collection of German proverbs. The first volume contains 300 proverbs and was published in 1529 (\"Drey hundert Gemeyner Sprichworter, der wir Deutschen vns gebrauchen, vnd doch nicht wissen woher sie kommen\"; first published in Low German the year before); the second volume contains 450 proverbs and was published in 1530 (\"Das ander teyl gemainer Tewtscher Sprichw\u00f6rter, mit jhrer au\u00dflegung : hat f\u00fcnffthalb hundert newer W\u00f6rtter\"). A revised edition containing the seven hundred and fifty proverbs of the previous two volumes was published in 1534 (\"Sybenhundert und f\u00fcnfftzig te\u00fctscher Sprichw\u00f6rter, verne\u00fcwert und gebessert\") and later republished with updated orthography, for example, in Wittenberg in 1592.\nIn literature.\nIn 1836, Robert Browning used him as the subject of an early poetic soliloquy, \"Johannes Agricola in Meditation\"."}
{"id": "15971", "revid": "2074638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15971", "title": "July 12", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 12 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15974", "revid": "40707762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15974", "title": "Johann Georg Albrechtsberger", "text": "Austrian composer (1736\u20131809)\nJohann Georg Albrechtsberger (3 February 1736 \u2013 7 March 1809) was an Austrian composer, organist, and music theorist, widely regarded as one of the leading figures in counterpoint and composition theory during the Classical period. He was a prolific composer of church music, orchestral works, and keyboard pieces, though he is best remembered for his influence as a teacher.\nAlbrechtsberger was a mentor to several important composers, most notably Ludwig van Beethoven, whom he instructed in counterpoint and fugue. His theoretical writings and pedagogical methods had a lasting impact on 19th-century composition, and his treatises on harmony and counterpoint remain highly regarded. He was also a friend of Haydn and Mozart.\nIn addition to his teaching contributions, Albrechtsberger held several prestigious positions, including Kapellmeister of St. Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna. He was a composer though his works are little performed today.\nBiography.\nAlbrechtsberger was born at Klosterneuburg, near Vienna. He originally studied music at Melk Abbey and philosophy at a Benedictine seminary in Vienna, and became one of the most learned and skillful contrapuntists of his age. Albrechtsberger's earliest classmates included Michael Haydn and Franz Joseph Aumann. After being employed as organist at Raab, Hungary in 1755 and Maria Taferl, Austria in 1757, he was appointed Thurnermeister back at Melk Abbey. In 1772 he was appointed organist to the court of Vienna, and in 1792 Kapellmeister of St. Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna.\nHis fame as a theorist attracted to him in the Austrian capital a large number of pupils, some of whom afterwards became eminent musicians. Among these were Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Ignaz Moscheles, Josef Weigl, Ludwig-Wilhelm Tepper de Ferguson, Antonio Casimir Cartellieri, Ludwig van Beethoven, Anton Reicha and Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart. (See: .) Beethoven had arrived in Vienna in 1792 to study with Joseph Haydn, but quickly became infuriated when his work was not being given attention or corrected. Haydn recommended his friend Albrechtsberger, with whom Beethoven then studied harmony and counterpoint. On completion of his studies, the young student noted, \"Patience, diligence, persistence, and sincerity will lead to success\", which reflects upon Albrechtsberger's own compositional philosophy.\nAlbrechtsberger died in Vienna; his grave is in St. Marx cemetery.\nCompositions.\nHis published compositions consist of preludes, fugues and sonatas for the piano and organ, string quartets, etc.; but the greater proportion of his works, vocal and instrumental, exists only in manuscript. They are in the library of the Vienna Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde. Around 1765, he wrote at least seven concerti for Jew's harp and strings (three survive in the Hungarian National Library in Budapest). They are pleasant, well-written works in the \"galant\" style.\nOne of his most notable works is his Concerto for Alto Trombone and Orchestra in B\u266d Major (1759). As the trombone has few works dating back to the classical period, his concerto is often highlighted by the trombone community. He also wrote a Concerto for the Mandola, Op. 27, discussed positively in the 1914 book \"The Guitar and Mandolin\".\nPossibly the most valuable service he rendered to music was in his theoretical works. In 1790 he published at Leipzig a treatise on composition, of which a third edition appeared in 1821. A collection of his writings on harmony, in three volumes, was published under the care of his pupil Ignaz von Seyfried (1776\u20131841) in 1826. An English version of this was published by Novello in 1855. His compositional style derives from the counterpoint of Johann Joseph Fux, who was Kapellmeister at St Stephen's Cathedral from 1713 to 1741; Albrechtsberger later held the same position.\nA continuous thread can be traced from his teaching through that of his pupil Anton Reicha, who went on to become the first Professor of Counterpoint and Fugue at the Paris Conservatoire from 1818 until his death in 1836, and who in turn reached a wide audience through both his own teaching and his theoretical writings, which were standard reference at the Conservatoire for most of the 19th century, and translated into German by Carl Czerny.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15975", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15975", "title": "John Alden", "text": "Crew member on the Mayflower\nJohn Alden (c.\u20091598 \u2013 September 12, 1687) was an English magistrate, settler, and cooper, best known for being a crew member on the 1620 voyage of the \"Mayflower\" which brought the English settlers, commonly known as Pilgrims, to Plymouth Colony in Massachusetts. He was hired in Southampton, England, as the ship's cooper, responsible for maintaining the ship's barrels. He was a member of the ship's crew and not initially a settler, yet he decided to remain in Plymouth Colony when the \"Mayflower\" returned to England. He was a signatory to the Mayflower Compact.\nHe married fellow \"Mayflower\" passenger Priscilla Mullins, whose entire family perished in the first winter in Plymouth Colony. The marriage of the young couple became prominent in Victorian popular culture after the 1858 publication of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's fictitious narrative poem \"The Courtship of Miles Standish.\" The book inspired widespread depictions of John and Priscilla Alden in art and literature during the 19th and 20th centuries.\nAlden was one of Plymouth Colony's most active public servants and played a prominent role in colonial affairs. He was annually elected to the Governor's Council nearly every year from 1640 to 1686. He served as Treasurer of Plymouth Colony, Deputy to the General Court of Plymouth, a member of the colony's Council of War, and a member of the colony's Committee on Kennebec Trade, among other posts.\nHe was the last surviving signer of the Mayflower Compact upon his death in 1687. The approximate location of his grave in the Myles Standish Burial Ground was marked with a memorial stone in 1930. The site of his first house in Duxbury is preserved and marked with interpretative signs. The Alden Kindred of America began as a society of John and Priscilla's descendants, and it maintains the Alden House Historic Site in Duxbury, Massachusetts\u2014likely built by Alden's son, Capt. Jonathan Alden.\nEnglish origins.\nHistorians and genealogists have advanced many theories to the English origin of John Alden. According to the \"American Ancestors\" project of the New England Historic Genealogical Society, Alden genealogical expert Alicia Crane Williams has called two of the hypothesized origins \"tempting\"; however, she asserts that none are definitively proven.\nThe only definite primary source evidence regarding Alden's background comes from Plymouth Colony Governor William Bradford's history \"Of Plymouth Plantation\". Bradford wrote that Alden \"was hired for a cooper, at South-Hampton, wher the ship victuled; and being a hopefull yong man, was much desired, but left to his owne liking to go or stay when he came here; but he stayed, and maryed here\". Charles Edward Banks states that the employment of Alden \"at Southampton\" does not necessarily mean that he was a resident of the seaport and may have only been there to work temporarily when the \"Mayflower\" arrived.\nBanks cited research by certain historians and genealogists who offered theories as to Alden's origin based on inconclusive but possibly relevant evidence. One such theory was proposed by historian and genealogist B. Carlyon-Hughes who found evidence of an Alden family living in Harwich in Essex, England during the 17th century. Harwich is an ancient North Sea port, northeast of London, which was the home port of the ship \"Mayflower\" and home of its captain Christopher Jones. Carlyon-Hughes asserted that the Aldens of Harwich were related to Jones and also that a young John Alden of the Harwich Aldens was about the same age as the \"Mayflower\" passenger. A prior association with the captain of the \"Mayflower\" (although not definitively proven) could account, according to Banks, for Alden joining the crew. Historian George F. Willison subscribed to the Harwich origin theory and wrote that Alden's children \"remembered him as tall, blond, and very powerful in physique\". Willison, however, offers no specific source material for this description.\nAnother theory cited by Banks, which he called \"a fair presumption\", involves a John Alden of Southampton who \"may have been the son of George Alden the fletcher, who disappeared\u2014probably dying in that year\u2014leaving John, an orphan, free to take employment overseas. Jane, the widow, may have been his mother and Richard and Avys his grandparents\". The tax list of Holyrood Ward, Southampton in 1602 lists the names of George Alden and John's future father-in-law William Mullins. Banks even went so far as to postulate that, if the Alden and Mullins families both originated from Southampton, then perhaps their courtship began in Southampton.\nAlicia Crane Williams analyzed these and several other theories in \"The Mayflower Descendant\", a scholarly journal of Pilgrim history and genealogy. She pointed out that some genealogists have connected John Alden of the \"Mayflower\" with John Alden, \"son and heir of John Alden of Swanscomb, Kent\" who obtained a Patent of Arms in 1607. There is no evidence that John Alden of the \"Mayflower\" was connected to this family or inherited this coat of arms. Williams states, \"This Alden coat of arms was published in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" and has led many unsuspecting [genealogists] astray.\"\nVoyage of the \"Mayflower\".\nAlden was hired by Capt. Christopher Jones in Southampton when he was about 21 years old to work as the ship's cooper during the \"Mayflower's\" voyage to America. According to historian Nathaniel Philbrick, the colonists encouraged him during the voyage to remain with them in America due to his useful skills as a barrel-maker and carpenter.\nThe \"Mayflower\" departed Plymouth, England, on September 6, 1620. The 100-foot ship had aboard 102 passengers and a crew of about 20 to 30 in extremely cramped conditions. A lack of proper rations and unsanitary conditions for months caused illnesses that eventually proved fatal for many, particularly to women and children. There were two deaths during the ocean crossing, a crew member and a passenger.\nThe ship spotted Cape Cod on November 9, 1620, after about two months at sea. Their original destination had been the mouth of the Hudson River, which was then part of the Colony of Virginia. Capt. Jones made an attempt to round the southern end of Cape Cod, but he lacked an adequate chart of the area known as Pollock's Rip, and the strong currents and dangerous shoals there forced him to turn back. Jones determined that the colonists would have to disembark and settle in New England rather than the Hudson River due to widespread illness aboard ship and dwindling supplies. The \"Mayflower\" eventually came to anchor on November 11 in Provincetown Harbor at the northern tip of Cape Cod.\nThe decision to settle outside of Virginia Colony raised some problems. The group carried a patent which granted authority to their elected leaders and entitled them to establish their own plantation within the bounds of Virginia Colony. They were settling in New England, however, so the patent became irrelevant and some members began to question the authority of their leaders. To settle these questions, the colony's leadership drew up the Mayflower Compact, an agreement that they would work together, acting as \"a civil body politic\" in obedience to such laws as the colony might enact. The Mayflower Compact was signed by all free male settlers on November 11, the same day that they set anchor at Provincetown. John Alden signed the document, which is an indication that he had already made the decision to remain with the settlers. He was the youngest of the signers and the last survivor.\nEstablishing Plymouth Colony.\nAfter exploring the inner shoreline of Cape Cod, the colonists chose to settle in Plymouth. The site offered a good harbor, several fresh water springs, and a large hill overlooking the harbor (which they would later name Burial Hill) suitable for a fort. A tribe known as the Patuxet (part of the Wampanoag peoples) had settled the site and cleared a large area of land for planting corn. By the time the \"Mayflower\" arrived, the Patuxet tribe had been wiped out by plagues, likely as a result of contact with English fishermen.\nDuring their first winter in Plymouth, most of the settlers fell ill and half died of disease. Priscilla Mullins (John Alden's future wife) lost her entire family\u2014her father William, her mother Alice, and her brother Joseph. The fifty colonists who survived began building a fort atop Burial Hill and small wooden houses on either side of a \"street\" now known as Leyden Street, named in 1823 after the town in Holland where the Pilgrims lived for several years. A small plot of land at the foot of Burial Hill near the top of the street was designated for John Alden. He built a primitive house in this location and lived there for about seven years with his wife Priscilla and his growing family. The site of Alden's first house in Plymouth was marked in 1930 with a boulder and bronze plaque placed by the Alden Kindred of America. A recreation of this house stands today at Plimoth Patuxet, a living history museum which replicates the original Pilgrim settlement.\nMarriage to Priscilla Mullins.\nThe exact date of John Alden's marriage to Priscilla Mullins was not noted in colonial records. According to the Pilgrim Society, it was likely in 1622 as Priscilla Mullins is not listed separately in the 1623 Division of Land. It was either the second or third marriage to take place in the colony.\nThe marriage of the two young colonists has been widely depicted in art and literature primarily due to the extraordinary popularity of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's narrative poem \"The Courtship of Miles Standish,\" published in 1858. The fictionalized story tells of a love triangle involving John Alden, Priscilla Mullins, and Myles Standish (the captain of the colony's militia). In the story, Standish is too timid to express his feelings to Priscilla Mullins and therefore asks Alden to speak for him. Alden's words of courtship on Standish's behalf prompt Mullins to offer an often-quoted quip, \"Why don't you speak for yourself, John?\" The book sold 10,000 copies in London in a single day. In the United States, the story brought the Pilgrims to the forefront of American culture, contributing to the establishment of a national Thanksgiving holiday in 1863. The book made John and Priscilla Alden celebrated figures in American popular culture.\nWhile some historians state that the courtship story is \"loosely based\" on Alden family oral history, others dismiss it as complete fiction. A brief account of a rivalry between John Alden and Myles Standish for Priscilla's hand was first published in \"A Collection of American Epitaphs and Inscriptions\" by Timothy Alden in 1814. Longfellow, therefore, was not the originator of the story but he greatly embellished it. No part of the tale is supported by 17th century documentation. Historian John Goodwin pointed out several anachronisms and inconsistencies, asserting, there was no \"reason for believing any part of it.\"\nService to Plymouth Colony.\nIn 1626, the colony's financial backers in London, known as the Merchant Adventurers, disbanded. This left the colonists with no means of settling their significant debts to those who had funded the effort. Eight of the Plymouth colonists, including John Alden, agreed to collectively assume, or undertake, the debt in exchange for a monopoly on the fur trade from the colony. These men who averted financial ruin for the colony became known as the \"Undertakers\". This agreement to grant the Undertakers a monopoly was signed by the 37 freemen of Plymouth Colony. The fact that Alden was among the Undertakers is indicative of his growing stature in the colony.\nAlden was elected Governor's Assistant (one of a small council of advisors to the Governor) in 1632 and was regularly reelected to that office until 1640 and then again from 1650 to 1686, because he was deputy from Duxbury from 1641 to 1642, and from 1645 to 1649, and a member of Captain Miles Standish's militia company from 1643. He also served as Deputy Governor on two occasions in the absence of the Governor in 1665 and 1677. The colonists elected him Treasurer annually from 1656 to 1658. Alden served on the colony's Council of War, an important committee to decide on matters pertaining to the defense of the colony, in 1642, 1643, 1646, 1653, 1658 and 1667. The Plymouth General Court appointed Alden to a number of important committees including the Committee to Revise Laws, the Committee on the Kennebec Trade, and a number of additional minor posts. He then served for several years as magistrate.\nPlymouth Colony held a patent entitling them to a monopoly on the fur trade at the Kennebec River in what would later become Maine. In 1634, a man named John Hocking from Piscataqua Plantation in New Hampshire interloped in the trade provoking a confrontation between him and traders from Plymouth Colony at Kennebec. Hocking shot a Plymouth colonist named Moses Talbot and, in turn, a Plymouth man shot Hocking. When the Plymouth traders arrived by boat at Boston, authorities there decided to imprison John Alden who was aboard the Plymouth vessel, even though he had not been present during the violence. It was only through the intervention of William Bradford that Alden was eventually released.\nSettlement of Duxbury.\nIn January 1628, the land along Plymouth Bay was divided up into farm lots with each individual receiving 20 acres plus an additional 20 acres for each family member. John and Priscilla Alden, who had three children at that time, received 100 acres along the Bluefish River in the area known as Duxbury (sometimes spelled Duxburough or Duxborrow at that time). Grants were drawn by lot, so the location of Alden's farm was not his selection. By chance, as historian Dorothy Wentworth observed, the location was ideal as it included upland that had been partially cleared by Native Americans, woodland, and salt marshes (a good source of hay). Alden built their first small house in 1628. As they were required to travel to Plymouth every Sunday for Sabbath services (10 miles away), they lived seasonally on their Duxbury farm for the first few years, staying in Plymouth during the winter to avoid long travels in harsh weather. The site was professionally excavated by Roland Wells Robbins in 1960, unearthing many artifacts including a halberd blade which is now exhibited at Pilgrim Hall Museum in Plymouth. The site is now part of the Duxbury school campus and is located next to a playing field. The footprint of the house is evident as a depression in the ground and is marked by a boulder, plaque, and other interpretive signage.\nIn 1632, Alden was one of several men who petitioned the colony to have Duxbury set off as a separate church congregation with their own minister. This would allow those with Duxbury grants to reside on their farms year-round. William Bradford and other colonial officials were reluctant to break apart the \"mother\" church congregation in Plymouth but nonetheless gave permission. Duxbury was incorporated as a separate town in 1637. John Alden became one of the leading men of the new town of Duxbury and a key figure in the colony. He served as Deputy from Duxbury to the General Court for most of the 1640s.\nLocal historians of the 19th and 20th centuries asserted that a later Alden house in Duxbury was the second home of John and Priscilla Alden and was constructed in 1653. As local historian Dorothy Wentworth wrote, the tradition \"has been accepted for so long that there seems no point in doubting it.\" This house is now owned by the Alden Kindred of America and maintained as a museum known as the Alden House Historic Site. Long-standing assumptions about the house turned out to be incorrect as Dendrochronological and architectural analysis conducted in 2003 suggest that the house was likely built about 1700 and therefore was not the home of John and Priscilla Alden. It was likely built by one of their children (possibly Jonathan Alden) or grandchildren.\nThe Alden's first Duxbury home site and the Alden House Historic Site were together granted National Historic Landmark status in 2008.\nFamily.\nJohn and Priscilla Alden had ten children:\nFinal days and legacy.\nJohn Alden was the last survivor of the signers of the Mayflower Compact. He died in Duxbury on September 12, 1687. Both he and his wife Priscilla were buried in the Old Burying Ground in South Duxbury. The precise location of their graves is not known as markers either were not placed or have crumbled away. In 1930, the Alden Kindred of America placed commemorative slate stones at the estimated location of their graves near the headstone of their son, Capt. Jonathan Alden.\nSeveral artifacts attributed to John Alden are exhibited at major museums. These include the halberd blade discovered in the 1960 archaeological dig at the Alden first house site in Duxbury, the Alden family bible, and a mortar and pestle attributed to John and Priscilla Alden, all of which are displayed at Pilgrim Hall Museum. A wheel-lock carbine attributed to John Alden is housed at the National Firearms Museum. Of early-17th-century Italian make, the carbine was found in the Alden House during a 1924 restoration.\nThe Alden Kindred of America, initially a society composed strictly of Alden descendants, was established in 1906. It is now an incorporated non-profit organization welcoming both Alden descendants and non-descendants to its membership. The organization manages the Alden House Historic Site in Duxbury, Massachusetts.\nAccording to the Alden Kindred of America, John Alden had more than one million living descendants as of 2008. One of them being the most famous whistleblower in history, Edward Snowden, according to his autobiographical book Permanent Record.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "15976", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15976", "title": "Japanese cuisine", "text": "Japanese cuisine encompasses the regional and traditional foods of Japan, which have developed through centuries of political, economic, and social changes. The traditional cuisine of Japan (Japanese: ) is based on rice with miso soup and other dishes with an emphasis on seasonal ingredients. Side dishes often consist of fish, pickled vegetables, tamagoyaki, and vegetables cooked in broth. Common seafood is often grilled, but it is also sometimes served raw as sashimi or as sushi. Seafood and vegetables are also deep-fried in a light batter, as \"\". Apart from rice, a staple includes noodles, such as soba and udon. Japan also has many simmered dishes, such as fish products in broth called , or beef in and .\nHistorically influenced by Chinese cuisine, Japanese cuisine has also opened up to influence from Western cuisines in the modern era. Dishes inspired by foreign food\u2014in particular Chinese food\u2014like ramen and , as well as foods like spaghetti, curry and hamburgers, have been adapted to Japanese tastes and ingredients. Traditionally, the Japanese shunned meat as a result of adherence to Buddhism, but with the modernization of Japan in the 1880s, meat-based dishes such as and have become common. Since this time, Japanese cuisine, particularly sushi and ramen, has become popular globally.\nIn 2011, Japan overtook France to become the country with the most 3-starred Michelin restaurants; as of 2018[ [update]], the capital of Tokyo has maintained the title of the city with the most 3-starred restaurants in the world. In 2013, Japanese cuisine was added to the UNESCO Intangible Heritage List.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nRice is a staple in Japanese cuisine. Wheat and soybeans were introduced shortly after rice. All three act as staple foods in Japanese cuisine today. At the end of the Kofun period and beginning of the Asuka period, Buddhism became the official religion of the country. Therefore, eating meat and fish was prohibited. In 675 AD, Emperor Tenmu prohibited the eating of horses, dogs, monkeys, and chickens. In the 8th and 9th centuries, many emperors continued to prohibit killing many types of animals. However, meat continued to be eaten in some areas. In Kagoshima, pig farming flourished, and in Oumi, there was a culture of eating beef. In addition, in the Suwa region, there was a ritual of deer sacrifice for Shinto rituals. The number of regulated meats increased significantly, leading to the banning of all mammals except whale, which were categorized as fish. During the Asuka period, chopsticks were introduced to Japan. Initially, they were used only by the nobility. The general population used their hands, as utensils were quite expensive.\nDue to the lack of meat products, Japanese people minimized spice utilization. Spices were rare to find at the time. Spices, like pepper and garlic, were used only in a minimalist amount. Spices widely used in Japan were sansho and black pepper. They were often used in noodle, white rice, and fish dishes. They were also used as a nourishing medicine. In the absence of meat, fish was served as the main protein, as Japan is an island nation. Fish has influenced many iconic Japanese dishes today. In the 9th century, grilled fish and sliced raw fish were widely popular. Japanese people who could afford it would eat fish at every meal; others would have to make do without animal protein for many of their meals. In traditional Japanese cuisine, oil and fat are usually avoided during the cooking process in order to maintain a healthy lifestyle.\nPreserving fish became a sensation and sushi originated as a means of preserving fish by fermenting it in boiled rice. Fish that are salted and then placed in rice are preserved by lactic acid fermentation, which helps prevent the proliferation of the bacteria that bring about putrefaction. During the 15th century, advancement and development helped shorten the fermentation of sushi to about one to two weeks. Sushi thus became popular both as a main meal and as a snack food, combining fish with rice. During the late Edo period (early 19th century), sushi without fermentation was introduced. Sushi was still being consumed with and without fermentation till the 19th century when the hand-rolled and nigiri-type sushi was invented.\nIn 1854, Japan started to enter new trade deals with Western countries. The concept of \"washoku\" (\"Japanese cuisine\") was introduced in Japan following negotiations with the United States on a trade treaty. When Emperor Meiji took power in 1868 as part of the Meiji Restoration, the government began to adopt Western customs, including the use of animal products in food. The new ruler staged a New Year's feast designed to embrace the Western world and countries in 1872. The feast contained food that reflected European cuisine. For the first time in a thousand years, people were allowed to consume meat in public, and the general population started to include meat in their regular diets.\nCulture.\nTerminology.\nThe word is now the common word for traditional Japanese cooking. The term is synonymous with \"cooking\", but became a reference to mostly Japanese cooking, or restaurants, and was much used in the Meiji and Taish\u014d eras. It has come to connote a certain standard, perhaps even of the highest caliber, a restaurant with the most highly trained chefs. However, is generally seen as an eating establishment which is slightly more casual or informal compared to the .\nThe is tied with the Japanese tea ceremony. The is considered a (simplified) form of , which was formal banquet dining where several trays of food were served. The homophone term originally referred to a gathering of composers of haiku or , and the simplified version of the dishes served at the poem parties became . However, the meaning of degenerated to become just another term for a sumptuous carousing banquet, or .\nTraditional table settings.\nThe traditional Japanese table setting has varied considerably over the centuries, depending primarily on the type of table common during a given era. Before the 19th century, small individual box tables (\"hakozen\", \u7bb1\u81b3) or flat floor trays were set before each diner. Larger low tables (\"chabudai\", \u3061\u3083\u3076\u53f0) that accommodated entire families were gaining popularity by the beginning of the 20th century, but these gave way to Western-style dining tables and chairs by the end of the 20th century.\nThe traditional Japanese table setting is to place a bowl of rice on the diner's left and to place a bowl of miso soup on the diner's right side at the table. Behind these, each \"okazu\" is served on its own individual plate. Based on the standard three-\"okazu\" formula, behind the rice and soup are three flat plates to hold the three \"okazu\"; one to far back left, one at far back right, and one in the center. Pickled vegetables are often served on the side but are not counted as part of the three \"okazu\". Chopsticks are generally placed at the very front of the tray near the diner with pointed ends facing left and supported by a chopstick rest, or \"hashioki\".\nDining etiquette.\nMany restaurants and homes in Japan are equipped with Western-style chairs and tables. However, traditional Japanese low tables and cushions, usually found on tatami floors, are also very common. Tatami mats, which are made of straw, can be easily damaged and are hard to clean, thus shoes or any type of footwear are always taken off when stepping on tatami floors.\nWhen dining in a traditional tatami room, sitting upright on the floor is common. In a casual setting, men usually sit with their feet crossed and women sit with both legs to one side. Only men are supposed to sit cross-legged. The formal way of sitting for both sexes is a kneeling style known as \"seiza\". To sit in a \"seiza\" position, one kneels on the floor with legs folded under the thighs and the buttocks resting on the heels.\nWhen dining out in a restaurant, the customers are guided to their seats by the host. The honored or eldest guest will usually be seated at the center of the table farthest from the entrance. In the home, the most important guest is also seated farthest away from the entrance. If there is a tokonoma, or alcove, in the room, the guest is seated in front of it. The host sits next to or closest to the entrance.\nIn Japan, it is customary to say \"itadakimasu\" (\"I [humbly] receive\") before starting to eat a meal. When saying \"itadakimasu\", both hands are put together in front of the chest or on the lap. \"Itadakimasu\" is preceded by complimenting the appearance of food. Another customary and important etiquette is to say \"go-chis\u014d-sama deshita\" (\"It was a feast\") to the host after the meal and the restaurant staff when leaving.\nTraditional cuisine.\nJapanese cuisine is based on combining the staple food, which is steamed white rice or , with one or more (\u304a\u304b\u305a), \"main\" or \"side\" dishes. This may be accompanied by a clear or miso soup and (pickles). The phrase refers to the makeup of a typical meal served but has roots in classic , , and cuisine. The term is also used to describe the first course served in standard cuisine nowadays.\nThe origin of Japanese \"one soup, three sides\" cuisine is a dietary style called Ichiju-Issai (\u4e00\u6c41\u4e00\u83dc, \"one soup, one dish\"), tracing back to the Five Great Zen Temples of the 12-century Kamakura period (Kamakura Gozan), developed as a form of meal that emphasized frugality and simplicity.\nRice is served in its own small bowl (), and each main course item is placed on its own small plate () or bowl () for each individual portion. This is done even in Japanese homes. This contrasts with Western-style home dinners in which each individual takes helpings from large serving dishes of food placed in the middle of the dining table. Japanese style traditionally abhors different flavored dishes touching each other on a single plate, so different dishes are given their own individual plates as mentioned or are partitioned using, for example, leaves. Placing main dishes on top of rice, thereby \"soiling\" it, is also frowned upon by traditional etiquette.\nAlthough this tradition of not placing other foods on rice originated from classical Chinese dining formalities, especially after the adoption of Buddhist tea ceremonies; it became most popular and common during and after the Kamakura period, such as in the (\u61d0\u77f3). Although present-day Chinese cuisine has abandoned this practice, Japanese cuisine retains it. One exception is the popular , in which toppings are directly served on rice.\nThe small , literally \"tea bowl\", doubles as a word for the large tea bowls in tea ceremonies. Thus in common speech, the drinking cup is referred to as or for the purpose of distinction. Among the nobility, each course of a full-course Japanese meal would be brought on serving napkins called , which were originally platformed trays or small dining tables. In the modern age, faldstool trays or stackup-type legged trays may still be seen used in (\u5ea7\u6577), i.e. tatami-mat rooms, for large banquets or at a type inn. Some restaurants might use the suffix as a more sophisticated though dated synonym to the more familiar , since the latter basically is a term for a combo meal served at a , akin to a diner. means a meal of fixed menu (for example, grilled fish with rice and soup), a dinner \"\u00e0 prix fixe\" served at or , which is somewhat vague ( can mean a diner-type restaurant or a corporate lunch hall); writer on Japanese popular culture Ishikawa Hiroyoshi defines it as fare served at , and comparable diner-like establishments.\nSeasonality.\nEmphasis is placed on seasonality of food or , and dishes are designed to herald the arrival of the four seasons or calendar months.\nSeasonality means taking advantage of the (for example, bamboo shoots in spring, chestnuts in the autumn) as well as the as they come into season. Thus that arrives with the Kuroshio Current has traditionally been greatly prized.\nIf something becomes available rather earlier than what is usual for the item in question, the first crop or early catch is called \"hashiri\".\nUse of tree leaves and branches as decor is also characteristic of Japanese cuisine. Maple leaves are often floated on water to exude coolness or ; sprigs of nandina are popularly used. The \"haran\" (\"Aspidistra\") and sasa bamboo leaves were often cut into shapes and placed underneath or used as separators.\nUNESCO recognition.\nIn February 2012, the Agency for Cultural Affairs recommended that 'Washoku : Traditional Dietary Cultures of the Japanese' be added to the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. On December 4, 2013, \"Washoku, traditional dietary cultures [\"sic\"] of the Japanese, notably for the celebration of New Year\" was added to UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, bringing the number of Japanese assets listed on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage list to 22.\nTraditional ingredients.\nA characteristic of traditional Japanese food is the sparing use of red meat, oils and fats, and dairy products. Use of ingredients such as soy sauce, miso, and umeboshi tends to result in dishes with high salt content, though there are low-sodium versions of these available.\nMeat consumption.\nAs Japan is an island nation surrounded by an ocean, its people have always taken advantage of the abundant seafood supply. It is the opinion of some food scholars that the Japanese diet always relied mainly on \"grains with vegetables or seaweeds as main, with poultry secondary, and red meat in slight amounts\" even before the advent of Buddhism which placed an even stronger taboo. The eating of was spoken of as taboo, unclean or something to be avoided by personal choice through the Edo period. The consumption of whale and terrapin meat were not forbidden under this definition. Despite this, the consumption of red meat did not completely disappear in Japan. Eating wild game\u2014as opposed to domesticated livestock\u2014was tolerated; in particular, trapped hare was counted using the measure word , a term normally reserved for birds.\nIn 1872 of the Meiji restoration, as part of the opening up of Japan to Western influence, Emperor Meiji lifted the ban on the consumption of red meat. The removal of the ban encountered resistance and in one notable response, ten monks attempted to break into the Imperial Palace. The monks asserted that due to foreign influence, large numbers of Japanese had begun eating meat and that this was \"destroying the soul of the Japanese people.\" Several of the monks were killed during the break-in attempt, and the remainder were arrested. On the other hand, the consumption of meat was accepted by the common people. \"Gy\u016bnabe\" (\u725b\u934b, beef hot pot), the prototype of sukiyaki, became the rage of the time. Western restaurants moved in, and some of them changed their form to \"Y\u014dshoku\" (\u6d0b\u98df, western foods).\nVegetable consumption has dwindled while processed foods have become more prominent in Japanese households due to the rising costs of general foodstuffs. Nonetheless, Kyoto vegetables, or Kyoyasai, are rising in popularity and different varieties of Kyoto vegetables are being revived.\nCooking oil.\nGenerally speaking, traditional Japanese cuisine is prepared with little cooking oil. A major exception is the deep-frying of foods. This cooking method was introduced during the Edo period due to influence from Western (formerly called ) and Chinese cuisine, and became commonplace with the availability of cooking oil due to increased productivity. Dishes such as tempura, aburaage, and satsuma age are now part of established traditional Japanese cuisine. Words such as \"tempura\" or \"hiry\u014dzu\" (synonymous with ganmodoki) are said to be of Portuguese origin.\nAlso, certain rustic sorts of traditional Japanese foods such as kinpira, hijiki, and \"kiriboshi\" daikon usually involve stir-frying in oil before stewing in soy sauce. Some standard \"os\u014dzai\" or obanzai dishes feature stir-fried Japanese greens with either age or chirimen-jako, dried sardines.\nSeasonings.\nTraditional Japanese food is typically seasoned with a combination of dashi, soy sauce, sake and mirin, vinegar, sugar, and salt. A modest number of herbs and spices may be used during cooking as a hint or accent, or as a means of neutralizing fishy or gamy odors present. Examples of such spices include ginger, perilla and red pepper.\nIntense condiments, such as wasabi or Japanese mustard, are provided as condiments to raw fish, due to their effect on the mucous membrane which paralyze the sense of smell, particularly from fish odors. A sprig of mitsuba or a piece of yuzu rind floated on soups are called \"ukimi\". Minced shiso leaves and myoga often serve as \"yakumi\", a type of condiment paired with tataki of katsuo or soba. Shichimi is also a very popular spice mixture often added to soups, noodles and rice cakes. Shichimi is a chilli-based spice mix which contains seven spices: chilli, sansho, orange peel, black sesame, white sesame, hemp, ginger, and nori.\nGarnishes.\nOnce a main dish has been cooked, spices such as minced ginger and various pungent herbs may be added as a garnish, called \"tsuma\". Finally, a dish may be garnished with minced seaweed in the form of crumpled nori or flakes of aonori.\nInedible garnishes are featured in dishes to reflect a holiday or the season. Generally these include inedible leaves, flowers native to Japan or with a long history of being grown in the country, as well as their artificial counterparts.\nSalads.\nThe is boiled green-leaf vegetables bunched and cut to size, steeped in dashi broth, eaten with dashes of soy sauce. Another item is , which could be made with wakame seaweed, or be something like a made from thin toothpick slices of daikon and carrot. The so-called vinegar that is blended with the ingredient here is often which is a blend of vinegar, mirin, and soy sauce. A adds katsuo dashi to this.\nAn is another group of items, describable as a sort of \"tossed salad\" or \"dressed\" (though \"aemono\" also includes thin strips of squid or fish sashimi (\"itozukuri\") etc. similarly prepared). One type is where usually vegetables such as green beans are tossed with white or black sesame seeds ground in a suribachi mortar bowl, flavored additionally with sugar and soy sauce. adds tofu (bean curd) in the mix. An \"aemono\" is tossed with vinegar-white miso mix and uses \"wakegi\" scallion and as standard.\nEggs.\nJapanese egg dishes include \"tamagoyaki\", \"onsen tamago\", and \"chawanmushi\". \"Datemaki\" is eaten during the New Year holidays.\nWell-known rice dishes with eggs include \"oyakodon\", \"omurice\" and \"tamago kake gohan\" that is simply raw egg on rice.\nRice.\nRice has historically been the staple food of the Japanese people. Its fundamental importance is evident from the fact that the word for cooked rice, \"gohan\" or \"meshi\", also stands for a \"meal\". While rice has an ancient history of cultivation in Japan, its use as a staple has not been universal. Notably, in northern areas (northern Honsh\u016b and Hokkaid\u014d), other grains such as wheat were more common into the 19th century.\nIn most of Japan, rice used to be consumed for almost every meal, and although a 2007 survey showed that 70% of Japanese still eat it once or twice a day, its popularity is now declining. In the 20th century there has been a shift in dietary habits, with an increasing number of people choosing wheat-based products (such as bread and noodles) over rice.\nJapanese rice is short-grained and becomes sticky when cooked. Most rice is sold as \"hakumai\" (\u767d\u7c73, \"white rice\"), with the outer portion of the grains (\u7ce0, \"nuka\") polished away. Unpolished brown rice (\u7384\u7c73, \"genmai\") is considered less desirable, but its popularity has been increasing.\nNoodles.\nJapanese noodles often substitute for a rice-based meal. \"Soba\" (thin, grayish-brown noodles containing buckwheat flour) and \"udon\" (thick wheat noodles) are the main traditional noodles, while ramen is a modern import and now very popular. There are also other, common noodles, such as \"somen\" (thin, white noodles containing wheat flour). Cold \"somen\" noodles are often eaten during the hot summer. \"Hiyashi ch\u016bka\" are also popular noodles in the summer.\nJapanese noodles, such as soba and udon, are eaten as a standalone, and usually not with a side dish, in terms of general custom. It may have toppings, but they are called . The fried battered shrimp tempura sitting in a bowl of tempura-soba would be referred to as \"the shrimp\" or \"the tempura\", and not so much be referred to as a topping (\"gu\"). The identical toppings, if served as a dish to be eaten with plain white rice could be called \"okazu\", so these terms are context-sensitive. Some noodle dishes derive their name from Japanese folklore, such as kitsune and tanuki, reflecting dishes in which the noodles can be changed, but the broth and garnishes correspond to their respective legend.\nHot noodles are usually served in a bowl already steeped in their broth and are called \"kakesoba\" or \"kakeudon\". Cold soba arrive unseasoned and heaped atop a \"zaru\" or \"seiro\", and are picked up with a chopstick and dunked in their dipping sauce. The broth can consist of many ingredients but is generally based on dashi; the sauce, called tsuyu, is usually more concentrated and made from soy sauce, dashi and mirin, sake or both.\nIn the simple form, \"yakumi\" (\u85ac\u5473, condiments and spices) such as shichimi, nori, finely chopped scallions, wasabi, etc. are added to the noodles, besides the broth/dip sauce.\nUdon may also be eaten in \"kama-age\" style, piping hot straight out of the boiling pot, and eaten with plain soy sauce and sometimes with raw egg also.\nJapanese noodles are traditionally eaten by bringing the bowl close to the mouth, and sucking in the noodles with the aid of chopsticks. The resulting loud slurping noise is considered normal in Japan, although in the 2010s concerns began to be voiced about the slurping being offensive to others, especially tourists. The word \"nuuhara\" (\u30cc\u30fc\u30cf\u30e9, from \"nuudoru harasumento\", noodle harassment) was coined to describe this.\nSweets.\nTraditional Japanese sweets are known as \"wagashi\". Ingredients such as red bean paste and mochi are used. More modern-day tastes includes green tea ice cream, a very popular flavor. Almost all manufacturers produce a version of it. \"Kakig\u014dri\" (\u304b\u304d\u6c37) is a shaved ice dessert flavored with syrup or condensed milk. It is usually sold and eaten at summer festivals. A dessert very popular amongst children in Japan is \"dorayaki\". They are sweet pancakes filled with a sweet red bean paste. They are mostly eaten at room temperature but are also considered very delicious hot. Similar sweets to dorayaki include \"imagawayaki\" and fish-shaped \"taiyaki\". Sweet breads containing red bean paste, such as \"anpan\" and \"an-doughnut\", are also commonly eaten.\nDrinks.\nTea.\nGreen tea may be served with most Japanese dishes. It is produced in Japan and prepared in various forms, such as matcha, the tea used in the Japanese tea ceremony. Barley tea is a favorite drink during the hot summertime.\nSoft drink.\nJapan has a vibrant soft drink culture, with local flavors like ramune, melon soda, canned coffee, Calpis, and the citrusy electrolyte drink Pocari Sweat. Imported drinks are garner unique meanings in Japan, for example, Dr Pepper has become associated as an intellectual beverage thanks to the anime Steins;Gate, as well as drinks like A&amp;W Root Beer and their Restaurants having a strong ice cream float presence in Okinawa giving it an association with beach vacations.\nBeer.\nBeer production started in Japan in the 1860s. The most commonly consumed beers in Japan are pale-coloured light lagers, with an alcohol strength of around 5.0% ABV. Lager beers are the most commonly produced beer style in Japan, but beer-like beverages, made with lower levels of malts called \"Happoshu\" (\u767a\u6ce1\u9152, literally, \"bubbly alcohol\") or non-malt Happousei (\u767a\u6ce1\u6027, literally \"effervescence\") have captured a large part of the market as tax is substantially lower on these products. Beer and its varieties have a market share of almost 2/3 of alcoholic beverages.\nSmall local microbreweries have also gained increasing popularity since the 1990s, supplying distinct tasting beers in a variety of styles that seek to match the emphasis on craftsmanship, quality, and ingredient provenance often associated with Japanese food.\nSake.\nSake is a brewed rice beverage that typically contains 15\u201317% alcohol and is made by multiple fermentation of rice. At traditional formal meals, it is considered an equivalent to rice and is not simultaneously taken with other rice-based dishes, although this notion is typically no longer applied to modern, refined, premium (\"ginjo\") sake, which bear little resemblance to the sakes of even 100 years ago. Side dishes for sake are particularly called \"sakana\" or \"otsumami\".\nSake is brewed in a highly labor-intensive process more similar to beer production than winemaking, hence, the common description of sake as rice \"wine\" is misleading.\nSake is made with, by legal definition, strictly just four ingredients: special rice, water, koji, and special yeast.\nAs of 2014, Japan had some 1500 registered breweries, which produce thousands of different sakes. Sake characteristics and flavor profiles vary with regionality, ingredients, and the styles (maintained by brewmaster guilds) that brewery leaders want to produce.\nSake flavor profiles lend extremely well to pairing with a wide variety of cuisines, including non-Japanese cuisines.\nSh\u014dch\u016b.\n\"Sh\u014dch\u016b\" is a distilled spirit that is typically made from barley, sweet potato, buckwheat, or rice. \"Sh\u014dch\u016b\" is produced everywhere in Japan, but its production started in Kyushu.\nWhisky.\nJapanese whisky began commercial production in the early 20th century, and is now extremely popular, primarily consumed in . It is produced in the Scottish style, with malt whisky produced since the 1980s, and has won top international awards since the 2000s.\nWine.\nA domestic wine production has existed since the 1860s, yet most wine is imported. The total market share of wine on alcoholic beverages is about 3%.\nSpecialty food.\nWagyu is the collective name for the four principal Japanese breeds of beef cattle. All wagy\u016b cattle derive from cross-breeding in the early twentieth century of native Japanese cattle with imported stock, mostly from Europe.\nIn several areas of Japan, Wagyu beef is shipped carrying area names. Some examples are Matsusaka beef, Kobe beef, Yonezawa beef, \u014cmi beef, and Sanda beef. In recent years, Wagyu beef has increased in fat percentage due to a decrease in grazing and an increase in using feed, resulting in larger, fattier cattle.\nSpecialty eggs\u2014compared to ordinary eggs, eggs produced with special feed and poultry-raising.\nThe is a cantaloupe cultivar farmed in greenhouses in Y\u016bbari, Hokkaido, a small city close to Sapporo.\nSquare or cube watermelons are watermelons grown into the shape of a cube. Cube watermelons are commonly sold in Japan, where they are essentially ornamental and are often very expensive, with prices as high as US$.\nCooking techniques.\nDifferent cooking techniques are applied to each of the three \"okazu\"; they may be raw (sashimi), grilled, simmered (sometimes called boiled), steamed, deep-fried, vinegared, or dressed.\nDishes.\nIn , the word has the basic meaning of \"vegetable\", but secondarily means any accompanying dish (whether it uses fish or meat), with the more familiar combined form , which is a term for any side dish, such as the vast selections sold at Japanese supermarkets or \"depachikas\".\nIt figures in the Japanese word for appetizer, ; main dish, ; or (formal synonym for \"okazu\"), but the latter is considered somewhat of a ladies' term or \"ny\u014db\u014d kotoba\".\nBelow are listed some of the most common categories for prepared food:\nClassification.\nKaiseki.\n\"Kaiseki\", closely associated with tea ceremony (\"chanoyu\"), is a high form of hospitality through cuisine. The style is minimalist, extolling the aesthetics of wabi-sabi. Like the tea ceremony, appreciation of the diningware and vessels is part of the experience. In the modern standard form, the first course consists of \"ichij\u016b-sansai\" (one soup, three dishes), followed by the serving of sake accompanied by dish(es) plated on a square wooden bordered tray of sorts called . Sometimes another element called is served to complement the sake, for guests who are heavier drinkers.\nVegetarian.\nStrictly vegetarian food is rare since even vegetable dishes are flavored with the ubiquitous dashi stock, usually made with katsuobushi (dried skipjack tuna flakes), and are therefore pescetarian more often than carnivorous. An exception is \"sh\u014djin-ry\u014dri\" (\u7cbe\u9032\u6599\u7406), vegetarian dishes developed by Buddhist monks. However, the advertised \"sh\u014djin-ry\u014dri\" at public eating places includes some non-vegetarian elements. Vegetarianism, was introduced from China by the \u014cbaku sect (a sub-sect of Zen Buddhism), and which some sources still regard as part of \"Japanese cuisine\". The sect in Japan was founded by the priest Ingen (d. 1673), and is headquartered in Uji, Kyoto. The Japanese name for the common green bean takes after this priest who allegedly introduced the New World crop via China. One aspect of the fucha-ry\u014dri practiced at the temple is the wealth of , one example being mock-eel, made from strained tofu, with nori seaweed used expertly to mimic the black skin. The secret ingredient used is grated \"gob\u014d\" (burdock) roots.\nMasakazu Tada, Honorary Vice-President of the International Vegetarian Union for 25 years from 1960, stated that \"Japan was vegetarian for 1,000 years\". The taboo against eating meat was lifted in 1872 by the Meiji Emperor as part of an effort towards westernizing Japan. British journalist J.\u00a0W. Robertson Scott reported in the 1920s that the society was still 90% vegetarian, and 50\u201360% of the population ate fish only on festive occasions, probably due to poverty more than for any other reason.\nRegional cuisine.\nJapanese cuisine offers a vast array of regional specialties known as \"ky\u014ddo-ry\u014dri\" (\u90f7\u571f\u6599\u7406), many of them originating from dishes prepared using traditional recipes with local ingredients. Foods from the Kant\u014d region taste very strong. For example, the dashi-based broth for serving udon noodles is heavy on dark soy sauce, similar to soba broth. On the other hand, Kansai region foods are lightly seasoned, with clear udon noodles. made with light soy sauce.\nDishes for special occasions.\nIn Japanese tradition, some dishes are strongly tied to a festival or event. These dishes include:\nIn some regions, on every first and fifteenth day of the month, people eat a mixture of rice and \"azuki\" (\"azuki meshi\" (\u5c0f\u8c46\u98ef); see \"Sekihan\").\nImported and adapted foods.\nJapan has a long history of importing food from other countries, some of which are now part of Japan's most popular cuisine. Ramen is considered an important part to their culinary history, to the extent where in survey of 2,000 Tokyo residents, instant ramen came up many times as a product they thought was an outstanding Japanese invention. Believed to have originated in China, ramen became popular in Japan after the Second Sino-Japanese war (1937\u20131945), when many Chinese students were displaced to Japan.\nCurry is another popular imported dish and is ranked near the top of nearly all Japanese surveys for favorite foods. The origins of curry, as well many other foreign imports such as \"pan\" or bread, are linked to the emergence of \"y\u014dshoku\", or western cuisine. \"Y\u014dshoku\" can be traced as far back as the late Muromachi period (1336\u20131573) during a culinary revolution called \"namban ryori\" (\u5357\u86ee\u6599\u7406), which means \"Southern barbarian cooking\", as it is rooted in European cuisine. This cuisine style was first seen in Nagasaki, which served as the point of contact between Europe and Japan at that point in time. Food items such as potatoes, corn, dairy products, as well as the hard candy \"kompeito\" (\u91d1\u5e73\u7cd6), spread during this time. This cuisine became popular in the Meiji era, which is considered by many historians to be when Japan first opened itself to the outside world.\nBread was not a traditional food in Japan, but \"shokupan\", or Japanese milk bread, was developed and came into broad use after the American response to post-World War II Japanese rice shortages included relief shipments of wheat.\nToday, many of these imported items still hold a heavy presence in Japan.\nY\u014dshoku\u2014Foreign (Western) food, dishes.\nSource:\nJapan today abounds with home-grown, loosely Western-style food. Many of these were invented in the wake of the 1868 Meiji Restoration and the end of national seclusion, when the sudden influx of foreign (in particular, Western) culture led to many restaurants serving Western food, known as \"y\u014dshoku\" (\u6d0b\u98df), a shortened form of \"seiy\u014dshoku\" (\u897f\u6d0b\u98df, \"Western cuisine\"), opening up in cities. Restaurants that serve these foods are called \"y\u014dshokuya\" (\u6d0b\u98df\u5c4b, \"Western cuisine restaurants\").\nMany \"y\u014dshoku\" items from that time have been adapted to a degree that they are now considered Japanese and are an integral part of any Japanese family menu. Many are served alongside rice and miso soup, and eaten with chopsticks. Yet, due to their origins these are still categorized as \"y\u014dshoku\" as opposed to the more traditional \"washoku\" (\u548c\u98df, \"Japanese cuisine\").\nCh\u016bka ry\u014dri\u2014Japanese Chinese cuisine.\nChinese cuisine is one of the oldest and most prominent foreign influences on Japanese cuisine, predating the introduction of Western influences into the country by thousands of years. Many elements of Chinese cuisine have been fully assimilated into Japanese culinary traditions.\nA domesticated variety of peach from China appeared in Japan around 4700\u20134400 BCE, during the J\u014dmon period. The Yayoi period arrived with immigrants from mainland East Asia introducing rice agriculture and other elements of continental material culture to the Japanese archipelago. The migration of early rice farmers into Japan coincided with a range of sociopolitical transformations occurring in China, beginning with the eastward expansion of the Shang dynasty from 1600 to 1400 BCE. It is believed that rice farming spread to Japan from the Yangtze River Delta to the Shandong peninsula, then to the Liaodong peninsula, and finally to the Korean peninsula, from where it was directly introduced to the Japanese archipelago.\nChopsticks were adopted from China around the latter half of the 7th century, during the Asuka period, with the earliest known examples in Japan discovered at archaeological sites such as Asuka Itabuki-no-miya and Fujiwara-kyo. Tea, soy sauce, tofu, and noodles were borrowed from China in the 8th century, during the Nara period. The Shippoku culinary style of Nagasaki, which originated in the 17th century, reflects strong Chinese influences.\nThese early elements are generally considered distinct from modern Japanese Chinese cuisine, known as \"ch\u016bka ry\u014dri\", which emerged in the 19th century. Iconic dishes of \"ch\u016bka ry\u014dri\" include ramen, gyoza, and chukaman. In contrast, dishes of Chinese origin such as kakuni and karaage are often regarded as part of \"washoku\", or traditional Japanese cuisine, due to their longstanding integration into Japanese food culture.\nOkonomiyaki.\nOkonomiyaki is a savoury pancake containing a variety of ingredients in a wheat-flour-based batter.\nTonkatsu.\nTonkatsu is a breaded, deep-fried pork cutlet. It is frequently served with tonkatsu sauce.\nCurry.\nCurry was introduced by Anglo-Indian officers of the Royal Navy from India who brought curry powder to Japan in the Meiji era. The Imperial Japanese Navy adopted curry to prevent beriberi. Overtime it was reinvented and adapted to suit Japanese tastes that it became uniquely Japanese. It is consumed so much that it is considered a national dish. Many recipes are on the menu of the JMSDF. A variety of vegetables and meats are used to make Japanese curry, usually vegetables like onions, carrots, and potatoes. The types of meat used are beef, pork, and chicken. A popular dish is \"Katsu-kar\u0113\" which is a breaded deep-fried cutlet (\"tonkatsu\"; usually pork or chicken) with Japanese curry sauce. Japanese curry can be found in foods such as curry udon, curry bread, and \"katsukar\u0113\", tonkatsu served with curry. It's very commonly made with rice beside the curry on the dish called . This can be eaten during dinner.\nWaf\u016b burgers (Japanese-style burgers).\nHamburger chains active in Japan include McDonald's, Burger King, First Kitchen, Lotteria and MOS Burger. Many chains developed uniquely Japanese versions of American fast food such as the teriyaki burger, kinpira (saut\u00e9) rice burger, fried shrimp burgers, and green tea milkshakes.\nItalian.\nHigh-class Japanese chefs have preserved many Italian seafood dishes that are forgotten in other countries. These include pasta with prawns, lobster (a specialty known in Italy as pasta all'aragosta), crab (an Italian specialty; in Japan it is served with a different species of crab), and pasta with sea urchin sauce (sea urchin pasta being a specialty of the Puglia region).\nOutside Japan.\nMany countries have imported portions of Japanese cuisine. Some may adhere to the traditional preparations of the cuisines, but in some cultures the dishes have been adapted to fit the palate of the local populace. In 1970s sushi travelled from Japan to Canada and the United States, it was modified to suit the American palate, and re-entered the Japanese market as \"American Sushi\". An example of this phenomenon is the California roll, which was created in North America in the 1970s, rose in popularity across the United States through the 1980s, and thus sparked Japanese food's\u2014more precisely, sushi's\u2014global popularity.\nIn 2014, Japanese Restaurant Organization has selected potential countries where Japanese food is becoming increasingly popular, and conducted research concerning the Japanese restaurants abroad. These key nations or region are Taiwan, Hong Kong, China, Singapore, Thailand and Indonesia. This was meant as an effort to promote Japanese cuisine and to expand the market of Japanese ingredients, products and foodstuffs. Numbers of Japanese foodstuff and seasoning brands such as Ajinomoto, Kikkoman, Nissin and Kewpie mayonnaise, are establishing production base in other Asian countries, such as China, Thailand and Indonesia.\nAustralia.\nJapanese cuisine is very popular in Australia, and Australians are becoming increasingly familiar with traditional Japanese foods. Restaurants serving Japanese cuisine feature prominently in popular rankings, including Gourmet Traveller and The Good Food Guide.\nSushi in particular has been described as being \"as popular as sandwiches\", particularly in large cities like Melbourne, Sydney, or Brisbane. As such, sushi bars are a mainstay in shopping centre food courts, and are extremely common in cities and towns all over the country.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, Japanese food is widespread due to the large Japanese-Brazilian population living in the country, which represents the largest Japanese community living outside Japan. Over the past years, many restaurant chains such as Koni Store have opened, selling typical dishes such as the popular temaki. Yakisoba, which is readily available in all supermarkets, and often included in non-Japanese restaurant menus.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, Japanese cuisine has become quite popular. Sushi, sashimi, and instant ramen are highly popular at opposite ends of the income scale, with instant ramen being a common low-budget meal. Sushi and sashimi takeout began in Vancouver and Toronto, and is now common throughout Canada. The largest supermarket chains all carry basic sushi and sashimi, and Japanese ingredients and instant ramen are readily available in most supermarkets. Most mid-sized mall food courts feature fast-food teppan cooking. Izakaya restaurants have surged in popularity. Higher-end ramen restaurants (as opposed to instant ramen noodles of variable quality) are increasingly common.\nIndonesia.\nIn the ASEAN region, Indonesia is the second largest market for Japanese food, after Thailand. Japanese cuisine has been increasingly popular as a result of the growing Indonesian middle-class expecting higher quality foods. This has also contributed to the fact that Indonesia has large numbers of Japanese expatriates. The main concern is the issue of many traditional Japanese recipes not being halal. As a Muslim majority country, Indonesians expect that Japanese foods served there are halal according to Islamic dietary law, which means no pork or alcohol are allowed. Japanese restaurants in Indonesia often offer a set menu which includes rice served with an array of Japanese favourites in a single setting. A set menu might include a choice of yakiniku or sukiyaki, including a sample of sushi, tempura, gyoza and miso soup. Authentic Japanese style izakaya and ramen shops can be found in the Little Tokyo (Melawai) area in Blok M, South Jakarta, serving both Japanese expats and local clienteles. Today, Japanese restaurants can be found in most major Indonesian cities, with a high concentration in Greater Jakarta area, Bandung, Surabaya and Bali.\nIn some cases, Japanese cuisine in Indonesia is often altered to suit Indonesian taste. Hoka Hoka Bento in particular is an Indonesian-owned Japanese fast food restaurant chain that caters to the Indonesian clientele. As a result, the foods served there have been adapted to suit Indonesians' taste. Examples of the change include stronger flavours compared to the authentic subtle Japanese taste, the preference for fried food, as well as the addition of sambal to cater to the Indonesians' preference for hot and spicy food.\nJapanese food popularity also has penetrated street food culture, as modest \"Warjep\" or \"Warung Jepang\" (Japanese food stall) offer Japanese food such as tempura, okonomiyaki and takoyaki, at moderately low prices. Today, okonomiyaki and takoyaki are popular street fare in Jakarta and other Indonesian cities. This is also pushed further by the Japanese convenience stores operating in Indonesia, such as 7-Eleven and Lawson offering Japanese favourites such as oden, chicken katsu (deep-fried chicken cutlet), chicken teriyaki and onigiri.\nSome chefs in Indonesian sushi establishments have created a Japanese-Indonesian fusion cuisine, such as krakatau roll, gado-gado roll, rendang roll and gulai ramen. The idea of fusion cuisine melding spicy Indonesian Padang and Japanese cuisine was combined because both cuisine traditions are well-liked by Indonesians. Nevertheless, some of these Japanese eating establishments might strive to serve authentic Japanese cuisine abroad. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Indonesia, such as Yoshinoya gy\u016bdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Ajisen Ramen restaurant chain.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, certain Japanese restaurants have created what is known as \"sushi Mexicano\", in which spicy sauces and ingredients accompany the dish or are integrated in sushi rolls. The habanero and serrano chiles have become nearly standard and are referred to as chiles toreados, as they are fried, diced and tossed over a dish upon request.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, Japanese cuisine is also popular among the local population. The Philippines have been exposed to the influences from the Japanese, Indian and Chinese. The cities of Davao and Metro Manila probably have the most Japanese influence in the country. The popular dining spots for Japanese nationals are located in Makati, which is called as \"Little Tokyo\", a small area filled with restaurants specializing in different types of Japanese food. Some of the best Japanese no-frills restaurants in the Philippines can be found in Makati's \"Little Tokyo\" area. In the Philippines, Halo-halo is derived from Japanese Kakigori. Halo-halo is believed to be an indigenized version of the Japanese \"kakigori\" class of desserts, originating from pre-war Japanese migrants into the islands. The earliest versions were composed only of cooked red beans or mung beans in crushed ice with sugar and milk, a dessert known locally as \"mongo-ya\". Over the years, more native ingredients were added, resulting in the development of the modern \"halo-halo\". Some authors specifically attribute it to the 1920s or 1930s Japanese migrants in the Quinta Market of Quiapo, Manila, due to its proximity to the now defunct Insular Ice Plant, which was the source of the city's ice supply. In Cebu City, the Little Kyoto district let's you experience the feel of being in Kyoto, Japan with a statue of the reclining Buddha overlooking the city. The Little Kyoto district also features Japanese food stalls serving various Japanese dishes like Takoyaki, Tempura, and various other Japanese cuisine that is enjoyed by the people of Cebu City, Philippines. Odong, also called pancit odong, is a Visayan noodle soup made with noodles, canned smoked sardines (\"tinapa\") in tomato sauce, bottle gourd (), loofah (), chayote, ginger, garlic, red onions, and various other vegetables. It is garnished and spiced with black pepper, scallions, toasted garlic, calamansi, or labuyo chilis. The dish is usually prepared as a soup, but it can also be cooked with minimal water, in which case, it is known as odong guisado.\nIt is a common simple and cheap meal in Mindanao (particularly the Davao Region) and the Visayas Islands. It is almost always eaten with white rice, rarely on its own.\nIt is named after the round flour noodles called which are closest in texture and taste to the Okinawa soba. These noodles are characteristically sold dried into straight sticks around long. The name is derived from the Japanese \"udon\" noodles, although it does not use \"udon\" noodles or bear any resemblance to \"udon\" dishes. It originates from the Davao Region of Mindanao which had a large Japanese migrant community in the early 1900s. The noodles were previously locally manufactured by Okinawans, but modern noodles (which are distinctly yellowish) are imported from China. Because noodles are difficult to find in other regions, they can be substituted with other types of noodles; including \"misua\", \"miki\" (egg noodles), \"udon\", and even instant noodles.\nTaiwan.\nJapan and Taiwan have shared close historical and cultural relations. Dishes such as sushi, ramen, and donburi are very popular among locals. Japanese chain restaurants such as Coco Ichibanya, Ippudo, Kura Sushi, Marugame Seimen, Mister Donut, MOS Burger, Ootoya, Ramen Kagetsu Arashi, Saizeriya, Sukiya, Sushiro, Tonkatsu Shinjuku Saboten, Yayoi Ken, and Yoshinoya, can all be found in Taiwan, among others. Taiwan has adapted many Japanese food items. Tianbula (\"Taiwanese tempura\") is actually satsuma-age and was introduced to Taiwan during Japanese rule by people from Kyushu, where the word \"tempura\" is commonly used to refer to satsuma-age. It is popular as a night market snack and as an ingredient for oden, hot pot and lu wei. Taiwanese versions of oden are sold locally as olen or, more recently, as guandongzhu (from Japanese Kant\u014d-ni) in convenience stores.\nThailand.\nIn Southeast Asia, Thailand is the largest market for Japanese food. This is partly because Thailand is a popular tourist destination, having large numbers of Japanese expatriates, as well as the local population having developed a taste for authentic Japanese cuisine. According to the Organisation that Promote Japanese Restaurants Abroad (JRO), the number of Japanese restaurants in Thailand jumped about 2.2-fold from 2007's figures to 1,676 in June 2012. In Bangkok, Japanese restaurants accounts for 8.3 percent of all restaurants, following those that serve Thai. Numbers of Japanese chain restaurants has established their business in Thailand, such as Yoshinoya gy\u016bdon restaurant chain, Gyu-Kaku yakiniku restaurant chain and Kourakuen ramen restaurant chain.\nUnited Kingdom.\nJapanese food Inspired restaurant chains in the UK include Wagamama, YO! Sushi, Nudo Sushi Box, Wasabi, Bone Daddies and Kokoro, often localising the food and mixing in other ingredients originating from Southeast Asia and India.\nUnited States.\nThe California roll has been influential in sushi's global popularity; its invention often credited to a Japanese-born chef working in Los Angeles, with dates assigned to 1973, or even 1964. The dish has been snubbed by some purist sushi chefs, and also likened to the American-born chop suey by one scholar.\nAs of 2015[ [update]] the country has about 4,200 sushi restaurants. It is one of the most popular styles of sushi in the US market. Japanese cuisine is an integral part of food culture in Hawaii as well as in other parts of the United States. Popular items are sushi, sashimi, and teriyaki. Kamaboko, known locally as fish cake, is a staple of saimin, a noodle soup that is a local favorite in Hawaii. Sushi, long regarded as quite exotic in the west until the 1970s, has become a popular health food in parts of North America, Western Europe and Asia.\nTwo of the first Japanese restaurants in the United States were Saito and Nippon. Restaurants such as these popularized dishes such as sukiyaki and tempura, while Nippon was the first restaurant in Manhattan to have a dedicated sushi bar. Nippon was also one of the first Japanese restaurants in the U.S. to grow and process their own soba and responsible for creation of the now standard beef negimayaki dish.\nIn the U.S., teppanyaki \"iron hot plate\" cooking restaurants took foothold. Such restaurants featured steak, shrimp and vegetables (including bean sprouts), cooked in front of the customer on a \"teppanyaki grill\" (teppan) by a personal chef who turns cooking into performance art, twirling and juggling cutting knives like batons. The meal would be served with steamed rice and Japanese soup. This style of cooking was made popular in the U.S. when Rocky Aoki founded his popular restaurant chain Benihana in 1964. In Japan this type of cooking is thought to be American food, but in the U.S. it is thought to be Japanese. Aoki thought this would go over better in the U.S. than traditional Japanese cuisine because he felt that Americans enjoyed \"eating in exotic surroundings, but are deeply mistrustful of exotic foods\".\nFood controversies.\nSome elements of Japanese cuisine involving eating live seafood, such as Ikizukuri and Odori ebi, have received criticism overseas as a form of animal cruelty.\nJapanese cuisine is heavily dependent on seafood products. About 45 kilograms of seafood are consumed per capita annually in Japan, more than most other developed countries. An aspect of environmental concern is Japanese appetite for seafood, which could contribute to the depletion of natural ocean resources. For example, Japan consumes 80% of the global supply of blue fin tuna, a popularly sought sushi and sashimi ingredient, which could lead to its extinction due to commercial overfishing. Another environmental concern is commercial whaling and the consumption of whale meat, for which Japan is the world's largest market.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15978", "revid": "19269270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15978", "title": "James Monroe", "text": "Founding Father, U.S. president from 1817 to 1825\nJames Monroe ( ; April 28, 1758\u00a0\u2013 July 4, 1831) was an American Founding Father who served as the fifth president of the United States from 1817 to 1825. He was the last Founding Father to serve as president as well as the last president of the Virginia dynasty. Monroe was a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, and his presidency coincided with the Era of Good Feelings, concluding the First Party System era of American politics. He issued the Monroe Doctrine, a policy of limiting European colonialism in the Americas. Monroe previously served as Governor of Virginia, a member of the United States Senate, U.S. ambassador to France and Britain, the seventh secretary of state, and the eighth secretary of war.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, he served in the Continental Army. From 1780 to 1783, Monroe studied law under Thomas Jefferson and subsequently served as a delegate to both the Continental Congress and the Virginia Ratifying Convention. He opposed the ratification of the United States Constitution. In 1790, Monroe won election to the Senate where he became a leader of the Democratic-Republican Party. He left the Senate in 1794 to serve as President George Washington's ambassador to France but was recalled by Washington in 1796. Monroe won the election as Governor of Virginia in 1799 and strongly supported Jefferson's candidacy in the 1800 presidential election.\nAs President Jefferson's special envoy, Monroe helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase, through which the United States nearly doubled in size. Monroe fell out with his longtime friend James Madison after Madison rejected the Monroe\u2013Pinkney Treaty that Monroe negotiated with Britain. He unsuccessfully challenged Madison for the Democratic-Republican nomination in the 1808 presidential election, but he joined Madison's administration as Secretary of State in 1811. During the later stages of the War of 1812, Monroe simultaneously served as Madison's Secretary of State and Secretary of War. Monroe's wartime leadership established him as Madison's heir apparent, and he easily defeated Federalist candidate Rufus King in the 1816 presidential election.\nDuring Monroe's tenure as president, the Federalist Party collapsed as a national political force and Monroe was re-elected, virtually unopposed, in 1820. As president, he signed the Missouri Compromise, which admitted Missouri as a slave state and banned slavery from territories north of the 36\u00b030\u2032 parallel. In foreign affairs, Monroe and Secretary of State John Quincy Adams favored a policy of conciliation with Britain and a policy of expansionism against the Spanish Empire. In the 1819 Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty with Spain, the United States secured Florida and established its western border with New Spain. In 1823, Monroe announced the United States' opposition to any European intervention in the recently independent countries of the Americas with the Monroe Doctrine, which became a landmark in American foreign policy. Monroe was a member of the American Colonization Society which supported the colonization of Africa by freed slaves, and Liberia's capital of Monrovia is named in his honor. Following his retirement in 1825, he was plagued by financial difficulties and died on July 4, 1831, in New York City. Historians have generally ranked him as an above-average president.\nEarly life and education.\nJames Monroe was born on April 28, 1758, in his parents' house in a wooded area of Westmoreland County in the Colony of Virginia, to Andrew Spence Monroe and Elizabeth Jones. The marked site is one mile (1.6\u00a0km) from the unincorporated community known today as Monroe Hall, Virginia. The James Monroe Family Home Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. He had one sister, Elizabeth and three younger brothers, Spence, Andrew and Joseph Jones. Monroe's father worked as a craftsman and was a patriot who was involved in protests against the Stamp Act. His mother was the daughter of a Welsh immigrant whose family was one of the wealthiest in King George County.\nHis paternal great-great-grandfather Patrick Andrew Monroe emigrated to America from Scotland in the mid-17th century as a Royalist after the defeat of Charles I in the English Civil War, and was part of an ancient Scottish clan known as Clan Munro. In 1650, he patented a large tract of land in Washington Parish, Westmoreland County, Virginia. Also among James Monroe's ancestors were French Huguenot immigrants, who came to Virginia in 1700.\nAt age 11, Monroe was enrolled in Campbelltown Academy, the only school in the county. This school was considered the best in the colony of Virginia, which is why Monroe was later able to immediately take advanced courses in Latin and mathematics at the College of William &amp; Mary. He attended this school only 11 weeks a year, as his labor was needed on the farm. During this time, Monroe formed a lifelong friendship with an older classmate, future Chief Justice of the Supreme Court John Marshall. In 1772, Monroe's mother died after giving birth to her youngest child and his father died soon after, leaving him as the eldest son in charge of the family. Though he inherited property, including slaves, from both of his parents, the 16-year-old Monroe was forced to withdraw from school to support his younger brothers. His childless maternal uncle, Joseph Jones, became a surrogate father to Monroe and his siblings and paid off his brother-in-law's debts. A member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, Jones took Monroe to the capital of Williamsburg, Virginia, and enrolled him in the College of William and Mary in June 1774. Jones also introduced Monroe to important Virginians such as Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, and George Washington.\nDuring this phase of the American Revolution, opposition to the British government grew in the Thirteen Colonies in reaction to the \"Intolerable Acts\", a series of harsh laws against the Colonies in response to the Boston Tea Party. In Williamsburg, British Governor John Murray, 4th Earl of Dunmore, dissolved the Assembly after protests by the delegates, who then decided to send a delegation to the First Continental Congress in Philadelphia. Dunmore wanted to take advantage of the absence of the Burgesses, who had convened to Richmond, and had soldiers of the Royal Navy confiscate the weapons of the Virginian militia, which alarmed militiamen and students of the College of William &amp; Mary, including Monroe. They marched to the Governor's Palace and demanded that Dunmore return the confiscated gunpowder. When more militiamen arrived in Williamsburg under the leadership of Patrick Henry, Dunmore agreed to pay compensation for the confiscated goods. Monroe and his fellow students were so incensed by the governor's actions that they conducted daily military drills on campus afterward. On June 24, 1775, Monroe and 24 militiamen stormed the Governor's Palace, capturing several hundred muskets and swords.\nRevolutionary War service.\nIn early 1776, about a year and a half after his enrollment, Monroe dropped out of college and joined the 3rd Virginia Regiment in the Continental Army, despite mourning the death of his brother Spence, who had died shortly before. As the fledgling army valued literacy in its officers, Monroe was commissioned with the rank of lieutenant, serving under Colonel George Weedon and later Captain William Washington. After months of training, Monroe and 700 Virginia infantrymen were called north to serve in the New York and New Jersey campaign. Monroe's regiment played a central role in the Continental Army's retreat across the Delaware River on December 7 in response to the loss of Fort Washington. In late December, Monroe took part in a surprise attack on a Hessian encampment at the Battle of Trenton. Though the attack was successful, Monroe suffered a severed artery in the battle and nearly died. In the aftermath, Washington cited Monroe and William Washington for their bravery, and promoted Monroe to captain.\nAfter recovering for two months, Monroe returned to Virginia to recruit his own company of soldiers. Lacking the wealth to induce soldiers to join his company, Monroe instead asked his uncle to return him to the front. Monroe was assigned to the staff of General William Alexander, Lord Stirling as an auxiliary officer. At the Battle of Brandywine, he formed a close friendship with the Marquis de Lafayette, a French volunteer who encouraged him to view the war as part of a wider struggle against religious and political tyranny. Monroe served in the Philadelphia campaign and spent the winter of 1777\u201378 at the encampment of Valley Forge, sharing a log hut with Marshall. By late 1777, he was promoted to major and served as Lord Stirling's aide-de-camp. After serving in the Battle of Monmouth, the destitute Monroe resigned his commission in December 1778 and joined his uncle in Philadelphia. After the British captured Savannah, the Virginia legislature decided to raise four regiments, and Monroe returned to his native state, hoping to receive his own command. With letters of recommendation from Washington, Stirling, and Alexander Hamilton, Monroe received a commission as a lieutenant colonel and was expected to lead one of the regiments, but recruitment again proved to be a problem. On Jones's advice, Monroe returned to Williamsburg to study law at the College of William and Mary, becoming a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Virginia Governor Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson, with whom Monroe soon formed a close and lifelong friendship, advised his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 to pursue a political career and made his library available to him, where the works of Epictetus in particular had a great influence on Monroe\nWith the British increasingly focusing their operations in the Southern colonies, the Virginians moved the capital to the more defensible city of Richmond, and Monroe accompanied Jefferson to the new capital. Jefferson appointed Monroe as a military commissioner with the task of maintaining contact with the Southern Continental Army, under the command of General Johann von Kalb, and the Virginia Militia. At the end of 1780, the British invaded Virginia and Monroe, who had become a colonel in the meantime, was given command of a regiment for the first time, but he was still unable to raise an army due to a lack of interested recruits, Monroe returned to his home in King George County, and was not present for the British raid on Richmond. As both the Continental Army and the Virginia militia had an abundance of officers, Monroe did not serve during the Yorktown campaign, and, much to his frustration, did not take part in the Siege of Yorktown. Although Andrew Jackson served as a courier in a militia unit at age 13, Monroe is regarded as the last U.S. president who was a Revolutionary War veteran, since he served as an officer of the Continental Army and took part in combat. As a result of his service, Monroe became a member of the Society of the Cincinnati.\nEarly political career.\nMember of Continental Congress.\nMonroe resumed studying law under Jefferson and continued until 1783. He was not particularly interested in legal theory or practice, but chose to take it up because he thought it offered \"the most immediate rewards\" and could ease his path to wealth, social standing, and political influence. In 1782, Monroe was elected to the Virginia House of Delegates. After serving on Virginia's Executive Council, he was elected to the Fourth Congress of the Confederation in November 1783 and served in Annapolis until Congress convened in Trenton, New Jersey in June 1784. He had served a total of three years when he finally retired from that office by the rule of rotation. By that time, the government was meeting in the temporary capital of New York City. In 1784, Monroe undertook an extensive trip through Western New York and Pennsylvania to inspect the conditions in the Northwest. The tour convinced him that the United States had to pressure Britain to abandon its posts in the region and assert control of the Northwest. While serving in Congress, Monroe became an advocate for western expansion, and played a key role in the writing and passage of the Northwest Ordinance. The ordinance created the Northwest Territory, providing for federal administration of the territories west of Pennsylvania and north of the Ohio River. Another of Monroe's goals in the Confederate Congress was to negotiate American rights to free navigation on the Mississippi River. During this period, Jefferson continued to serve as a mentor to Monroe, and, at Jefferson's prompting, he befriended another prominent Virginian, James Madison.\nMarriage and law practice.\nOn February 16, 1786, Monroe married Elizabeth Kortright (1768\u20131830), who came from New York City's high society, at Trinity Church in Manhattan. The marriage produced three children, Eliza in 1786, James in 1799 and Maria in 1802. Although Monroe was raised in the Anglican faith, the children were educated according to the teachings of the Episcopal Church. After a brief honeymoon on Long Island, New York, the Monroes returned to New York City to live with her father until Congress adjourned:\nIn the fall of 1786, Monroe resigned from Congress and moved to his uncle Jones' house in Fredericksburg, Virginia, where he successfully passed the bar exam and became an attorney for the state. In 1787, Monroe won election to another term in the Virginia House of Delegates. Though he had become outspoken in his desire to reform the Articles, he was unable to attend the Philadelphia Convention due to his work obligations. In 1788, Monroe became a delegate to the Virginia Ratifying Convention, which voted on the adoption of the United States Constitution. In Virginia, the struggle over the ratification of the proposed Constitution involved more than a simple clash between Federalists and Anti-Federalists. Virginians held a full spectrum of opinions about the merits of the proposed change in national government, and those who held the middle ground in the ideological struggle became the central figures. Led by Monroe and Edmund Pendleton, these \"federalists who are for amendments\" criticized the absence of a bill of rights and worried about surrendering taxation powers to the central government. Monroe called for the Constitution to include guarantees regarding free navigation on the Mississippi River and to give the federal government direct control over the militia in case of defense. In doing so, he wanted to prevent the creation of a standing army, which proved to be a critical point of contention between the federalists and the anti-federalists. Monroe also opposed the Electoral College, which he viewed as too corruptible and susceptible to state interests, and favored direct election of the president. After Madison reversed his decision and promised to pass a bill of rights, the Virginia Convention ratified the Constitution by a narrow vote, though Monroe himself voted against it.\nSenator.\nIn the 1789 election to the 1st United States Congress, Anti-Federalist Henry Monroe persuaded Monroe to run against Madison, and he had the Virginia legislature draw a congressional district designed to elect Monroe. During the campaign, Madison and Monroe often traveled together, and the election did nothing to diminish their friendship. In the election for Virginia's Fifth District, Madison prevailed over Monroe, taking 1,308 votes compared to Monroe's 972 votes. After this defeat, Monroe moved his family from Fredericksburg to Albemarle County, first to Charlottesville and later to the immediate neighborhood of Monticello, where he bought an estate and named it Highland. After the death of Senator William Grayson in 1790, Virginia legislators elected Monroe to serve the remainder of Grayson's term. Since the Senate, unlike the House of Representatives, met behind closed doors, the public paid little attention to it and focused on the House of Representatives. Monroe therefore requested in February 1791 that Senate sessions be held in public, but this was initially rejected and not implemented until February 1794.\nDuring the presidency of George Washington, U.S. politics became increasingly polarized between the Anti-Administration Party, led by Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and the Federalists, led by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton. Monroe stood firmly with Jefferson in opposing Hamilton's strong central government and strong executive; Monroe was one of only 5 southern senators to vote against Hamilton's national bank proposal. The Democratic-Republican Party coalesced around Jefferson and Madison, and Monroe became one of the fledgling party's leaders in the Senate. He also helped organize opposition to John Adams in the 1792 election, though Adams defeated George Clinton to win re-election as vice president. When Monroe took part in congressional investigations into Hamilton's illegal transactions with James Reynolds in November 1792, this led to the uncovering of the first political sex scandal in the United States: The payments had been hush money to keep Hamilton's affair with Reynolds' wife secret. Hamilton never forgave Monroe for this public humiliation, which almost led to a duel between the two. Throughout 1792 and 1793, Monroe and Madison responded to Hamilton's pamphlets accusing Jefferson of undermining Washington's authority with a series of six essays. These sharply worded replies were largely penned by Monroe. As leader of the Republicans in the Senate, Monroe soon became involved in matters of foreign relations. In 1794, he emerged as an opponent of Hamilton's appointment as ambassador to the United Kingdom and a supporter of the First French Republic. Since 1791 he had taken sides with the French Revolution in several essays under the pseudonym Aratus.\nMinister to France.\nAs the 1790s progressed, the French Revolutionary Wars came to dominate U.S. foreign policy, with the British and French navies both interfering with U.S. trade with Europe. Like most other Jeffersonians, Monroe supported the French Revolution, but Hamilton's followers tended to sympathize more with Britain. In 1794, hoping to find a way to avoid war with both countries, Washington appointed Monroe as his minister (ambassador) to France, after Madison and Robert R. Livingston had declined the offer. At the same time, he appointed the Anglophile Federalist John Jay as his minister to Britain. Monroe took this position at a difficult time: America's negotiating position was made considerably more difficult by its lack of military strength. In addition, the conflict between Paris and London in America intensified the confrontation between the Anglophile Federalists and the Francophile Republicans. While the Federalists were basically only aiming for independence from Great Britain, the Republicans wanted a revolutionary new form of government, which is why they strongly sympathized with the First French Republic.\nAfter arriving in France, Monroe addressed the National Convention, receiving a standing ovation for his speech celebrating republicanism. Monroe's passionate and friendly message of greeting at the inaugural ceremony before the National Convention was later criticized by Jay for its sentimentality, and Washington viewed the speech as \"not well devised\" in terms of venue and in light of American neutrality in the First Coalition War. Monroe experienced several early diplomatic successes, including the protection of U.S. trade from French attacks. In February 1795, Monroe used his influence to secure the release of all American citizens imprisoned since the French Revolution and Adrienne de La Fayette, the wife of the Marquis de Lafayette. He had already secured the release of Thomas Paine in July 1794 and took him in, but when Paine worked on a diatribe against Washington despite Monroe's objections, they parted ways in the spring of 1796.\nMonths after Monroe arrived in France, the U.S. and Great Britain concluded the Jay Treaty, outraging both the French and Monroe\u2014not fully informed about the treaty prior to its publication. Despite the undesirable effects of the Jay Treaty on Franco-American relations, Monroe won French support for U.S. navigational rights on the Mississippi River\u2014the mouth of which was controlled by Spain\u2014and in 1795 the U.S. and Spain signed Pinckney's Treaty. The treaty granted the U.S. limited rights to use the port of New Orleans.\nImmediately after Timothy Pickering succeeded Secretary of State Edmund Randolph, who had been the only Francophile member of Washington's cabinet, in December 1795, he worked to dismiss Monroe. In 1796, Monroe sent a dispatch summarizing his response to French complaints of the Jay Treaty, but it was incomplete and did not include the French note or Monroe's written response. Pickering saw this as a sign of Monroe's unsuitability and, together with Hamilton, persuaded Washington to replace Monroe as ambassador. Washington decided Monroe was inefficient, disruptive, and failed to safeguard the national interest. He recalled Monroe in November 1796, the letter of dismissal being deliberately delayed in order to prevent his return before the presidential election. Returning to his home in Charlottesville, he resumed his dual careers as a farmer and lawyer. Jefferson and Madison urged Monroe to run for Congress, but Monroe chose to focus on state politics instead.\nIn 1797, Monroe published \"A View of the Conduct of the Executive, in the Foreign Affairs of the United States: Connected with the Mission to the French Republic, During the Years 1794, 5, and 6,\" which sharply attacked Washington's government and accused it of acting against America's interests. He followed the advice of his friend Robert Livingston who cautioned him to \"repress every harsh and acrimonious\" comment about Washington. However, he did complain that too often the U.S. government had been too close to Britain, especially regarding the Jay Treaty. Washington made notes on this copy, writing, \"The truth is, Mr. Monroe was cajoled, flattered, and made to believe strange things. In return he did, or was disposed to do, whatever was pleasing to that nation, reluctantly urging the rights of his own.\"\nGovernor of Virginia and diplomat (1799\u20131802, 1811).\nGovernor of Virginia.\nOn a party-line vote, the Virginia legislature elected Monroe as Governor of Virginia in 1799. He would serve as governor until 1802. The constitution of Virginia endowed the governor with very few powers aside from commanding the militia when the Assembly called it into action, but Monroe used his stature to convince legislators to enhance state involvement in transportation and education and to increase training for the militia. Monroe also began to give State of the Commonwealth addresses to the legislature, in which he highlighted areas in which he believed the legislature should act. Monroe also led an effort to create the state's first penitentiary, and imprisonment replaced other, often harsher, punishments. In 1800, Monroe called out the state militia to suppress Gabriel's Rebellion, a slave rebellion originating on a plantation six miles from the capital of Richmond. Gabriel and 27 other enslaved people who participated were all hanged for treason. The executions sparked compassionate feelings among the people of Virginia, and Monroe worked with the legislature to secure a location where free and enslaved African Americans suspected of \"conspiracy, insurgency, Treason, and rebellion\" would be permanently banished outside the United States.\nMonroe thought that foreign and Federalist elements had created the Quasi War of 1798\u20131800, and he strongly supported Thomas Jefferson's candidacy for president in 1800. Federalists were likewise suspicious of Monroe, some viewing him at best as a French dupe and at worst a traitor. With the power to appoint election officials in Virginia, Monroe exercised his influence to help Jefferson win Virginia's presidential electors. He also considered using the Virginia militia to force the outcome in favor of Jefferson. Jefferson won the 1800 election, and he appointed Madison as his Secretary of State. As a member of Jefferson's party and the leader of the largest state in the country, Monroe emerged as one of Jefferson's two most likely successors, alongside Madison.\nLouisiana Purchase and Minister to Great Britain.\nShortly after the end of Monroe's gubernatorial tenure, President Jefferson sent Monroe back to France to assist Ambassador Robert Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase. In the 1800 Treaty of San Ildefonso, France had acquired the territory of Louisiana from Spain; at the time, many in the U.S. believed that France had also acquired West Florida in the same treaty. The American delegation originally sought to acquire West Florida and the city of New Orleans, which controlled the trade of the Mississippi River. Determined to acquire New Orleans even if it meant war with France, Jefferson also authorized Monroe to form an alliance with the British if the French refused to sell the city.\nMeeting with Fran\u00e7ois Barb\u00e9-Marbois, the French foreign minister, Monroe and Livingston agreed to purchase the entire territory of Louisiana for $15\u00a0million; the purchase became known as the Louisiana Purchase. In agreeing to the purchase, Monroe violated his instructions, which had only allowed $9\u00a0million for the purchase of New Orleans and West Florida. The French did not acknowledge that West Florida remained in Spanish possession, and the United States would claim that France had sold West Florida to the United States for several years to come. Though he had not ordered the purchase of the entire territory, Jefferson strongly supported Monroe's actions, which ensured that the United States would continue to expand to the West. Overcoming doubts about whether the Constitution authorized the purchase of foreign territory, Jefferson won congressional approval for the Louisiana Purchase, and the acquisition doubled the size of the United States. Monroe would travel to Spain in 1805 to try to win the cession of West Florida, but found that the American ambassador to Spain, Charles Pinckney, had alienated the Spanish government with crude threats of violence. In the negotiations on the outstanding territorial issues concerning New Orleans, West Florida and the Rio Grande, Monroe made no progress and was treated condescendingly, and with the support of France, Spain refused to consider relinquishing the territory.\nAfter the resignation of Rufus King, Monroe was appointed as the ambassador to Great Britain in 1803. The greatest issue of contention between the United States and Britain was that of the impressment of U.S. sailors. Many U.S. merchant ships employed British seamen who had deserted or dodged conscription, and the British frequently impressed sailors on U.S. ships in hopes of quelling their manpower issues. Many of the sailors they impressed had never been British subjects, and Monroe was tasked with persuading the British to stop their practice of impressment. Monroe found little success in this endeavor, partly due to Jefferson's alienation of the British minister to the United States, Anthony Merry. Rejecting Jefferson's offer to serve as the first governor of Louisiana Territory, Monroe continued to serve as ambassador to Britain until 1807.\nIn 1806 he negotiated the Monroe\u2013Pinkney Treaty with Great Britain. It would have extended the Jay Treaty of 1794 which had expired after ten years. Jefferson had fought the Jay Treaty intensely in 1794\u201395 because he felt it would allow the British to subvert American republicanism. The treaty had produced ten years of peace and highly lucrative trade for American merchants, but Jefferson was still opposed. When Monroe and the British signed the new treaty in December 1806, Jefferson refused to submit it to the Senate for ratification. Although the treaty called for ten more years of trade between the United States and the British Empire and gave American merchants guarantees that would have been good for business, Jefferson was unhappy that it did not end the hated British practice of impressment and refused to give up the potential weapon of commercial warfare against Britain. The president made no attempt to obtain another treaty, and as a result, the two nations drifted from peace toward the War of 1812. Monroe was severely pained by the administration's repudiation of the treaty, and he fell out with Secretary of State James Madison.\n1808 election and the Quids.\nOn his return to Virginia in 1807, Monroe received a warm reception, and many urged him to run in the 1808 presidential election. After Jefferson refused to submit the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty, Monroe had come to believe that Jefferson had snubbed the treaty out of the desire to avoid elevating Monroe above Madison in 1808. Out of deference to Jefferson, Monroe agreed to avoid actively campaigning for the presidency, but he did not rule out accepting a draft effort. The Democratic-Republican Party was increasingly factionalized, with \"Old Republicans\" or \"Quids\" denouncing the Jefferson administration for abandoning what they considered to be true republican principles. The Quids, led by John Randolph of Roanoke, tried to enlist Monroe in their cause. The plan was to run Monroe for president in the 1808 election in cooperation with the Federalist Party, which had a strong base in New England. Monroe decided to run against Madison in the 1808 presidential election in order to demonstrate the strength of his political position in Virginia. The regular Democratic-Republicans overcame the Quids in the nominating caucus, kept control of the party in Virginia, and protected Madison's base. Monroe did not publicly criticize Jefferson or Madison during Madison's campaign against Federalist Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, but he refused to support Madison. Madison defeated Pinckney by a large margin, carrying all but one state outside of New England. Monroe won 3,400 votes in Virginia, but received little support elsewhere.\nMonroe, who had fallen out of favor with the majority of Republicans because of his candidacy, withdrew into private life for the next few years. The plan to sell his second house in Loudon County, Oak Hill, in order to renovate and expand Highland with the proceeds, failed due to the low real estate prices. After the election Monroe quickly reconciled with Jefferson, but their friendship endured further strains when Jefferson did not promote Monroe's candidacy to Congress in 1809. Monroe did not speak with Madison until 1810. Monroe devoted his attentions to farming at his Charlottesville estate, experimenting with new horticultural techniques in order to switch from tobacco, whose value was steadily declining, to wheat.\nSecretary of State and Secretary of War (1811\u20131817).\nMadison administration.\nIn 1810, Monroe returned to the Virginia House of Delegates and was elected to another term as governor in 1811, but served only four months, as less than two months into his term, Monroe was asked on Madison's behalf if he would be willing to succeed Robert Smith as Secretary of State. In April 1811, Madison appointed Monroe to his cabinet as Secretary of State in hopes of shoring up the support of the more radical factions of the Democratic-Republicans. Madison also hoped that Monroe, an experienced diplomat with whom he had once been close friends, would improve upon Smith's performance. Madison assured Monroe that their differences regarding the Monroe-Pinkney Treaty had been a misunderstanding, and the two resumed their friendship. The Senate voted unanimously (30\u20130) to confirm him. On taking office, Monroe hoped to negotiate treaties with the British and French to end the attacks on American merchant ships. While the French agreed to reduce the attacks and release seized American ships, the British were less receptive to Monroe's demands. Monroe had long worked for peace with the British, but he came to favor war with Britain, joining with \"war hawks\" such as Speaker of the House Henry Clay. With the support of Monroe and Clay, Madison asked Congress to declare war upon the British, and Congress complied on June 18, 1812, thus beginning the War of 1812.\nThe war went very badly, and the Madison administration quickly sought peace, but were rejected by the British. The U.S. Navy did experience several successes after Monroe convinced Madison to allow the Navy's ships to set sail rather than remaining in port for the duration of the war. After the resignation of Secretary of War William Eustis, Madison asked Monroe to serve in dual roles as Secretary of State and Secretary of War, but opposition from the Senate limited Monroe to serving as acting Secretary of War until Brigadier General John Armstrong won Senate confirmation. Monroe and Armstrong clashed over war policy, and Armstrong blocked Monroe's hopes of being appointed to lead an invasion of Canada. When British warships appeared in the Potomac River estuary in the summer of the same year, Monroe urged that defensive measures be taken for Washington, D.C., and that a military intelligence service should be established to Chesapeake Bay, which Armstrong dismissed as unnecessary. Since there was no functioning reconnaissance, Monroe formed his own small cavalry unit and began scouting the bay until the British withdrew from it. As the war dragged on, the British offered to begin negotiations in Ghent, and the United States sent a delegation led by John Quincy Adams to conduct negotiations. Monroe allowed Adams leeway in setting terms, so long as he ended the hostilities and preserved American neutrality.\nWhen a British fleet of 50 warships and 5,000 soldiers massed in the mouth of the Potomac, Monroe scouted the Chesapeake Bay with a troop and on August 21 sent the President a warning of the impending invasion so that Madison and his wife could flee in time and the state's assets and inhabitants could be evacuated. The British burned the U.S. Capitol and the White House on August 24, 1814, Madison removed Armstrong as Secretary of War and turned to Monroe for help, appointing him Secretary of War on September 27. Monroe resigned as Secretary of State on October 1, 1814, but no successor was ever appointed and thus from October 1814 to February 28, 1815, Monroe effectively held both Cabinet posts. Now in command of the war effort, Monroe ordered General Andrew Jackson to defend against a likely attack on New Orleans by the British, and he asked the governors of nearby states to send their militias to reinforce Jackson. He also called on Congress to draft an army of 100,000 men, increase compensation to soldiers, and establish a new national bank, the Second Bank of the United States, to ensure adequate funding for the war effort. Months after Monroe took office as Secretary of War, the war ended with the signing of the Treaty of Ghent. The treaty resulted in a return to the status quo ante bellum, and many outstanding issues between the United States and Britain remained. Americans celebrated the end of the war as a great victory, partly due to the news of the treaty reaching the United States shortly after Jackson's victory in the Battle of New Orleans. With the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, the British also ended the practice of impressment. After the war, Congress authorized the creation of the Second Bank of the United States. Monroe resigned as Secretary of War in March 1815 and took over the leadership of the State Department again, emerging from the war politically strengthened and a promising presidential candidate.\nElection of 1816.\nMonroe decided to seek the presidency in the 1816 election, and his war-time leadership had established him as Madison's heir apparent. Monroe had strong support from many in the party, but his candidacy was challenged at the 1816 Democratic-Republican congressional nominating caucus. Since there was no longer a serious opposition party due to the decline of the Federalists, who were perceived as disloyal because of their pro-British stance and opposition to the War of 1812, the Democratic-Republican caucus in Congress was crucial to Monroe's victory. Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford had the support of numerous Southern and Western Congressmen, while Governor Daniel D. Tompkins was backed by several Congressmen from New York. Crawford appealed especially to many Democratic-Republicans who were wary of Madison and Monroe's support for the establishment of the Second Bank of the United States. Despite his substantial backing, Crawford decided to defer to Monroe on the belief that he could eventually run as Monroe's successor, and Monroe won his party's nomination. Tompkins won the party's vice presidential nomination. The moribund Federalists nominated Rufus King as their presidential nominee, but the party offered little opposition following the conclusion of a popular war that they had opposed. Monroe received 183 of the 217 electoral votes, winning every state but Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Delaware.\nSince he previously served as an officer of the Continental Army during the Revolutionary War and as a delegate to the Continental Congress, he became the last president who was a Founding Father. Born in 1758, he was also the last president who belonged to the Republican generation.\nPresidency (1817\u20131825).\nInauguration and cabinet.\nMonroe's inauguration took place on March 4, 1817. As Monroe was the first president to take office during a period of peace and economic stability, the term \"Era of Good Feelings\" was soon coined. This period was characterized by the unchallenged dominance of the Republicans, who by the end of Madison's term had adopted some Federalist policies, such as the establishment of a central bank and protective tariffs. Monroe largely ignored old party lines in making federal appointments, which reduced political tensions and augmented the sense of \"oneness\" that pervaded the United States. He made two long national tours to build national trust, which included ceremonies of welcome and expressions of good-will. Monroe appointed a geographically balanced cabinet, through which he led the executive branch. At Monroe's request, Crawford continued to serve as Treasury Secretary. Monroe also chose to retain Benjamin Crowninshield of Massachusetts as Secretary of the Navy and Richard Rush of Pennsylvania as Attorney General. Recognizing Northern discontent at the continuation of the Virginia dynasty, Monroe chose John Quincy Adams of Massachusetts as Secretary of State, making Adams the early favorite to eventually succeed Monroe. An experienced diplomat, Adams had abandoned the Federalist Party in 1807 in support of Thomas Jefferson's foreign policy, and Monroe hoped that the appointment would encourage the defection of more Federalists. After General Andrew Jackson declined appointment as Secretary of War, Monroe turned to South Carolina Congressman John C. Calhoun, leaving the Cabinet without a prominent Westerner. In late 1817 Rush became the ambassador to Britain, and William Wirt succeeded him as Attorney General. With the exception of Crowninshield, the rest of Monroe's initial cabinet appointees remained in place for the remainder of his presidency.\nForeign policy.\nAccording to historian William Earl Weeks, \"Monroe evolved a comprehensive strategy aimed at expanding the Union externally while solidifying it internally\". He expanded trade and pacified relations with Great Britain while expanding the United States at the expense of the Spanish Empire, from which he obtained Florida and the recognition of a border across the continent. Faced with the breakdown of the expansionist consensus over the question of slavery, the president tried to provide both North and South with guarantees that future expansion would not tip the balance of power between slave and free states, a system that, Weeks remarks, did indeed allow the continuation of American expansion for the best of four decades.\nTreaties with Britain and Russia.\nUpon taking office, Monroe pursued warmer relations with Britain in the aftermath of the War of 1812. In 1817, the United States and Britain signed the Rush\u2013Bagot Treaty, which regulated naval armaments on the Great Lakes and Lake Champlain and demilitarized the border between the U.S. and British North America. The Treaty of 1818, also with Great Britain, was concluded October 20, 1818, and fixed the present Canada\u2013United States border from Minnesota to the Rocky Mountains at the 49th parallel. The accords also established a joint U.S.\u2013British occupation of Oregon Country for the next ten years. Though they did not solve every outstanding issue between the U.S. and Britain, the treaties allowed for greater trade between the United States and the British Empire and helped avoid an expensive naval arms race in the Great Lakes. In the Pacific Northwest, American territorial claims clashed with those of Tsarist Russia, which had trading posts as far south as San Francisco Bay, and those of Great Britain. The situation intensified in the fall of 1821 when Saint Petersburg closed America's Pacific coastal sea north of 51\u00b0 latitude to foreign ships within a 100-mile zone, thus shifting its territorial claim four degrees of latitude to the south. Late in Monroe's second term, the U.S. concluded the Russo-American Treaty of 1824 with the Russian Empire, setting the southern limit of Russian sovereignty on the Pacific coast of North America at the 54\u00b040\u2032 parallel (the present southern tip of the Alaska Panhandle).\nAcquisition of Florida.\nIn October 1817, the United States cabinet held several lengthy meetings to address the declarations of independence by former Spanish colonies in South America and the increasing piracy, particularly from Amelia Island. Piracy on the southern border with the Floridas was intensified by smugglers, slave traders, and privateers who had fled from the Spanish colonies over which the mother country had lost control. Spain had long rejected repeated American attempts to purchase Florida. However, by 1818, Spain's troubling colonial situation made the cession of Florida make sense. Spain had been exhausted by the Peninsular War in Europe and needed to rebuild its credibility and presence in its colonies. Revolutionaries in Central America and South America were beginning to demand independence. Spain was unwilling to invest further in Florida, encroached on by American settlers, and it worried about the border between New Spain and the United States. With only a minor military presence in Florida, Spain was not able to restrain the Seminole warriors who routinely crossed the border and raided American villages and farms, as well as protected southern slave refugees from slave owners and traders of the southern United States. The Seminole people were also providing sanctuary for runaway slaves, those of which the United States wanted back.\nIn response to Seminole attacks and their provision of aid to escaped slaves, Monroe ordered a military expedition to cross into Spanish Florida and attack the Seminoles. In this expedition, led by Andrew Jackson, the US Army displaced numerous Seminole people from their houses along with burning their towns. Jackson also seized the Spanish territorial capital of Pensacola. With the capture of Pensacola, Jackson established de facto American control of the entire territory. While Monroe supported Jackson's actions, many in Congress harshly criticized what they saw as an undeclared war. With the support of Secretary of State Adams, Monroe defended Jackson against domestic and international criticism, and the United States began negotiations with Spain. Monroe later fixed the government's official position in a letter from Adams to Spanish Ambassador Luis de On\u00eds, which he edited accordingly by removing all justifications for Jackson's actions. He also emphasized that although Jackson had exceeded his orders, he had come to a new assessment of the situation on the basis of previously unknown information at the scene of the war.\nSpain faced revolt in all of its American colonies and could neither govern nor defend Florida. On February 22, 1819, Spain and the United States signed the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, which ceded the Floridas in return for the assumption by the United States of claims of American citizens against Spain to an amount not exceeding $5,000,000 (~$ in 2024). The treaty also contained a definition of the boundary between Spanish and American possessions on the North American continent. Beginning at the mouth of the Sabine River the line ran along that river to the 32nd parallel, then due north to the Red River, which it followed to the 100th meridian, due north to the Arkansas River, and along that river to its source, then north to the 42nd parallel, which it followed to the Pacific Ocean. The United States renounced all claims to the west and south of this boundary (Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, California, Colorado, Utah, Nevada), so Spain surrendered any title she had to the Northwest (Oregon Country).\nSouth American Wars of Independence.\nIn 1810, South America's wars of independence began, inspired by the American and French Revolutionary Wars, but the Madison administration, as well as Monroe himself during his first term in office, treated the conflicts as civil wars and kept the United States neutral. Monroe was deeply sympathetic to the revolutionary movements against Spain, and was determined that the United States should never repeat the policies of the Washington administration during the French Revolution, when the nation had failed to demonstrate its sympathy for the aspirations of peoples seeking to establish republican governments. He did not envisage military involvement in Latin American affairs, but only the provision of moral support, as he believed that a direct American intervention would provoke other European powers into assisting Spain. Monroe initially refused to recognize the Latin American governments due to ongoing negotiations with Spain over Florida.\nFollowing their respective declarations of independence, the South American republics quickly sent emissaries to Washington to ask for diplomatic recognition and economic and trade relations. In 1818, Monroe assured a representative of the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata that his attitude was \"impartial neutrality,\" Although not diplomatically recognized, the young republics enjoyed the advantages of a sovereign nation in economic, trade, and diplomatic relations with the United States. After Spain and America had fully ratified the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty in February 1821 and a liberal government had come to power in Madrid, Monroe officially recognized the countries of Argentina, Peru, Colombia, Chile, and Mexico, all of which had won independence from Spain. Secretary of State Adams, under Monroe's supervision, wrote the instructions for the ministers to these new countries. They declared that the policy of the United States was to uphold republican institutions and to seek treaties of commerce on a most-favored-nation basis. The United States would support inter-American congresses dedicated to the development of economic and political institutions fundamentally differing from those prevailing in Europe. Monroe took pride as the United States was the first nation to extend recognition and to set an example to the rest of the world for its support of the \"cause of liberty and humanity\".\nMonroe Doctrine.\nIn January 1821, Adams first expressed the idea that the American double continent should be closed to further colonization by foreign powers. The idea, which was later adopted by Monroe, was influenced by the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty and the negotiations on border disputes in the Oregon Country. Adams emphasized that the further colonization of America, except for Canada, should be in the hands of the Americans themselves. This later became a principle in Monroe's administration. After the Spanish Revolution of 1820 was ended by France, Secretary of War Calhoun and British Foreign Secretary George Canning warned Monroe that European powers might intend to intervene in South America, increasing the pressure on him to speak out on the future of the Western Hemisphere.\nFor their part, the British also had a strong interest in ensuring the demise of Spanish colonialism, with all the trade restrictions mercantilism imposed. In October 1823, Richard Rush, the American minister in London, corresponded with Canning to work out a common position on a potential French intervention in South America. When Monroe was presented with this correspondence, which had yielded no tangible results, in mid-October 1823, his first reaction was to accept the British offer. Adams vigorously opposed cooperation with Great Britain, contending that a statement of bilateral nature could limit United States expansion in the future. He also argued that the British were not committed to recognizing the Latin American republics and must have had imperial motivations themselves.\nTwo months later, the bilateral statement proposed by the British became a unilateral declaration by the United States. While Monroe thought that Spain was unlikely to re-establish its colonial empire on its own, he feared that France or the Holy Alliance might seek to establish control over the former Spanish possessions. On December 2, 1823, in his annual message to Congress, Monroe articulated what became known as the Monroe Doctrine. He first reiterated the traditional U.S. policy of neutrality with regard to European wars and conflicts. He then declared that the United States would not accept the recolonization of any country by its former European master, though he also avowed non-interference with existing European colonies in the Americas. Finally, he stated that European countries should no longer consider the Western Hemisphere open to new colonization, a jab aimed primarily at Russia, which was attempting to expand its colony on the northern Pacific Coast.\nDomestic policy.\nMissouri Compromise.\nIn the period between 1817 and 1819, Mississippi, Illinois, and Alabama were recognized as new states. This rapid expansion resulted in a growing economic divide between the regions and a change of power in Congress to the detriment of the southern states, which viewed their plantation economy, which was dependent on slavery, as increasingly threatened. In February 1819, a bill to enable the people of the Missouri Territory to draft a constitution and form a government preliminary to admission into the Union came before the House of Representatives. During these proceedings, Congressman James Tallmadge, Jr. of New York \"tossed a bombshell into the Era of Good Feelings\" by offering the Tallmadge Amendment, which prohibited the further introduction of slaves into Missouri and required that all future children of slave parents therein should be free at the age of twenty-five years. After three days of rancorous and sometimes bitter debate, the bill, with Tallmadge's amendments, passed. The measure then went to the Senate, which rejected both amendments. A House\u2013Senate conference committee proved unable to resolve the disagreements on the bill, and so the entire measure failed. The ensuing debates pitted the northern \"restrictionists\" (antislavery legislators who wished to bar slavery from the Louisiana territories and prohibit slavery's further expansion) against southern \"anti-restrictionists\" (proslavery legislators who rejected any interference by Congress inhibiting slavery expansion).\nDuring the following session, the House passed a similar bill with an amendment, introduced on January 26, 1820, by John W. Taylor of New York, allowing Missouri into the union as a slave state. Initially, Monroe opposed any compromise that involved restrictions on slavery's expansion in federal territories. The question had been complicated by the admission in December of Alabama, a slave state, making the number of slave and free states equal. In addition, there was a bill in passage through the House (January 3, 1820) to admit Maine as a free state. Southern congressmen sought to force northerners to accept slavery in Missouri by connecting Maine and Missouri statehood. In this plan, endorsed by Monroe, Maine statehood would be held hostage to slavery in Missouri. In February 1820 the Senate passed a bill for the admission of Maine with an amendment enabling the people of Missouri to form a state constitution. Before the bill was returned to the House, a second amendment was adopted on the motion of Jesse B. Thomas of Illinois, excluding slavery from the Louisiana Territory north of the parallel 36\u00b030\u2032 north (the southern boundary of Missouri), except within the limits of the proposed state of Missouri. The House then approved the bill as amended by the Senate. Though Monroe remained firmly opposed to any compromise that restricted slavery anywhere, he reluctantly signed the Compromise into law (March 6, 1820) only because he believed it was the least bad alternative for southern slaveholders. The legislation passed, and became known as \"the Missouri Compromise\", which temporarily settled the issue of slavery in the territories. Monroe's presidential leadership role in drafting the Missouri Compromise is disputed. He viewed the issue of admission conditions more from a political perspective and did not convene a cabinet meeting on this matter.\nInternal improvements.\n Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP) engraved portrait of Monroe as President\nAs the United States continued to grow, many Americans advocated a system of internal improvements to help the country develop. Federal assistance for such projects evolved slowly and haphazardly\u2014the product of contentious congressional factions and an executive branch generally concerned with avoiding unconstitutional federal intrusions into state affairs. Monroe believed that the young nation needed an improved infrastructure, including a transportation network to grow and thrive economically, but did not think that the Constitution authorized Congress to build, maintain, and operate a national transportation system, Monroe repeatedly urged Congress to pass an amendment allowing Congress the power to finance internal improvements, but Congress never acted on his proposal, in part because many congressmen believed that the Constitution did in fact authorize the federal financing of internal improvements. In 1822, Congress passed a bill authorizing the collection of tolls on the Cumberland Road, with the tolls being used to finance repairs on the road. Adhering to stated position regarding internal improvements, Monroe vetoed the bill. In an elaborate essay, Monroe set forth his constitutional views on the subject. Congress might appropriate money, he admitted, but it might not undertake the actual construction of national works nor assume jurisdiction over them.\nIn 1824, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Gibbons v. Ogden\" that the Constitution's Commerce Clause gave the federal government the authority to regulate interstate commerce. Shortly thereafter, Congress passed two important laws that, together, marked the beginning of the federal government's continuous involvement in civil works. The General Survey Act authorized the president to have surveys made of routes for roads and canals \"of national importance, in a commercial or military point of view, or necessary for the transportation of public mail\". The president assigned responsibility for the surveys to the Army Corps of Engineers. The second act, passed a month later, appropriated $75,000 to improve navigation on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers by removing sandbars, snags, and other obstacles. Subsequently, the act was amended to include other rivers such as the Missouri. This work, too, was given to the Corps of Engineers\u2014the only formally trained body of engineers in the new republic and, as part of the nation's small army, available to serve the wishes of Congress and the executive branch.\nPanic of 1819.\nAt the end of his first term of office, Monroe faced an economic crisis known as the Panic of 1819, the first major depression to hit the country since the ratification of the Constitution in 1788. The panic stemmed from declining imports and exports, and sagging agricultural prices as global markets readjusted to peacetime production and commerce in the aftermath of the War of 1812 and the Napoleonic Wars. The severity of the economic downturn in the U.S. was compounded by excessive speculation in public lands, fueled by the unrestrained issue of paper money from banks and business concerns. Monroe lacked the power to intervene directly in the economy, as banks were largely regulated by the states, and he could do little to stem the economic crisis. As a result, cuts had to be made to the state budget in the following years, primarily affecting the defense budget, whose growth to over 35% of the total budget in 1818 had already shocked the conservative republicans. Monroe's fortification program survived the cutbacks unscathed for the time being, while the target size of the standing army was reduced from 12,656 to 6,000 in May 1819. The next year, the budget for reinforcing and expanding the forts was reduced by over 70%. By 1821, the defense budget had shrunk to $5 million, about half of what it had been in 1818.\nBefore the onset of the Panic of 1819, some business leaders had called on Congress to increase tariff rates to address the negative balance of trade and help struggling industries. As the panic spread, Monroe declined to call a special session of Congress to address the economy. When Congress finally reconvened in December 1819, Monroe requested an increase in the tariff but declined to recommend specific rates. Congress would not raise tariff rates until the passage of the Tariff of 1824. The panic resulted in high unemployment and an increase in bankruptcies and foreclosures, and provoked popular resentment against banking and business enterprises.\nNative American policy.\nMonroe was the first president to visit the American West and entrusted Secretary of War Calhoun with departmental responsibility for this region. In order to prevent the relentless attacks on Native American settlements that accompanied the steadily advancing westward expansion, he advocated dividing up the areas between the federal territories and the Rocky Mountains and assigning them to different tribes for settlement. The districts were each to be given a civil government and a school system. In a speech to Congress on March 30, 1824, Monroe advocated the resettlement of Native Americans living within the territory of the United States to lands beyond the western frontier where they could continue their ancestral way of life. Nonetheless, he shared Jackson and Calhoun's concerns about sovereign Indian nations, believing they were an obstacle to the West's future development. Like Washington and Jefferson, he wished to present the Natives with the benefits of American culture and Western civilization for their own good, as well as to save them from extinction.\nElection of 1820.\nMonroe announced his candidacy for a second term early on. At the Republican Caucus on April 8, 1820, the 40 members unanimously decided not to nominate an opposing candidate to Monroe. The collapse of the Federalists left Monroe with no organized opposition at the end of his first term, and he ran for reelection unopposed, the only president other than Washington to do so. A single elector from New Hampshire, William Plumer, cast a vote for John Quincy Adams, preventing a unanimous vote in the Electoral College. He did so because he thought Monroe was incompetent. Later in the century, the story arose that he had cast his dissenting vote so that only George Washington would have the honor of unanimous election. Plumer never mentioned Washington in his speech explaining his vote to the other New Hampshire electors. Despite this broad support in the presidential election, Monroe had few loyal supporters and correspondingly little influence in the parallel elected 17th United States Congress.\nPost-presidency (1825\u20131831).\nWhen his presidency ended on March 4, 1825, James Monroe resided at Monroe Hill, which is now included in the grounds of the University of Virginia. Monroe spent the first five years of his retirement at his Oak Hill residence in Aldie, Virginia. In August 1825, the Monroes had received the Marquis de Lafayette and President John Quincy Adams as guests there. He devoted himself to reading, with his private library containing over 3,000 books, most of which he had acquired during his stays in Europe. Monroe began work on a book of political theory \"The People the Sovereigns, Being a Comparison of the Government of the United States with those of the Republics Which Have Existed Before, with the Causes of their Decadence and Fall\". The work was designed to highlight the difference between governments and people of the United States and other countries, ancient and modern, to show that certain issues that produced disastrous effects in them were not present in America. In 1829, Monroe abandoned work on \"The People the Sovereigns\" after hearing George Hay's unfavorable reaction to the manuscript. Hay suggested that Monroe write an autobiography, which would be more interesting and valuable to posterity. Monroe, delighted with the idea, began working on an autobiography, but died before it could be completed.\nIn retirement, he was plagued by pressing financial worries. As Minister to France during the 1790s, he had had to take out substantial private loans to fulfill representative duties and diplomatic protocol due to his moderate pay. As early as 1797, he had asked Congress for an expense allowance and had been waiting in vain for a payment ever since. In the last days before handing over to Adams, Monroe wrote to Jefferson and Madison asking them to support him in his claims against Congress if necessary. He sold off his Highland Plantation to the Second Bank of the United States out of financial necessity. It is now owned by his \"alma mater\", the College of William and Mary, which has opened it to the public as a historic site. Throughout his life, he was financially insolvent, which was exacerbated by his wife's poor health.\nMonroe served on the Board of Visitors for the University of Virginia under Jefferson and the second rector, James Madison, both former presidents, nearly until his death. Monroe had previously been a member of the original board of Central College (the predecessor to the University of Virginia), however the demands of the Presidency prevented him from continuing in the role. At the annual examinations in July, he presided over the Board of Examiners. When there was considerable indiscipline among the students, Monroe suggested in a report in 1830 that military drill be added to the curriculum, but Madison refused.\nVirginia Constitutional Convention Delegate.\nAlthough already clearly marked by age and severely impaired by a horse accident in 1828, Monroe was elected as a delegate to the Virginia Constitutional Convention of 1829\u20131830. He was one of four delegates elected from the senatorial district made up of his home district of Loudoun and Fairfax County. In October 1829, he was elected by the convention to serve as the presiding officer, until his failing health required him to withdraw on December 8, after which Philip P. Barbour of Orange County was elected presiding officer.\nDeath.\nShortly before his death, Monroe was dealt a severe blow when his son-in-law and close advisor George Hay died on September 21, 1830, and his wife Elizabeth died just two days later. Upon Elizabeth's death in 1830, Monroe moved to 63 Prince Street at Lafayette Place in New York City to live with his daughter Maria Hester Monroe Gouverneur, who had married Samuel L. Gouverneur, son of Nicholas Gouverneur. On July 4, 1831, Monroe died at age 73 from heart failure and tuberculosis, thus becoming the third president to have died on Independence Day. His death came 55 years after the United States Declaration of Independence was proclaimed and five years after the deaths of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. Monroe was originally buried in New York at the Gouverneur family's vault in the New York City Marble Cemetery. 27 years later, in 1858, his body was re-interred at the President's Circle in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond, Virginia. The James Monroe Tomb is a U.S. National Historic Landmark.\nPhilosophy and views.\nFreemasonry.\nMonroe was initiated as a Freemason on November 9, 1775, in Williamsburg Lodge No. 6, Williamsburg, Virginia at the age of 17 while he studied at the College of William &amp; Mary. He was active as a Freemason until at least 1786.\nReligious beliefs.\n\"When it comes to Monroe's thoughts on religion,\" historian Bliss Isely notes, \"less is known than that of any other President.\" No letters survive in which he discussed his religious beliefs. Nor did his friends, family or associates comment on his beliefs. Letters that do survive, such as ones written after the death of his son, contain no discussion of religion.\nMonroe was raised in a family that belonged to the Church of England when it was the state church in Virginia before the Revolution. As an adult, he attended Episcopal churches. Some historians see \"deistic tendencies\" in his few references to an impersonal God. Unlike Jefferson, Monroe was rarely attacked as an atheist or infidel. In 1832, James Renwick Willson, a Reformed Presbyterian minister in Albany, New York, criticized Monroe for having \"lived and died like a second-rate Athenian philosopher\".\nSlavery.\nMonroe owned dozens of slaves. He took several slaves with him to Washington to serve at the White House from 1817 to 1825. This was typical of other slaveholding presidents. Monroe sold his small Virginia plantation in 1783 to enter law and politics. Although he owned multiple properties over the course of his lifetime, his plantations were never profitable. Although he owned much more land and many more slaves, and speculated in property, he was rarely on site to oversee the operations. Overseers treated the slaves harshly to force production, but the plantations barely broke even. Monroe incurred debts by his lavish and expensive lifestyle and often sold property (including slaves) to pay them off. The labor of Monroe's many slaves was also used to support his daughter and son-in-law, along with a ne'er-do-well brother, Andrew, and his son, James.\nWhen Monroe was Governor of Virginia in 1800, hundreds of slaves from Virginia planned to kidnap him, take Richmond, and negotiate for their freedom. Gabriel's slave conspiracy was discovered. Monroe called out the militia; the slave patrols soon captured some slaves accused of involvement. Sidbury says some trials had a few measures to prevent abuses, such as an appointed attorney, but they were \"hardly 'fair'\". Slave codes prevented slaves from being treated like whites, and they were given quick trials without a jury. Monroe influenced the Executive Council to pardon and sell some slaves instead of hanging them. Historians say the Virginia courts executed between 26 and 35 slaves. None of the executed slaves had killed any whites because the uprising had been foiled before it began. An additional 50 slaves charged for their role in the planned rebellion would be spared, as a result of pardons, acquittals, and commutations. One reason for this was influence of a letter Monroe received from Thomas Jefferson urging mercy, telling him \"The other states &amp; the world at large will for ever condemn us if we indulge a principle of revenge, or go one step beyond absolute necessity. They cannot lose sight of the rights of the two parties, &amp; the object of the unsuccessful one.\" Only seven of the executions carried out against the rebels occurred after Monroe received Jefferson's letter.\nDuring Monroe's Ministry to the United Kingdom, William Wilberforce, an ardent abolitionist and British MP, sent a letter to Monroe asking him to confirm or deny a rumor he had heard regarding Congress reviving the slave trade (to which Monroe's reply is now lost, but is understood to have denied any such thing happening). Following this, Monroe and Wilberforce maintained a \"sporadic correspondence,\" with Wilberforce asking Monroe about the conditions of southern slaves and Monroe appreciating Wilberforce's writings on abolition.\nDuring the course of his presidency, Monroe remained convinced that slavery was wrong and supported private manumission, but at the same time he insisted that any attempt to promote emancipation would cause more problems. Monroe believed that slavery had become a permanent part of southern life, and that it could only be removed on providential terms. Like so many other Upper South slaveholders, Monroe believed that a central purpose of government was to ensure \"domestic tranquility\" for all. Like so many other Upper South planters, he also believed that the central purpose of government was to empower planters like himself. He feared for public safety in the United States during the era of violent revolution on two fronts. First, from potential class warfare of the French Revolution in which those of the propertied classes were summarily purged in mob violence and then preemptive trials, and second, from possible racial warfare similar to that of the Haitian Revolution in which blacks, whites, then mixed-race inhabitants were indiscriminately slaughtered as events there unfolded.\nAs president of Virginia's constitutional convention in the fall of 1829, Monroe reiterated his belief that slavery was a blight which, even as a British colony, Virginia had attempted to eradicate. \"What was the origin of our slave population?\" he rhetorically asked. \"The evil commenced when we were in our Colonial state, but acts were passed by our Colonial Legislature, prohibiting the importation, of more slaves, into the Colony. These were rejected by the Crown.\" To the dismay of states' rights proponents, he was willing to accept the federal government's financial assistance to emancipate and transport freed slaves to other countries. At the convention, Monroe made his final public statement on slavery, proposing that Virginia emancipate and deport its bondsmen with \"the aid of the Union\".\nMonroe was active in the American Colonization Society, which supported the establishment of colonies outside of the United States for free African Americans. The society helped send several thousand freed slaves to the new colony of Liberia in Africa from 1820 to 1840. Slave owners like Monroe and Andrew Jackson wanted to prevent free blacks from encouraging slaves in the South to rebel. Liberia's capital, Monrovia, was named after President Monroe.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nPolls of historians and political scientists tend to rank Monroe as an above average president. Monroe presided over a period in which the United States began to turn away from European affairs and towards domestic issues. His presidency saw the United States settle many of its longstanding boundary issues through an accommodation with Britain and the acquisition of Florida. Monroe also helped resolve sectional tensions through his support of the Missouri Compromise and by seeking support from all regions of the country. Political scientist Fred Greenstein argues that Monroe was a more effective executive than some of his better-known predecessors, including Madison and John Adams.\nMemorials.\nThe capital of Liberia is named Monrovia after Monroe; it is the only national capital other than Washington, D.C., named after a U.S. president. Monroe is the namesake of seventeen Monroe counties. Monroe, Maine, Monroe, Michigan, Monroe, Georgia, Monroe, Connecticut, both Monroe Townships in New Jersey, and Fort Monroe are all named for him. Monroe has been depicted on U.S. currency and stamps, including a 1954 United States Postal Service 5\u00a2 Liberty Issue postage stamp. \nMonroe was the last U.S. president to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue, a tricorne hat and knee-breeches according to the style of the late 18th century. That earned him the nickname \"The Last Cocked Hat\". He was also the last president who was not photographed. \nMonroe's participation in three historical events was memorialized. His participation in George Washington's crossing of the Delaware River in 1776 was memorialized in Emanuel Leutze's 1851 painting \"Washington Crossing the Delaware\" and his participation in the Battle of Trenton in 1776 as well as in George Washington's resignation as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army in 1783 was memorialized in John Trumbull's paintings \"The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton, December 26, 1776\" and \"General George Washington Resigning His Commission\" respectively.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "15980", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15980", "title": "James K. Polk", "text": "President of the United States from 1845 to 1849\nJames Knox Polk (; November 2, 1795 \u2013 June 15, 1849) was the 11th president of the United States, serving from 1845 to 1849. A prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Andrew Jackson and a member of the Democratic Party, he was an advocate of Jacksonian democracy and American expansionism. Polk saw Texas join the Union in his first year in office, one of the precipitating causes that soon led the U.S. into the Mexican\u2013American War. The settlement of that war expanded American territory to the Pacific Ocean. During his term, the dispute over the Oregon Territory with the United Kingdom was also resolved, creating the present U.S.-Canadian boundary.\nAfter building a successful law practice in Tennessee, Polk was elected to its state legislature in 1823 and then to the United States House of Representatives in 1825, becoming a strong supporter of Jackson. Following his tenure as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, he became Speaker of the House in 1835, the only person to serve both as Speaker and U.S. president. Polk left Congress to run for governor of Tennessee, winning in 1839 but losing in 1841 and 1843. He was a dark-horse candidate in the 1844 presidential election as the Democratic Party nominee. Polk entered his party's convention as a potential nominee for vice president but emerged as a compromise to head the ticket when no presidential candidate could gain the necessary two-thirds majority. In the general election, he narrowly defeated Henry Clay of the Whig Party and pledged to serve only one term.\nAfter a negotiation fraught with the risk of war, Polk reached a settlement with Great Britain over the disputed Oregon Country, with the territory for the most part divided along the 49th parallel. He oversaw victory in the Mexican\u2013American War, resulting in Mexico's cession of the entire American Southwest. He secured a substantial reduction of tariff rates with the Walker tariff of 1846. The same year, he achieved his other major goal, reestablishment of the Independent Treasury system. True to his campaign pledge to serve one term (one of the few U.S. presidents to make and keep such a pledge), Polk left office in 1849 and returned to Tennessee, where he died of cholera soon afterward.\nThough he has become relatively obscure, scholars have ranked Polk in the upper tier of U.S. presidents, mostly for his ability to promote and achieve the major items on his presidential agenda. At the same time, he has been criticized for leading the country into a war with Mexico that exacerbated sectional divides. A property owner who used slave labor, he kept a plantation in Mississippi and increased his slave ownership during his presidency. Polk's policy of territorial expansion saw the nation reach the Pacific coast and almost all its contiguous borders. He helped make the U.S. a nation poised to become a world power, but with divisions between free and slave states gravely exacerbated, setting the stage for the Civil War.\nEarly life.\nJames Knox Polk was born on November 2, 1795, in a log cabin in Pineville, North Carolina. He was the first of 10 children born into a family of farmers. His mother Jane named him after her father, James Knox. His father Samuel Polk was a farmer, slaveholder, and surveyor of Scots-Irish descent. The Polks had immigrated to America in the late 17th century, settling initially on the Eastern Shore of Maryland but later moving to south-central Pennsylvania and then to the Carolina hill country.\nThe Knox and Polk families were Presbyterian. While Polk's mother remained a devout Presbyterian, his father, whose own father Ezekiel Polk was a deist, rejected dogmatic Presbyterianism. He refused to declare his belief in Christianity at his son's baptism, and the minister refused to baptize young James. Nevertheless, James' mother \"stamped her rigid orthodoxy on James, instilling lifelong Calvinistic traits of self-discipline, hard work, piety, individualism, and a belief in the imperfection of human nature\", according to James A. Rawley's \"American National Biography\" article.\nIn 1803, Ezekiel Polk led four of his adult children and their families to the Duck River area in what became Maury County, Tennessee; Samuel Polk and his family followed in 1806. The Polk clan dominated politics in Maury County and in the new town of Columbia. Samuel became a county judge, and the guests at his home included Andrew Jackson, who had already served as a judge and in Congress. James learned from the political talk around the dinner table; both Samuel and Ezekiel were strong supporters of President Thomas Jefferson and opponents of the Federalist Party.\nPolk suffered from frail health as a child, a particular disadvantage in a frontier society. His father took him to see prominent Philadelphia physician Dr. Philip Syng Physick for urinary stones. The journey was broken off by James's severe pain, and Dr. Ephraim McDowell of Danville, Kentucky, operated to remove them. No anesthetic was available except brandy. The operation was successful, but it may have left James impotent or sterile, as he had no children. He recovered quickly and became more robust. His father offered to bring him into one of his businesses, but he wanted an education and enrolled at a Presbyterian academy in 1813. He became a member of the Zion Church near his home in 1813 and enrolled in the Zion Church Academy. He then entered Bradley Academy in Murfreesboro, Tennessee, where he proved a promising student.\nIn January 1816, Polk was admitted into the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill as a second-semester sophomore. The Polk family had connections with the university, then a small school of about 80 students; Samuel was its land agent in Tennessee and his cousin William Polk was a trustee. Polk's roommate was William Dunn Moseley, who became the first Governor of Florida. Polk joined the Dialectic Society where he took part in debates, became its president, and learned the art of oratory. In one address, he warned that some American leaders were flirting with monarchical ideals, singling out Alexander Hamilton, a foe of Jefferson. Polk graduated with honors in May 1818.\nAfter graduation, Polk returned to Nashville, Tennessee to study law under renowned trial attorney Felix Grundy, who became his first mentor. On September 20, 1819, he was elected clerk of the Tennessee State Senate, which then sat in Murfreesboro and to which Grundy had been elected. He was re-elected clerk in 1821 without opposition, and continued to serve until 1822. In June 1820, he was admitted to the Tennessee bar, and his first case was to defend his father against a public fighting charge; he secured his release for a one-dollar fine. He opened an office in Maury County and was successful as a lawyer, due largely to the many cases arising from the Panic of 1819, a severe depression. His law practice subsidized his political career.\nEarly political career.\nTennessee state legislator.\nBy the time the legislature adjourned its session in September 1822, Polk was determined to be a candidate for the Tennessee House of Representatives. The election was in August 1823, almost a year away, allowing him ample time for campaigning. Already involved locally as a member of the Masons, he was commissioned in the Tennessee militia as a captain in the cavalry regiment of the 5th Brigade. He was later appointed a colonel on the staff of Governor William Carroll, and was afterwards often referred to as \"Colonel\". Although many of the voters were members of the Polk clan, the young politician campaigned energetically. People liked Polk's oratory, which earned him the nickname \"Napoleon of the Stump\". At the polls, where Polk provided alcoholic refreshments for his voters, he defeated incumbent William Yancey.\nBeginning in early 1822, Polk courted Sarah Childress; they were engaged the following year and married on January 1, 1824, in Murfreesboro. Educated far better than most women of her time, especially in frontier Tennessee, Sarah Polk was from one of the state's most prominent families. During James's political career Sarah assisted her husband with his speeches, gave him advice on policy matters, and played an active role in his campaigns. Rawley noted that Sarah Polk's grace, intelligence and charming conversation helped compensate for her husband's often austere manner.\nPolk's first mentor was Grundy, but in the legislature, Polk came increasingly to oppose him on such matters as land reform, and came to support the policies of Andrew Jackson, by then a military hero for his victory at the Battle of New Orleans (1815). Jackson was a family friend to both the Polks and the Childresses\u2014there is evidence Sarah Polk and her siblings called him \"Uncle Andrew\"\u2014and James Polk quickly came to support his presidential ambitions for 1824. When the Tennessee Legislature deadlocked on whom to elect as U.S. senator in 1823 (until 1913, legislators, not the people, elected senators), Jackson's name was placed in nomination. Polk broke from his usual allies, casting his vote for Jackson, who won. The Senate seat boosted Jackson's presidential chances by giving him current political experience to match his military accomplishments. This began an alliance that would continue until Jackson's death early in Polk's presidency. Polk, through much of his political career, was known as \"Young Hickory\", based on the nickname for Jackson, \"Old Hickory\". Polk's political career was as dependent on Jackson as his nickname implied.\nIn the 1824 United States presidential election, Jackson got the most electoral votes (and led in the popular vote) but as he did not receive a majority in the Electoral College, the election was thrown into the U.S. House of Representatives, which chose Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, who had received the second-most of each. Polk, like other Jackson supporters, believed that Speaker of the House Henry Clay had traded his support as fourth-place finisher \u2013 the House may only choose from among the top three \u2013 to Adams in a Corrupt Bargain in exchange for being the new Secretary of State. Polk had in August 1824 declared his candidacy for the following year's election to the House of Representatives from Tennessee's 6th congressional district. The district stretched from Maury County south to the Alabama line, and extensive electioneering was expected of the five candidates. Polk campaigned so vigorously that Sarah began to worry about his health. During the campaign, Polk's opponents said that at the age of 29 Polk was too young for the responsibility of a seat in the House, but he won the election with 3,669 votes out of 10,440 and took his seat in Congress later that year.\nJackson disciple.\nWhen Polk arrived in Washington, D.C. for Congress's regular session in December 1825, he roomed in Benjamin Burch's boarding house with other Tennessee representatives, including Sam Houston. Polk made his first major speech on March 13, 1826, in which he said that the Electoral College should be abolished and that the president should be elected by popular vote. Remaining bitter at the alleged Corrupt Bargain between Adams and Clay, Polk became a vocal critic of the Adams administration, frequently voting against its policies. Sarah Polk remained at home in Columbia during her husband's first year in Congress, but accompanied him to Washington beginning in December 1826; she assisted him with his correspondence and came to hear James's speeches.\nPolk won re-election in 1827 and continued to oppose the Adams administration. He remained in close touch with Jackson, and when Jackson ran for president in 1828, Polk was an advisor on his campaign. Following Jackson's victory over Adams, Polk became one of the new President's most prominent and loyal supporters. Working on Jackson's behalf, Polk successfully opposed federally-funded \"internal improvements\" such as a proposed Buffalo-to-New Orleans road, and he was pleased by Jackson's Maysville Road veto in May 1830, when Jackson blocked a bill to finance a road extension entirely within one state, Kentucky, deeming it unconstitutional. Jackson opponents alleged that the veto message, which strongly complained about Congress' penchant for passing pork barrel projects, was written by Polk, but he denied this, stating that the message was entirely the President's.\nPolk served as Jackson's most prominent House ally in the \"Bank War\" that developed over Jackson's opposition to the re-authorization of the Second Bank of the United States. The Second Bank, headed by Nicholas Biddle of Philadelphia, not only held federal dollars but controlled much of the credit in the United States, as it could present currency issued by local banks for redemption in gold or silver. Some Westerners, including Jackson, opposed the Second Bank, deeming it a monopoly acting in the interest of Easterners. Polk, as a member of the House Ways and Means Committee, conducted investigations of the Second Bank, and though the committee voted for a bill to renew the bank's charter (scheduled to expire in 1836), Polk issued a strong minority report condemning the bank. The bill passed Congress in 1832; however, Jackson vetoed it and Congress failed to override the veto. Jackson's action was highly controversial in Washington but had considerable public support, and he won easy re-election in 1832.\nLike most Southerners, Polk favored low tariffs on imported goods, and initially sympathized with John C. Calhoun's opposition to the Tariff of Abominations during the Nullification Crisis of 1832\u20131833, but came over to Jackson's side as Calhoun moved towards advocating secession. Thereafter, Polk remained loyal to Jackson as the President sought to assert federal authority. Polk condemned secession and supported the Force Bill against South Carolina, which had claimed the authority to nullify federal tariffs. The matter was settled by Congress passing a compromise tariff.\nWays and Means Chair and Speaker of the House.\nIn December 1833, after being elected to a fifth consecutive term, Polk, with Jackson's backing, became the chairman of Ways and Means, a powerful position in the House. In that position, Polk supported Jackson's withdrawal of federal funds from the Second Bank. Polk's committee issued a report questioning the Second Bank's finances and another supporting Jackson's actions against it. In April 1834, the Ways and Means Committee reported a bill to regulate state deposit banks, which, when passed, enabled Jackson to deposit funds in pet banks, and Polk got legislation passed to allow the sale of the government's stock in the Second Bank.\nIn June 1834, Speaker of the House Andrew Stevenson resigned from Congress to become Minister to the United Kingdom. With Jackson's support, Polk ran for speaker against fellow Tennessean John Bell, Calhoun disciple Richard Henry Wilde, and Joel Barlow Sutherland of Pennsylvania. After ten ballots, Bell, who had the support of many opponents of the administration, defeated Polk. Jackson called in political debts to try to get Polk elected Speaker of the House at the start of the next Congress in December 1835, assuring Polk in a letter he meant him to burn that New England would support him for speaker. They were successful; Polk defeated Bell to take the speakership.\nAccording to Thomas M. Leonard, \"by 1836, while serving as Speaker of the House of Representatives, Polk approached the zenith of his congressional career. He was at the center of Jacksonian Democracy on the House floor, and, with the help of his wife, he ingratiated himself into Washington's social circles.\" The prestige of the speakership caused them to move from a boarding house to their own residence on Pennsylvania Avenue. In the 1836 presidential election, Vice President Martin Van Buren, Jackson's chosen successor, defeated multiple Whig candidates, including Tennessee Senator Hugh Lawson White. Greater Whig strength in Tennessee helped White carry his state, though Polk's home district went for Van Buren. Ninety percent of Tennessee voters had supported Jackson in 1832, but many in the state disliked the destruction of the Second Bank, or were unwilling to support Van Buren.\nAs Speaker of the House, Polk worked for the policies of Jackson and later Van Buren. Polk appointed committees with Democratic chairs and majorities, including the New York radical C. C. Cambreleng as the new Ways and Means chair, although he tried to maintain the speaker's traditional nonpartisan appearance. The two major issues during Polk's speakership were slavery and, after the Panic of 1837, the economy. Polk firmly enforced the \"gag rule\", by which the House of Representatives would not accept or debate citizen petitions regarding slavery. This ignited fierce protests from John Quincy Adams, who was by then a congressman from Massachusetts and an abolitionist. Instead of finding a way to silence Adams, Polk frequently engaged in useless shouting matches, leading Jackson to conclude that Polk should have shown better leadership. Van Buren and Polk faced pressure to rescind the Specie Circular, Jackson's 1836 order that payment for government lands be in gold and silver. Some believed this had led to the crash by causing a lack of confidence in paper currency issued by banks. Despite such arguments, with support from Polk and his cabinet, Van Buren chose to back the Specie Circular. Polk and Van Buren attempted to establish an Independent Treasury system that would allow the government to oversee its own deposits (rather than using pet banks), but the bill was defeated in the House. It eventually passed in 1840.\nUsing his thorough grasp of the House's rules, Polk attempted to bring greater order to its proceedings. Unlike many of his peers, he never challenged anyone to a duel no matter how much they insulted his honor. The economic downturn cost the Democrats seats, so that when he faced re-election as Speaker of the House in December 1837, he won by only 13 votes, and he foresaw defeat in 1839. Polk by then had presidential ambitions but was well aware that no Speaker of the House had ever become president (Polk is still the only one to have held both offices). After seven terms in the House, two as speaker, he announced that he would not seek re-election, choosing instead to run for Governor of Tennessee in the 1839 election.\nGovernor of Tennessee.\nIn 1835, the Democrats had lost the governorship of Tennessee for the first time in their history, and Polk decided to return home to help the party. Tennessee was afire for White and Whiggism; the state had reversed its political loyalties since the days of Jacksonian domination. As head of the state Democratic Party, Polk undertook his first statewide campaign, He opposed Whig incumbent Newton Cannon, who sought a third two-year term as governor. The fact that Polk was the one called upon to \"redeem\" Tennessee from the Whigs tacitly acknowledged him as head of the state Democratic Party.\nPolk campaigned on national issues, whereas Cannon stressed state issues. After being bested by Polk in the early debates, the governor retreated to Nashville, the state capital, alleging important official business. Polk made speeches across the state, seeking to become known more widely than just in his native Middle Tennessee. When Cannon came back on the campaign trail in the final days, Polk pursued him, hastening the length of the state to be able to debate the governor again. On Election Day, August 1, 1839, Polk defeated Cannon, 54,102 to 51,396, as the Democrats recaptured the state legislature and won back three congressional seats.\nTennessee's governor had limited power\u2014there was no gubernatorial veto, and the small size of the state government limited any political patronage. But Polk saw the office as a springboard for his national ambitions, seeking to be nominated as Van Buren's vice presidential running mate at the 1840 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore in May. Polk hoped to be the replacement if Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson was dumped from the ticket; Johnson was disliked by many Southern whites for fathering two daughters by a biracial mistress and attempting to introduce them into white society. Johnson was from Kentucky, so Polk's Tennessee residence would keep the New Yorker Van Buren's ticket balanced. The convention chose to endorse no one for vice president, stating that a choice would be made once the popular vote was cast. Three weeks after the convention, recognizing that Johnson was too popular in the party to be ousted, Polk withdrew his name. The Whig presidential candidate, General William Henry Harrison, conducted a rollicking campaign with the motto \"Tippecanoe and Tyler Too\", easily winning both the national vote and that in Tennessee. Polk campaigned in vain for Van Buren and was embarrassed by the outcome; Jackson, who had returned to his home, the Hermitage, near Nashville, was horrified at the prospect of a Whig administration. In the 1840 election, Polk received one vote from a faithless elector in the Electoral College's vote for vice president. Harrison's death after a month in office in 1841 left the presidency to Vice President John Tyler, who soon broke with the Whigs.\nPolk's three major programs during his governorship \u2013 regulating state banks, implementing state internal improvements, and improving education \u2013 failed to win the approval of the legislature. His only major success as governor was his politicking to secure the replacement of Tennessee's two Whig U.S. senators with Democrats. Polk's tenure was hindered by the continuing nationwide economic crisis that had followed the Panic of 1837 and which had caused Van Buren to lose the 1840 election.\nEncouraged by the success of Harrison's campaign, the Whigs ran a freshman legislator from frontier Wilson County, James C. Jones against Polk in 1841. \"Lean Jimmy\" had proven one of their most effective gadflies against Polk, and his lighthearted tone at campaign debates was very effective against the serious Polk. The two debated the length of Tennessee, and Jones's support of distribution to the states of surplus federal revenues, and of a national bank, struck a chord with Tennessee voters. On election day in August 1841, Polk was defeated by 3,000 votes, the first time he had been beaten at the polls. Polk returned to Columbia and the practice of law and prepared for a rematch against Jones in 1843, but though the new governor took less of a joking tone, it made little difference to the outcome, as Polk was beaten again, this time by 3,833 votes. In the wake of his second statewide defeat in three years, Polk faced an uncertain political future.\nElection of 1844.\nDemocratic nomination.\nDespite his loss, Polk was determined to become the next vice president of the United States, seeing it as a path to the presidency. Van Buren was the frontrunner for the 1844 Democratic nomination, and Polk engaged in a careful campaign to become his running mate. The former president faced opposition from Southerners who feared his views on slavery, while his handling of the Panic of 1837\u2014he had refused to rescind the Specie Circular\u2014aroused opposition from some in the West (modern Midwestern United States) who believed his hard money policies had hurt their section of the country. Many Southerners backed Calhoun's candidacy, Westerners rallied around Senator Lewis Cass of Michigan, and former Vice President Johnson also maintained a strong following among Democrats. Jackson assured Van Buren by letter that Polk in his campaigns for governor had \"fought the battle well and fought it alone\". Polk hoped to gain Van Buren's support, hinting in a letter that a Van Buren/Polk ticket could carry Tennessee, but found him unconvinced.\nThe biggest political issue in the United States at that time was territorial expansion. The Republic of Texas had successfully revolted against Mexico in 1836. With the republic largely populated by American emigres, those on both sides of the Sabine River border between the U.S. and Texas deemed it inevitable that Texas would join the United States, but this would anger Mexico, which considered Texas a breakaway province, and threatened war if the United States annexed it. Jackson, as president, had recognized Texas independence, but the initial momentum toward annexation had stalled. Britain was seeking to expand her influence in Texas: Britain had abolished slavery, and if Texas did the same, it would provide a western haven for runaways to match one in the North. A Texas not in the United States would also stand in the way of what was deemed America's Manifest Destiny to overspread the continent.\nClay was nominated for president by acclamation at the April 1844 Whig National Convention, with New Jersey's Theodore Frelinghuysen his running mate. A Kentucky slaveholder at a time when opponents of Texas annexation argued that it would give slavery more room to spread, Clay sought a nuanced position on the issue. Jackson, who strongly supported a Van Buren/Polk ticket, was delighted when Clay issued a letter for publication in the newspapers opposing Texas annexation, only to be devastated when he learned Van Buren had done the same thing. Van Buren did this because he feared losing his base of support in the Northeast, but his supporters in the old Southwest were stunned at his action. Polk, on the other hand, had written a pro-annexation letter that had been published four days before Van Buren's. Jackson wrote sadly to Van Buren that no candidate who opposed annexation could be elected, and decided Polk was the best person to head the ticket. Jackson met with Polk at the Hermitage on May 13, 1844, and explained to his visitor that only an expansionist from the South or Southwest could be elected\u2014and, in his view, Polk had the best chance. Polk was at first startled, calling the plan \"utterly abortive\", but he agreed to accept it. Polk immediately wrote to instruct his lieutenants at the convention to work for his nomination as president.\nDespite Jackson's quiet efforts on his behalf, Polk was skeptical that he could win. Nevertheless, because of the opposition to Van Buren by expansionists in the West and South, Polk's key lieutenant at the 1844 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore, Gideon Johnson Pillow, believed Polk could emerge as a compromise candidate. Publicly, Polk, who remained in Columbia during the convention, professed full support for Van Buren's candidacy and was believed to be seeking the vice presidency. Polk was one of the few major Democrats to have declared for the annexation of Texas.\nThe convention opened on May 27, 1844. A crucial question was whether the nominee needed two-thirds of the delegate vote, as had been the case at previous Democratic conventions, or merely a majority. A vote for two-thirds would doom Van Buren's candidacy due to opposition from southern delegates. With the support of the Southern states, the two-thirds rule was passed. Van Buren won a majority on the first presidential ballot but failed to win the necessary two-thirds, and his support slowly faded. Cass, Johnson, Calhoun and James Buchanan also received votes on the first ballot, and Cass took the lead on the fifth. After seven ballots, the convention remained deadlocked: Cass could not reach two-thirds, and Van Buren's supporters became discouraged about his chances. Delegates were ready to consider a new candidate who might break the stalemate.\nWhen the convention adjourned after the seventh ballot, Pillow, who had been waiting for an opportunity to press Polk's name, conferred with George Bancroft of Massachusetts, a politician and historian and longtime Polk correspondent, who had planned to nominate Polk for vice president. Bancroft had supported Van Buren's candidacy and was willing to see New York Senator Silas Wright head the ticket, but as a Van Buren loyalist, Wright would not consent. Pillow and Bancroft decided if Polk were nominated for president, Wright might accept the second spot. Before the eighth ballot, former Attorney General Benjamin F. Butler, head of the New York delegation, read a pre-written letter from Van Buren to be used if he could not be nominated, withdrawing in Wright's favor. But Wright (who was in Washington) had also entrusted a pre-written letter to a supporter, in which he refused to be considered as a presidential candidate, and stated in the letter that he agreed with Van Buren's position on Texas. Had Wright's letter not been read he most likely would have been nominated, but without him, Butler began to rally Van Buren supporters for Polk as the best possible candidate, and Bancroft placed Polk's name before the convention. On the eighth ballot, Polk received only 44 votes to Cass's 114 and Van Buren's 104, but the deadlock showed signs of breaking. Butler formally withdrew Van Buren's name, many delegations declared for the Tennessean, and on the ninth ballot, Polk received 233 ballots to Cass's 29, making him the Democratic nominee for president. The nomination was then made unanimous.\nThe convention then considered the vice-presidential nomination. Butler advocated for Wright, and the convention agreed, with only four Georgia delegates dissenting. Word of Wright's nomination was sent to him in Washington via telegraph. Having declined by proxy an almost certain presidential nomination, Wright also refused the vice-presidential nomination. Senator Robert J. Walker of Mississippi, a close Polk ally, then suggested former senator George M. Dallas of Pennsylvania. Dallas was acceptable enough to all factions and gained the nomination on the third ballot. The delegates passed a platform and adjourned on May 30.\nMany contemporary politicians, including Pillow and Bancroft, later claimed credit for getting Polk the nomination, but Walter R. Borneman felt that most of the credit was due to Jackson and Polk, \"the two who had done the most were back in Tennessee, one an aging icon ensconced at the Hermitage and the other a shrewd lifelong politician waiting expectantly in Columbia\". Whigs mocked Polk with the chant \"Who is James K. Polk?\", affecting never to have heard of him. Though he had experience as Speaker of the House and Governor of Tennessee, all previous presidents had served as vice president, Secretary of State, or as a high-ranking general. Polk has been described as the first \"dark horse\" presidential nominee, although his nomination was less of a surprise than that of future nominees such as Franklin Pierce or Warren G. Harding. Despite his party's gibes, Clay recognized that Polk could unite the Democrats.\nGeneral election.\nRumors of Polk's nomination reached Nashville on June 4, much to Jackson's delight; they were substantiated later that day. The dispatches were sent on to Columbia, arriving the same day, and letters and newspapers describing what had happened at Baltimore were in Polk's hands by June 6. He accepted his nomination by letter dated June 12, alleging that he had never sought the office, and stating his intent to serve only one term. Wright was embittered by what he called the \"foul plot\" against Van Buren, and demanded assurances that Polk had played no part; it was only after Polk professed that he had remained loyal to Van Buren that Wright supported his campaign. Following the custom of the time that presidential candidates avoid electioneering or appearing to seek the office, Polk remained in Columbia and made no speeches. He engaged in extensive correspondence with Democratic Party officials as he managed his campaign. Polk made his views known in his acceptance letter and through responses to questions sent by citizens that were printed in newspapers, often by arrangement.\nA potential pitfall for Polk's campaign was the issue of whether the tariff should be for revenue only, or with the intent to protect American industry. Polk finessed the tariff issue in a published letter. Recalling that he had long stated that tariffs should only be sufficient to finance government operations, he maintained that stance but wrote that within that limitation, government could and should offer \"fair and just protection\" to American interests, including manufacturers. He refused to expand on this stance, acceptable to most Democrats, despite the Whigs pointing out that he had committed himself to nothing. In September, a delegation of Whigs from nearby Giles County came to Columbia, armed with specific questions on Polk's views regarding the existing Whig-passed Tariff of 1842, and with the stated intent of remaining in Columbia until they got answers. Polk took several days to respond and chose to stand by his earlier statement, provoking an outcry in the Whig papers.\nAnother concern was the third-party candidacy of President Tyler, which might split the Democratic vote. Tyler had been nominated by a group of loyal officeholders. Under no illusions he could win, he believed he could rally states' rights supporters and populists to hold the balance of power in the election. Only Jackson had the stature to resolve the situation, which he did with two letters to friends in the Cabinet, that he knew would be shown to Tyler, stating that the President's supporters would be welcomed back into the Democratic fold. Jackson wrote that once Tyler withdrew, many Democrats would embrace him for his pro-annexation stance. The former president also used his influence to stop Francis Preston Blair and his \"Globe\" newspaper, the semi-official organ of the Democratic Party, from attacking Tyler. These proved enough; Tyler withdrew from the race in August.\nParty troubles were a third concern. Polk and Calhoun made peace when a former South Carolina congressman, Francis Pickens visited Tennessee and came to Columbia for two days and to the Hermitage for sessions with the increasingly ill Jackson. Calhoun wanted the \"Globe\" dissolved, and that Polk would act against the 1842 tariff and promote Texas annexation. Reassured on these points, Calhoun became a strong supporter.\nPolk was aided regarding Texas when Clay, realizing his anti-annexation letter had cost him support, attempted in two subsequent letters to clarify his position. These angered both sides, which attacked Clay as insincere. Texas also threatened to divide the Democrats sectionally, but Polk managed to appease most Southern party leaders without antagonizing Northern ones. As the election drew closer, it became clear that most of the country favored the annexation of Texas, and some Southern Whig leaders supported Polk's campaign due to Clay's anti-annexation stance.\nThe campaign was vitriolic; both major party candidates were accused of various acts of malfeasance; Polk was accused of being both a duelist and a coward. The most damaging smear was the Roorback forgery; in late August an item appeared in an abolitionist newspaper, part of a book detailing fictional travels through the South of a Baron von Roorback, an imaginary German nobleman. The Ithaca \"Chronicle\" printed it without labeling it as fiction, and inserted a sentence alleging that the traveler had seen forty slaves who had been sold by Polk after being branded with his initials. The item was withdrawn by the \"Chronicle\" when challenged by the Democrats, but it was widely reprinted. Borneman suggested that the forgery backfired on Polk's opponents as it served to remind voters that Clay too was a slaveholder. John Eisenhower, in his journal article on the election, stated that the smear came too late to be effectively rebutted, and likely cost Polk Ohio. Southern newspapers, on the other hand, went far in defending Polk, one Nashville newspaper alleging that his slaves preferred their bondage to freedom. Polk himself implied to newspaper correspondents that the only slaves he owned had either been inherited or had been purchased from relatives in financial distress; this paternalistic image was also painted by surrogates like Gideon Pillow. This was not true, though not known at the time; by then he had bought over thirty slaves, both from relatives and others, mainly for the purpose of procuring labor for his Mississippi cotton plantation.\nThere was no uniform election day in 1844; states voted between November 1 and 12. Polk won the election with 49.5% of the popular vote and 170 of the 275 electoral votes. Becoming the first president elected despite losing his state of residence (Tennessee), Polk also lost his birth state, North Carolina. However, he won Pennsylvania and New York, where Clay lost votes to the antislavery Liberty Party candidate James G. Birney, who got more votes in New York than Polk's margin of victory. Had Clay won New York, he would have been elected president.\nPresidency (1845\u20131849).\nWith a slender victory in the popular vote, but with a greater victory in the Electoral College (170\u2013105), Polk proceeded to implement his campaign promises. He presided over a country whose population had doubled every twenty years since the American Revolution and which had reached demographic parity with Great Britain. During Polk's tenure, technological advancements persisted, including the continued expansion of railroads and increased use of the telegraph. These improvements in communication encouraged a zest for expansionism. \nPolk set four clearly defined goals for his administration:\nWhile his domestic aims represented continuity with past Democratic policies, successful completion of Polk's foreign policy goals would represent the first major American territorial gains since the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty of 1819.\nTransition, inauguration and appointments.\nPolk formed a geographically balanced Cabinet. He consulted Jackson and one or two other close allies, and decided that the large states of New York, Pennsylvania and Virginia should have representation in the six-member Cabinet, as should his home state of Tennessee. At a time when an incoming president might retain some or all of his predecessor's department heads, Polk wanted an entirely fresh Cabinet, but this proved delicate. Tyler's final Secretary of State was Calhoun, leader of a considerable faction of the Democratic Party, but, when approached by emissaries, he did not take offense and was willing to step down.\nPolk did not want his Cabinet to contain presidential hopefuls, though he chose to nominate James Buchanan of Pennsylvania, whose ambition for the presidency was well-known, as Secretary of State. Tennessee's Cave Johnson, a close friend and ally of Polk, was nominated for the position of Postmaster General, with George Bancroft, the historian who had played a crucial role in Polk's nomination, as Navy Secretary. Polk's choices met with the approval of Andrew Jackson, with whom Polk met for the last time in January 1845, as Jackson died that June.\nTyler's last Navy Secretary, John Y. Mason of Virginia, Polk's friend since college days and a longtime political ally, was not on the original list. As Cabinet choices were affected by factional politics and President Tyler's drive to resolve the Texas issue before leaving office, Polk at the last minute chose Mason as Attorney General. Polk also chose Mississippi Senator Walker as Secretary of the Treasury and New York's William Marcy as Secretary of War. The members worked well together, and few replacements were necessary. One reshuffle was required in 1846 when Bancroft, who wanted a diplomatic posting, became U.S. minister to Britain.\nIn his last days in office, President Tyler sought to complete the annexation of Texas. After the Senate had defeated an earlier treaty that required a two-thirds majority, Tyler urged Congress to pass a joint resolution, relying on its constitutional power to admit states. There were disagreements about the terms under which Texas would be admitted and Polk became involved in negotiations to break the impasse. With Polk's help, the annexation resolution narrowly cleared the Senate. Tyler was unsure whether to sign the resolution or leave it for Polk and sent Calhoun to consult with Polk, who declined to give any advice. On his final evening in office, March 3, 1845, Tyler offered annexation to Texas according to the terms of the resolution.\nEven before his inauguration, Polk wrote to Cave Johnson, \"I intend to be myself President of the U.S.\" He would gain a reputation as a hard worker, spending ten to twelve hours at his desk, and rarely leaving Washington. Polk wrote, \"No President who performs his duty faithfully and conscientiously can have any leisure. I prefer to supervise the whole operations of the government myself rather than intrust the public business to subordinates, and this makes my duties very great.\" When he took office on March 4, 1845, Polk, at 49, became the youngest president to that point. Polk's inauguration was the first inaugural ceremony to be reported by telegraph, and first to be shown in a newspaper illustration (in \"The Illustrated London News\").\nIn his inaugural address, delivered in a steady rain, Polk made clear his support for Texas annexation by referring to the 28 states of the U.S., thus including Texas. He proclaimed his fidelity to Jackson's principles by quoting his famous toast, \"Every lover of his country must shudder at the thought of the possibility of its dissolution and will be ready to adopt the patriotic sentiment, 'Our Federal Union\u2014it must be preserved.'\" He stated his opposition to a national bank, and repeated that the tariff could include incidental protection. Although he did not mention slavery specifically, he alluded to it, decrying those who would tear down an institution protected by the Constitution.\nPolk devoted the second half of his speech to foreign affairs, and specifically to expansion. He applauded the annexation of Texas, warning that Texas was no affair of any other nation, and certainly none of Mexico's. He spoke of the Oregon Country, and of the many who were migrating, pledging to safeguard America's rights there and to protect the settlers.\nAs well as appointing Cabinet officers to advise him, Polk made his sister's son, Joseph Knox Walker, his personal secretary, an especially important position because, other than his slaves, Polk had no staff at the White House. Walker, who lived at the White House with his growing family (two children were born to him while living there), performed his duties competently through his uncle's presidency. Other Polk relatives visited at the White House, some for extended periods.\nForeign policy.\nPartition of Oregon Country.\nRussia, Spain, Britain and the U.S. each derived claims to the Oregon Country from the voyages of explorers, but Russia and Spain later waived theirs. As a result, only Britain and the U.S. negotiated over possession of the territory; the claims of the indigenous peoples were not a factor.\nRather than war over the distant and unsettled territory, Washington and London negotiated amicably. Previous U.S. administrations had offered to divide the region along the 49th parallel, which was not acceptable to Britain, as it had commercial interests along the Columbia River. Britain's preferred partition was unacceptable to Polk, as it would have awarded Puget Sound and all lands north of the Columbia River to Britain, and Britain was unwilling to accept the 49th parallel extended to the Pacific, as it meant the entire opening to Puget Sound would be in American hands, isolating its settlements along the Fraser River.\nEdward Everett, Tyler's minister in London, had informally proposed dividing the territory at the 49th parallel with the strategic Vancouver Island granted to the British, thus allowing an opening to the Pacific. But when the new British minister in Washington, Richard Pakenham arrived in 1844 prepared to follow up, he found that many Americans desired the entire territory, which extended north to 54 degrees, 40 minutes north latitude. Oregon had not been a major issue in the 1844 election, but the heavy influx of settlers, mostly American, to the Oregon Country in 1845, and the rising spirit of expansionism in the U.S. as Texas and Oregon seized the public's eye, made a treaty with Britain more urgent. Many Democrats believed the U.S. should span from coast to coast, a philosophy called Manifest Destiny.\nThough both sides sought an acceptable compromise, each also saw the territory as an important geopolitical asset that would play a large part in determining the dominant power in North America. In his inaugural address, Polk announced that he viewed the U.S. claim to the land as \"clear and unquestionable\", provoking threats of war from British leaders should Polk attempt to take control of the entire territory. Polk had refrained in his address from asserting a claim to the entire territory, although the Democratic Party platform called for such a claim. Despite Polk's hawkish rhetoric, he viewed war over Oregon as unwise, and Polk and Buchanan began negotiations with the British. Like his predecessors, Polk again proposed a division along the 49th parallel, which Pakenham immediately rejected. Buchanan was wary of a two-front war with Mexico and Britain, but Polk was willing to risk war with both countries in pursuit of a favorable settlement. In his annual message to Congress in December 1845, Polk requested approval of giving Britain a one-year notice (as required in the Treaty of 1818) of his intention to terminate the joint occupancy of Oregon. In that message, he quoted from the Monroe Doctrine to denote America's intention of keeping European powers out, the first significant use of it since its origin in 1823. After much debate, Congress passed the resolution in April 1846, attaching its hope that the dispute would be settled amicably.\nWhen the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Aberdeen, learned of the proposal Pakenham rejected, Aberdeen asked the U.S. to reopen negotiations, but Polk was unwilling unless the British made a proposal. With Britain moving toward free trade with the repeal of the Corn Laws, good trade relations with the U.S. were more important to Aberdeen than a distant territory. In February 1846, Louis McLane, the American minister in London, was told that Washington would look favorably on a British proposal to divide the continent at the 49th parallel. In June 1846, Pakenham presented an offer calling for a boundary line at the 49th parallel, with the exception that Britain would retain all of Vancouver Island, and there would be limited navigation rights for British subjects on the Columbia River until the expiration of the charter of the Hudson's Bay Company in 1859. Polk and most of his Cabinet were prepared to accept the proposal. The Senate ratified the Oregon Treaty in a 41\u201314 vote. Polk's willingness to risk war with Britain had frightened many, but his tough negotiation tactics may have gained concessions from the British (particularly regarding the Columbia River) that a more conciliatory president might not have won.\nAnnexation of Texas.\nThe annexation resolution signed by Tyler gave the president the choice of asking Texas to approve annexation, or reopening negotiations; Tyler immediately sent a messenger with the first option. Polk allowed the messenger to continue. He also sent assurance that the United States would defend Texas, and would fix its southern border at the Rio Grande, as claimed by Texas, rather than at the Nueces River, as claimed by Mexico. Public sentiment in Texas favored annexation. In July 1845, a Texas convention ratified annexation, and thereafter voters approved it. In December 1845, Texas became the 28th state. However Mexico had broken diplomatic relations with the United States on passage of the joint resolution in March 1845; the annexation escalated tensions as Mexico had never recognized Texan independence.\nMexican-American War.\nRoad to war.\nFollowing the annexation of Texas in 1845, Polk began preparations for a potential war, sending an army there, led by Brigadier General Zachary Taylor. American land and naval forces were both ordered to respond to any Mexican aggression but to avoid provoking a war. Polk thought Mexico would give in under duress.\nPolk hoped that a show of force would lead to negotiations. In late 1845, He sent John Slidell to Mexico to purchase New Mexico and California for $30 million ($ in 2024 dollars ), as well as securing Mexico's agreement to a Rio Grande border. Mexican opinion was hostile and President Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn de Herrera refused to receive Slidell. Herrera soon was deposed by a military coup led by General Mariano Paredes, a hard-liner who pledged to take back Texas. Dispatches from Slidell warned Washington that war was near.\nPolk regarded the treatment of Slidell as an insult and an \"ample cause of war\", and he prepared to ask Congress to declare it. Meanwhile, in late March, General Taylor had reached the Rio Grande, and his army camped across the river from Matamoros, Tamaulipas. In April, after Mexican general Pedro de Ampudia demanded that Taylor return to the Nueces River, Taylor began a blockade of Matamoros. A skirmish on the northern side of the Rio Grande on April 25 ended in the death or capture of dozens of American soldiers and became known as the Thornton Affair. Word reached Washington on May 9, and Polk sent a war message to Congress on the ground that Mexico had, \"shed American blood on the American soil\". The House overwhelmingly approved a resolution declaring war and authorizing the president to accept 50,000 volunteers into the military. In the Senate, war opponents led by Calhoun questioned Polk's version of events. Nonetheless, the House resolution passed the Senate in a 40\u20132 vote, with Calhoun abstaining, marking the beginning of the Mexican\u2013American War.\nCourse of the war.\nAfter the initial skirmishes, Taylor and much of his army marched away from the river to secure the supply line, leaving a makeshift base, Fort Texas. On the way back to the Rio Grande, Mexican forces under General Mariano Arista attempted to block Taylor's way as other troops laid siege to Fort Texas, forcing the U.S. Army general to the attack if he hoped to relieve the fort. In the Battle of Palo Alto, the first major engagement of the war, Taylor's troops forced Arista's from the field, suffering only four dead to hundreds for the Mexicans. The next day, Taylor led the army to victory in the Battle of Resaca de la Palma, putting the Mexican Army to rout. The early successes boosted support for the war, which despite the lopsided votes in Congress, had deeply divided the nation. Many Northern Whigs opposed the war, as did others; they felt Polk had used patriotism to manipulate the nation into fighting a war, the goal of which was to give slavery room to expand.\nPolk distrusted the two senior officers, Major General Winfield Scott and Taylor, as both were Whigs. Polk would have replaced them with Democrats, but felt Congress would not approve it. He offered Scott the position of top commander in the war, which the general accepted. Polk and Scott already knew and disliked each other: the President made the appointment despite the fact that Scott had sought his party's presidential nomination for the 1840 election. Polk came to believe that Scott was too slow in getting himself and his army away from Washington and to the Rio Grande, and was outraged to learn Scott was using his influence in Congress to defeat the administration's plan to expand the number of generals. The news of Taylor's victory at Resaca de la Palma arrived then, and Polk decided to have Taylor take command in the field, and Scott to remain in Washington. Polk also ordered Commodore Conner to allow Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna to return to Mexico from his exile in Havana, thinking that he would negotiate a treaty ceding territory to the U.S. for a price. Polk sent representatives to Cuba for talks with Santa Anna.\nPolk sent an army expedition led by Stephen W. Kearny towards Santa Fe, to territory beyond the original claims in Texas. In 1845, Polk, fearful of French or British intervention, had sent Lieutenant Archibald H. Gillespie to California with orders to foment a pro-American rebellion that could be used to justify annexation of the territory. After meeting with Gillespie, Army captain John C. Fr\u00e9mont led settlers in northern California to overthrow the Mexican garrison in Sonoma in what became known as the Bear Flag Revolt. In August 1846, American forces under Kearny captured Santa Fe, capital of the province of New Mexico, without firing a shot. Almost simultaneously, Commodore Robert F. Stockton landed in Los Angeles and proclaimed the capture of California. After American forces put down a revolt, the United States held effective control of New Mexico and California. Nevertheless, the Western theater of the war would prove to be a political headache for Polk, since a dispute between Fr\u00e9mont and Kearny led to a break between Polk and the powerful Missouri senator (and father-in-law of Fr\u00e9mont), Thomas Hart Benton.\nThe initial public euphoria over the victories at the start of the war slowly dissipated. In August 1846, Polk asked Congress to appropriate $2 million (~$ in 2024) as a down payment for the potential purchase of Mexican lands. Polk's request ignited opposition, as he had never before made public his desire to annex parts of Mexico (aside from lands claimed by Texas). It was unclear whether such newly acquired lands would be slave or free, and there was fierce and acrimonious sectional debate. A freshman Democratic Congressman, David Wilmot of Pennsylvania, previously a firm supporter of Polk's administration, offered an amendment to the bill, the Wilmot Proviso, that would ban slavery in any land acquired using the money. The appropriation bill, with the Wilmot Proviso attached, passed the House, but died in the Senate. This discord cost Polk's party, with Democrats losing control of the House in the 1846 elections. In early 1847, though, Polk was successful in passing a bill raising further regiments, and he also finally won approval for the appropriation.\nTo try to bring the war to a quick end, in July 1846, Polk considered supporting a potential coup led by the exiled Mexican former president, General Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna, with the hope that Santa Anna would sell parts of California. Santa Anna was in exile in Cuba, still a colony of Spain. Polk sent an envoy to have secret talks with Santa Anna. The U.S. Consul in Havana, R.B. Campbell, began seeking a way to engage with Santa Anna. A U.S. citizen of Spanish birth, Col. Alejandro Jos\u00e9 Atocha, knew Santa Anna and acted initially as an intermediary. Polk noted his contacts with Atocha in his diary, who said that Santa Anna was interested in concluding a treaty with the U.S. gaining territory while Mexico received payment that would include settling its debts. Polk decided that Atocha was untrustworthy and sent his own representative, Alexander Slidell Mackenzie, (a relative of John Slidell) to meet with Santa Anna. Mackenzie told Santa Anna that Polk wished to see him in power and that if they came to an agreement that the U.S. naval blockade would be lifted briefly to allow Santa Anna to return to Mexico. Polk requested $2 million from Congress to be used to negotiate a treaty with Mexico or payment to Mexico before a treaty was signed. The blockade was indeed briefly lifted and Santa Anna returned to Mexico, not to head a government that would negotiate a treaty with the U.S., but rather to organize a military defense of his homeland. Santa Anna gloated over Polk's na\u00efvet\u00e9; Polk had been \"snookered\" by Santa Anna. Instead of coming to a negotiated settlement with the U.S., Santa Anna mounted a defense of Mexico and fought to the bitter end. \"His actions would prolong the war for at least a year, and more than any other single person, it was Santa Anna who denied Polk's dream of short war.\"\nThis caused Polk to harden his position on Mexico, and he ordered an American landing at Veracruz, the most important Mexican port on the Gulf of Mexico. From there, troops were to march through Mexico's heartland to Mexico City, which it was hoped would end the war. Continuing to advance in northeast Mexico, Taylor defeated a Mexican army led by Ampudia in the September 1846 Battle of Monterrey, but allowed Ampudia's forces to withdraw from the town, much to Polk's consternation. Polk believed Taylor had not aggressively pursued the enemy and offered command of the Veracruz expedition to Scott.\nThe lack of trust Polk had in Taylor was returned by the Whig general, who feared the partisan president was trying to destroy him. Accordingly, Taylor disobeyed orders to remain near Monterrey. In March 1847, Polk learned that Taylor had continued to march south, capturing the northern Mexican town of Saltillo. Continuing beyond Saltillo, Taylor's army fought a larger Mexican force, led by Santa Anna, in the Battle of Buena Vista. Initial reports gave the victory to Mexico, with great rejoicing, but Santa Anna retreated. Mexican casualties were five times that of the Americans, and the victory made Taylor even more of a military hero in the American public's eyes, though Polk preferred to credit the bravery of the soldiers rather than the Whig general.\nThe U.S. changed the course of the war with its invasion of Mexico's heartland through Veracruz and ultimately the capture of Mexico City, following hard fighting. In March 1847, Scott landed in Veracruz, and quickly won control of the city. The Mexicans expected that yellow fever and other tropical diseases would weaken the U.S. forces. With the capture of Veracruz, Polk dispatched Nicholas Trist, Buchanan's chief clerk, to accompany Scott's army and negotiate a peace treaty with Mexican leaders. Trist was instructed to seek the cession of Alta California, New Mexico, and Baja California, recognition of the Rio Grande as the southern border of Texas, and U.S. access across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. Trist was authorized to make a payment of up to $30 million in exchange for these concessions.\nIn August 1847, as he advanced towards Mexico City, Scott defeated Santa Anna at the Battle of Contreras and the Battle of Churubusco. With the Americans at the gates of Mexico City, Trist negotiated with commissioners, but the Mexicans were willing to give up little. Scott prepared to take Mexico City, which he did in mid-September. In the United States, a heated political debate emerged regarding how much of Mexico the United States should seek to annex, Whigs such as Henry Clay arguing that the United States should only seek to settle the Texas border question, and some expansionists arguing for the annexation of all of Mexico. War opponents were also active; Whig Congressman Abraham Lincoln of Illinois introduced the \"exact spot\" resolutions, calling on Polk to state exactly where American blood had been shed on American soil to start the war, but the House refused to consider them.\nPeace: The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.\nFrustrated by a lack of progress in negotiations, Polk ordered Trist to return to Washington, but the diplomat, when the notice of recall arrived in mid-November 1847, ignored the order, deciding to remain and writing a lengthy letter to Polk the following month to justify his decision. Polk considered having Butler, designated as Scott's replacement, forcibly remove him from Mexico City. Though outraged by Trist's defiance, Polk decided to allow him some time to negotiate a treaty.\nThroughout January 1848, Trist regularly met with officials in Mexico City, though at the request of the Mexicans, the treaty signing took place in Guadalupe Hidalgo, a small town near Mexico City. Trist was willing to allow Mexico to keep Baja California, as his instructions allowed, but successfully haggled for the inclusion of the important harbor of San Diego in a cession of Alta California. Provisions included the Rio Grande border and a $15 million payment to Mexico. On February 2, 1848, Trist and the Mexican delegation signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Polk received the document on February 19, and, after the Cabinet met on the 20th, decided he had no choice but to accept it. If he turned it down, with the House by then controlled by the Whigs, there was no assurance Congress would vote funding to continue the war. Both Buchanan and Walker dissented, wanting more land from Mexico, a position with which the President was sympathetic, though he considered Buchanan's view motivated by his ambition.\nSome senators opposed the treaty because they wanted to take no Mexican territory; others hesitated because of the irregular nature of Trist's negotiations. Polk waited in suspense for two weeks as the Senate considered it, sometimes hearing that it would likely be defeated and that Buchanan and Walker were working against it. He was relieved when the two Cabinet officers lobbied on behalf of the treaty. On March 10, the Senate ratified the treaty in a 38\u201314 vote, a vote that cut across partisan and geographic lines. The Senate made some modifications to the treaty before ratification, and Polk worried that the Mexican government would reject them. On June 7, Polk learned that Mexico had ratified the treaty. Polk declared the treaty in effect as of July 4, 1848, thus ending the war. With the acquisition of California, Polk had accomplished all four of his major presidential goals. With the exception of the territory acquired by the 1853 Gadsden Purchase, and some later minor adjustments, the territorial acquisitions under Polk established the modern borders of the Contiguous United States.\nPostwar and the territories.\nPolk was anxious to establish a territorial government for Oregon but the matter became embroiled in the arguments over slavery, though few thought Oregon suitable for it. Bills to establish a territorial government passed the House twice but died in the Senate. By the time Congress met again in December, California and New Mexico were in U.S. hands, and Polk in his annual message urged the establishment of territorial governments in all three. The Missouri Compromise had settled the issue of the geographic reach of slavery within the Louisiana Purchase by prohibiting slavery in states north of 36\u00b030\u2032 latitude, and Polk sought to extend this line into the newly acquired territory. This would have made slavery illegal in Oregon and San Francisco but allowed it in Los Angeles. Such an extension of slavery was defeated in the House by a bipartisan alliance of Northerners. In 1848 Polk signed a bill to establish the Territory of Oregon and prohibit slavery in it.\nIn December 1848, Polk sought to establish territorial governments in California and New Mexico, a task made especially urgent by the onset of the California Gold Rush. The divisive issue of slavery blocked the idea. Finally in the Compromise of 1850 the issue was resolved.\nPolk had misgivings about a bill creating the Department of the Interior (March 3, 1849). He feared the federal government usurping power over public lands from the states. Nevertheless, he signed the bill.\nOther initiatives.\nPolk's ambassador to the Republic of New Granada, Benjamin Alden Bidlack, negotiated the Mallarino\u2013Bidlack Treaty. Though Washington had initially only sought to remove tariffs on American goods, Bidlack and New Granada's Foreign Minister negotiated a broad agreement that deepened military and trade ties. A U.S. guarantee of New Granada's sovereignty over the Isthmus of Panama was also included. The treaty was ratified in 1848 and in the long run it facilitated the Panama Canal, built in the early 20th century. It also allowed for the construction of the Panama Railway, which opened in 1855. The railway, built and operated by Americans and protected by the U.S. military, gave a quicker, safer journey to California and Oregon. The agreement was the only alliance Washington made in the 19th century. It established a strong American role in Central America and was a counterweight to British influence there.\nIn mid-1848, President Polk authorized his ambassador to Spain, Romulus Mitchell Saunders, to negotiate the purchase of Cuba and offer Spain up to $100\u00a0million, a large sum at the time for one territory, equal to $ in present-day terms. Cuba was close to the United States and had slavery, so the idea appealed to Southerners but was unwelcome in the North. However, Spain was still making profits in Cuba (notably in sugar, molasses, rum and tobacco), and thus the Spanish government rejected Saunders's overtures. Though Polk was eager to acquire Cuba, he refused to support the filibuster expedition of Narciso L\u00f3pez, who sought to invade and take over the island as a prelude to annexation.\nDomestic policy.\nFiscal policy.\nIn his inaugural address, Polk called upon Congress to re-establish the Independent Treasury System under which government funds were held in the Treasury and not in banks or other financial institutions. President Van Buren had previously established a similar system, but it had been abolished during the Tyler administration. Polk made clear his opposition to a national bank in his inaugural address, and in his first annual message to Congress in December 1845, he called for the government to keep its funds itself. Congress was slow to act; the House passed a bill in April 1846 and the Senate in August, both without a single Whig vote. Polk signed the Independent Treasury Act into law on August 6, 1846. The act provided that the public revenues were to be retained in the Treasury building and in sub-treasuries in various cities, separate from private or state banks. The system would remain in place until the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913.\nPolk's other major domestic initiative was the lowering of the tariff. Polk directed Secretary of the Treasury Robert Walker to draft a new and lower tariff, which Polk submitted to Congress. After intense lobbying by both sides, the bill passed the House and, in a close vote that required Vice President Dallas to break a tie, the Senate in July 1846. Dallas, although from protectionist Pennsylvania, voted for the bill, having decided his best political prospects lay in supporting the administration. Polk signed the Walker Tariff into law, substantially reducing the rates that had been set by the Tariff of 1842. The reduction of tariffs in the United States and the repeal of the Corn Laws in Great Britain led to a boom in Anglo-American trade.\nDevelopment of the country.\nCongress passed the Rivers and Harbors Bill in 1846 to provide $500,000 to improve port facilities, but Polk vetoed it. Polk believed that the bill was unconstitutional because it unfairly favored particular areas, including ports that had no foreign trade. Polk considered internal improvements to be matters for the states, and feared that passing the bill would encourage legislators to compete for favors for their home district\u2014a type of corruption that he felt would spell doom to the virtue of the republic. In this regard he followed his hero Jackson, who had vetoed the Maysville Road Bill in 1830 on similar grounds.\nOpposed by conviction to Federal funding for internal improvements, Polk stood strongly against all such bills. Congress, in 1847, passed another internal improvements bill; he pocket vetoed it and sent Congress a full veto message when it met in December. Similar bills continued to advance in Congress in 1848, though none reached his desk. When he came to the Capitol to sign bills on March 3, 1849, the last day of the congressional session and his final full day in office, he feared that an internal improvements bill would pass Congress, and he brought with him a draft veto message. The bill did not pass, so it was not needed, but feeling the draft had been ably written, he had it preserved among his papers.\nAuthoritative word of the discovery of gold in California did not arrive in Washington until after the 1848 election, by which time Polk was a lame duck. Polk's political adversaries had claimed California was too far away to be useful and was not worth the price paid to Mexico. The President was delighted by the news, seeing it as validation of his stance on expansion, and referred to the discovery several times in his final annual message to Congress that December. Shortly thereafter, actual samples of the California gold arrived, and Polk sent a special message to Congress on the subject. The message, confirming less authoritative reports, caused large numbers of people to move to California, both from the U.S. and abroad, thus helping to spark the California Gold Rush.\nJudicial appointments.\nPolk appointed the following justices to the U.S. Supreme Court:\nThe 1844 death of Justice Henry Baldwin left a vacant place on the Supreme Court, but Tyler had been unable to get the Senate to confirm a nominee. At the time, it was the custom to have a geographic balance on the Supreme Court, and Baldwin had been from Pennsylvania. Polk's efforts to fill Baldwin's seat became embroiled in Pennsylvania politics and the efforts of factional leaders to secure the lucrative post of Collector of Customs for the Port of Philadelphia. As Polk attempted to find his way through the minefield of Pennsylvania politics, a second position on the high court became vacant with the death, in September 1845, of Justice Joseph Story; his replacement was expected to come from his native New England. Because Story's death had occurred while the Senate was not in session, Polk was able to make a recess appointment, choosing Senator Levi Woodbury of New Hampshire, and when the Senate reconvened in December 1845, Woodbury was confirmed. Polk's initial nominee for Baldwin's seat, George W. Woodward, was rejected by the Senate in January 1846, in large part due to the opposition of Buchanan and Pennsylvania Senator Simon Cameron.\nDespite Polk's anger at Buchanan, he eventually offered the Secretary of State the seat, but Buchanan, after some indecision, turned it down. Polk subsequently nominated Robert Cooper Grier of Pittsburgh, who won confirmation. Justice Woodbury died in 1851, but Grier served until 1870 and in the slavery case of \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" (1857) wrote a concurring opinion stating that slaves were property and could not sue.\nPolk appointed eight other federal judges, one to the United States Circuit Court of the District of Columbia, and seven to various United States district courts.\nElection of 1848.\nHonoring his pledge to serve only one term, Polk declined to seek re-election. At the 1848 Democratic National Convention, Lewis Cass was nominated. The 1848 Whig National Convention nominated Zachary Taylor for president and former congressman Millard Fillmore of New York for vice president. Martin Van Buren led a breakaway Free Soil group from the Democrats. Polk was surprised and disappointed by his former ally's political conversion and worried about the divisiveness of a sectional party devoted to abolition. Polk did not give speeches for Cass, remaining at his desk at the White House. He did remove some Van Buren supporters from federal office during the campaign.\nTaylor won the three-way election with a plurality of the popular vote and a majority of the electoral vote. Polk was disappointed by the outcome as he had a low opinion of Taylor, seeing the general as someone with poor judgment and few opinions on important public matters. Nevertheless, Polk observed tradition and welcomed President-elect Taylor to Washington, hosting him at a gala White House dinner. Polk departed the White House on March 3, leaving behind him a clean desk, though he worked from his hotel or the Capitol on last-minute appointments and bill signings. He attended Taylor's inauguration on March 5 (March 4, the presidential inauguration day until 1937, fell on a Sunday, and thus the ceremony was postponed a day), and though he was unimpressed with the new president, wished him the best.\nPost-presidency and death (1849).\nPolk's time in the White House took its toll on his health. Full of enthusiasm and vigor when he entered office, Polk left the presidency exhausted by his years of public service. He left Washington on March 6 for a pre-arranged triumphal tour of the Southern United States, to end in Nashville. Polk had two years previously arranged to buy a house there, afterwards dubbed Polk Place, that had once belonged to his mentor, Felix Grundy.\nJames and Sarah Polk progressed down the Atlantic coast, and then westward through the Deep South. He was enthusiastically received and banqueted. By the time the Polks reached Alabama, he was suffering from a bad cold, and soon became concerned by reports of cholera\u2014a passenger on Polk's riverboat died of it, and it was rumored to be common in New Orleans, but it was too late to change plans. Worried about his health, he would have departed the city quickly but was overwhelmed by Louisiana hospitality. Several passengers on the riverboat up the Mississippi died of the disease, and Polk felt so ill that he went ashore for four days, staying in a hotel. A doctor assured him he did not have cholera, and Polk arrived in Nashville on April 2 to a huge reception.\nAfter a visit to James's mother in Columbia, the Polks settled into Polk Place. The exhausted former president seemed to gain new life, but in early June, he fell ill again, by most accounts of cholera. Attended by several doctors, he lingered for several days and chose to be baptized into the Methodist Church, which he had long admired, though his mother arrived from Columbia with her Presbyterian clergyman, and his wife was also a devout Presbyterian. On the afternoon of June 15, Polk died at his Polk Place home in Nashville, Tennessee at the age of 53. According to traditional accounts, his last words before he died were \"I love you, Sarah, for all eternity, I love you.\" Borneman noted that whether or not they were spoken, there was nothing in Polk's life that would make the sentiment false.\nAt age 53, Polk had the shortest lifespan of any president not assassinated, and the shortest post-presidency among the presidents who did not die in office (103 days). His funeral was held at the McKendree Methodist Church in Nashville. Following his death, Sarah Polk lived at Polk Place for 42 years and died on August 14, 1891, at the age of 87. Their house, Polk Place, was demolished in 1901.\nBurials.\nPolk's remains have been moved twice. After his death, he was buried in what later became Nashville City Cemetery due to a legal requirement related to his infectious disease death. Polk was first moved to a tomb on the grounds of Polk Place (as specified in his will) in 1850.\nThen, in 1893, the bodies of James and Sarah Polk were relocated to their resting place on the grounds of the Tennessee State Capitol in Nashville. In March 2017, the Tennessee Senate approved a resolution considered a \"first step\" toward relocating the Polks' remains to the family home in Columbia. Such a move would require approval by state lawmakers, the courts, and the Tennessee Historical Commission. A year later, a renewed plan to reinter Polk was defeated by Tennessee lawmakers before being taken up again and approved, via the non-signature of Tennessee governor Bill Haslam. The state's Capitol Commission heard arguments over the issue in November 2018, during which the THC reiterated its opposition to the tomb relocation, and a vote was delayed indefinitely.\nHistorical legacy.\nPolk's reputation was forged early by attacks made on him during his lifetime. Whig politicians claimed that he was drawn from well-deserved obscurity. Sam Houston is said to have observed that Polk, a teetotaler, was \"a victim of the use of water as a beverage\". Little was published about him, but two biographies were released in the wake of his death. Polk was not again the subject of a major biography until 1922 when Eugene I. McCormac published \"James K. Polk: A Political Biography\". McCormac relied heavily on Polk's presidential diary, first published in 1909. When historians began ranking the presidents in 1948, Polk ranked tenth in Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.'s poll, and has subsequently ranked eighth in Schlesinger's 1962 poll, tenth in a 1982 \"Chicago Tribune\" poll, ninth in Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.'s 1996 poll, and 14th in the 2017 survey by C-SPAN.\nJames Polk is widely considered a successful president; he is regarded as a man of destiny and a political chess master, who, through extraordinary diligence, worked to promote American democracy. Borneman deemed Polk the most effective president prior to the Civil War and noted that Polk expanded the power of the presidency, especially in its power as commander in chief and its oversight over the Executive Branch. Steven G. Calabresi and Christopher S. Yoo, in their history of presidential power, praised Polk's conduct of the Mexican War, \"it seems unquestionable that his management of state affairs during this conflict was one of the strongest examples since Jackson of the use of presidential power to direct specifically the conduct of subordinate officers.\"\nHistorian John C. Pinheiro, analyzing Polk's impact and legacy, wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Polk accomplished nearly everything that he said he wanted to accomplish as President and everything he had promised in his party's platform: acquisition of the Oregon Territory, California, and the Territory of New Mexico; the positive settlement of the Texas border dispute; lower tariff rates; the establishment of a new federal depository system; and the strengthening of the executive office. He masterfully kept open lines of communication with Congress, established the Department of the Interior, built up an administrative press, and conducted himself as a representative of the whole people. Polk came into the presidency with a focused political agenda and a clear set of convictions. He left office the most successful President since George Washington in the accomplishment of his goals.\nBergeron noted that the matters that Polk settled, he settled for his time. The questions of the banking system, and of the tariff, which Polk had made two of the main issues of his presidency, were not significantly revised until the 1860s. Similarly, the Gadsden Purchase, and that of Alaska (1867), were the only major U.S. expansions until the 1890s.\nPaul H. Bergeron wrote in his study of Polk's presidency: \"Virtually everyone remembers Polk and his expansionist successes. He produced a new map of the United States, which fulfilled a continent-wide vision.\" \"To look at that map,\" Robert W. Merry concluded, \"and to take in the western and southwestern expanse included in it, is to see the magnitude of Polk's presidential accomplishments.\" Amy Greenberg, in her history of the Mexican War, found Polk's legacy to be more than territorial, \"during a single brilliant term, he accomplished a feat that earlier presidents would have considered impossible. With the help of his wife, Sarah, he masterminded, provoked and successfully prosecuted a war that turned the United States into a world power.\" Borneman noted that in securing this expansion, Polk did not consider the likely effect on Mexicans and Native Americans, \"That ignorance may well be debated on moral grounds, but it cannot take away Polk's stunning political achievement.\" James A. Rawley wrote in his \"American National Biography\" piece on Polk, \"he added extensive territory to the United States, including Upper California and its valuable ports, and bequeathed a legacy of a nation poised on the Pacific rim prepared to emerge as a superpower in future generations\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo the retrospective eye of the historian Polk's alarums and excursions present an astonishing spectacle. Impelled by his conviction that successful diplomacy could rest only on a threat of force, he made his way, step by step, down the path to war. Then, viewing the war as a mere extension of his diplomatic scheme, he proceeded as confidently as a sleepwalker through a maze of obstacles and hazards to the peace settlement he had intended from the beginning.\n David M. Pletcher\nHistorians have criticized Polk for not perceiving that his territorial gains set the table for civil war. Pletcher stated that Polk, like others of his time, failed \"to understand that sectionalism and expansion had formed a new, explosive compound\". Fred I. Greenstein, in his journal article on Polk, noted that Polk \"lacked a far-seeing awareness of the problems that were bound to arise over the status of slavery in the territory acquired from Mexico\" William Dusinberre, in his volume on Polk as slave owner, suggested \"that Polk's deep personal involvement in the plantation slavery system\u00a0... colored his stance on slavery-related issues\".\nGreenberg noted that Polk's war served as the training ground for that later conflict:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The conflict Polk engineered became the transformative event of the era. It not only changed the nation but also created a new generation of leaders, for good and for ill. In the military, Robert E. Lee, Ulysses S. Grant, Stonewall Jackson, George Meade, and Jefferson Davis all first experienced military command in Mexico. It was there that they learned the basis of the strategy and tactics that dominated the Civil War.\nPolk and slavery.\nPolk owned slaves for most of his adult life. His father left Polk more than 8,000 acres (32\u00a0km2) of land and divided about 53 enslaved people among his widow and children in his will. James inherited twenty slaves, either directly or from deceased brothers. In 1831, he became an absentee cotton planter, sending enslaved people to clear plantation land that his father had left him near Somerville, Tennessee. Four years later, Polk sold his Somerville plantation and, together with his brother-in-law, bought 920 acres (3.7\u00a0km2) of land, a cotton plantation near Coffeeville, Mississippi, hoping to increase his income. The land in Mississippi was richer than that in Somerville, and Polk transferred slaves there, taking care to conceal from them that they were to be sent south. From the start of 1839, Polk, having bought out his brother-in-law, owned all of the Mississippi plantations, and ran it on a mostly absentee basis for the rest of his life. He occasionally visited; for example, he spent much of April 1844 on his Mississippi plantation, right before the Democratic convention.\nAdding to the inherited slaves, in 1831, Polk purchased five more, mostly buying them in Kentucky, and expending $1,870 (~$ in 2024); the youngest had a recorded age of 11. As older children sold for a higher price, slave-sellers routinely lied about age. Between 1834 and 1835, he bought five more, aged from 2 to 37, the youngest a granddaughter of the oldest. The amount expended was $2,250 (~$ in 2024). In 1839, he bought eight slaves from his brother William at a cost of $5,600 (~$ in 2024). This represented three young adults and most of a family, though not including the father, whom James Polk had previously owned, and who had been sold to a slave trader as he had repeatedly tried to escape his enslavement.\nThe expenses of four campaigns (three for governor, one for the presidency) in six years kept Polk from making more slave purchases until after he was living in the White House. In an era when the presidential salary was expected to cover wages for the White House servants, Polk replaced them with slaves from his home in Tennessee. Polk did not purchase enslaved people with his presidential salary, likely for political reasons. Instead, he reinvested earnings from his plantation in the purchase of slaves, enjoining secrecy on his agent: \"that as my \"private business\" does not concern the public, you will keep it to yourself\".\nPolk saw the plantation as his route to a comfortable existence after his presidency for himself and his wife; he did not intend to return to the practice of law. Hoping the increased labor force would increase his retirement income, he purchased seven slaves in 1846, through an agent, aged roughly between 12 and 17. The 17-year-old and one of the 12-year-olds were purchased together at an estate sale; the agent within weeks resold the younger boy to Polk's profit. The year 1847 saw the purchase of nine more. Three he purchased from Gideon Pillow, and his agent purchased six enslaved people aged between 10 and 20. By the time of the purchase from Pillow, the Mexican War had begun and Polk sent payment with the letter in which he offered Pillow a commission in the Army. The purchase from Pillow was a man Polk had previously owned and had sold for being a disruption, and his wife and child. None of the other enslaved people Polk purchased as president, all younger than 20, came with a parent, and as only in the one case were two slaves bought together, most likely none had an accompanying sibling as each faced life on Polk's plantation.\nDiscipline for those owned by Polk varied over time. At the Tennessee plantation, he employed an overseer named Herbert Biles, who was said to be relatively indulgent. Biles's illness in 1833 resulted in Polk replacing him with Ephraim Beanland, who tightened discipline and increased work. Polk backed his overseer, returning escapees who complained of beatings and other harsh treatment, \"even though every report suggested that the overseer was a heartless brute\". Beanland was hired for the Mississippi plantation but was soon dismissed by Polk's partner, who deemed Beanland too harsh as the slaves undertook the arduous task of clearing the timber from the new plantation so it could be used for cotton farming. His replacement was discharged after a year for being too indulgent; the next died of dysentery in 1839. Others followed, and it was not until 1845 that Polk found a satisfactory overseer, John Mairs, who was still working at the plantation for Sarah Polk in 1860 when the widow sold a half-share in many of her slaves. There had been a constant stream of runaways under Mairs' predecessors, many seeking protection at the plantation of Polk relatives or friends; only one ran away between the time of Mairs' hiring and the end of 1847, but the overseer had to report three absconded slaves (including the one who had fled earlier) to Polk in 1848 and 1849.\nPolk's will, dated February 28, 1849, contained the nonbinding expectation that his slaves were to be freed when both he and Sarah Polk were dead. The Mississippi plantation was expected to support Sarah Polk during her widowhood. Sarah Polk lived until 1891, but the slaves were freed in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment, which abolished slavery in the United States. By selling a half-interest in the slaves in 1860, Sarah Polk had given up the sole power to free them, and it is unlikely that her new partner, having paid $28,500 (~$ in 2024) for a half-interest in the plantation and its slaves, would have allowed the laborers to go free had she died while slavery was legal.\nLike Jackson, Polk saw the politics of slavery as a side issue compared to territorial expansion and economic policy. The issue of slavery became increasingly polarizing during the 1840s, and Polk's expansionary successes redoubled its divisiveness. During his presidency, many abolitionists harshly criticized him as an instrument of the \"Slave Power\", and claimed that spreading slavery was the reason he supported Texas Annexation and later war with Mexico. Polk did support the expansion of slavery's realm, with his views informed by his own family's experience of settling Tennessee, bringing slaves with them. He believed in Southern rights, meaning both the right of slave states not to have that institution interfered with by the Federal government and the right of individual Southerners to bring their slaves with them into the new territory. Though Polk opposed the Wilmot Proviso, he also condemned southern agitation on the issue, and he accused both northern and southern leaders of attempting to use the slavery issue for political gain.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPrimary sources.\nMaterial that may be of interest but constitute primary sources.\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "15982", "revid": "50908785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15982", "title": "January 4", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 4 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15986", "revid": "50845887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15986", "title": "January 6", "text": "List of notable occurrences on this date\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 6 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15987", "revid": "40436291", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15987", "title": "January 7", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 7 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15988", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15988", "title": "January 8", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 8 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15990", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15990", "title": "January 23", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 23 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15992", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15992", "title": "Jimmy Carter", "text": "President of the United States from 1977 to 1981\nJames Earl Carter Jr. (October 1, 1924\u00a0\u2013 December 29, 2024) was an American politician and humanitarian who served as the 39th president of the United States from 1977 to 1981. A member of the Democratic Party, Carter served from 1971 to 1975 as the 76th governor of Georgia and from 1963 to 1967 in the Georgia State Senate. He is the longest-lived president in U.S. history and the only one to reach the age of 100.\nBorn in Plains, Georgia, Carter graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1946 and joined the submarine service before returning to his family's peanut farm. He was active in the civil rights movement, then served as a state senator and the 76th governor, one of the first of the \"New South governors\" committed to desegregation. After announcing his candidacy in 1976, Carter secured the Democratic nomination as a dark horse little known outside his home state before narrowly defeating Republican incumbent Gerald Ford in the general election.\nAs president, Carter pardoned all Vietnam draft evaders and negotiated major foreign policy agreements, including the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaties, and the second round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks, and he established diplomatic relations with China. He created a national energy policy that included conservation, price control, and new technology. He signed bills that created the Departments of Energy and Education. The later years of his presidency were marked by several foreign policy crises, including the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan (leading to the end of \"d\u00e9tente\" and the 1980 Olympics boycott) and the fallout of the Iranian Revolution (including the Iran hostage crisis and 1979 oil crisis). Carter sought reelection in 1980, defeating a primary challenge by Senator Ted Kennedy, but lost the election to Republican nominee Ronald Reagan.\nPolls of historians and political scientists have ranked Carter's presidency below average. His post-presidency\u2014the longest in U.S. history\u2014is viewed more favorably. After Carter's presidential term ended, he established the Carter Center to promote human rights, earning him the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize. He traveled extensively to conduct peace negotiations, monitor elections, and end neglected tropical diseases, becoming a major contributor to the eradication of dracunculiasis. Carter was a key figure in the nonprofit housing organization Habitat for Humanity. He also wrote political memoirs and other books, commentary on the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, and poetry.\nEarly life.\nJames Earl Carter Jr. was born on October 1, 1924, in Plains, Georgia, at the Wise Sanitarium, where his mother worked as a registered nurse. Carter was the first U.S. president born in a hospital. He was the eldest child of Bessie Lillian Gordy and James Earl Carter Sr., and a descendant of English immigrant Thomas Carter, who settled in the Colony of Virginia in 1635. In Georgia, numerous generations of Carters worked as cotton farmers. Carter's father was a successful local businessman who ran a general store and was an investor in farmland; he had served as a reserve second lieutenant in the U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps during World War I.\nDuring Carter's infancy, his family moved several times, settling on a dirt road in nearby Archery, which was almost entirely populated by impoverished Black families. His family eventually had three more children, Gloria, Ruth, and Billy. Carter had a good relationship with his parents, even though his mother was often absent during his childhood since she worked long hours. Although his father was staunchly pro-segregation, he allowed Jimmy to befriend the Black farmhands' children. Carter was an enterprising teenager who was given his own acre of Earl's farmland, where he grew and sold peanuts. Carter also rented out a section of tenant housing he had purchased.\nEducation.\nCarter attended Plains High School from 1937 to 1941, graduating from the 11th grade; the school did not have a 12th grade. By that time, Archery and Plains had been impoverished by the Great Depression, but the family benefited from New Deal farming subsidies, and Carter's father became a community leader. Carter was a diligent student with a fondness for reading. According to a popular anecdote, he was passed over for valedictorian after he and his friends skipped school to venture downtown in a hot rod (although it is not clear he would otherwise have been valedictorian). Carter played on the Plains High School basketball team and joined Future Farmers of America, which helped him develop a lifelong interest in woodworking.\nCarter had long dreamed of attending the United States Naval Academy. In 1941, he started undergraduate coursework in engineering at Georgia Southwestern College in nearby Americus, Georgia. The next year, Carter transferred to the Georgia School of Technology (now Georgia Tech) in Atlanta. While at Georgia Tech, Carter took part in the Reserve Officers' Training Corps. Civil rights icon Blake Van Leer encouraged Carter to join the Naval Academy. In 1943, he received an appointment to the Naval Academy from U.S. Representative Stephen Pace, and Carter graduated with a Bachelor of Science in 1946. He was a good student, but was seen as reserved and quiet, in contrast to the academy's culture of aggressive hazing of freshmen. While at the academy, Carter fell in love with Rosalynn Smith, a friend of his sister Ruth. The two wed shortly after his graduation in 1946, and were married until her death on November 19, 2023. Carter was a sprint football player for the Navy Midshipmen and a standout freshman cross country runner. He graduated 60th out of 821 midshipmen in the class of 1947 with a Bachelor of Science degree and was commissioned as an ensign.\nNaval career.\nFrom 1946 to 1953, the Carters lived in Virginia, Hawaii, Connecticut, New York, and California, during his deployments in the Atlantic and Pacific fleets. In 1948, he began officer training for submarine duty and served aboard . Carter was promoted to lieutenant junior grade in 1949. His service aboard \"Pomfret\" included a simulated war patrol to the western Pacific and Chinese coast from January to March of that year. In 1951, Carter was assigned to the diesel/electric , qualified for command, and served in several positions, including executive officer.\nIn 1952, Carter began an association with the Navy's fledgling nuclear submarine program, led by then-Captain Hyman G. Rickover. Rickover had high standards, and Carter later said that, next to his parents, Rickover had the greatest influence on his life. Carter was sent to the Naval Reactors Branch of the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington, D.C., for three-month temporary duty, while Rosalynn moved with their children to Schenectady, New York.\nOn December 12, 1952, an accident with the experimental NRX reactor at Atomic Energy of Canada's Chalk River Laboratories caused a partial meltdown. Carter was ordered to Chalk River to lead a U.S. maintenance crew to assist in the shutdown of the reactor. The painstaking process required each team member to don protective gear and be lowered individually into the reactor for 90 seconds at a time, limiting their exposure to radioactivity while they disassembled the crippled reactor. During and after his presidency, Carter said that his experience at Chalk River had shaped his views on atomic energy and led him to cease the development of a neutron bomb.\nIn March 1953, Carter began a six-month nuclear power plant operation course at Union College in Schenectady. His intent was to eventually work aboard , which was intended to be the second U.S. nuclear submarine. His plans changed when his father died of pancreatic cancer in July, two months before construction of \"Seawolf\" began, and Carter obtained a release from active duty so he could take over the family peanut business. Deciding to leave Schenectady proved difficult, as Rosalynn had grown comfortable with their life there. She later said that returning to small-town life in Plains seemed \"a monumental step backward\". Carter left active duty on October 9, 1953. He served in the inactive Navy Reserve until 1961 and left with the rank of lieutenant. Carter's awards include the American Campaign Medal, World War II Victory Medal, China Service Medal, and National Defense Service Medal. As a submarine officer, he also earned the \"dolphin\" badge.\nFarming.\nAfter debt settlements and division of his father's estate, Jimmy inherited comparatively little. For a year, he, Rosalynn, and their three sons lived in public housing in Plains. Carter set out to expand the family's peanut-growing business. Transitioning from the Navy to farming was difficult as his first-year harvest failed due to drought, and Carter had to open several lines of credit to keep the farm afloat. He took classes and studied agriculture while Rosalynn learned accounting to manage the business's books. Though they barely broke even the first year, the Carters grew the business and became quite successful.\nEarly political career (1963\u20131971).\nGeorgia state senator (1963\u20131967).\nAs racial tension inflamed in Plains by the 1954 Supreme Court of the United States ruling in \"Brown v. Board of Education\", Carter favored integration but often kept those feelings to himself to avoid making enemies. By 1961, Carter began to speak more prominently of integration as a member of the Baptist Church and chairman of the Sumter County school board. In 1962, he announced his campaign for an open Georgia State Senate seat. Rosalynn, who had an instinct for politics and organization, was instrumental in his campaign. While early counting of the ballots showed Carter trailing his opponent, Homer Moore, this was later proven to be the result of fraudulent voting. Another election was held, in which Carter defeated Moore as the sole Democratic candidate. He served in both the 127th Georgia General Assembly and the 128th Georgia General Assembly.\nThe civil rights movement was well underway when Carter took office. Carter remained relatively quiet on the issue at first, even as it polarized much of the county, to avoid alienating his segregationist colleagues. Carter did speak up on a few divisive issues, giving speeches against literacy tests and against an amendment to the Georgia Constitution that he felt implied a compulsion to practice religion. Carter entered the state Democratic Executive Committee two years into office, where he helped rewrite the state party's rules. He became the chairman of the West Central Georgia Planning and Development Commission, which oversaw the disbursement of federal and state grants for projects such as historic site restoration.\nWhen Bo Callaway was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1964, Carter immediately began planning to challenge him. The two had previously clashed over which two-year college would be expanded to a four-year college program by the state, and Carter saw Callaway\u2014who had switched to the Republican Party\u2014as representing aspects of politics he despised. Carter was reelected to a second two-year term in the state Senate, where he chaired its Education Committee and sat on the Appropriations Committee. He contributed to a bill expanding statewide education funding and getting Georgia Southwestern State University a four-year program. He leveraged his regional planning work, giving speeches around the district to make himself more visible to potential voters. On the last day of the term, Carter announced his candidacy for the House of Representatives. Callaway decided to run for governor instead; Carter decided to do the same.\n1966 and 1970 gubernatorial campaigns.\nIn the 1966 gubernatorial election, Carter ran against liberal former governor Ellis Arnall and conservative segregationist Lester Maddox in the Democratic primary. In a press conference, he described his ideology as \"Conservative, moderate, liberal and middle-of-the-road ... I believe I am a more complicated person than that.\" He lost the primary but drew enough votes as a third-place candidate to force Arnall into a runoff election with Maddox, who defeated Arnall. In the general election, Republican nominee Callaway won a plurality of the vote but less than a majority, allowing the Democratic-majority Georgia House of Representatives to elect Maddox as governor. Maddox's victory\u2014due to his segregationist stance\u2014was seen as the worst outcome for the indebted Carter. Carter returned to his agriculture business, carefully planning his next campaign. This period was a spiritual turning point for Carter; he declared himself a born again Christian. His last child, Amy, was born during this time.\nIn the 1970 gubernatorial election, liberal former governor Carl Sanders became Carter's main opponent in the Democratic primary. Carter ran a more modern campaign, employing printed graphics and statistical analysis. Responding to polls, he leaned more conservative than before, positioning himself as a populist and criticizing Sanders for both his wealth and perceived links to the national Democratic Party. He also accused Sanders of corruption, but when pressed by the media, he did not provide evidence. Throughout his campaign, Carter sought both the black vote and the votes of those who had supported prominent Alabama segregationist George Wallace. While he met with black figures such as Martin Luther King Sr. and Andrew Young and visited many black-owned businesses, he also praised Wallace and promised to invite him to give a speech in Georgia. Carter's appeal to racism became more blatant over time, with his senior campaign aides handing out a photograph of Sanders celebrating with Black basketball players.\nCarter came ahead of Sanders in the first ballot, leading to a runoff election. The subsequent campaign was even more bitter. Despite his early support for civil rights, Carter's appeal to racism grew, and he criticized Sanders for supporting Martin Luther King Jr. Carter won the runoff election and won the general election against Republican nominee Hal Suit. Once elected, Carter began to speak against Georgia's racist politics. Leroy Johnson, a black state senator, voiced his support for Carter: \"I understand why he ran that kind of ultra-conservative campaign. I don't believe you can win this state without being a racist.\"\nGeorgia governorship (1971\u20131975).\nCarter was sworn in as the 76th governor of Georgia on January 12, 1971. In his inaugural speech, he declared that \"the time for racial discrimination is over\", shocking the crowd and causing many segregationists who had supported his candidacy to feel betrayed. Carter was reluctant to engage with fellow politicians, making him unpopular with the legislature. He expanded the governor's authority by introducing a reorganization plan submitted in January 1972. Despite an initially cool reception in the legislature, the plan passed at midnight on the last day of the session. Carter merged about 300 state agencies into 22, although it is disputed whether that saved the state money. On July 8, 1971, during an appearance in Columbus, Georgia, he stated his intention to establish a Georgia Human Rights Council.\nIn a July 1971 news conference, Carter announced that he had ordered department heads to reduce spending to prevent a $57\u00a0million deficit by the end of the 1972 fiscal year, specifying that each state department would be affected and estimating that five percent over government revenue would be lost if state departments continued to fully use allocated funds. In January 1972, he requested that the state legislature fund an early childhood development program along with prison reform programs and $48\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024) in paid taxes for nearly all state employees.\nIn March 1972, Carter said he might call a special session of the general assembly if the Justice Department struck down any reapportionment plans by either the House or Senate. He pushed several reforms through the legislature, providing equal state aid to schools, setting up community centers for mentally disabled children, and increasing educational programs for convicts. In one of his more controversial decisions, he vetoed a plan to build a dam on Georgia's Flint River, which attracted the attention of environmentalists nationwide.\nCivil rights were a high priority for Carter, who added black state employees and portraits of three prominent black Georgians to the capitol building. This angered the Ku Klux Klan. He favored a constitutional amendment to ban busing for the purpose of expediting integration in schools on a televised joint appearance with Florida Governor Reubin Askew on January 31, 1973, and co-sponsored an anti-busing resolution with Wallace at the 1971 National Governors Conference. After the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Georgia's death penalty statute in \"Furman v. Georgia\" (1972), Carter signed a revised statute that reintroduced the practice. He later regretted endorsing the death penalty, saying, \"I didn't see the injustice of it as I do now.\"\nIneligible for a second consecutive term under the 1945 Georgia Constitution, Carter considered running for president and engaged in national politics. He was named to several southern planning commissions and a delegate to the 1972 Democratic National Convention, where U.S. Senator George McGovern was the likely nominee. Carter tried to ingratiate himself with conservative and anti-McGovern voters. He was fairly obscure at the time, and his attempt at triangulation failed. On August 3, Carter met with Wallace in Birmingham, Alabama, to discuss preventing the Democrats from losing in a landslide, but they did.\nCarter regularly met with his fledgling campaign staff and decided to start putting together a presidential campaign for 1976. He tried unsuccessfully to become chairman of the National Governors Association to boost his visibility. With David Rockefeller's endorsement, he was named to the Trilateral Commission in April 1973. The next year, he was named chairman of the Democratic National Committee's congressional and gubernatorial campaigns. In May 1973, Carter warned his party against politicizing the Watergate scandal, which he attributed to president Richard Nixon's isolation from Americans and secretive decision-making.\n1976 presidential campaign.\nOn December 12, 1974, Carter announced his presidential campaign at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. His speech contained themes of domestic inequality, optimism, and change. Upon his entrance in the Democratic primaries, he was competing against sixteen other candidates and was considered to have little chance against the more nationally known politicians such as Wallace. His name recognition was very low, and his opponents derisively asked \"Jimmy Who?\". In response to this, Carter began to emphasize his name and what he stood for, stating \"My name is Jimmy Carter, and I'm running for president.\"\nThis strategy proved successful. By mid-March 1976, Carter was not only far ahead of the active contenders for the presidential nomination, but led incumbent Republican president Gerald Ford by a few percentage points. As the Watergate scandal was still fresh in the voters' minds, Carter's position as an outsider proved helpful. He promoted government reorganization. In June, Carter published a memoir titled \"Why Not the Best?\" to introduce himself to the American public.\nCarter became the front-runner early on by winning the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. His strategy involved reaching a region before another candidate could extend influence there, traveling over , visiting 37 states, and delivering over 200 speeches before any other candidate had entered the race. In the South, he tacitly conceded certain areas to Wallace and swept them as a moderate when it became clear Wallace could not win the region. In the North, Carter appealed largely to conservative Christian and rural voters. While he did not achieve a majority in most Northern states, he won several by building the largest singular support base. Although Carter was initially dismissed as a regional candidate, he would clinch the Democratic nomination. In 1980, Laurence Shoup noted that the national news media discovered and promoted Carter, and stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What Carter had that his opponents did not was the acceptance and support of elite sectors of the mass communications media. It was their favorable coverage of Carter and his campaign that gave him an edge, propelling him rocket-like to the top of the opinion polls. This helped Carter win key primary election victories, enabling him to rise from an obscure public figure to President-elect in the short space of 9 months.\nDuring an interview in April 1976, Carter said, \"I have nothing against a community that is... trying to maintain the ethnic purity of their neighborhoods.\" His remark was intended as supportive of open housing laws, but specifying opposition to government efforts to \"inject black families into a white neighborhood just to create some sort of integration\". Carter's stated positions during his campaign included public financing of congressional campaigns, supporting the creation of a federal consumer protection agency, creating a separate cabinet-level department for education, signing a peace treaty with the Soviet Union to limit nuclear weapons, reducing the defense budget, a tax proposal implementing \"a substantial increase toward those who have the higher incomes\" alongside a levy reduction on taxpayers with lower and middle incomes, making multiple amendments to the Social Security Act, and having a balanced budget by the end of his first term.\nOn July 15, 1976, Carter chose U.S. senator Walter Mondale as his running mate. Carter and Ford faced off in three televised debates, the first United States presidential debates since 1960.\nFor the November 1976 issue of \"Playboy\", which hit newsstands a couple of weeks before the election, Robert Scheer interviewed Carter. While discussing his religion's view of pride, Carter said: \"I've looked on a lot of women with lust. I've committed adultery in my heart many times.\" This response and his admission in another interview that he did not mind if people uttered the word \"fuck\" led to a media feeding frenzy and critics lamenting the erosion of boundary between politicians and their private intimate lives.\nElection.\nCarter once had a sizable lead over Ford in national polling, but by late September his lead had narrowed to only several points. In the final days before the election, several polls showed that Ford had tied Carter, and one Gallup poll found that Ford was slightly ahead. Most analysts agreed that Carter was going to win the popular vote, but some argued Ford had an opportunity to win the electoral college and thus the election.\nCarter and Mondale ultimately defeated Ford and his runningmate (Senator Bob Dole), receiving 297 electoral votes and 50.1% of the popular vote. Carter's victory was attributed in part to his overwhelming support among black voters in states decided by close margins. In Ohio and Wisconsin, where the margin between Carter and Ford was under two points, the black vote was crucial for Carter; if he had not won both states, Ford would have won the election.\nTransition.\nPreliminary planning for Carter's presidential transition had been underway for months before his election. Carter had been the first presidential candidate to allot significant funds and a significant number of personnel to a pre-election transition planning effort, which then became standard practice. He set a mold that influenced all future transitions to be larger, more methodical and more formal than they were.\nOn November 22, 1976, Carter conducted his first visit to Washington, D.C. after being elected, meeting with director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) James Lynn and United States secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld at the Blair House, and holding an afternoon meeting with President Ford at the White House. The next day, he conferred with congressional leaders, saying that his meetings with cabinet members had been \"very helpful\" and that Ford had offered his assistance if he needed anything. Relations between Ford and Carter were relatively cold during the transition. During his transition, Carter announced the selection of numerous designees for positions in his administration.\nA few weeks before his inauguration, Carter moved his peanut business into the hands of trustees to avoid a potential conflict of interest. He also asked incoming members of his administration to divest themselves of assets through blind trusts.\nPresidency (1977\u20131981).\nCarter was inaugurated as the 39th president on January 20, 1977. One of Carter's first acts was the fulfillment of a campaign promise by issuing Proclamation 4483 declaring unconditional amnesty for Vietnam War\u2013era draft evaders. Carter's tenure in office was marked by an economic malaise, a time of continuing inflation and recession and the 1979 energy crisis. Under Carter, in May 1980, the Federal Trade Commission became \"apparently the first agency ever closed by a budget dispute\", but Congress took action and the agency opened the next day.\nCarter attempted to calm various conflicts around the world, most visibly in the Middle East with the signing of the Camp David Accords; giving the Panama Canal to Panama; and signing the SALT II nuclear arms reduction treaty with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev. His final year was marred by the Iran hostage crisis, which contributed to his losing the 1980 election to Ronald Reagan. Whistleblowers have alleged, most recently in 2023, that people working on the Reagan campaign's behalf convinced Iran to prolong the crisis to reduce Carter's chance of reelection.\nDomestic policy.\nHolidays and proclamations.\nIn 1978, Carter signed into law a bill creating a celebration in May called Asian American Heritage Week. May 7 and 10 were designated for national observance and recognition of the contributions of Asian Americans and Asian immigrants to American society. In 1992, President George H. W. Bush signed a bill expanding the celebration into Asian American Heritage Month. In 2021, President Joe Biden signed a bill renaming this celebration Asian American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Heritage Month.\nEconomy.\nThe first two years of Carter's presidency were a time of intense stagflation, primarily due to recovery from a previous recession that had left fixed investment at extreme lows and unemployment at 9%. Under Carter, the unemployment rate declined from 8.1% when he took office to 5.7% by July 1978, but during the early 1980s recession it returned to its pre-1977 level. His last two years were marked by double-digit inflation, very high interest rates, oil shortages, and slow economic growth. Due to economic stimulus legislation, such as the Public Works Employment Act of 1977, proposed by Carter and passed by Congress, real household median income had grown by 5.2%, with a projection of 6.4% for the next quarter.\nThe 1979 energy crisis ended this period of growth, and as inflation and interest rates rose, economic growth, job creation and consumer confidence declined sharply. Federal Reserve Board chairman G. William Miller's relatively loose monetary policy had already contributed to somewhat higher inflation, rising from 5.8% in 1976 to 7.7% in 1978. The sudden doubling of crude oil prices forced inflation to double-digit levels, averaging 11.3% in 1979 and 13.5% in 1980. The sudden shortage of gasoline as the 1979 summer vacation season began exacerbated the problem and came to symbolize the crisis to the general public; the acute shortage, originating in the shutdown of Amerada Hess refining facilities, led the federal government to sue the company that year.\nEnvironment.\nDuring his 1976 campaign, Carter promised to sign into law any bills Congress passed to regulate strip mining. In 1977, Carter signed the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, which regulated strip mining.\nIn 1978, Carter declared a federal emergency in the Love Canal neighborhood of Niagara Falls, New York. More than 800 families were evacuated from the neighborhood, which was on top of a toxic waste landfill. The Superfund law was created in response to the situation. Federal disaster money was appropriated to demolish about 500 houses and two schools built atop the dump, and to remediate the dump and construct a containment area for the hazardous waste. This was the first time such a process had been undertaken. Carter acknowledged that several more \"Love Canals\" existed across the country, and that discovering such hazardous dump sites was \"one of the grimmest discoveries of our modern era\".\nIn December 1978, Carter used the 1906 Antiquities Act and his executive order power to designate of land in Alaska as a national monument. This executive order protected the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge until Congress codified it into law with the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980, which doubled the amount of public land set aside for national parks and wildlife refuges.\nU.S. energy crisis.\nMoralism typified much of Carter's action. On April 18, 1977, he delivered a televised speech declaring that the energy crisis was the \"moral equivalent of war\". He encouraged energy conservation and installed solar water heating panels on the White House. He wore a cardigan to offset turning down the heat in the White House. On August 4, 1977, Carter signed the Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977, forming the Department of Energy, the first new cabinet position in eleven years.\nCarter emphasized that the House of Representatives had \"adopted almost all\" of the energy proposal he had made five months earlier and called the compromise \"a turning point in establishing a comprehensive energy program.\" The next month, he called energy \"the most important domestic issue that we will face while I am in office\".\nOn January 12, 1978, Carter said the continued discussions about his energy reform proposal had been \"long and divisive and arduous\". In an April 11, 1978, news conference, Carter said his biggest surprise \"in the nature of a disappointment\" since becoming president was the difficulty Congress had in passing legislation, citing the energy reform bill in particular. After much deliberation and modification, Congress approved the Carter energy legislation on October 15, 1978. It deregulated the sale of natural gas, dropped a longstanding pricing disparity between intra- and interstate gas, and created tax credits to encourage energy conservation and the use of non-fossil fuels.\nOn March 1, 1979, Carter submitted a standby gasoline rationing plan per the request of Congress. On April 5, he delivered an address in which he stressed the urgency of energy conservation and increasing domestic production of energy sources such as coal and solar.\nOn July 15, 1979, Carter delivered a nationally televised address in which he identified what he believed to be a \"\" among American people, under the advisement of pollster Pat Caddell who believed Americans faced a crisis in confidence from events of the 1960s and 1970s, before his presidency. Some later called this his \"malaise speech\", memorable for mixed reactions and his use of rhetoric. The speech's negative reception centered on a view that he did not emphasize his own efforts to address the energy crisis and seemed too reliant on Americans.\nRelations with Congress.\nCarter typically refused to conform to Washington's rules. He avoided phone calls from members of Congress and verbally insulted them. He was unwilling to return political favors. His negativity led to frustration in passing legislation. During a press conference on February 23, 1977, Carter stated that it was \"inevitable\" that he would come into conflict with Congress and added that he had found \"a growing sense of cooperation\" with Congress and met in the past with congressional members of both parties. Carter developed a bitter feeling following an unsuccessful attempt at having Congress enact the scrapping of several water projects.\nAs a rift ensued between the White House and Congress afterward, Carter noted that the Democratic Party's liberal wing opposed his policies the most ardently, attributing this to Ted Kennedy's wanting the presidency. Thinking he had support from 74 Congressmen, Carter issued a \"hit list\" of 19 projects that he claimed were \"pork barrel\" spending that he said he would veto if they were included in legislation. He found himself again at odds with Congressional Democrats, as House Speaker Tip O'Neill found it inappropriate for a president to pursue what had traditionally been the role of Congress. Carter was also weakened by signing a bill that contained many of the \"hit list\" projects he had intended to veto.\nIn an address to a fundraising dinner for the Democratic National Committee on June 23, 1977, Carter said, \"I think it's good to point out tonight, too, that we have evolved a good working relationship with the Congress. For eight years we had government by partisanship. Now we have government by partnership.\" At a July 28 news conference, assessing the first six months of his presidency, Carter spoke of his improved understanding of Congress: I have learned to respect the Congress more in an individual basis. I've been favorably impressed at the high degree of concentrated experience and knowledge that individual members of Congress can bring on a specific subject, where they've been the chairman of a subcommittee or committee for many years and have focused their attention on this particular aspect of government life which I will never be able to do.\nOn May 10, 1979, the House voted against giving Carter authority to produce a standby gas rationing plan. The following day, Carter described himself as shocked and embarrassed for the U.S. government by the vote and concluded \"the majority of the House Members are unwilling to take the responsibility, the political responsibility for dealing with a potential, serious threat to our Nation.\" He added that most House members were placing higher importance on \"local or parochial interests\" and challenged the House to compose its own rationing plan in the next 90 days.\nCarter's remarks were met with criticism by House Republicans, who accused his comments of not befitting the formality a president should have in their public remarks. Others pointed to 106 Democrats voting against his proposal and the bipartisan criticism potentially coming back to haunt him. At a news conference on July 25, 1979, Carter called on believers in the future of the U.S. and his proposed energy program to speak with Congress as it bore the responsibility to impose his proposals. Amid the energy proposal opposition, \"The New York Times\" commented that \"as the comments flying up and down Pennsylvania Avenue illustrate, there is also a crisis of confidence between Congress and the President, sense of doubt and distrust that threatens to undermine the President's legislative program and become an important issue in next year's campaign.\"\nDeregulation.\nIn 1977, Carter appointed Alfred E. Kahn to lead the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). He was part of a push for deregulation of the industry, supported by leading economists, leading think tanks in Washington, a civil society coalition advocating the reform, the head of the regulatory agency, Senate leadership, the Carter administration, and even some in the airline industry. This coalition swiftly gained legislative results in 1978.\nCarter signed the Airline Deregulation Act into law on October 24, 1978. The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes and market entry (of new airlines) from commercial aviation. The Civil Aeronautics Board's powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares. The Act did not remove or diminish the Federal Aviation Administration's regulatory powers over airline safety.\nIn 1978, Carter signed a bill into law \"allowing homebrewing and small-scale craft brewing to operate legally\". The new law deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt, hops, and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the 1920 beginning of prohibition in the United States. This deregulation led to an increase in home brewing that by the 2000s had developed into a strong craft microbrew culture in the United States.\nChrysler bailout.\nIn the late 1970s, the Chrysler Cooperation\u2014one of the \"Big Three\" automakers in the U.S.\u2014faced near-certain bankruptcy as it projected a loss of $1billion. Carter proposed that the company forgo salary increases and bonuses, saying that it might be done \"without decimating the company or putting it on its knees\", but the company had already frozen wage increases and bonuses months before, to no avail. In 1979, Congress began working on a bailout plan for Chrysler, led by Congressman James J. Blanchard. Carter assembled a team that included Vice President Mondale and Assistant Domestic Policy Adviser David Rubenstein to secure a $1.5\u00a0billion loan guarantee.\nIn December, Congress passed the Chrysler Corporation Loan Guarantee Act of 1979 to bail Chrysler out with $3.5billion (equivalent to $billion in 2024) in aid. The bill turned over $162\u00a0million in stock to Chrysler's workers, eliminated around $125\u00a0million in wage increases, and gave Chrysler $500\u00a0million in bank loans. Carter, who had initially opposed the bailout of corporations, signed it into law in January 1980, saying that the bill saved thousands of jobs. The bailout was successful at the time, but Chrysler would eventually file for bankruptcy during the 2008 financial crisis.\nHealthcare.\nDuring his presidential campaign, Carter embraced healthcare reform akin to the Ted Kennedy\u2013sponsored bipartisan universal national health insurance. Carter's proposals on healthcare while in office included a 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal, and a 1979 proposal that provided private health insurance coverage. The 1977 mandatory health care cost proposal was passed in the Senate, but later defeated in the House. During 1978, he met with Kennedy over a compromise healthcare law that proved unsuccessful. He later said Kennedy's disagreements thwarted his plan to provide a comprehensive American health care system.\nIn 1980, Carter signed into law the Mental Health Systems (MHSA) Act, which allocated block grants to states to bolster community health services and provided funding to states to create and implement community-based health services. The MHSA was considered landmark legislation in mental health care. By September 1981, the Reagan administration had repealed most of the law.\nEducation.\nEarly into his term, Carter collaborated with Congress to fulfill his campaign promise to create a cabinet-level education department. In an address from the White House on February 28, 1978, Carter argued \"Education is far too important a matter to be scattered piecemeal among various government departments and agencies, which are often busy with sometimes dominant concerns.\" On February 8, 1979, the Carter administration released an outline of its plan to establish an education department and asserted enough support for the enactment to occur by June. On October 17, the same year, Carter signed the Department of Education Organization Act into law, establishing the United States Department of Education.\nCarter added 43,000 children and families to the Head Start program, while the percentage of nondefense dollars spent on education was doubled. In a speech on November 1, 1980, Carter stated his administration had extended Head Start to migrant children.\nLGBTQ rights.\nDuring Carter's administration, the United States Foreign Service \"lifted its ban on gay and lesbian personnel\". In 1977, the Carter administration became the first U.S. presidential administration to invite gay and lesbian rights activists to the White House to discuss federal policy with regard to ending employment discrimination in the federal government on the basis of sexual orientation and related issues.\nForeign policy.\nIsrael and Egypt.\nFrom the onset of his presidency, Carter attempted to mediate the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. After a failed attempt to seek a comprehensive settlement in 1977 (through reconvening the 1973 Geneva conference), Carter invited the Egyptian president Anwar Sadat and Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin to the presidential lodge Camp David in September 1978, in hopes of creating a definitive peace. While the two sides could not agree on Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank, the negotiations resulted in Egypt formally recognizing Israel, and the creation of an elected government in the West Bank and Gaza. This resulted in the Camp David Accords, which ended the war between Israel and Egypt.\nThe accords were a source of great domestic opposition in both Egypt and Israel. Historian J\u00f8rgen Jensehaugen argues that by the time Carter left office in January 1981, he was \"in an odd position\u2014he had attempted to break with traditional U.S. policy but ended up fulfilling the goals of that tradition, which had been to break up the Arab alliance, sideline the Palestinians, build an alliance with Egypt, weaken the Soviet Union and secure Israel.\"\nAfrica.\nIn an address to the African officials at the United Nations on October 4, 1977, Carter stated the U.S.'s interest to \"see a strong, vigorous, free, and prosperous Africa with as much of the control of government as possible in the hands of the residents of your countries\" and pointed to their unified efforts on \"the problem of how to resolve the Rhodesian, Zimbabwe question.\" At a news conference later that month, Carter said the U.S. wanted to \"work harmoniously with South Africa in dealing with the threats to peace in Namibia and in Zimbabwe in particular\", to do away with racial issues such as apartheid, and to work for equal opportunities in other facets of society in the region.\nDespite human rights concerns, Carter continued U.S. support for Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire. Zaire received nearly half the foreign aid Carter allocated to sub-Saharan Africa. Under Carter an alliance with Liberia's Samuel Doe, who had come to power in a 1980 coup, was pursued.\nCarter visited Nigeria from March 31 to April 3, 1978, to improve relations, the first U.S. president to do so. He reiterated interest in convening a peace conference on Rhodesia that involved all parties.\nThe elections of Margaret Thatcher as prime minister of the United Kingdom and Abel Muzorewa for Prime Minister of Zimbabwe Rhodesia, South Africa turning down a plan for South West Africa's independence, and domestic opposition in Congress were seen as a heavy blow to the Carter administration's policy toward South Africa. On May 16, 1979, the Senate voted in favor of lifting economic sanctions against Rhodesia, seen by some Rhodesians and South Africans as a potentially fatal blow to joint diplomacy efforts and any compromise between the Salisbury leaders and guerrillas. On December 3, Secretary of State Cyrus Vance promised Senator Jesse Helms that when the British governor arrived in Salisbury to implement an agreed Lancaster House settlement and the electoral process began, the President would take prompt action to lift sanctions against Zimbabwe Rhodesia.\nEast Asia.\nCarter sought closer relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC), continuing the Nixon administration's drastic policy of rapprochement. The two countries increasingly collaborated against the Soviet Union, and the Carter administration tacitly consented to the Chinese invasion of Vietnam. In December 1978, he announced the United States' intention to formally recognize and establish full diplomatic relations with the PRC starting on January 1, 1979, while severing ties with Taiwan, including revoking a mutual defense treaty with the latter. In 1979, Carter extended formal diplomatic recognition to the PRC for the first time. This decision led to a boom in trade between the United States and the PRC, which was pursuing economic reforms under the leadership of Deng Xiaoping. Carter supported the China-allied Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia fighting the Soviet-backed Vietnamese invasion. \nAfter the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, Carter allowed the sale of military supplies to China and began negotiations to share military intelligence. In January 1980, Carter unilaterally revoked the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of China (ROC). Conservative Republicans challenged Carter's abrogation of the treaty in court, but the Supreme Court ruled that the issue was a non-justiciable political question in \"Goldwater v. Carter\". The U.S. continued to maintain quasi-diplomatic contacts with the ROC through the 1979 Taiwan Relations Act.\nDuring Carter's presidency, the U.S. continued to support Indonesia under Suharto as a Cold War ally, despite human rights violations in East Timor. The violations followed Indonesia's December 1975 invasion of East Timor. Under Carter's administration military assistance to Indonesia increased, peaking in 1978. This was antithetical to Carter's stated policy of \"not selling weapons if it would exacerbate a potential conflict in a region\". In the Philippines, Carter supported the regime of President Ferdinand Marcos.\nDuring a news conference on March 9, 1977, Carter reaffirmed his interest in having a gradual withdrawal of American troops from South Korea. On May 19, \"The Washington Post\" quoted Chief of Staff of U.S. forces in South Korea John K. Singlaub as criticizing Carter's withdrawal of troops from the Korean peninsula. Carter relieved Singlaub of his duties on May 21.\nDuring a news conference on May 26, 1977, Carter said South Korea could defend itself with reduced American troops in case of conflict. From June 30 to July 1, 1979, Carter held meetings with president of South Korea Park Chung Hee for a discussion on relations between the U.S. and South Korea as well as Carter's interest in preserving his policy of worldwide tension reduction. On April 21, 1978, Carter announced a reduction in American troops in South Korea scheduled to be released by the end of the year by two-thirds, citing lack of action by Congress in regard to a compensatory aid package for the South Korean government. He supported South Korean President Chun Doo-hwan during the suppression of the Gwangju Uprising in May 1980. South Korean pro-democracy activist Kim Dae-jung was sentenced to death in September 1980, but his sentence was commuted after the intervention of presidents Carter and Reagan.\nIran.\nOn November 15, 1977, Carter pledged that his administration would continue positive relations between the U.S. and Iran, calling its contemporary status \"strong, stable and progressive\". On December 31, 1977, he called Iran under the Shah an \"island of stability\". Carter praised the Shah's \"great leadership\" and spoke of \"personal friendship\" between them. American support for the unpopular Shah increased anti-American sentiment in Iran, which intensified after the Shah, who was dying of cancer, left Iran for the last time in January 1979 and Carter allowed him to be admitted to the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York on October 22, 1979.\nOn November 4, 1979, a group of Iranian students took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. The students belonged to the Muslim Student Followers of the Imam's Line and supported the Iranian revolution. Fifty-two American diplomats and citizens were held hostage for the next 444 days. They were freed immediately after Ronald Reagan succeeded Carter as president on January 20, 1981. During the crisis, Carter remained in isolation in the White House for more than 100 days.\nA month into the affair, Carter announced his commitment to resolving the dispute without \"any military action that would cause bloodshed or arouse the unstable captors of our hostages to attack them or to punish them\". On April 7, 1980, he issued Executive Order 12205, imposing economic sanctions against Iran, and announced further government measures he deemed necessary to ensure a safe release.\nOn April 24, 1980, Carter ordered Operation Eagle Claw to try to free the hostages. The mission failed, leaving eight American servicemen dead and two aircraft destroyed. The failure led Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, who had opposed the mission, to resign.\nReleased in 2017, a declassified memo produced by the CIA in 1980 concluded \"Iranian hardliners\u2014especially Ayatollah Khomeini\" were \"determined to exploit the hostage issue to bring about President Carter's defeat in the November elections.\" Additionally, Tehran in 1980 wanted \"the world to believe that Imam Khomeini caused President Carter's downfall and disgrace.\"\nSoviet Union.\nOn February 8, 1977, Carter said he had urged the Soviet Union to align with the U.S. in forming \"a comprehensive test ban to stop all nuclear testing for at least an extended period of time\", and that he was in favor of the Soviet Union ceasing deployment of the RSD-10 Pioneer. At a June 13 press conference, he announced that the U.S. would \"work closely with the Soviet Union on a comprehensive test ban treaty to prohibit all testing of nuclear devices underground or in the atmosphere\", and that Paul Warnke would negotiate demilitarization of the Indian Ocean with the Soviet Union.\nAt a December 30 news conference, Carter said that during \"the last few months, the United States and the Soviet Union have made great progress in dealing with a long list of important issues, the most important of which is to control the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons\", and that the two countries sought to conclude SALT II talks by the spring of the next year. The talk of a comprehensive test ban treaty materialized with the signing of the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II by Carter and Leonid Brezhnev on June 18, 1979.\nIn 1979, the Soviets intervened in the Second Yemenite War. The Soviet backing of South Yemen constituted a \"smaller shock\", in tandem with tensions that were rising due to the Iranian Revolution. This played a role in making Carter's stance on the Soviet Union more assertive, a shift that finalized with the impending Soviet-Afghan War.\nIn his 1980 State of the Union Address, Carter emphasized the significance of relations between the two regions: \"Now, as during the last 3\u00bd decades, the relationship between our country, the United States of America, and the Soviet Union is the most critical factor in determining whether the world will live at peace or be engulfed in global conflict.\"\nSoviet invasion of Afghanistan.\nCommunists under the leadership of Nur Muhammad Taraki seized power in Afghanistan on April 27, 1978. Due to the regime's improvement of secular education and redistribution of land coinciding with mass executions and political oppression, Taraki was deposed by rival Hafizullah Amin in September. Amin was considered a \"brutal psychopath\" by foreign observers and had lost control of much of the country, prompting the Soviet Union to invade Afghanistan on December 24, 1979, execute Amin, and install Babrak Karmal as president.\nIn the West, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was considered a threat to global security and the oil supplies of the Persian Gulf, as well as the existence of Pakistan. These concerns led Carter to expand collaboration between the CIA and Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), which had begun in July 1979, when the CIA started providing $695,000 worth of non-lethal assistance to the Afghan mujahideen. The modest scope of this early collaboration was likely influenced by the understanding, later recounted by CIA official Robert Gates, \"that a substantial U.S. covert aid program\" might have \"raise[d] the stakes\", thereby causing \"the Soviets to intervene more directly and vigorously than otherwise intended.\"\nAccording to a 2020 review of declassified U.S. documents by Conor Tobin in the journal \"Diplomatic History\": The primary significance of this small-scale aid was in creating constructive links with dissidents through Pakistan's ISI that could be utilized in the case of an overt Soviet intervention ... The small-scale covert program that developed \"in response\" to the increasing Soviet influence was part of a contingency plan \"if\" the Soviets did intervene militarily, as Washington would be in a better position to make it difficult for them to consolidate their position, but not designed to induce an intervention.\nOn December 28, 1979, Carter signed a presidential finding explicitly allowing the CIA to transfer \"lethal military equipment either directly or through third countries to the Afghan opponents of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan\" and to arrange \"selective training, conducted outside of Afghanistan, in the use of such equipment either directly or via third country intermediation.\" His finding defined the CIA's mission as \"harassment\" of Soviet troops; at the time, \"this was not a war the CIA expected to win outright on the battlefield,\" in the words of Steve Coll.\nCarter was determined to respond harshly to what he considered a dangerous provocation. In a televised speech on January 23, 1980, he announced sanctions on the Soviet Union, promised renewed aid and registration to Pakistan and the Selective Service System, and committed the U.S. to the Persian Gulf's defense. Carter imposed an embargo on grain shipments to the USSR, tabled SALT II, requested a 5% annual increase in defense spending, and called for a boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, which was ultimately joined by 65 other nations.\nIn early 1980, Carter determined the thrust of U.S. policy for the duration of the war: he initiated a program to arm the mujahideen through Pakistan's ISI and secured a pledge from Saudi Arabia to match U.S. funding for this purpose. Despite huge expenditure, the Soviet Union was unable to quell the insurgency and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989. The routing of U.S. aid through Pakistan led to some controversy, as weapons sent to Karachi were frequently controlled by Pakistan, whose government influenced which rebels received assistance. Despite this, Carter has expressed no regret over his decision to support what he considered the Afghan freedom fighters.\nInternational trips.\nCarter made twelve international trips to 25 countries as president. He was the first president to make a state visit to Sub-Saharan Africa when he went to Nigeria in 1978. He made several trips to the Middle East to broker peace negotiations. His visit to Iran from December 31, 1977, to January 1, 1978, took place less than a year before the overthrow of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. \nCarter gave his \"Island of Stability\" speech during this visit.\nAllegations and investigations.\nOn September 21, 1977, the Carter administration's OMB director Bert Lance resigned amid allegations of improper banking activities before his tenure. United States Attorney General Griffin Bell appointed Paul J. Curran as a special counsel to investigate loans made to the peanut business Carter owned by a bank controlled by Lance, and Carter became the first sitting president to testify under oath as part of an investigation of him. In October 1979, Curran announced that no evidence had been found to support allegations that funds loaned from the National Bank of Georgia had been diverted to Carter's 1976 presidential campaign, ending the investigation.\n1980 presidential campaign.\nCarter's reelection campaign was based primarily on attacking Ronald Reagan. The campaign frequently pointed out and mocked Reagan's proclivity for gaffes, using his age and perceived lack of connection to his native California voter base against him. Later, the campaign used similar rhetoric as Lyndon Johnson's 1964 presidential campaign, portraying Reagan as a warmonger who could not be trusted with the nuclear arsenal. Carter attempted to deny the Reagan campaign $29.4\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024) in campaign funds, due to dependent conservative groups already raising $60\u00a0million to get him elected\u2014an amount that exceeded the limit of campaign funds. Carter's attempt was later denied by the Federal Election Commission.\nCarter announced his reelection campaign in December 1979. A month earlier, Senator Ted Kennedy had announced his candidacy for the Democratic nomination. During the Democratic presidential primaries, questions about Kennedy were a frequent subject of Carter's press conferences. Despite winning key states such as California and New York, Kennedy surprised his supporters by running a weak campaign. Carter won most of the primaries and secured renomination. He later wrote that the strongest opposition to his policies came from the Democratic Party's liberal wing, which he attributed to Kennedy. Kennedy had mobilized the liberal wing, which weakened Carter's support in the general election.\nCarter and Mondale were formally nominated at the 1980 Democratic National Convention in New York City. Carter delivered a speech notable for its tribute to the late Hubert Humphrey, whom he initially called \"Hubert Horatio Hornblower\", and Kennedy made \"The Dream Shall Never Die\" speech, in which he criticized Reagan and did not endorse Carter.\nAlong with Reagan and Kennedy, Carter was opposed by centrist John B. Anderson, who had previously contested the Republican presidential primaries, and upon losing to Reagan, reentered the race as an independent. Anderson advertised himself as a more liberal alternative to Reagan's conservatism. As the campaign went on, Anderson's polling numbers dropped and his base was gradually pulled to Carter or Reagan. Carter had to run against his own \"stagflation\"-ridden economy, while the hostage crisis in Iran dominated the news. He was attacked by conservatives for failing to \"prevent Soviet gains\" in less-developed countries, as pro-Soviet governments had taken power in countries including Angola, Ethiopia, Nicaragua and Afghanistan. His brother, Billy Carter, caused controversy due to his association with Muammar Gaddafi's regime in Libya. Carter alienated many liberal college students, who were expected to be one of his strongest support bases, by reactivating the Selective Service System on July 2, 1980, reinstating registration for the military draft. His campaign manager, Timothy Kraft, stepped down five weeks before the general election amid what turned out to be an uncorroborated allegation of cocaine use.\nOn October 28, Carter and Reagan participated in the sole presidential debate of the election cycle in which they were both present, due to Carter refusing to participate in debates that included Anderson. Though initially trailing Carter by several points, Reagan experienced a surge in polling after the debate. This was in part influenced by Reagan deploying the phrase \"There you go again\", which became the election's defining phrase. It was later discovered that in the final days of the campaign, Reagan's team acquired classified documents Carter used to prepare for the debate.\nReagan and his running mate (George H. W. Bush) defeated Carter and Mondale in a landslide, winning 489 electoral votes. The Senate went Republican for the first time since 1952. Carter's 49 electoral votes were the second-fewest for an incumbent president seeking reelection. In his concession speech, Carter admitted that he was hurt by the election's outcome but pledged \"a very fine transition period\" with President-elect Reagan.\nPost-presidency (1981\u20132024).\nShortly after losing reelection, Carter told the White House press corps that he intended to emulate the retirement of Harry S. Truman and not use his subsequent public life to enrich himself.\nDiplomacy.\nDiplomacy was a large part of Carter's post-presidency. These diplomatic efforts began in the Middle East, with a September 1981 meeting with prime minister of Israel Menachem Begin, and a March 1983 tour of Egypt that included meeting with members of the Palestine Liberation Organization.\nIn 2018, official files revealed that, in January 1993, Carter had been suggested for a Northern Ireland peace process role by president-elect Bill Clinton amid speculation that Clinton would appoint a special envoy for Northern Ireland.\nIn 1994, Clinton sought Carter's assistance in a North Korea peace mission, during which Carter negotiated an understanding with Kim Il Sung. Carter outlined a treaty with Kim, which, in order to spur American action, he announced to CNN without the Clinton administration's consent. North Korea and the United States signed the Agreed Framework on October 21, 1994.\nIn March 1999, Carter visited Taiwan and met with President Lee Teng-hui. During the meeting, Carter praised the progress Taiwan made in democracy, human rights, economy, culture, science, and technology. But Carter remained a controversial figure in Taiwan for having ended U.S. diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan).\nIn 2003, Carter championed a plan to hold elections in Venezuela amid protests aimed at doing so. Ultimately, no elections were held.\nIn 2006, Carter stated his disagreements with Israel's domestic and foreign policy while saying he supported the country, extending his criticisms to Israel's policies in Lebanon, the West Bank, and Gaza.\nIn July 2007, Carter joined Nelson Mandela in Johannesburg, South Africa, to announce his participation in The Elders, a group of independent global leaders working together on peace and human rights issues. After the announcement, Carter participated in visits to Darfur, Sudan, Cyprus, the Korean Peninsula, and the Middle East, among others. He attempted to travel to Zimbabwe in 2008, but was stopped by President Robert Mugabe's government. In December 2008, Carter met with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and in a June 2012 call with Jeffery Brown, he stressed that Egyptian military generals could take full executive and legislative power to form a new constitution favoring themselves if their announced intentions came true.\nOn August 10, 2010, Carter traveled to North Korea and negotiated the release of Aijalon Gomes. In 2017, as tensions between the U.S. and North Korea persisted, Carter recommended a peace treaty between the two nations, and confirmed that he had volunteered to the Trump administration to be a diplomatic envoy to North Korea.\nViews on later presidents.\nCarter began his first year out of office with a pledge not to critique the Reagan administration, saying it was \"too early\". He sided with Reagan on issues like building neutron arms after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, but frequently spoke out against his administration, denouncing many of its actions in the Middle East. He condemned the handling of the Sabra and Shatila massacre, the lack of efforts to rescue and retrieve four American businessmen from West Beirut in 1984, Reagan's support of the Strategic Defense Initiative in 1985, and his claim of an international conspiracy on terrorism. In 1987 he criticized Reagan for conceding to terrorist demands, nominating Robert Bork for the Supreme Court, and his handling of the Persian Gulf crisis.\nOn January 16, 1989, before the inauguration of George H. W. Bush, Carter told Gerald Ford that Reagan had experienced a media honeymoon, saying that he believed Reagan's immediate successor would be less fortunate.\nCarter had a mostly poor relationship with Bill Clinton, who snubbed him from his inauguration ceremony. He questioned the Clinton administration's morality, particularly with respect to the Clinton\u2013Lewinsky scandal and the pardon of Marc Rich.\nIn July 2001, Carter said he was \"disappointed in almost everything\" President George W. Bush had done, but after the September 11 attacks, he offered only praise, calling on Americans to support Bush with \"complete unity\". Later, Carter opposed the Iraq War and what he considered an attempt by Bush and Tony Blair to oust Saddam Hussein with \"lies and misinterpretations\". In 2004, Carter said he believed Bush had exploited the September 11 attacks. In 2007, Carter said the Bush administration \"has been the worst in history\" on foreign affairs; he later said he was just comparing Bush's tenure to Nixon's. On the Bush administration's behalf, Tony Fratto responded that Carter's comments increased his irrelevance.\nThough he praised President Barack Obama in the early part of his tenure, Carter stated his disagreement with using drone strikes against suspected terrorists, Obama's choice to keep Guantanamo Bay detention camp open, and the federal surveillance programs Edward Snowden revealed.\nDuring Donald Trump's presidency, Carter spoke favorably of the chance for immigration reform and criticized Trump for his handling of the U.S. national anthem protests. In an October 2017 interview with \"The New York Times\", he said the media had covered Trump more harshly \"than any other president certainly that I've known about\". In 2019, Trump called Carter and expressed concern that China was \"getting ahead\" of the United States. Carter agreed, saying that China's strength came from its lack of involvement in armed conflict and calling the U.S. \"the most warlike nation in the history of the world.\"\nIn July 2021, Carter gave his final recorded interview and said that President Biden had \"done very well\" in office.\nPresidential politics.\nCarter was considered a potential candidate in the 1984 presidential election. In May 1982, Carter ruled out another run, and instead endorsed Mondale for the Democratic presidential nomination. After Mondale secured the nomination in the Democratic primaries, Carter critiqued the Reagan campaign, spoke at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, and advised Mondale about his campaign. After the election, in which Reagan defeated Mondale, Carter said the loss was predictable because Mondale's platform included raising taxes.\nIn March 1987, Carter ruled himself out as a candidate in the 1988 presidential election. Ahead of the 1988 Democratic National Convention, Carter predicted that the convention would see party unity after tensions arose between presumptive nominee Michael Dukakis and runner-up Jesse Jackson. Carter delivered an address at the convention.\nCarter spoke of the need for the 1992 Democratic National Convention to address certain issues not focused on in the past, and campaigned for Clinton after he became the Democratic nominee, publicly stating his expectation to be consulted during Clinton's presidency.\nCarter endorsed Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic nominee, days before the 2000 presidential election, and in subsequent years voiced his opinion that Gore won the election, despite Republican nominee George W. Bush having been certified the victor following the Supreme Court's ruling in \"Bush v. Gore\".\nIn the 2004 presidential election, Carter endorsed the Democratic nominee John Kerry and spoke at the 2004 Democratic National Convention. He also voiced concern about another voting mishap in Florida.\nDuring the 2008 Democratic presidential primaries, it was speculated that Carter would endorse Barack Obama over his main primary rival Hillary Clinton, as Carter and other members of the Carter family had spoken favorably of Obama. Although he did not endorse Obama during the primaries, he said in late May 2008 that Clinton should end her bid and concede to Obama after the final primaries on June 3. On June 3, Carter endorsed Obama, and said he would vote for Obama as a superdelegate to the 2008 Democratic National Convention (as a former president, Carter was entitled to hold one of 20 superdelegate slots reserved for \"distinguished party leaders\"). Before this, he had remained publicly neutral. During the general election campaign, Carter criticized John McCain, the Republican nominee. Once Obama became the presumptive nominee, he advised Obama not to select Clinton as his running mate.\nAhead of the primaries of the 2012 presidential election, Carter expressed his preference for Mitt Romney to win the Republican nomination, though he clarified that he preferred Romney because he believed him to be the prospective Republican nominee who would most assure Obama's reelection. Carter recorded an address that was shown at the 2012 Democratic National Convention.\nIn the 2016 presidential election, Carter was critical of Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump shortly after Trump entered the primary, predicting that he would lose. As the primary continued, Carter said he preferred Trump to his main rival, Ted Cruz, though he rebuked the Trump campaign during the primary and in his address to the 2016 Democratic National Convention. In August 2016, Carter endorsed the presumptive Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton. He again expressed his support of Clinton in his speech to the Democratic convention, which he delivered by video. In 2019, Carter said that Trump would not have been elected without Russia's interference in the 2016 election. When questioned, he agreed that Trump is an \"illegitimate president\".&lt;ref name=\"Lewis_6/28/2019\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"C-SPAN_6/28/2019\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In a 2017 discussion with Senator Bernie Sanders, Carter said he voted for Sanders in the 2016 Democratic Party presidential primaries.\nJimmy and Rosalynn Carter delivered a recorded audio message endorsing Joe Biden for the virtual 2020 Democratic National Convention. On January 6, 2021, after the U.S. Capitol attack, Carter released a statement that he and his wife were \"troubled\" by the events, that what had occurred was \"a national tragedy and is not who we are as a nation\", and that \"having observed elections in troubled democracies worldwide, I know that we the people can unite to walk back from this precipice to peacefully uphold the laws of our nation\". Carter recorded an audio message for Biden's inauguration on January 20, 2021, as the Carters could not attend the ceremony in person.\nIn November 2022, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit overruled a three-judge panel of the court and scheduled a rehearing of the case against the Trump administration\u2013proposed land swap in Alaska to allow a road through the Izembek National Wildlife Refuge. In an unusual action, Carter had filed an opinion in support of a lawsuit by environmental groups, saying the swap violated the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act passed near the end of his presidency. Carter said the act \"may be the most significant domestic achievement of my political life\".\nIn August 2024, Carter's son Chip said his father wanted to live to 100 to vote for Kamala Harris in the 2024 presidential election. He did so on October 16.\nHurricane relief.\nCarter criticized the Bush administration's handling of Hurricane Katrina, and built homes in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy. He also partnered with former presidents to work with One America Appeal to help the victims of Hurricane Harvey and Hurricane Irma in the Gulf Coast and Texas communities, in addition to writing op-eds about the goodness seen in Americans who assist each other during natural disasters.\nOther activities.\nThe Carter family's peanut business accumulated a $1\u00a0million debt in 1981. Carter began writing books to pay off this debt. As of July 2019, he had \"published more than 30, from a children's book to reflections on his presidency\". After he left the White House, \"[o]n average, he completed just about one book per year over those 35 years, including many bestsellers, a novel and a children's book.\"\nIn 1982, Carter founded the Carter Center, a non-governmental and nonprofit organization with the purpose of advancing human rights and alleviating human suffering. Among these efforts has been working with the World Health Organization to eradicate dracunculiasis, also called Guinea worm disease. The incidence of this disease has decreased from 3.5million cases in the mid-1980s to four in the first seven months of 2024, according to the Carter Center's statistics.\nCarter attended the dedication of his presidential library and those of Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush. He delivered eulogies at the funerals of Coretta Scott King, Gerald Ford, and Theodore Hesburgh.\nIn 2007, Carter founded the New Baptist Covenant organization for social justice.\nIn 2013, Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter, their son Chip, and Chip's wife Becky traveled to the neighborhood of Queens Village in New York City. They worked on five housing construction projects with Habitat for Humanity.\nAs of August\u00a02019,[ [update]] Carter was Honorary Chair of the World Justice Project. He was formerly an honorary chair of the Continuity of Government Commission. He continued to occasionally teach Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church as of 2019. Carter also taught at Emory University, and in 2019 was awarded tenure for 37 years of service.\nIsrael and Palestine.\nCarter was one of many international observers who took part in the first Palestinian general election in 1996. The Carter Center and National Democratic Institute sent an 85-person team to take part in the election observation.\nCarter's 2006 book \",\" a \"New York Times\" Best Seller, generated controversy for characterizing Israel's policies in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip as amounting to apartheid. In remarks broadcast over radio, he said that Israel's policies amounted to an apartheid worse than South Africa's:\nCarter defended himself against accusations of antisemitism by saying \"the hope is that my book will at least stimulate a debate, which has not existed in this country. There's never been any debate on this issue of any significance.\" He said that Israel would not have peace until it agreed to withdraw from the occupied territories, adding, \"the greatest commitment in my life has been trying to bring peace to Israel.\"\nIn a 2007 speech at Brandeis University, Carter apologized for wording in the book that suggested that Palestinian suicide terror attacks were justified as a political tool. \"That sentence was worded in a completely improper and stupid way. I've written my publishers to change that sentence immediately in future editions of the book. I apologize to you personally and to everyone here.\"\nIn his 2010 book \"We Can Have Peace in the Holy Land\", Carter cites Israel's unwillingness to withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories and settlement expansion as the primary obstacle to peace in the Middle East.\nPersonal life.\nCarter had three younger siblings, all of whom died of pancreatic cancer: Gloria Spann, Ruth Stapleton, and Billy Carter. He was a first cousin of politician Hugh Carter and a distant cousin of the Carter family of musicians.\nCarter married Rosalynn Smith on July 7, 1946, in the Plains Methodist Church, the church of Rosalynn's family. They had three sons, John \"Jack\", James III \"Chip\", and Donnel \"Jeff\", and a daughter, Amy. Mary Prince (an African American woman wrongly convicted of murder, and later pardoned) was their daughter Amy's nanny for most of the period from 1971 until Carter's presidency ended. Carter had asked to be designated as her parole officer, helping enable her to work in the White House.\nOn October 19, 2019, the Carters became the longest-wed presidential couple, having overtaken George and Barbara Bush at 26,765 days. After Rosalynn's death on November 19, 2023, after 77 years and four months of marriage, Carter released the following statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rosalynn was my equal partner in everything I ever accomplished. She gave me wise guidance and encouragement when I needed it. As long as Rosalynn was in the world, I always knew somebody loved and supported me.\nThe Carters' eldest son, Jack, was the 2006 Democratic nominee for U.S. Senate in Nevada and lost to Republican incumbent John Ensign. Jack's son Jason Carter is a former Georgia state senator who in 2014 was the Democratic nominee for governor of Georgia, losing to the Republican incumbent, Nathan Deal. On December 20, 2015, while teaching a Sunday school class, Carter announced that his 28-year-old grandson Jeremy Carter had died of unspecified causes.\nInterests, friendships and hobbies.\nCarter's hobbies included painting, fly fishing, woodworking, cycling, tennis, and skiing. He also had an interest in poetry, particularly the works of Dylan Thomas. During a state visit to the UK in 1977, Carter suggested that Thomas should have a memorial in Poets' Corner at Westminster Abbey; this came to fruition in 1982. In 1994, Carter published a book of poetry, \"Always a Reckoning and Other Poems,\" illustrated by his granddaughter Sarah Chuldenko.\nCarter was a personal friend of Elvis Presley, whom he and Rosalynn met on June 30, 1973. They remained in contact by telephone two months before Presley's sudden death in August 1977. According to Carter, Presley was almost incoherent because of his addiction to barbiturates; although he phoned the White House several more times, that was the last time they spoke. The day after Presley's death, Carter issued a statement and said Presley had \"changed the face of American popular culture\".\nCarter filed a report with both the International UFO Bureau and the National Investigations Committee On Aerial Phenomena saying that he saw an unidentified flying object in October 1969. Records showed that Carter got the date wrong, and it was in fact on January 6, 1969. In 2016, a former Air Force scientist found old government reports about a scientific project that on that date launched a barium cloud to examine the upper atmosphere. It would have appeared in the sky at an elevation of 33 degrees, which is almost exactly what Carter had speculated.\nBeliefs.\nFrom a young age, Carter showed deep commitment to evangelical Christianity. He taught Sunday school at Maranatha Baptist Church in Plains. At a private inauguration worship service, the preacher was Nelson Price, the pastor of Roswell Street Baptist Church of Marietta, Georgia. An evangelical Christian, Carter appealed to voters after the scandals of the Nixon Administration, and is credited with popularizing the term \"born again\" into American lexicon during his 1976 presidential campaign. As president, Carter prayed several times a day, and said Jesus was the driving force in his life. He was greatly influenced by a sermon he had heard as a young man that asked: \"If you were arrested for being a Christian, would there be enough evidence to convict you?\" In 2000, after the Southern Baptist Convention announced it would no longer permit women to become pastors, he renounced his membership, saying: \"I personally feel that women should play an absolutely equal role in service of Christ in the church.\" He remained a member of the Cooperative Baptist Fellowship. Carter's support for the Equal Rights Amendment led many evangelical conservatives to leave the Democratic Party, contributing to the development of the Christian right in American politics.\nHealth.\nOn August 3, 2015, Carter underwent elective surgery to remove a small mass on his liver, and his prognosis for a full recovery was initially said to be excellent. On August 12, he announced he had been diagnosed with cancer that had metastasized. On August 20, Carter said that melanoma had been found in his brain and liver and that he had begun treatment. On December 5, he announced that his medical scans no longer showed any cancer.\nCarter broke his hip in a fall at his Plains home on May 13, 2019, and underwent surgery the same day at the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center in Americus, Georgia. On October 6, an injury above his left eyebrow sustained in another fall at home required 14 stitches and resulted in a black eye. On October 21, Carter was admitted to the Phoebe Sumter Medical Center after sustaining a minor pelvic fracture from falling at home for the third time in 2019.\nOn November 11, 2019, Carter was hospitalized at the Emory University Hospital in Atlanta for a procedure to relieve pressure on his brain caused by bleeding connected with his falls. He was released from the hospital on November 27. On December 2, 2019, Carter was readmitted to the hospital for a urinary tract infection. He was released on December 4.\nOn February 18, 2023, the Carter Center announced that following a \"series of short hospital stays\", Carter decided to \"spend his remaining time at home with his family\" in Plains to \"receive hospice care\" for an unspecified illness.\nLongevity.\nAt 100 years old, Carter was the longest-lived former U.S. president. He was the earliest-serving living former president since Gerald Ford's death in 2006. In 2012, he surpassed Herbert Hoover as the longest-retired president. In 2017 and 2021, he became the first president to live to the 40th anniversary of his inauguration and post-presidency, respectively. In 2017, Carter, then 92, became the oldest former president ever to attend an American presidential inauguration. On March 22, 2019, he became the longest-lived U.S. president. He said in a 2019 interview with \"People\" that he never expected to live as long as he had and that the best explanation for longevity was a good marriage.\nThe Carter Center announced \"Jimmy Carter 100: A Celebration in Song\", an event concert to celebrate Carter's 100th birthday that featured appearances by musicians and celebrities. The event took place on September 17, 2024, at the Fox Theatre in Atlanta. On October 1, 2024, Carter turned 100, the first U.S. president to do so. Local events celebrating his birthday included a F-18 Super Hornet flyover formation by eight Navy pilots from Naval Air Station Oceana, which Carter viewed from his backyard, and a naturalization ceremony for 100 new citizens at Plains High School, which Chip Carter attended.\nCarter made arrangements to be buried in front of his home at 209 Woodland Drive in Plains. In 2006, he said that a funeral in Washington, D.C., with visitation at the Carter Center, was also planned. Carter asked President Biden to deliver his eulogy.\nDeath and funeral.\nCarter died at his home in Plains, Georgia, on December 29, 2024, at age 100.\nShortly after the announcement, President Biden released a statement honoring Carter's legacy, calling him a \"man of principle, faith, and humility\". The nation held an official state funeral and day of mourning for Carter on January 9, 2025. All five living U.S. presidents\u2014Biden, Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, Barack Obama, and President-elect Donald Trump\u2014attended the funeral.\nLegacy.\nAssessments.\nWhen Carter left office in 1981, scholars and even many Democrats viewed his presidency as a failure. Betty Glad, a political scientist at the University of Illinois, summarized the public consensus on Carter: \"he didn't have a well-developed political philosophy and gave people a feeling he didn't quite know where he was headed.\"\nHistorians have ranked Carter's presidency as below average. After leaving office, he told allies he predicted history would be kinder to him than voters were in the 1980 election. In a 1982 \"Chicago Tribune\" survey, when 49 historians and scholars were asked to rank the best and worst U.S. presidents, Carter was ranked the tenth worst. In 2006, conservative British historian Andrew Roberts ranked Carter the worst U.S. president. Yet some of Carter's policy accomplishments have been more favorably received. The 2009 documentary \"\" credits Carter's efforts at Camp David, which brought peace between Israel and Egypt, with bringing the only meaningful peace to the Middle East. Stuart E. Eizenstat, who served as Carter's chief White House domestic policy adviser, wrote, \"Carter's accomplishments at home and abroad were more extensive and longer lasting than those of almost all modern presidents.\"\nWhile historians generally consider Carter a below-average president, his post-presidency activities have been universally praised, including his peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts. \"The Independent\" wrote in 2009, \"Carter is widely considered a better man than he was a president.\"\nPublic opinion.\nIn exit polls from the 1976 presidential election, many voters still held Ford's pardon of Nixon in 1974 against him. By comparison, Carter was viewed as a sincere, honest, and well-meaning southerner. During his presidency, polls generally showed that most Americans saw Carter as likable and \"a man of high moral principles\". In the 1980 election, Reagan projected an easy self-confidence, in contrast to Carter's serious and introspective temperament. Carter was portrayed as more pessimistic and indecisive than Reagan, who was known for his charm and delegation of tasks to subordinates. Reagan used the economic issues, the Iran hostage crisis, and the lack of Washington cooperation to portray Carter as a weak and ineffectual leader. Carter was the first elected incumbent president since Herbert Hoover in 1932 to lose a reelection bid.\nCarter began his presidency with an approval rating between 66% and 75%. He maintained approval ratings above 50% until March 1978, and the following month his approval rating fell to 39%, primarily due to the declining economy. His ratings briefly rebounded after the Camp David Accords in late 1978 but dipped during the 1979 energy crisis and got as low as 28% in July 1979. At the beginning of the Iran hostage crisis, his approval rating surged to 61%, up 23 points from his pre-crisis rating. Polls also found that up to 77% of Americans approved of Carter's initial response to the crisis, but by June 1980, amid heated criticism from across the political spectrum for his failure to free the hostages, his approval rating slumped to 33%; that same month Reagan surpassed Carter in pre-1980 election polling. As Carter was leaving office, a Gallup poll found that 48% of Americans thought he had been an \"average\" or \"above average\" president, 46% said he had been \"below average\" or \"poor\", and only 3% thought he had been \"outstanding\". His average approval rating during his entire presidency was 46%, and he left office as one of the most unpopular U.S. presidents in history.\nIn a 1990 Gallup survey, 45% of respondents said they approved of the overall job Carter did as president, leaving only Nixon and Lyndon B. Johnson with lower ratings. In a 2006 poll, 61% of respondents said they approved of the job Carter did as president, his highest rating since 1979. In a 2021 survey, 27% of respondents said he had been an \"outstanding\" or \"above average\" president, 43% regarded him as \"average\", and only 24% said he had been \"below average\" or \"poor\". A 2025 YouGov poll listed Carter as the most popular politician in America, with an overall approval rating of 64%.\nAwards and honors.\nCarterpuri, a village in Haryana, India, was renamed in his honor after he visited in 1978.\nCarter received the American Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award in 1984. \nThe Jimmy Carter Library and Museum was opened in 1986. The following year, buildings connected to Carter's life were granted status as National Historic Sites and in 2021 were collectively renamed the Jimmy Carter National Historic Park.\nIn 1991, Carter was made an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa at Kansas State University, and was elected to the American Philosophical Society. In 1998, the U.S. Navy named the third and final submarine .\nCarter received the United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights, given in honor of human rights achievements, and the Hoover Medal, recognizing engineers who have contributed to global causes. Carter's 2002 Nobel Peace Prize was partially a response to president George W. Bush's threats of war against Iraq and Carter's criticism of the Bush administration.\nIn 2009, the Souther Field Airport in Americus, Georgia, was renamed Jimmy Carter Regional Airport.\nIn November 2024, Carter received his 10th nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for audio recordings of his books. He won four times\u2014for \"Our Endangered Values: America's Moral Crisis\" (2007), \"\" (2015), \"Faith: A Journey For All\" (2018), and \"Last Sunday in Plains: A Centennial Celebration\" (2024). He is the most nominated and awarded recipient in the category.\nOn February 21, 2024, the White House Historical Association unveiled its official 2024 White House Christmas ornament honoring Carter's naval service and efforts for peace. This was the first time a president being honored was alive at the time of the unveiling.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15993", "revid": "6702527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15993", "title": "John Napier", "text": "Scottish mathematician (1550\u20131617)\nJohn Napier of Merchiston ( ; Latinized as Ioannes Neper; 1 February 1550\u00a0\u2013 4 April 1617), nicknamed Marvellous Merchiston, was a Scottish landowner known as a mathematician, physicist, and astronomer. He was the 8th Laird of Merchiston. Napier is best known as the discoverer of logarithms. He also invented the \"Napier's bones\" calculating device and popularised the use of the decimal point in arithmetic.\nNapier's birthplace, Merchiston Tower in Edinburgh, is now part of the facilities of Edinburgh Napier University. There is a memorial to him at St Cuthbert's Parish Church at the west end of Princes Street Gardens in Edinburgh.\nLife.\nNapier's father was Sir Archibald Napier of Merchiston Castle, and his mother was Janet Bothwell, daughter of the politician and judge Francis Bothwell, and a sister of Adam Bothwell who became the Bishop of Orkney. Archibald Napier was 16 years old when John Napier was born.\nThere are no records of Napier's early learning, but many believe that he was privately tutored during early childhood. At age 13, he was enrolled in St Salvator's College, St Andrews. Near the time of his matriculation the quality of the education provided by the university was poor, owing in part to the Reformation's causing strife between those of the old faith and the growing numbers of Protestants. There are no records showing that John Napier completed his education at St Andrews. It is believed he left Scotland to further his education in mainland Europe, following the advice given by his uncle Adam Bothwell in a letter written to John Napier's father on 5 December 1560, saying, \"I pray you, sir, to send John to the schools either to France or Flanders, for he can learn no good at home\". It is not known which university Napier attended in Europe, but when he returned to Scotland in 1571 he was fluent in Greek, a language that was not commonly taught in European universities at the time. There are also no records showing his enrollment in the premier universities in Paris or Geneva during this time.\nIn 1571, Napier, aged 21, returned to Scotland, and bought a castle at Gartness in 1574. On the death of his father in 1608, Napier and his family moved into Merchiston Castle in Edinburgh, where he resided the remainder of his life. He had a property within Edinburgh city as well on Borthwick's Close off the Royal Mile.\nOn 7 June 1596 Napier wrote a paper \"Secret inventions, profitable and necessary in these days for defence of this island\". He describes two kinds of burning mirror for use against ships at a distance, a special kind of artillery shot, and a musket-proof metal chariot.\nNapier died from the effects of gout at home at Merchiston Castle at the age of 67. He was buried in the kirkyard of St Giles in Edinburgh. Following the loss of the kirkyard of St Giles to build Parliament House, his remains were transferred to an underground vault on the north side of St Cuthbert's Parish Church at the west side of Edinburgh. There is also a wall monument to Napier at St Cuthbert's.\nNapier, like many mathematicians at the time, worked on methods to reduce the labour required for calculations, and he became famous for the devices that he invented to assist with these issues of computation, for example the numbering rods more quaintly known as \"Napier's bones\".\nIn addition, Napier recognised the potential of the recent developments in mathematics, particularly those of prosthaphaeresis, decimal fractions, and symbolic index arithmetic, to tackle the issue of reducing computation. He appreciated that, for the most part, practitioners who had laborious computations generally did them in the context of trigonometry. Therefore, as well as developing the logarithmic relation, Napier set it in a trigonometric context so it would be even more relevant.\nMathematics.\nNapier's Bones.\nHis work \"Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio\" (1614) contained fifty-seven pages of explanatory matter and ninety pages of tables listing the natural logarithms of trigonometric functions. The book also has a discussion of theorems in spherical trigonometry, usually known as Napier's Rules of Circular Parts.\nModern English translations of both Napier's books on logarithms and their description can be found on the web, as well as a discussion of Napier's bones and Promptuary (another early calculating device).\nHis invention of logarithms was quickly taken up at Gresham College, and prominent English mathematician Henry Briggs visited Napier in 1615. Among the matters they discussed were a re-scaling of Napier's logarithms, in which the presence of the mathematical constant now known as \"e\" (more accurately, \"e\" times a large power of 10 rounded to an integer) was a practical difficulty. Neither Napier nor Briggs actually discovered the constant \"e\"; that discovery was made decades later by Jacob Bernoulli.\nNapier delegated to Briggs the computation of a revised table. The computational advance available via logarithms, the inverse of powered numbers or exponential notation, was such that it made calculations by hand much quicker. The way was opened to later scientific advances, in astronomy, dynamics, and other areas of physics.\nNapier made further contributions. He improved Simon Stevin's decimal notation, introducing the full stop (.) as the delimiter for the fractional part. Lattice multiplication, used by Fibonacci, was made more convenient by his introduction of Napier's bones, a multiplication tool using a set of numbered rods.\nNapier may have worked largely in isolation, but he had contact with Tycho Brahe who corresponded with his friend John Craig. Craig certainly announced the discovery of logarithms to Brahe in the 1590s (the name itself came later); there is a story from Anthony \u00e0 Wood, perhaps not well substantiated, that Napier had a hint from Craig that Longomontanus, a follower of Brahe, was working in a similar direction. Craig had notes on a method of Paul Wittich that used trigonometric identities to reduce a multiplication formula for the sine function to additions.\nTrigonometry.\nWhen one of the angles, say \"C\", of a spherical triangle is equal to \"\u03c0\"/2 the various identities given above are considerably simplified. There are ten identities relating three elements chosen from the set \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"A\", \"B\".\nNapier provided an elegant mnemonic aid for the ten independent equations: the mnemonic is called Napier's circle or Napier's pentagon (when the circle in the above figure, right, is replaced by a pentagon).\nFirst, write the six parts of the triangle (three vertex angles, three arc angles for the sides) in the order they occur around any circuit of the triangle: for the triangle shown above left, going clockwise starting with a gives \"aCbAcB\". Next replace the parts that are not adjacent to C (that is \"A, c, B\") by their complements and then delete the angle C from the list. The remaining parts can then be drawn as five ordered, equal slices of a pentagram, or circle, as shown in the above figure (right). For any choice of three contiguous parts, one (the \"middle\" part) will be adjacent to two parts and opposite the other two parts. The ten Napier's Rules are given by\nThe key for remembering which trigonometric function goes with which part is to look at the first vowel of the kind of part: middle parts take the sine, adjacent parts take the tangent, and opposite parts take the cosine. For an example, starting with the sector containing formula_1 we have:\nformula_2\nThe full set of rules for the right spherical triangle is (Todhunter, Art.62)\nformula_3 \nA quadrantal spherical triangle is defined to be a spherical triangle in which one of the sides subtends an angle of \"\u03c0\"/2 radians at the centre of the sphere: on the unit sphere the side has length \"\u03c0\"/2. In the case that the side \"c\" has length \"\u03c0\"/2 on the unit sphere the equations governing the remaining sides and angles may be obtained by applying the rules for the right spherical triangle of the previous section to the polar triangle \"A'B'C'\" with sides \"a',b',c'\" such that \"A'\" = \"\u03c0\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"a\",\u00a0 \"a\"' =\u00a0\"\u03c0\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"A\" etc. The results are:\nformula_4\nLogarithm \nGiven a positive real number \"b\" such that \"b\" \u2260 1, the \"logarithm\" of a positive real number \"x\" with respect to base \"b\" is the exponent by which \"b\" must be raised to yield \"x\". In other words, the logarithm of \"x\" to base \"b\" is the unique real number \"y\" such that \"b\"\"y\" = \"x\".\nThe logarithm is denoted \"log\"b\"\u2009\"x\"\" (pronounced as \"the logarithm of \"x\" to base \"b\"\", \"the base-\"b\" logarithm of \"x\"\", or most commonly \"the log, base \"b\", of \"x\"\").\nAn equivalent and more succinct definition is that the function formula_5 is the inverse function to the function formula_6\nTheology.\nNapier had an interest in the \"Book of Revelation\", from his student days at St Salvator's College, St Andrews. Under the influence of the sermons of Christopher Goodman, he developed a strongly anti-papal reading, going as far as to say that the Pope was the Antichrist in some of his writings.\nNapier regarded \"A Plaine Discovery of the Whole Revelation of St. John\" (1593) as his most important work. It was written in English, unlike his other publications, in order to reach the widest audience and so that, according to Napier, \"the simple of this island may be instructed\". \"A Plaine Discovery\" used mathematical analysis of the \"Book of Revelation\" to attempt to predict the date of the Apocalypse. Napier identified events in chronological order which he believed were parallels to events described in the \"Book of Revelation\" believing that \"Revelation\"'s structure implied that the prophecies would be fulfilled incrementally. In this work Napier dated the seventh trumpet to 1541, and predicted the end of the world would occur in either 1688 or 1700. Napier did not believe that people could know the true date of the Apocalypse, but claimed that since the Bible contained so many clues about the end, God wanted the Church to know when the end was coming.\nIn his dedication of the \"Plaine Discovery\" to James VI, dated 29 January 1594, Napier urged the king to see \"that justice be done against the enemies of God's church,\" and counselled the King \"to reform the universal enormities of his country, and first to begin at his own house, family, and court.\" The volume includes nine pages of Napier's English verse. It met with success at home and abroad. In 1600 Michiel Panneel produced a Dutch translation, and this reached a second edition in 1607. In 1602 the work appeared at La Rochelle in a French version, by Georges Thomson, revised by Napier, and that also went through several editions (1603, 1605, and 1607). A new edition of the English original was called for in 1611, when it was revised and corrected by the author, and enlarged by the addition of \"With a resolution of certain doubts, moved by some well affected brethren.\"; this appeared simultaneously at Edinburgh and London. The author stated that he still intended to publish a Latin edition, but it never appeared. A German translation, by Leo de Dromna, of the first part of Napier's work appeared at Gera in 1611, and of the whole by Wolfgang Meyer at Frankfurt-am-Main, in 1615. Among Napier's followers was Matthew Cotterius (Matthieu Cotti\u00e8re).\nInterest in the occult.\nIn addition to his mathematical and religious interests, Napier was often perceived as a magician, and is thought to have dabbled in alchemy and necromancy. It was said that he would travel about with a black spider in a small box, and that his black cockerel was his familiar spirit.\nSome of Napier's neighbours accused him of being a sorcerer and in league with the devil, believing that all of the time he spent in his study was being used to learn the black art. These rumours were stoked when Napier used his black cockerel to catch a thief. Napier told his servants to go into a darkened room and pet the cockerel, claiming the bird would crow if they were the one who stole his property. Unbeknownst to the servants, Napier had covered the bird with soot and when the servants emerged from the room, Napier inspected their hands to find the one who had been too afraid to touch the rooster.\nAnother act which Napier is reported to have carried out, which may have seemed mystical to the locals, was when Napier removed the pigeons from his estate since they were eating his grain. Napier caught the pigeons by strewing grain laced with alcohol throughout the field and then capturing the pigeons once they were too drunk to fly away.\nA contract still exists for a treasure hunt, made between Napier and Robert Logan of Restalrig. Napier was to search Fast Castle for treasure allegedly hidden there, wherein it is stated that Napier should \"do his utmost diligence to search and seek out, and by all craft and ingine to find out the same, or make it sure that no such thing has been there.\" This contract was never fulfilled by Napier, and no gold was found when the Edinburgh Archaeological Field society excavated the castle between 1971 and 1986.\nInfluence.\nAmong Napier's early followers were the instrument makers Edmund Gunter and John Speidell. The development of logarithms is given credit as the largest single factor in the general adoption of decimal arithmetic. The \"Trissotetras\" (1645) of Thomas Urquhart builds on Napier's work, in trigonometry.\nHenry Briggs was an early adopter of the Napierian logarithm. He later computed a new table of logarithms to base 10, accurate to 14 decimal places.\nEponyms.\nAn alternative unit to the decibel used in electrical engineering, the neper, is named after Napier, as is Edinburgh Napier University in Edinburgh, Scotland.\nThe crater Neper on the Moon is named after him.\nIn French, Spanish and Portuguese, the natural logarithm is named after him (respectively, \"Logarithme N\u00e9p\u00e9rien\" and \"Logaritmos Neperianos\" for Spanish and Portuguese). In Finnish and Italian, the mathematical constant \"e\" is named after him (\"Neperin luku\" and \"Numero di Nepero\").\nFamily.\nIn 1572, Napier married 16-year-old Elizabeth, daughter of James Stirling, the 4th Laird of Keir and of Cadder. They had two children. Elizabeth died in 1579, and Napier then married Agnes Chisholm, with whom he had ten more children.\nNapier's father-in-law, Sir James Chisholm of Cromlix, was one of many excommunicated by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian party following the Spanish blanks plot. Napier sat on the General Assembly that excommunicated the plotters, and petitioned the King James VI and I to enforce the punishment on the plotters, but was ultimately ignored since the King believed the ministers were acting cruelly, and was in favor of pursuing policies of more appeasement.\nHis half-brother (through his father's remarriage) was Alexander Napier, Lord Laurieston.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "15995", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15995", "title": "Johann Heinrich Alsted", "text": "German Calvinist academic, 1588\u20131638\nJohann Heinrich Alsted (March 1588 \u2013 November 9, 1638), \"the true parent of all the Encyclop\u00e6dias\",&lt;ref name=\"s:Budget of Paradoxes/O\"&gt;.&lt;/ref&gt; was a German-born Transylvanian Saxon Calvinist minister and academic, known for his varied interests: in Ramism and Lullism, pedagogy and encyclopedias, theology and millenarianism. His contemporaries noted that an anagram of Alstedius was \"sedulitas\", meaning \"hard work\" in Latin.\nLife.\nAlsted was born in Mittenaar. He was educated at Herborn Academy in the state of Hesse, studying under Johannes Piscator. From 1606 he was at the University of Marburg, taught by Rudolf Goclenius, Gregorius Sch\u00f6nfeld and Rapha\u00ebl Egli. The following year he went to Basel, where his teachers were Leonhardt Zubler for mathematics, Amandus Polanus von Polansdorf for theology, and Johann Buxtorf. From about 1608 he returned to the Herborn Academy to teach as professor of philosophy and theology.\nAlsted was later in exile from the Thirty Years' War in Transylvania, where he remained for the rest of his life. In 1629 he left war-torn Germany for Wei\u00dfenburg (now Alba Iulia in Romania) to found a Calvinist Academy: the context was that the Transylvanian royal family had just returned from Unitarianism to Calvinism, and Alsted and Johannes Bisterfeld were German professors brought in to improve standards. Among the students there was J\u00e1nos Ap\u00e1czai Csere.\nAlsted died in Alba Iulia in 1638.\nWorks.\nEncyclopedist.\nAlsted has been called 'one of the most important encyclopedists of all time'. He was a prolific writer, and his \"Encyclopaedia\" (1630) long had a high reputation. It was preceded by shorter works, including the 1608 \"Encyclopaedia cursus philosophici\". His major encyclopedia of 1630, the \"Encyclopaedia, Septem Tomis Distincta\", was divided into 35 books, and had 48 synoptical tables as well as an index. Alsted described it as \"a methodical systemization of all things which ought to be learned by men in this life. In short, it is the totality of knowledge.\" In its time it was praised by Bernard Lamy and Cotton Mather, and it informed the work of Alsted's student John Amos Comenius. An unfinished encyclopedic project by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz began as a plan to expand and modernize it, and the famous diarist Samuel Pepys purchased a copy in 1660\u2014thirty years after its initial publication. Although Jacob Thomasius criticised it for plagiarism for verbatim copying without acknowledgment, Augustus De Morgan later called it \"the true parent of all the Encyclop\u00e6dias, or collections of treatises, or works in which that character predominates\".\n\"The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy\", p.\u00a0632, in the context of Calvinist metaphysics, states\n\"In the works of authors like Clemens Timpler of Heidelberg and Steinfurt, Bartolomaeus Keckermann of Heidelberg and Danzig, and Johann Heinrich Alsted of Herborn there appeared a new, unified vision of the encyclopaedia of the scientific disciplines in which ontology had the role of assigning to each of the particular sciences its proper domain.\"\nIn his \"The New England Mind\", Perry Miller writes about the \"Encyclopaedia\":\n\"It was indeed nothing short of a summary, in sequential and numbered paragraphs, of everything that the mind of European man had yet conceived or discovered. The works of over five hundred authors, from Aristotle to James I, were digested and methodized, including those of Aquinas, Scotus, and medieval theology, as also those of medieval science, such as \"De Natura Rerum\".\"\nIt was reissued as a 4-volume facsimile reprint, edited by W. Schmidt-Biggemann (Fromann-Holzboog Press, Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, 1989\u20131990).\nAlstedius' Encyclopedia Biblica.\nIn 1610, Alstedius published the first edition of his Encyclopedia. In 1630, he published a second edition in a much more comprehensive form, in two large folio volumes. In the second edition, he professes to reduce the several branches of art and science then known and studied into a system. In this work, and his Encyclopedia Biblica, he tries to prove that the foundation and materials of the whole can be found in the Sacred Scriptures. The first four books contain an exposition of the various subjects to be discussed. He devotes six books to philology, ten to speculative philosophy, and four to practical matters. Then follow three on theology, jurisprudence, and medicine; three on mechanical arts, and five on history, chronology, and miscellanies. This work exhibited a great improvement on other published works that purported to be encyclopedias in the latter half of the 16th and the first half of the 17th centuries.\nLogician.\nAlsted published \"Logicae Systema Harmonicum\" (1614). In writing a semi-Ramist encyclopedia, he then applied his conception of logic to the sum of human knowledge. To do that, he added the Lullist topical art of memory to Ramist topical logic, indeed reversing one of the original conceptions of Ramus. He had a reputation in his own time as a distinctive methodologist. John Prideaux in 1639 asked:\nQ. Is it true that the seven dialectical theories of method in use today, to wit, i) the Aristotelian, 2) the Lullian, 3) the Ramistic, 4) the Mixt, whether indeed in the manner of Keckermann or of Alsted, 5) the Forensic of Hotman, 6) the Jesuitic, and 7) the Socinian, differ mostly in respect to manner of treatment, not in respect to \npurpose?\nTo which the pupil's answer was to be \"yes\"; as it was to be to the question \"Is it true that a Mixt ought to be preferred to a Peripatetic, a Ramist, a Lullian, and the others?\" A \"Mixt\" took elements from both Aristotle and Ramus; Philippo-Ramists, who blended Melanchthon with Ramus, were a type of \"Mixt\"; \"Systematics\" were \"Mixts\" who followed Keckermann in a belief in system, as Alsted did.\nTheologian.\nFrom his Transylvanian period dates Alsted's \"Prodromus\" (printed 1641, but dated 1635). The \"Prodromus\" was a Calvinist refutation of one of the most influential anti-Trinitarian works, \"De vera religione\" of Johannes V\u00f6lkel. This work was a compendium of the arguments of V\u00f6lkel's teacher Fausto Sozzini, figurehead of the Polish Unitarian movement.\nPublications.\nAlsted is now remembered as an encyclopedist, and for his millenarian views. His approach to the encyclopedia took two decades of preliminaries, and was an effort of integration of tools and theories to hand.\nIn 1609 Alsted published \"Clavis artis Lullianae\". In 1610 he published the \"Artificium perorandi\" of Giordano Bruno; and in the same year the \"Panacea philosophica\", an attempt to find the common ground in the work of Aristotle, Raymond Lull, and Petrus Ramus. In 1612 Alsted edited the \"Explanatio\" of Bernard de Lavinheta, a Lullist work. In 1613 he published an edition of the \"Systema systematum\" of Bartholom\u00e4us Keckermann. \"Theologia naturalis\" (1615) was an apologetical work of natural theology.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15996", "revid": "43486912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15996", "title": "July 22", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 22 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15997", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15997", "title": "Jean Joseph Marie Amiot", "text": "French Jesuit missionary in China (1718\u20131793)\nJean Joseph Marie Amiot (; February 8, 1718\u00a0\u2013 October 9, 1793) was a French Jesuit priest who worked in Qing China, during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor.\nBorn in Toulon, Amiot entered the novitiate of the Society of Jesus at the age of 19. After he was ordained in 1746, he aspired to serve in an overseas mission. Eventually, he was assigned a mission in China and left France in 1749. He arrived at Beijing in 1751 and remained there for the rest of his life.\nAmiot served as an intermediary between the academics of Europe and China. His correspondence provided insight on the culture of China to the Europeans. He is the most importance source of informations, images, musical scores for the knowledge of Chinese music in Europe in the XVIII century. He translated Chinese works into French. Most notably, his translation of Sun Tzu's \"The Art of War\" is the first rendition of the work into a Western language.\nEarly life.\nAmiot was born in Toulon on February 8, 1718 to Louis Amiot, the royal notary of Toulon, and Marie-Anne Serre. He was the eldest of ten children: five boys and five girls. His brother Pierre-Jules-Roch Amiot would go on to become the lieutenant-general of the admiralty of Toulon and his sister, Marguerite-Claire was an Ursuline nun. Amiot maintained contact with both.\nAfter finishing his studies in philosophy and theology at the Jesuit seminary in Toulon, Amiot entered the novitiate of the Society of Jesus in Avignon on September 27, 1737; he remained a novice for two years. Afterwards, he taught at the Jesuit colleges of Besan\u00e7on, Arles, Aix-en-Provence and finally at N\u00eemes, where he was professor of rhetoric in the academic year of 1744\u20131745. He completed his theological studies at D\u00f4le from 1745 to 1748 and was ordained as a priest on December 22, 1746.\nArrival at China.\nAmiot requested Franz Retz, the Superior General of the Society of Jesus at that time, to serve in an overseas mission, and was eventually given a mission to China. Earlier, in a letter to his brother, he had expressed his desire to serve in a delegation to this particular country. He left France in 1749, accompanied by Chinese Jesuits Paul Liu and Stanislas Kang, who had been sent to study in France and were returning to their home country. Kang died at sea, before the party could reach China.\nThey arrived at Macau on July 27, 1750. The Jesuits of Beijing announced Amiot's arrival, along with that of the Portuguese Jesuits Jos\u00e9 d'Espinha and Emmanuel de Mattos, to Emperor Qianlong, who ordered that they be taken to the capital. On March 28, 1751, they left Macau for Guangzhou and arrived there five days later. They left Canton on June 2, and reached Beijing on August 22.\nAfter his arrival in Beijing, he was put in charge of the children's congregation of the Holy Guardian Angels. Alongside this, he studied the Chinese language. He adopted the Chinese name Qian Deming () and wore Chinese clothing in order to adapt himself to the culture of China. In 1754, Amiot made a young Chinese man by the name of Jacob Yang Ya-Ko-Pe his assistant and instructed him in the European manner. Yang died in 1784, after working with Amiot for over thirty years.\nSuppression of the Jesuits.\nIn 1762 the Parlement of Paris ordered the suppression of the Society of Jesus and the confiscation of its property. The society was abolished in France two years later, by the order of King Louis XV. The Jesuit mission in China survived for a while after their suppression, being protected by the Qianlong Emperor himself. The final blow, however, would be Pope Clement XIV's brief, \"Dominus ac Redemptor\", issued on July 21, 1773, with which the Bishop of Rome officially ordered the suppression of the Society of Jesus. The brief reached the French Jesuits in China on September 22, 1775 via a German Carmelite named Joseph de Sainte-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se. The Jesuits of Beijing surrendered to it, resigned from the Society of Jesus and became secular priests. Wishing to keep the French mission alive, King Louis XVI sent them financial aid and appointed Fran\u00e7ois Bourgeois as their administrator. Amiot was named as Bourgeois' replacement in the event of his absence.\nSubsequently, Amiot turned his attention to writing. He maintained contact with Henri Bertin, the foreign minister of France. His correspondences were published from 1776 to 1791 in the . He also corresponded with other European Academies, including brief contacts with the Imperial Academy of Sciences and the Royal Society.\nLater life and death.\nAfter the death of Bourgeois in 1792, Amiot started visiting the tombs of his Jesuit companions, where he prayed and meditated; he also carved the Jesuits' epitaphs on their tombs. News about the upheaval of the French Revolution distressed him to the point that his physical and mental health declined, and thus he had to stop visiting the tombs by September 1792.\nIn 1792, Britain sent a diplomatic mission to China, led by George Macartney. The goals of the delegation were to open new trading ports with the country and establish a permanent mission there. Macartney had wished to meet Amiot in Beijing. However, he was too ill to meet the diplomat and instead sent him a portrait of himself and a letter, which was delivered on October 3, 1793. He gave his advice to Macartney and suggested that he leave China.\nOn October 8, 1793, the news of King Louis XVI's execution reached Amiot, who celebrated Mass for the deceased monarch. He died that night, or on the following day, October 9, 1793.\nWorks.\nIn 1772 Amiot's translation of Sun Tzu's \"The Art of War\" was published. It includes a translation of the Yongzheng Emperor's \"Ten Precepts\". Amiot was the first person to translate \"The Art of War\" in the West. The next translation of the work in a Western language would not be made until Everard Ferguson Calthrop published his English rendition in 1905.\nAmiot could speak in Manchu, the language of the emperor. He wrote a Manchu-French dictionary, which was published from 1789 to 1790 with the help of Bertin; Prince Hongwu, a member of the Qing imperial family, praised the dictionary. He also wrote a Manchu grammar, which was never published.\nAmiot carried out scientific observations and experiments while working in China. For example, he made a record of the weather in Beijing, which was published by Charles Messier in 1774. He also tried to build a hot air balloon, but was discouraged by Prince Hongwu, for fear of the danger of flying and disseminating the discovery.\nMusic.\nAmiot could play the harpsichord and the flute. He tried to please Chinese listeners by playing pieces by French baroque composers, including Rameau's \"Les sauvages\" and \"Les cyclopes\". These attempts, however, were not successful; when he asked the Chinese musicians for their opinions, they remarked that \"your music was not made for our ears, nor our ears for your music\". Lester Hu, assistant professor of musicology at the University of California, Berkeley has doubted the veracity of this story.\nAmiot sent his translation of Li Guangdi's \"Guyue Jingzhuan\" (), a treatise on Chinese music, to Paris in 1754; he later acknowledged that it contained errors and was incomplete. Jean-Philippe Rameau referenced the work in his 1760 treatise, , though Rameau's idea of harmony in Chinese music was erroneous. Probably the same year 1754, he sent a first manuscript on Chinese music (De la Musique moderne des Chinois), kept at the Biblioth\u00e8que nationale de France. Later, in 1776, he sent a new manuscript on Chinese music, was published twice by Pierre-Joseph Roussier in 1779 and 1780. The author's supplements to the work were not published until 1997. In 1776, he sent a series of musical instrument, including a Sheng , thus possibly contributing to the introduction of free reed in Europe.\nAmiot's most important contribution to music includes the sending in 1776 of a series of four books of music: \"Divertissements chinois\" and \"Musique sacr\u00e9e\", all having been transcribed, studied, played, recorded and published by Jean-Christophe Frisch and his ensemble XVIII-21 Le Baroque nomade and Fran\u00e7ois Picard and his ensemble Fleur de Prunus.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15998", "revid": "28509892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15998", "title": "Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re", "text": "French philologist (1800\u20131864)\nJean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re (12 August 1800 \u2013 27 March 1864) was a French philologist and man of letters.\nBorn in Lyon, he was the only son of the physicist Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re (1775\u20131836). Jean-Jacques' mother died while he was an infant. (But Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re had a daughter \u2013 Albine (1807\u20131842) \u2013 with his second wife.) On his tomb at the cemetery of Montmartre, Paris, he is named Jean-Jacques Antoine Amp\u00e8re. His father's father was also named Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re (executed in Lyon, 1793).\nHe studied the folk songs and popular poetry of the Scandinavian countries in an extended tour in northern Europe. Returning to France in 1830, he delivered a series of lectures on Scandinavian and early German poetry at the Athenaeum in Marseille. The first of these was printed as \"De l'Histoire de la po\u00e9sie\" (1830), and was practically the first introduction of the French public to the Scandinavian and German epics.\nMoving to Paris, he taught at the Sorbonne, and became professor of the history of French literature at the Coll\u00e8ge de France. A journey in northern Africa (1841) was followed by a tour in Greece and Italy, in company with Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, Jean de Witte and Charles Lenormant. This bore fruit in his \"Voyage dantesque\" (printed in his \"Gr\u00e8ce, Rome et Dante\", 1848), which did much to popularize the study of Dante in France.\nIn 1848 he became a member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, and in 1851 he visited America. From this time he was occupied with his chief work, \"L'Histoire romaine \u00e0 Rome\" (4 vols., 1861\u20131864), until his death at Pau.\nThe \"Correspondence et souvenirs\" (2 vols.) of A-M and J-J Amp\u00e8re (1805\u20131854) was published in 1875. Notices of J-J Amp\u00e8re are to be found in Sainte-Beuve's \"Portraits litt\u00e9raires,\" vol. iv., and \"Nouveaux Lundis,\" vol. xiii.; in P M\u00e9rim\u00e9e's \"Portraits historiques et litt\u00e9raires\" (2nd ed., 1875); and in Alexis de Tocqueville's \"Recollections\" (1893).\nThe Amp\u00e8re Museum, close to Lyon, France, includes some documents presenting the life and works of Jean-Jacques Amp\u00e8re.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "15999", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15999", "title": "Jacob Anatoli", "text": "Translator of Arabic texts to Hebrew\nJacob ben Abba Mari ben Simson Anatoli (c. 1194 \u2013 1256) was a translator of Arabic texts to Hebrew. He was invited to Naples by Frederick II. Under this royal patronage, and in association with Michael Scot, Anatoli made Arabic learning accessible to Western readers. Among his most important works were translations of texts by Averroes.\nEarly life and invitation to Naples.\nBorn in southern France, perhaps in Marseille, Anatoli had an interest in literary activity that was stimulated early by his learned associates and relations at Narbonne and B\u00e9ziers. He so distinguished himself that the emperor Frederick II, the most genial and enlightened monarch of the time, invited him to come to Naples. Under the emperor's patronage, Antatoli was enabled to devote himself to his studies. He translated scientific Arabic literature into the more accessible Hebrew language. Anatoli produced his most important literary and scientific translations while in Naples, and his works were copied under his name.\nOpposed by Anti-Maimonists.\nAnatoli was the son-in-law (and possibly also the brother-in-law) of Samuel ibn Tibbon, a well-known translator of Maimonides. Moses b. Samuel ibn Tibbon frequently refers to Anatoli as his uncle, which makes it likely that Samuel married Anatoli's sister. Anatoli later married Samuel's daughter. Because of this intimate connection with the ibn Tibbons, Anatoli was introduced to the philosophy of Maimonides. He found study of this man to be such a great revelation that he later referred to it as the beginning of his intelligent and true comprehension of the Scriptures. He also frequently alluded to Ibn Tibbon as one of the two masters who had instructed and inspired him. His esteem for Maimonides knew no bounds: he placed him next to the Prophets, and he exhibited little patience with Maimonides's critics and detractors.\nHe accordingly interprets the Bible and the Haggadah in a truly Maimonistic spirit, rationalizing the miracles and investing every possible passage in the ancient literature with philosophic and allegoric significance. As an allegorist who could read into the ancient documents the particular philosophical idiosyncrasies of his day, Anatoli deserves a place beside other allegoric and philosophical commentators, from Philo down; indeed, he may be regarded as a pioneer in the application of the Maimonistic manner to purposes of popular instruction. This work he began while still in his native land, on occasions of private and public festivities, such as weddings and other assemblies. Afterward he delivered Sabbath-afternoon sermons, in which he advocated the allegoric and philosophic method of Scriptural exegesis. This evoked the opposition of the anti-Maimonists, whose number was large in southern France; and probably Anatoli's departure for Sicily was hastened by the antagonism he encountered. But even at Naples Anatoli's views aroused the opposition of his Orthodox coreligionists. This treatment, together with several other unpleasant experiences at the royal court, seems to have caused him to entertain thoughts of suicide. He soon, however, recovered and wrote, for the benefit of his two sons, his \"Malmad ha-Talmidim\", a name which, involving a play on words, was intended to be both a \"Teacher of the Disciples\" and a \"Goad to the Students\".\nThe \"Malmad\", which was completed when its author was fifty-five years old, but was first published by the Me\u1e33i\u1e93e Nirdamim Society at Lyck in the year 1866, is really nothing but a volume of sermons, by which the author intended to stimulate study and to dispel intellectual blindness. As a curious specimen of his method, it may be mentioned that he regards the three stories of Noah's Ark as symbolic of the three sciences mathematics, physics, and metaphysics. As such, the work is of some importance in the history of Jewish culture. Anatoli's ethical admonitions and spiritual meditations have value as portraying both the circumstances of the age and the character of the reforms he aimed at.\nMoral Fervor.\nAnatoli is quite plain-spoken in the manner in which he states and defends his views, as well as in his criticisms of contemporary failings. For instance, he does not hesitate to reproach the rabbis of his day for their general neglect not only of the thorough study, but even of the obligatory perusal, of the Bible, charging them with a preference for Talmudic dialectics. He, likewise, deplores the contemporary degeneracy in the home life and the religious practises of his people, a circumstance which he thinks due largely to the imitation of surrounding manners. Scientific investigation he insists upon as an absolute necessity for the true comprehension of religion, despite the fact that his contemporaries regarded all the hours which he was accustomed to spend with his father-in-law, Samuel ibn Tibbon, in mathematical and philosophic study as mere waste of time.\nThe \"Malmad\".\nThe \"Malmad\" is divided into brief chapters, according to the weekly Scriptural portions. In it Anatoli manifests a wide acquaintance not only with the classic Jewish exegetes, but also with Plato, Aristotle, Averroes, and the Vulgate, as well as with a large number of Christian institutions, some of which he ventures to criticize, such as celibacy and monastic castigation, as well as certain heretics (compare 15a, 98a, 115a); and he repeatedly appeals to his readers for a broader cultivation of the classic languages and the profane branches of learning. He indignantly repudiates the fanatical view of some coreligionists that all non-Jews have no souls \u2014a belief reciprocated by the Gentiles of the time. To Anatoli all men are, in truth, formed in the image of God, though the Jews stand under a particular obligation to further the true cognition of God simply by reason of their election\u2014\"the Greeks had chosen wisdom as their pursuit; the Romans, power; and the Jews, religiousness\" (l.c. 103b). If, however, a non-Jew devotes himself to serious search after divine truth, his merit is so much the more significant; and whatever suggestion he may have to offer, no Jew dares refuse with levity.\nAnatoli and Michael Scot.\nAn example of such intellectual catholicity was set by Anatoli himself; for, in the course of his \"Malmad,\" he not only cites incidentally allegoric suggestions made to him by Frederick II., but several times\u2014G\u00fcdemann has counted seventeen\u2014he offers the exegetic remarks of a certain Christian savant of whose association he speaks most reverently, and whom, furthermore, he names as his second master besides Samuel ibn Tibbon. This Christian savant was identified by Senior Sachs as Michael Scot, who, like Anatoli, devoted himself to scientific work at the court of Frederick. Graetz even goes to the length of regarding Anatoli as identical with the Jew Andreas, who, according to Roger Bacon, assisted Michael Scot in his philosophic translations from the Arabic, seeing that Andreas might be a corruption of Anatoli. But Steinschneider will not admit the possibility of this conjecture, while Renan scarcely strengthens it by regarding \"Andreas\" as a possible northern corruption of \"En Duran,\" which, he says, may have been the Proven\u00e7al surname of Anatoli, since Anatoli, in reality, was but the name of his great-grandfather.\nAnatoli's example of broad-minded study of Christian literature and intercourse with Christian scholars found many followers, as, for example, Moses ben Solomon of Salerno; and his work was an important factor in bringing the Jews of Italy into close contact with their Christian fellow students.\nAnatoli as translator.\nThe \"Malmad,\" owing to its deep ethical vein, became, despite its Maimonistic heresies, a very popular book. It is rather as a translator that Anatoli deserves a distinguished place in the scientific realm; for it is he and Michael Scot who together, under the influence of Frederick II, opened to the western world the treasure-house of Arabic learning. Anatoli, in fact, was the first man to translate the commentaries of Averroes into Hebrew, thus opening a new era in the history of Aristotelian philosophy. Prior to translating Averroes' commentaries, Anatoli had occupied himself with the translation of astronomical treatises by the same writer and others; but at the instance of friends he turned his attention to logic and the speculative works, realizing and recommending the importance of logic, in particular, in view of the contemporary religious controversies. Thenceforth, his program was twofold, as he devoted himself to his work in astronomy in the mornings, and to logic in the evenings.\nHis principal translation embraced the first five books of Averroes' \"intermediate\" commentary on Aristotle's \"Logic\", consisting of the Introduction of Porphyry and the four books of Aristotle on the Categories, Interpretation, Syllogism, and Demonstration. Anatoli probably commenced his work on the commentary while in Provence, though he must have finished the fifth book at Naples about 1231 or 1232. The conclusion of the commentary was never reached. Upon the ending of the first division he desired to go over the ground again, to acquire greater proficiency, and, for some reason unknown, he never resumed his task, which was completed by another after a lapse of eighty years.\nBesides this, Anatoli translated, between the years 1231 and 1235, the following works: \n(1) The \"Almagest of Ptolemy\", from the Arabic, though probably the Greek or Latin title of this treatise was also familiar to him. Its Hebrew title is \"\u1e24ibbur ha-Gadol ha-Ni\u1e33ra al-Magesti\" (\"The Great Composition Called Almagest\"). \n(2) A \"Compendium of Astronomy\", by Averroes, a book which was unknown to the Christians of the Middle Ages, and of which neither a manuscript of the original nor a Latin translation has come down. Its Hebrew title is \"\u1e32i\u1e93\u1e93ur al-Magesti\" (\"Compendium of the Almagest\"). \n(3) \"The Elements of Astronomy\", by Al-Fargani (Alfraganus); possibly translated from a Latin version. It was afterward rendered into Latin by Jacob Christmann (Frankfort, 1590) under the title of \"Elementa Astronomica\", which, in its turn, may have given rise to the Hebrew title of the treatise \"Yesodot ha-Te\u1e33unah\", which is undoubtedly recent. \n(4) A treatise on the Syllogism, by Al-Farabi, from the Arabic. Its Hebrew title is \"Sefer He\u1e33esh \u1e32a\u1e93ar\" (\"A Brief Treatise on the Syllogism\").\nGraetz also suggests the possibility that Anatoli, in conjunction with Michael Scot, may have translated Maimonides' \"Guide for the Perplexed\" into Latin; but this suggestion has not yet been sufficiently proved (compare Steinschneider, \"Hebr. Uebers.\" i. 433). Similarly, the anonymous commentary on the \"Guide\", called \"Rua\u1e25 \u1e24en\", though sometimes attributed to Anatoli, can not definitely be established as his. Still, it is on an allusion in this work that Zunz, followed by Steinschneider, partly bases the hypothesis of Marseille having been Anatoli's original home (compare Zunz, \"Zur Gesch.\" p.\u00a0482; Renan-Neubauer, \"Les Rabbins Fran\u00e7ais,\" p.\u00a0588; Steinschneider, \"Cat. Bodl.\" col. 1180, and \"Hebr. Bibl.\" xvii. 124).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJewish Encyclopedia bibliography:\nThe \"Malmad ha-Talmidim\" yields a great deal of information concerning the life and the time of its author. Consult particularly the preface, which is freely drawn upon in this article."}
{"id": "16001", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16001", "title": "Gyula Andr\u00e1ssy", "text": "Hungarian statesman (1823\u20131890)\nCount Gyula Andr\u00e1ssy de Cs\u00edkszentkir\u00e1ly et Krasznahorka (, 8 March 1823 \u2013 18 February 1890) was a Hungarian statesman, who served as Prime Minister of Hungary (1867\u20131871) and subsequently as Foreign Minister of Austria-Hungary (1871\u20131879). Andr\u00e1ssy was a conservative; his foreign policies looked to expanding the Empire into Southeast Europe, preferably with British and German support, and without alienating Turkey. He saw Russia as the main adversary, because of its own expansionist policies toward Slavic and Orthodox areas. He distrusted Slavic nationalist movements as a threat to his multi-ethnic empire.\nBiography.\nThe son of Count K\u00e1roly Andr\u00e1ssy and Etelka Szap\u00e1ry, he was born in Ol\u00e1hpatak (present-day Vlachovo, Ro\u017e\u0148ava District, Slovakia), Kingdom of Hungary. His date and place of birth, however, are somewhat disputed. According to registry of Ko\u0161ice, Andr\u00e1ssy was baptised in the city then known as Kassa on 3 March 1823. The son of a liberal father who belonged to the political opposition, at a time when opposing the government was very dangerous, Andr\u00e1ssy at a very early age threw himself into the political struggles of the day, adopting at the outset the patriotic side.\nCareer.\nCount Istv\u00e1n Sz\u00e9chenyi was the first adequately to appreciate his capacity. In 1845 Andr\u00e1ssy was appointed as president of the society for the regulation of the waters of the Upper Tisza River.\nIn 1846, he attracted attention by publishing highly critical articles of the government in Lajos Kossuth's paper, the \"Pesti H\u00edrlap.\" He was elected as one of the Radical candidates to the Diet of 1848.\nWhen the Croats under Josip Jela\u010di\u0107 attempted to have Me\u0111imurje, which was then part of Hungary, returned to Croatia, Andr\u00e1ssy entered military service. He was commander of the gentry of his county, and served with distinction at the battles of P\u00e1kozd and Schwechat, as Art\u00far G\u00f6rgei's adjutant (1848).\nToward the end of the war, Andr\u00e1ssy was sent to Constantinople by the revolutionary government. He was seeking to obtain the neutrality of the Ottoman Empire, if not their support, during the struggle with Croatia.\nAfter the catastrophe of Vil\u00e1gos, where the Hungarians were defeated, Andr\u00e1ssy emigrated to London and then to Paris. On 21 September 1851, he was condemned \"in absentia\" to death and was hanged in effigy by the Austrian government for his share in the Hungarian revolt.\nIn exile for ten years, he studied politics in what was then the centre of European diplomacy. He discerned the weakness of the second French empire beneath its imposing exterior.\nAndr\u00e1ssy returned to Hungary in 1858, but his position was still difficult. He had never petitioned for an amnesty, and had steadily rejected all the overtures both of the Austrian government and of the Magyar Conservatives (who would have accepted something short of full autonomy for the kingdom). He enthusiastically supported Ferenc De\u00e1k's party.\nOn 21 December 1865, he was chosen vice-president of the Diet. In March 1866, he was elected as president of the sub-committee appointed by the parliamentary commission to draw up the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 between Austria and Hungary. He originated the idea of the \"Delegations\" of powers. \nIt was said at that time that he was the only member of the commission who could persuade the court of the justice of the national claims.\nIn the 1866 Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz (also called the Battle of Sadowa), Prussia decisively defeated Austria in the short Austro-Prussian War. It ended Austria's hopes for a role in uniting Germany. Bismarck wanted to restore good relations after the war. Emperor Franz Joseph for the first time consulted Andr\u00e1ssy, who recommended the re-establishment of the constitution and the appointment of a responsible foreign and defence ministry. On 17 February 1867 the king/emperor appointed him as the first prime minister of the Hungarian half of the newly formed Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary. The obvious first choice had been Ferenc De\u00e1k, one of the architects of the Compromise, but he declined in favour of Andr\u00e1ssy. De\u00e1k described him as \"the providential statesman given to Hungary by the grace of God.\"\nAs premier, Andr\u00e1ssy by his firmness, amiability and dexterity as a debater, soon won for himself a commanding position. Yet his position continued to be difficult, inasmuch as the authority of De\u00e1k dwarfed that of all the party leaders, however eminent. Andr\u00e1ssy chose for himself the departments of war and foreign affairs. It was he who reorganized the Honv\u00e9d system (state army), and he used often to say that the regulation of the military border districts was the most difficult labour of his life.\nOn the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, Andr\u00e1ssy resolutely defended the neutrality of the Austrian monarchy, and in his speech on 28 July 1870 warmly protested against the assumption that it was in the interests of Austria to seek to recover the position it had held in Germany before 1863. On the fall of Beust (6 November 1871), Andr\u00e1ssy stepped into his place. His tenure of the chancellorship was epoch-making. Where Beust had been hostile to Germany and friendly toward Russia, Andr\u00e1ssy took the opposite approach. One problem was that Germany was close to Italy, but Italy and Austria were at odds about who would control border areas.\nHitherto the empire of the Habsburgs had never been able to dissociate itself from its historic Holy Roman traditions. But its loss of influence in Italy and Germany, and the consequent formation of the Dual State, had at length indicated the proper, and, indeed, the only field for its diplomacy in the future \u2013 the Near East, where the process of the crystallization of the Balkan peoples into nationalities was still incomplete. The question was whether these nationalities were to be allowed to become independent or were only to exchange the tyranny of the sultan for the tyranny of the tsar or the Habsburg emperor.\nTo this point Austria had been content either to keep out the Russians or share the booty with them. She was now, moreover, in consequence of her misfortunes deprived of most of her influence in the councils of Europe.\nIt was Andrassy who recovered for Austria her proper place in the European concert. First he approached the German emperor; then more satisfactory relations were established with the courts of Italy and Russia by means of conferences at Berlin, Vienna, St Petersburg and Venice.\nThe \"Andr\u00e1ssy Note\".\nThe recovered influence of Austria was evident in the negotiations which followed the outbreak of serious disturbances in Bosnia in 1875.\nThe three courts of Vienna, Berlin and St Petersburg reached an understanding as to their attitude in the Eastern question, and their views were embodied in the dispatch, known as the \"Andr\u00e1ssy Note\", sent on 30 December 1875 by Andr\u00e1ssy to Count Beust, the Austrian ambassador to the Court of St James's.\nIn it he pointed out that the efforts of the powers to localize the revolt seemed in danger of failure, that the rebels were still holding their own, and that the Ottoman promises of reform, embodied in various firmans, were no more than vague statements of principle which had never had, and were probably not intended to have, any local application. In order to avert the risk of a general conflagration, therefore, he urged that the time had come for concerted action of the powers for the purpose of pressing the Porte to fulfil its promises.\nA sketch of the more essential reforms followed: the recognition rather than the toleration of the Christian religion; the abolition of the system of farming the taxes; and, in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the religious was complicated by an agrarian question, the conversion of the Christian peasants into free proprietors, to rescue them from their double subjection to the Muslim Ottoman landowners.\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina elected provincial councils were to be established, life-term judges appointed and individual liberties guaranteed.\nFinally, a mixed commission of Muslims and Christians was to be empowered to watch over the carrying out of these reforms.\nThe fact that the sultan would be responsible to Europe for the realization of his promises would serve to allay the natural suspicions of the insurgents. To this plan both Britain and France gave a general assent, and the Andr\u00e1ssy Note was adopted as the basis of negotiations.\nWhen war became inevitable between Russia and the Porte, Andr\u00e1ssy arranged with the Russian court that, in case Russia prevailed, the status quo should not be changed to the detriment of the Austrian monarchy. When, however, the Treaty of San Stefano threatened a Russian hegemony in the Near East, Andr\u00e1ssy concurred with the German and British courts that the final adjustment of matters must be submitted to a European congress.\nAt the Congress of Berlin in 1878 he was the principal Austrian plenipotentiary, and directed his efforts to diminish the gains of Russia and aggrandize the Dual Monarchy. Before the Congress opened on 13 June, negotiations between Andr\u00e1ssy and the British Foreign Secretary Marquess of Salisbury had already \"ended on 6 June by Britain agreeing to all the Austrian proposals relative to Bosnia-Herzegovina about to come before the congress while Austria would support British demands\".\nIn addition to the occupation and administration of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Andr\u00e1ssy also obtained the right to station garrisons in the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which remained under Ottoman administration. The Sanjak preserved the separation of Serbia and Montenegro, and the Austro-Hungarian garrisons there would open the way for a dash to Salonika that \"would bring the western half of the Balkans under permanent Austrian influence\". \"High [Austro-Hungarian] military authorities desired [an ...] immediate major expedition with Salonika as its objective\".\nThis occupation was most unpopular in Hungary, both for financial reasons and because of the strong pro-Turk sentiments of the Magyars.\nOn 28 September 1878 the Finance Minister, Koloman von Zell, threatened to resign if the army, behind which stood the Archduke Albert, were allowed to advance to Salonika. In the session of the Hungarian Parliament of 5 November 1878 the Opposition proposed that the Foreign Minister should be impeached for violating the constitution by his policy during the Near East Crisis and by the occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina. The motion was lost by 179 to 95. By the Opposition rank and file the gravest accusations were raised against Andrassy.\nOn 10 October 1878 the French diplomat Melchior de Vog\u00fc\u00e9 described the situation as follows:\nParticularly in Hungary the dissatisfaction caused by this \"adventure\" has reached the gravest proportions, prompted by that strong conservative instinct which animates the Magyar race and is the secret of its destinies. This vigorous and exclusive instinct explains the historical phenomenon of an isolated group, small in numbers yet dominating a country inhabited by a majority of peoples of different races and conflicting aspirations, and playing a role in European affairs out of all proportions to its numerical importance or intellectual culture. This instinct is to-day awakened and gives warning that it feels the occupation of Bosnia-Herzegovina to be a menace which, by introducing fresh Slav elements into the Hungarian political organism and providing a wider field and further recruitment of the Croat opposition, would upset the unstable equilibrium in which the Magyar domination is poised.\nAndr\u00e1ssy felt constrained to bow before the storm, and he placed his resignation in the emperor's hands (8 October 1879). The day before his retirement he signed the offensive-defensive alliance with Germany, which placed the foreign relations of Austria-Hungary once more on a stable footing.\nLater life.\nAfter his retirement, Andr\u00e1ssy continued to take an active part in public affairs both in the Delegations and in the Upper House. In 1885 he warmly supported the project for the reform of the House of Magnates, but on the other hand he jealously defended the inviolability of the Composition of 1867, and on 5 March 1889 in his place in the Upper House spoke against any particularist tampering with the common army. In the last years of his life he regained his popularity, and his death on 18 February 1890, aged 66, was mourned as a national calamity. There is a plaque dedicated to him in the town of Volosko where he died (between Rijeka and Opatija in present-day Croatia). It is located just above the restaurant Amfora.\nHe was the first Magyar statesman who, for centuries, had occupied a European position. It has been said that he united in himself the Magyar magnate with the modern gentleman. His motto was: \"It is hard to promise, but it is easy to perform.\"\nFamily.\n Statue of Gyula Andr\u00e1ssy, next to the Hungarian Parliament Building.\nAndr\u00e1ssy married countess Katinka Kendeffy in Paris in 1856. They had two sons, Tivadar (born 10 July 1857) and Gyula (born 30 June 1860), and one daughter, Ilona (b. 1858).\nBoth sons gained distinction in Hungarian politics. Tivadar was elected vice-president of the Lower House of the Hungarian parliament in 1890. Gyula also had a successful political career.\nCount Gyula Andr\u00e1ssy's granddaughter, Kl\u00e1ra, married the Hungarian nobleman and industrialist Prince K\u00e1roly Odescalchi.\nMany rumors suggest that Count Andr\u00e1ssy had a long lasting romance with Elisabeth, Empress of Austria and Queen of Hungary, also known as Sisi, the wife of Emperor Franz Josef I of Austria-Hungary. Some rumored that Sisi's fourth child, Archduchess Marie Valerie of Austria, had been fathered by Andrassy. There is no evidence for this, and these rumors have all been proven to be false. The rumor may have evolved due to the devotion of both Sisi and Count Andr\u00e1ssy towards Hungary, its culture and national customs (she was fluent in Hungarian, and both regarded Hungarian poetry highly), and the amount of time they spent together in mutual pursuit of their dreams for Hungary. Additionally, as Marie Valerie grew up, her physical resemblance to her father Franz Josef became very marked.\nCount Andr\u00e1ssy had four granddaughters, Kl\u00e1ra above, Borb\u00e1la, married Marquis Pallavicini, Katalin married Count Mih\u00e1ly K\u00e1rolyi and Ilona war widow of Prince P\u00e1l Esterh\u00e1zy, remarried Count J\u00f3zsef Czir\u00e1ky.\nHonours.\nHe received the following orders and decorations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16003", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16003", "title": "Joseph Weizenbaum", "text": "German-American computer scientist (1923\u20132008)\nJoseph Weizenbaum (8 January 1923 \u2013 5 March 2008) was a German-American computer scientist and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He is the namesake of the Weizenbaum Award and the Weizenbaum Institute.\nLife and career.\nBorn in Berlin, Germany to Jewish parents, he escaped Nazi Germany in January 1936, immigrating with his family to the United States. He started studying mathematics in 1941 at Wayne State University, in Detroit, Michigan. In 1942, he interrupted his studies to serve in the U.S. Army Air Corps as a meteorologist, having been turned down for cryptology work because of his \"enemy alien\" status. After the war, in 1946, he returned to Wayne State, obtaining his B.S. in Mathematics in 1948, and his M.S. in 1950.\nAround 1952, as a research assistant at Wayne, Weizenbaum worked on analog computers and helped create a digital computer. In 1956, he worked for General Electric on ERMA, a computer system that introduced the use of the magnetically encoded fonts imprinted on the bottom border of checks, allowing automated check processing via magnetic ink character recognition (MICR). He published a short paper in Datamation in 1962 entitled \"How to Make a Computer Appear Intelligent\" that described the strategy used in a Gomoku program that could beat novice players. \nIn 1963 he took a position of associate professor at MIT on the strength of his SLIP (Symmetric List Processing) software. Within four years, he had been awarded tenure and a full professorship in computer science and engineering (in 1970). In addition to working at MIT, Weizenbaum held academic appointments at Harvard, Stanford, the University of Bremen, and other universities.\nPsychology simulation at MIT.\nIn 1966, he published a comparatively simple program called ELIZA, named after the ing\u00e9nue in George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\", which could chat to the user. ELIZA was written in the SLIP programming language of Weizenbaum's own creation. The program applied pattern matching rules to statements to figure out its replies. (Programs like this are now called chatbots.) Driven by a script named DOCTOR, it was capable of engaging humans in a conversation which bore a striking resemblance to one with an empathic psychologist. Weizenbaum modeled its conversational style after Carl Rogers, who introduced the use of open-ended questions to encourage patients to communicate more effectively with therapists. He was shocked that his program was taken seriously by many users, who would open their hearts to it. Famously, when he was observing his secretary using the software \u2013 who was aware that it was a simulation \u2013 she asked Weizenbaum: \"would you mind leaving the room please?\" Many hailed the program as a forerunner of thinking machines, a misguided interpretation that Weizenbaum's later writing would attempt to correct.\nApprehensions about computers and artificial intelligence.\nHe started to think philosophically about the implications of artificial intelligence and later became one of its leading critics. In an interview with MIT's \"The Tech\", Weizenbaum elaborated on his fears, expanding them beyond the realm of mere artificial intelligence, explaining that his fears for society and the future of society were largely because of the computer itself. His belief was that the computer, at its most base level, is a fundamentally conservative force and that despite being a technological innovation, it would end up hindering social progress. Weizenbaum used his experience working with Bank of America as justification for his reasoning, saying that the computer allowed banks to deal with an ever-expanding number of checks in play that otherwise would have forced drastic changes to banking organization such as decentralization. As such, although the computer allowed the industry to become more efficient, it prevented a fundamental re-haul of the system.\nWeizenbaum also worried about the negative effects computers would have with regards to the military, calling the computer \"a child of the military.\" \nPosition on the military.\nWhen asked about his belief that a computer science professional would more often than not end up working with defense, Weizenbaum detailed his position on the effect of rhetoric, specifically euphemism, on public viewpoints. He believed that the terms \"the military\" and \"defense\" did not accurately represent the organizations and their actions. He made it clear that he did not think of himself as a pacifist, believing that there are certainly times where arms are necessary, but by referring to defense as killing people, humanity as a whole would be less inclined to embrace violent reactions so quickly.\nDifference between deciding and choosing.\nHis influential 1976 book \"Computer Power and Human Reason\" displays his ambivalence towards computer technology and lays out his case: the possibility of programming computers to perform one task or another that humans also perform (i.e., whether Artificial Intelligence is achievable or not) is irrelevant to the question of whether computers can be put to a given task. Instead, Weizenbaum asserts that the definition of tasks and the selection of criteria for their completion is a creative act that relies on human values, which cannot come from computers. Weizenbaum makes the crucial distinction between deciding and choosing. Deciding is a computational activity, something that can ultimately be programmed. Choice, however, is the product of judgement, not calculation. In deploying computers to make decisions that humans once made, the agent doing so has made a choice based on their values that will have particular, non-neutral consequences for the subjects who will experience the outcomes of the computerized decisions that the agent has instituted.\nPersonal life.\nWeizenbaum had five children: one son from his first marriage and four daughters from his second.\nIn 1996, Weizenbaum moved to Berlin and lived in the vicinity of his childhood neighborhood.\nWeizenbaum was buried at the Wei\u00dfensee Jewish cemetery in Berlin. A memorial service was held in Berlin on 18 March 2008.\nLegacy.\nA German documentary film on Weizenbaum, \"Weizenbaum. Rebel at Work.\", was released in 2007 and later dubbed in English. The documentary film \"Plug &amp; Pray\" on Weizenbaum and the ethics of artificial intelligence was released in 2010.\nThe interdisciplinary German Internet Institute (Weizenbaum Institute for the Networked Society) was named after Joseph Weizenbaum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16004", "revid": "55814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16004", "title": "John de Feckenham", "text": ""}
{"id": "16005", "revid": "43282988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16005", "title": "Jerome", "text": "Priest and theologian (c. 342/347\u2013420)\nJerome (; ; ; c.\u2009342\u2013347 \u2013 30 September 420), also known as Jerome of Stridon, was an early Christian priest, confessor, theologian, translator, and historian; he is commonly known as Saint Jerome.\nHe is best known for his translation of the Bible into Latin (the translation that became known as the Vulgate) and his commentaries on the whole Bible. Jerome attempted to create a translation of the Old Testament based on a Hebrew version, rather than the Septuagint, as prior Latin Bible translations had done. His list of writings is extensive. In addition to his biblical works, he wrote polemical and historical essays, always from a theologian's perspective.\nJerome was known for his teachings on Christian moral life, especially those in cosmopolitan centers such as Rome. He often focused on women's lives and identified how a woman devoted to Jesus should live her life. This focus stemmed from his close patron relationships with several prominent female ascetics who were members of affluent senatorial families.\nIn addition, his works are a crucial source of information on the pronunciation of the Hebrew language in Byzantine Palestine.\nJerome is recognized as a saint and Doctor of the Church by the Catholic Church, and as a saint in the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Lutheran Church, and the Anglican Communion. His feast day is 30 September (Gregorian calendar).\nEarly life.\nEusebius Sophronius Hieronymus was born at Stridon around 342\u2013347 AD. He was of Illyrian ancestry. He was not baptized until about 360\u2013369 in Rome, where he had gone with his friend Bonosus of Sardica to pursue rhetorical and philosophical studies. (This Bonosus may or may not have been the same Bonosus whom Jerome identifies as his friend who went to live as a hermit on an island in the Adriatic.) Jerome studied under the philologist Aelius Donatus. There he learned Latin and at least some Koine Greek, though he probably did not yet acquire the familiarity with Greek literature that he later claimed to have acquired as a schoolboy.\nAs a student, Jerome engaged in the superficial escapades and sexual experimentation of students in Rome; he indulged himself quite casually but he suffered terrible bouts of guilt afterwards. To appease his conscience, on Sundays he visited the sepulchers of the martyrs and the Apostles in the catacombs. This experience reminded him of the terrors of Hell:\nOften I would find myself entering those crypts, deep dug in the earth, with their walls on either side lined with the bodies of the dead, where everything was so dark that almost it seemed as though the Psalmist's words were fulfilled, Let them go down quick into Hell. Here and there the light, not entering in through windows, but filtering down from above through shafts, relieved the horror of the darkness. But again, as soon as you found yourself cautiously moving forward, the black night closed around, and there came to my mind the line of Virgil, \"Horror ubique animos, simul ipsa silentia terrent\".\nThe quotation from Virgil reads, in translation, \"On all sides round, horror spread wide; the very silence breathed a terror on my soul.\"\nConversion to Christianity.\nAlthough at first afraid of Christianity, he eventually converted.\nSeized with a desire for a life of ascetic penance, Jerome went for a time to the desert of Chalcis, to the southeast of Antioch, known as the \"Syrian Thebaid\" from the number of eremites (hermits) inhabiting it. During this period, he seems to have found time for studying and writing. He made his first attempt to learn Hebrew under the guidance of a converted Jew; and he seems to have been in correspondence with Jewish Christians in Antioch. Around this time, he had copied for himself a Hebrew Gospel, of which fragments are preserved in his notes. It is known today as the Gospel of the Hebrews, which the Nazarenes considered to be the true Gospel of Matthew. Jerome translated parts of this Hebrew Gospel into Greek.\nMinistry in Rome.\nAs prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Pope Damasus I, Jerome was given duties in Rome, and he undertook a revision of the \"Vetus Latina\" Gospels based on Greek manuscripts. He also updated the Psalter containing the Book of Psalms then in use in Rome, based on the Septuagint.\nThroughout his epistles, he shows himself to be surrounded by women and united with close ties; it is estimated that 40% of his epistles were addressed to someone of the female sex and, at the time, he was criticized for it.\nEven in his time, Jerome noted Porphyry's accusation that the Christian communities were run by women and that the favor of the ladies decided who could accede to the dignity of the priesthood.\nIn Rome, Jerome was surrounded by a circle of well-born and well-educated women, including some from the noblest patrician families. Among these women were such as the widows Lea, Marcella, and Paula, and Paula's daughters Blaesilla and Eustochium. The resulting inclination of these women towards the monastic life, away from the indulgent lasciviousness in Rome, and his unsparing criticism of the secular clergy of Rome, brought a growing hostility against him among the Roman clergy and their supporters. Soon after the death of his patron Pope Damasus I on 10 December 384, Jerome was forced to leave his position at Rome after an inquiry was brought up by the Roman clergy into allegations that he had an improper relationship with the widow Paula. Still, his writings were highly regarded by women who were attempting to maintain vows of becoming consecrated virgins. His letters were widely read and distributed throughout the Christian empire, and it is clear through his writing that he knew these virgin women were not his only audience.\nAdditionally, Jerome's condemnation of Blaesilla's hedonistic lifestyle in Rome led her to adopt ascetic practices, but these affected her health and worsened her physical weakness to the point that she died just four months after starting to follow his instructions; much of the Roman populace was outraged that Jerome, in their view, thus caused the premature death of such a lively young woman. Additionally, his insistence to Paula that Blaesilla should not be mourned and complaints that her grief was excessive were seen as heartless, which further polarized Roman opinion against him.\nScholarly works.\nTranslation of the Bible (382\u2013405).\nJerome was a scholar at a time when being a scholar implied a fluency in Greek. He knew some Hebrew when he started his translation project, but moved to Jerusalem to strengthen his grip on Jewish scripture commentary. A wealthy Roman aristocrat, Paula, funded Jerome's stay in a monastery in the nearby city of Bethlehem, where he settled next to the Church of the Nativity \u2013 built half a century prior on orders of Emperor Constantine over what was reputed to be the site of the Nativity of Jesus \u2013 and he completed his translation there. \nHe began in 382 by correcting the existing Latin-language version of the New Testament, commonly referred to as the \"Vetus Latina\". By 390 he turned to translating the Hebrew Bible from the original Hebrew, having previously translated portions from the Septuagint which came from Alexandria. He believed that the mainstream Rabbinical Judaism had rejected the Septuagint as invalid Jewish scriptural texts because of what were ascertained as mistranslations along with its Hellenistic heretical elements. He completed this work by 405. \nPrior to Jerome's Vulgate, all Latin translations of the Old Testament were based on the Septuagint, not the Hebrew. Jerome's decision to use a Hebrew text instead of the previously translated Septuagint went against the advice of most other Christians, including Augustine, who thought the Septuagint inspired. Some modern scholars believe that the Greek Hexapla is the main source for Jerome's \"iuxta Hebraeos\" (i.e. \"close to the Hebrews\", \"immediately following the Hebrews\") translation of the Old Testament. Some scholarship has cast doubts on the actual quality of Jerome's Hebrew knowledge, however, detailed studies have shown that to a considerable degree Jerome was a competent Hebraist.\nBiblical onomastica.\nJerome also produced two which were commonly found in subsequent Bibles until the Reformation:\nCommentaries (405\u2013420).\nFor the next 15 years, until he died, Jerome produced a number of commentaries on Scripture, often explaining his translation choices in using the original Hebrew rather than suspect translations. His patristic commentaries align closely with Jewish tradition, and he indulges in allegorical and mystical subtleties after the manner of Philo and the Alexandrian school. Unlike his contemporaries, he emphasizes the difference between the Hebrew Bible \"Apocrypha\" and the \"Hebraica veritas\" of the protocanonical books. In his Vulgate's prologues, he describes some portions of books in the Septuagint that were not found in the Hebrew as being non-canonical (he called them \"apocrypha\"); for Baruch, he mentions by name in his \"Prologue to Jeremiah\" and notes that it is neither read nor held among the Hebrews, but does not explicitly call it apocryphal or \"not in the canon\". His \"Preface to the Books of Samuel and Kings\" (commonly called the \"Helmeted Preface\") includes the following statement:\nThis preface to the Scriptures may serve as a \"helmeted\" introduction to all the books which we turn from Hebrew into Latin, so that we may be assured that what is not found in our list must be placed amongst the Apocryphal writings. Wisdom, therefore, which generally bears the name of Solomon, and the book of Jesus, the Son of Sirach, and Judith, and Tobias, and the Shepherd are not in the canon. The first book of Maccabees I have found to be Hebrew, the second is Greek, as can be proved from the very style.\nHistorical and hagiographic writings.\nJerome as a historian\nJerome's most famous work of historical writing was the \"Chronicon\", a translation, reworking, and continuation of the \"Chronicon\" of Eusebius. Written in Constantinople around 380 it became an influential text in Latin Christendom even though it is not without errors. In his other works he evoked historical events and used history as an example and source of argument. Even though Jerome engaged in historical writing, he did not consider himself bound by the rules of historians and his output in this domain has to be judged accordingly. \nDescription of vitamin A deficiency.\nThe following passage, taken from Jerome\u2019s hagiography, appears to be the earliest account of the etiology, symptoms and cure of severe vitamin A deficiency:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From his thirty-first to his thirty-fifth year he had for food six ounces of barley bread, and vegetables slightly cooked without oil. But finding that his eyes were growing dim, and that his whole body was shrivelled with an eruption and a sort of stony roughness (\"impetigine et pumicea quad scabredine\") he added oil to his former food, and up to the sixty-third year of his life followed this temperate course, tasting neither fruit nor pulse, nor anything whatsoever besides.\nLetters.\nJerome's letters or epistles, both by the great variety of their subjects and by their qualities of style, form an important portion of his literary remains. Whether he is discussing problems of scholarship, or reasoning on cases of conscience, comforting the afflicted, or saying pleasant things to his friends, scourging the vices and corruptions of the time and against sexual immorality among the clergy, exhorting to the ascetic life and renunciation of the world, or debating his theological opponents, he gives a vivid picture not only of his own mind, but of the age and its peculiar characteristics. (See Plowboy trope.) Because there was no distinct line between personal documents and those meant for publication, his letters frequently contain both confidential messages and treatises meant for others besides the one to whom he was writing.\nDue to the time he spent in Rome among wealthy families belonging to the Roman upper class, Jerome was frequently commissioned by women who had taken a vow of virginity to write to them in guidance of how to live their life. As a result, he spent a great deal of his life corresponding with these women about certain abstentions and lifestyle practices.\nTheological writings.\nEschatology.\nJerome warned that those substituting fake interpretations for the actual meaning of Scripture belonged to the \"synagogue of the Antichrist\". \"He that is not of Christ is of Antichrist,\" he wrote to Pope Damasus I. He believed that \"the mystery of iniquity\" written about by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:7 was already in action when \"every one chatters about his views.\" To Jerome, the power restraining this mystery of iniquity was the Roman Empire, but as it fell this restraining force was removed. He warned a noblewoman of Gaul:\nHe that letteth is taken out of the way, and yet we do not realize that Antichrist is near. Yes, Antichrist is near whom the Lord Jesus Christ \"shall consume with the spirit of his mouth\". \"Woe unto them,\" he cries, \"that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days.\" ... Savage tribes in countless numbers have overrun all parts of Gaul. The whole country between the Alps and the Pyrenees, between the Rhine and the Ocean, has been laid waste by hordes of Quadi, Vandals, Sarmatians, Alans, Gepids, Herules, Saxons, Burgundians, Allemanni, and \u2013 alas! for the commonweal! \u2013 even Pannonians.\nHis \"Commentary on Daniel\" was expressly written to offset the criticisms of Porphyry, who taught that Daniel related entirely to the time of Antiochus IV Epiphanes and was written by an unknown individual living in the second century BC. Against Porphyry, Jerome identified Rome as the fourth kingdom of chapters two and seven, but his view of chapters eight and eleven was more complex. Jerome held that chapter eight describes the activity of Antiochus Epiphanes, who is understood as a \"type\" of a future antichrist; 11:24 onwards applies primarily to a future antichrist but was partially fulfilled by Antiochus. Instead, he advocated that the \"little horn\" was the Antichrist:\nWe should therefore concur with the traditional interpretation of all the commentators of the Christian Church, that at the end of the world, when the Roman Empire is to be destroyed, there shall be ten kings who will partition the Roman world amongst themselves. Then an insignificant eleventh king will arise, who will overcome three of the ten kings. ... After they have been slain, the seven other kings also will bow their necks to the victor.\nIn his \"Commentary on Daniel\", he noted, \"Let us not follow the opinion of some commentators and suppose him to be either the Devil or some demon, but rather, one of the human race, in whom Satan will wholly take up his residence in bodily form.\" Instead of rebuilding the Jewish Temple to reign from, Jerome thought the Antichrist sat in God's Temple inasmuch as he made \"himself out to be like God.\"\nJerome identified the four prophetic kingdoms symbolized in Daniel\u00a02 as the Neo-Babylonian Empire, the Medes and Persians, Macedon, and Rome.(ch.\u00a02, vv.\u00a031\u201340) Jerome identified the stone cut out without hands as \"namely, the Lord and Savior\".(ch.\u00a02, v.\u00a040)\nJerome refuted Porphyry's application of the little horn of chapter seven to Antiochus. He expected that at the end of the world, Rome would be destroyed, and partitioned among ten kingdoms before the little horn appeared.(ch.\u00a07, v.\u00a08)\nJerome believed that Cyrus of Persia was the higher of the two horns of the Medo-Persian ram of Daniel\u00a08:3. The he-goat is Greece smiting Persia.(ch.\u00a08, v.\u00a05)\nSoteriology.\nJerome opposed the doctrine of Pelagianism, and wrote against it three years before his death. Jerome, despite being opposed to Origen, was influenced by Origenism in his soteriology. Although he taught that the Devil and the unbelieving will be eternally punished (unlike Origen), he believed that the punishment for Christian sinners, who have once believed but sin and fall away, will be temporal in nature. Some scholars such as J.N.D Kelly have also interpreted Ambrose to have held similar views considering the judgement of Christians.\nAlthough Augustine does not name Jerome personally, the view that all Christians would eventually be reunited to God was criticized by Augustine in his treatise \"on faith and works\".\nReception by later Christianity.\nJerome is the second-most voluminous writer \u2013 after Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) \u2013 in ancient Latin Christianity. The Catholic Church recognizes him as the patron saint of translators, librarians, and encyclopedists.\nJerome translated many biblical texts into Latin from Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. His translations formed part of the \"Vulgate\"; the \"Vulgate\" eventually superseded the preceding Latin translations of the Bible (the \"Vetus Latina\"). The Council of Trent in 1546 declared the \"Vulgate\" authoritative \"in public lectures, disputations, sermons, and expositions\".\nJerome showed more zeal and interest in the ascetic ideal than in abstract speculation. He lived as an ascetic for 4~5\u00a0years in the Syrian desert, and later near Bethlehem for 34\u00a0years. Nevertheless, his writings show outstanding scholarship and his correspondence has great historical importance.\nThe Church of England honours Jerome with a commemoration on 30\u00a0September.\nIn art.\nJerome is also often depicted with a lion, in reference to the popular hagiographical belief that Jerome once tamed a lion in the wilderness by healing its paw. The source for the story may actually have been the second century Roman tale of Androcles, or confusion with the exploits of Gerasimus (Jerome in later Latin is \"Geronimus\"); it is \"a figment\" found in the thirteenth-century \"Golden Legend\" by Jacobus de Voragine. Hagiographies of Jerome talk of his having spent many years in the Syrian desert, and artists often depict him in a \"wilderness\", which for West European painters can take the form of a wood.\nFrom the late Middle Ages, depictions of Jerome in a wider setting became popular. He is either shown in his study, surrounded by books and the equipment of a scholar, or in a rocky desert, or in a setting that combines both aspects, with him studying a book under the shelter of a rock-face or cave mouth. His study is often shown as large and well-provided for, he is often clean-shaven and well-dressed, and a cardinal's hat may appear. These images derive from the tradition of the evangelist portrait, though Jerome is often given the library and desk of a serious scholar. His attribute of the lion, often shown at a smaller scale, may be beside him in either setting. The subject of \"Jerome Penitent\" first appears in the later 15th century in Italy; he is usually in the desert, wearing ragged clothes, and often naked above the waist. His gaze is usually fixed on a crucifix and he may beat himself with his fist or a rock. In one of Georges de La Tour's 17th century French versions of St. Jerome his penitence is depicted alongside his red cardinal hat.\nJerome is often depicted in connection with the \"vanitas\" motif, the reflection on the meaninglessness of earthly life and the transient nature of all earthly goods and pursuits. In the 16th century by Pieter Coecke van Aelst and workshop, the saint is depicted with a skull. Behind him on the wall is pinned an admonition, \"Cogita Mori\" (\"Think upon death\"). Further reminders of the \"vanitas\" motif of the passage of time and the imminence of death are the image of the Last Judgment visible in the saint's Bible, the candle and the hourglass.\nBoth Agostino Carracci and Domenichino portrayed Jerome's last communion.\nJerome is also sometimes depicted with an owl, the symbol of wisdom and scholarship. Writing materials and the trumpet of final judgment are also part of his iconography.\nA four and three quarters foot tall limestone statue of Jerome was installed above the entrance of O'Shaughnessy Library on the campus of the University of St. Thomas (then College of St. Thomas) in St. Paul Minnesota in October 1950. The sculptor was Joseph Kiselewski and the stone carver was Egisto Bertozzi.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16006", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16006", "title": "Johann Wolfgang Von Goethe", "text": ""}
{"id": "16009", "revid": "50945571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16009", "title": "JPEG", "text": "Lossy compression method for reducing the size of digital images\nJPEG ( , short for Joint Photographic Experts Group and sometimes retroactively referred to as JPEG 1) is a commonly used method of lossy compression for digital images, particularly for those images produced by digital photography. The degree of compression can be adjusted, allowing a selectable trade off between storage size and image quality. JPEG typically achieves 10:1 compression with noticeable, but widely agreed to be acceptable perceptible loss in image quality. Since its introduction in 1992, JPEG has been the most widely used image compression standard in the world, and the most widely used digital image format, with several billion JPEG images produced every day as of 2015.\nThe Joint Photographic Experts Group created the standard in 1992, based on the discrete cosine transform (DCT) algorithm. JPEG was largely responsible for the proliferation of digital images and digital photos across the Internet and later social media. JPEG compression is used in a number of image file formats. JPEG/Exif is the most common image format used by digital cameras and other photographic image capture devices; along with JPEG/JFIF, it is the most common format for storing and transmitting photographic images on the World Wide Web. These format variations are often not distinguished and are simply called JPEG.\nThe MIME media type for JPEG is \"image/jpeg\", except in older Internet Explorer versions, which provide a MIME type of \"image/pjpeg\" when uploading JPEG images. JPEG files usually have a filename extension of \"jpg\" or \"jpeg\". JPEG/JFIF supports a maximum image size of 65,535\u00d765,535 pixels, hence up to 4 gigapixels for an aspect ratio of 1:1. In 2000, the JPEG group introduced a format intended to be a successor, JPEG 2000, but it was unable to replace the original JPEG as the dominant image standard.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe original JPEG specification published in 1992 implements processes from various earlier research papers and patents cited by the CCITT (now ITU-T) and Joint Photographic Experts Group.\nThe basis for JPEG's lossy compression algorithm is the discrete cosine transform (DCT), which was first proposed by Nasir Ahmed as an image compression technique in 1972. Ahmed published the DCT algorithm with T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in a 1974 paper, which is cited in the JPEG specification.\nThe JPEG specification cites patents from several companies. The following patents provided the basis for its arithmetic coding algorithm.\nThe JPEG specification also cites three other patents from IBM. Other companies cited as patent holders include AT&amp;T (two patents) and Canon Inc. Absent from the list is https://, filed by Compression Labs' Wen-Hsiung Chen and Daniel J. Klenke in October 1986. The patent describes a DCT-based image compression algorithm, and would later be a cause of controversy in 2002 (see \"Patent controversy\" below). However, the JPEG specification did cite two earlier research papers by Wen-Hsiung Chen, published in 1977 and 1984.\nJPEG standard.\n\"JPEG\" stands for Joint Photographic Experts Group, the name of the committee that created the JPEG standard and other still picture coding standards. The \"Joint\" stood for ISO TC97 WG8 and CCITT SGVIII. Founded in 1986, the group developed the JPEG standard during the late 1980s. The group published the JPEG standard in 1992.\nIn 1987, ISO TC 97 became ISO/IEC JTC 1 and, in 1992, CCITT became ITU-T. Currently on the JTC1 side, JPEG is one of two sub-groups of ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee 1, Subcommittee 29, Working Group 1 (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 1)\u00a0\u2013 titled as \"Coding of still pictures\". On the ITU-T side, ITU-T SG16 is the respective body. The original JPEG Group was organized in 1986, issuing the first JPEG standard in 1992, which was approved in September 1992 as ITU-T Recommendation T.81 and, in 1994, as ISO/IEC 10918-1.\nThe JPEG standard specifies the codec, which defines how an image is compressed into a stream of bytes and decompressed back into an image, but not the file format used to contain that stream.\nThe Exif and JFIF standards define the commonly used file formats for interchange of JPEG-compressed images.\nJPEG standards are formally named as \"Information technology\u00a0\u2013 Digital compression and coding of continuous-tone still images\". ISO/IEC 10918 consists of the following parts:\nEcma International TR/98 specifies the JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF); the first edition was published in June 2009.\nPatent controversy.\nIn 2002, Forgent Networks asserted that it owned and would enforce patent rights on the JPEG technology, arising from a patent that had been filed on 27 October 1986, and granted on 6 October 1987: https:// by Compression Labs' Wen-Hsiung Chen and Daniel J. Klenke. While Forgent did not own Compression Labs at the time, Chen later sold Compression Labs to Forgent, before Chen went on to work for Cisco. This led to Forgent acquiring ownership over the patent. Forgent's 2002 announcement created a furor reminiscent of Unisys' attempts to assert its rights over the GIF image compression standard.\nThe JPEG committee investigated the patent claims in 2002 and were of the opinion that they were invalidated by prior art, a view shared by various experts.\nBetween 2002 and 2004, Forgent was able to obtain about US$105 million by licensing their patent to some 30 companies. In April 2004, Forgent sued 31 other companies to enforce further license payments. In July of the same year, a consortium of 21 large computer companies filed a countersuit, with the goal of invalidating the patent. In addition, Microsoft launched a separate lawsuit against Forgent in April 2005. In February 2006, the United States Patent and Trademark Office agreed to re-examine Forgent's JPEG patent at the request of the Public Patent Foundation. On 26 May 2006, the USPTO found the patent invalid based on prior art. The USPTO also found that Forgent knew about the prior art, yet it intentionally avoided telling the Patent Office. This made any appeal to reinstate the patent highly unlikely to succeed.\nForgent also possesses a similar patent granted by the European Patent Office in 1994, though it is unclear how enforceable it is.\nAs of 27 October 2006, the U.S. patent's 20-year term appears to have expired, and in November 2006, Forgent agreed to abandon enforcement of patent claims against use of the JPEG standard.\nThe JPEG committee has as one of its explicit goals that their standards (in particular their baseline methods) be implementable without payment of license fees, and they have secured appropriate license rights for their JPEG 2000 standard from over 20 large organizations.\nBeginning in August 2007, another company, Global Patent Holdings, LLC claimed that its patent (https://) issued in 1993, is infringed by the downloading of JPEG images on either a website or through e-mail. If not invalidated, this patent could apply to any website that displays JPEG images. The patent was under reexamination by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office from 2000 to 2007; in July 2007, the Patent Office revoked all of the original claims of the patent but found that an additional claim proposed by Global Patent Holdings (claim 17) was valid. Global Patent Holdings then filed a number of lawsuits based on claim 17 of its patent.\nIn its first two lawsuits following the reexamination, both filed in Chicago, Illinois, Global Patent Holdings sued the Green Bay Packers, CDW, Motorola, Apple, Orbitz, Officemax, Caterpillar, Kraft and Peapod as defendants. A third lawsuit was filed on 5 December 2007, in South Florida against ADT Security Services, AutoNation, Florida Crystals Corp., HearUSA, MovieTickets.com, Ocwen Financial Corp. and Tire Kingdom, and a fourth lawsuit on 8 January 2008, in South Florida against the Boca Raton Resort &amp; Club. A fifth lawsuit was filed against Global Patent Holdings in Nevada. That lawsuit was filed by Zappos.com, Inc., which was allegedly threatened by Global Patent Holdings, and sought a judicial declaration that the '341 patent is invalid and not infringed.\nGlobal Patent Holdings had also used the '341 patent to sue or threaten outspoken critics of broad software patents, including Gregory Aharonian and the anonymous operator of a website blog known as the \"Patent Troll Tracker.\" On 21 December 2007, patent lawyer Vernon Francissen of Chicago asked the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office to reexamine the sole remaining claim of the '341 patent on the basis of new prior art.\nOn 5 March 2008, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office agreed to reexamine the '341 patent, finding that the new prior art raised substantial new questions regarding the patent's validity. In light of the reexamination, the accused infringers in four of the five pending lawsuits have filed motions to suspend (stay) their cases until completion of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office's review of the '341 patent. On 23 April 2008, a judge presiding over the two lawsuits in Chicago, Illinois granted the motions in those cases. On 22 July 2008, the Patent Office issued the first \"Office Action\" of the second reexamination, finding the claim invalid based on nineteen separate grounds. On 24 November 2009, a Reexamination Certificate was issued cancelling all claims.\nBeginning in 2011 and continuing as of early 2013, an entity known as Princeton Digital Image Corporation, based in Eastern Texas, began suing large numbers of companies for alleged infringement of https://. Princeton claims that the JPEG image compression standard infringes the '056 patent and has sued large numbers of websites, retailers, camera and device manufacturers and resellers. The patent was originally owned and assigned to General Electric. The patent expired in December 2007, but Princeton has sued large numbers of companies for \"past infringement\" of this patent. (Under U.S. patent laws, a patent owner can sue for \"past infringement\" up to six years before the filing of a lawsuit, so Princeton could theoretically have continued suing companies until December 2013.) As of March 2013, Princeton had suits pending in New York and Delaware against more than 55 companies. General Electric's involvement in the suit is unknown, although court records indicate that it assigned the patent to Princeton in 2009 and retains certain rights in the patent.\nTypical use.\nThe JPEG compression algorithm operates at its best on photographs and paintings of realistic scenes with smooth variations of tone and color. For web usage, where reducing the amount of data used for an image is important for responsive presentation, JPEG's compression benefits make JPEG popular. JPEG/Exif is also the most common format saved by digital cameras.\nHowever, JPEG is not well suited for line drawings and other textual or iconic graphics, where the sharp contrasts between adjacent pixels can cause noticeable artifacts. Such images are better saved in a lossless graphics format such as TIFF, GIF, PNG, or a raw image format. The JPEG standard includes a lossless coding mode, but that mode is not supported in most products.\nAs the typical use of JPEG is a lossy compression method, which reduces the image fidelity, it is inappropriate for exact reproduction of imaging data (such as some scientific and medical imaging applications and certain technical image processing work).\nJPEG is also not well suited to files that will undergo multiple edits, as some image quality is lost each time the image is recompressed, particularly if the image is cropped or shifted, or if encoding parameters are changed\u00a0\u2013 see digital generation loss for details. To prevent image information loss during sequential and repetitive editing, the first edit can be saved in a lossless format, subsequently edited in that format, then finally published as JPEG for distribution.\nJPEG compression.\nJPEG uses a lossy form of compression based on the discrete cosine transform (DCT). This mathematical operation converts each frame/field of the video source from the spatial (2D) domain into the frequency domain (a.k.a. transform domain). A perceptual model based loosely on how the human psychovisual system discards high-frequency information, i.e. sharp transitions in intensity, and color hue. In the transform domain, the process of reducing information is called quantization. In simpler terms, quantization is a method for optimally reducing a large number scale (with different occurrences of each number) into a smaller one, and the transform-domain is a convenient representation of the image because the high-frequency coefficients, which contribute less to the overall picture than other coefficients, are characteristically small-values with high compressibility. The quantized coefficients are then sequenced and losslessly packed into the output bitstream. Nearly all software implementations of JPEG permit user control over the compression ratio (as well as other optional parameters), allowing the user to trade off picture-quality for smaller file size. In embedded applications (such as miniDV, which uses a similar DCT-compression scheme), the parameters are pre-selected and fixed for the application.\nThe compression method is usually lossy, meaning that some original image information is lost and cannot be restored, possibly affecting image quality. There is an optional lossless mode defined in the JPEG standard. However, this mode is not widely supported in products.\nThere is also an interlaced \"progressive\" JPEG format, in which data is compressed in multiple passes of progressively higher detail. This is ideal for large images that will be displayed while downloading over a slow connection, allowing a reasonable preview after receiving only a portion of the data. However, support for progressive JPEGs is not universal. When progressive JPEGs are received by programs that do not support them (such as versions of Internet Explorer before Windows 7) the software displays the image only after it has been completely downloaded.\nThere are also many medical imaging, traffic and camera applications that create and process 12-bit JPEG images both grayscale and color. 12-bit JPEG format is included in an Extended part of the JPEG specification. The libjpeg codec supports 12-bit JPEG and there even exists a high-performance version.\nLossless editing.\nSeveral alterations to a JPEG image can be performed losslessly (that is, without recompression and the associated quality loss) as long as the image size is a multiple of 1 MCU block (Minimum Coded Unit) (usually 16 pixels in both directions, for 4:2:0 chroma subsampling). Utilities that implement this include:\nBlocks can be rotated in 90-degree increments, flipped in the horizontal, vertical and diagonal axes and moved about in the image. Not all blocks from the original image need to be used in the modified one.\nThe top and left edge of a JPEG image must lie on an 8\u00a0\u00d7\u00a08 pixel block boundary (or 16\u00a0\u00d7\u00a016 pixel for larger MCU sizes), but the bottom and right edge need not do so. This limits the possible lossless crop operations, and prevents flips and rotations of an image whose bottom or right edge does not lie on a block boundary for all channels (because the edge would end up on top or left, where\u00a0\u2013 as aforementioned\u00a0\u2013 a block boundary is obligatory).\nRotations where the image is not a multiple of 8 or 16, which value depends upon the chroma subsampling, are not lossless. Rotating such an image causes the blocks to be recomputed which results in loss of quality.\nWhen using lossless cropping, if the bottom or right side of the crop region is not on a block boundary, then the rest of the data from the partially used blocks will still be present in the cropped file and can be recovered. It is also possible to transform between baseline and progressive formats without any loss of quality, since the only difference is the order in which the coefficients are placed in the file.\nFurthermore, several JPEG images can be losslessly joined, as long as they were saved with the same quality and the edges coincide with block boundaries.\nJPEG files.\nThe file format known as \"JPEG Interchange Format\" (JIF) is specified in Annex B of the standard. However, this \"pure\" file format is rarely used, primarily because of the difficulty of programming encoders and decoders that fully implement all aspects of the standard and because of certain shortcomings of the standard:\nSeveral additional standards have evolved to address these issues. The first of these, released in 1992, was the JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF), followed in recent years by Exchangeable image file format (Exif) and ICC color profiles. Both of these formats use the actual JIF byte layout, consisting of different \"markers\", but in addition, employ one of the JIF standard's extension points, namely the \"application markers\": JFIF uses APP0, while Exif uses APP1. Within these segments of the file that were left for future use in the JIF standard and are not read by it, these standards add specific metadata.\nThus, in some ways, JFIF is a cut-down version of the JIF standard in that it specifies certain constraints (such as not allowing all the different encoding modes), while in other ways, it is an extension of JIF due to the added metadata. The documentation for the original JFIF standard states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;JPEG File Interchange Format is a minimal file format which enables JPEG bitstreams to be exchanged between a wide variety of platforms and applications. This minimal format does not include any of the advanced features found in the TIFF JPEG specification or any application specific file format. Nor should it, for the only purpose of this simplified format is to allow the exchange of JPEG compressed images.\nImage files that employ JPEG compression are commonly called \"JPEG files\", and are stored in variants of the JIF image format. Most image capture devices (such as digital cameras) that output JPEG are actually creating files in the Exif format, the format that the camera industry has standardized on for metadata interchange. On the other hand, since the Exif standard does not allow color profiles, most image editing software stores JPEG in JFIF format, and includes the APP1 segment from the Exif file to include the metadata in an almost-compliant way; the JFIF standard is interpreted somewhat flexibly.\nStrictly speaking, the JFIF and Exif standards are incompatible, because each specifies that its marker segment (APP0 or APP1, respectively) appear first. In practice, most JPEG files contain a JFIF marker segment that precedes the Exif header. This allows older readers to correctly handle the older format JFIF segment, while newer readers also decode the following Exif segment, being less strict about requiring it to appear first.\nJPEG filename extensions.\nThe most common filename extensions for files employing JPEG compression are codice_1 and codice_2, though codice_3, codice_4 and codice_5 are also used. It is also possible for JPEG data to be embedded in other file types\u00a0\u2013 TIFF encoded files often embed a JPEG image as a thumbnail of the main image; and MP3 files can contain a JPEG of cover art in the ID3v2 tag.\nColor profile.\nMany JPEG files embed an ICC color profile (color space). Commonly used color profiles include sRGB and Adobe RGB. Because these color spaces use a non-linear transformation, the dynamic range of an 8-bit JPEG file is about 11 stops; see gamma curve.\nIf the image doesn't specify color profile information (\"untagged\"), the color space is assumed to be sRGB for the purposes of display on webpages.\nSyntax and structure.\nA JPEG image consists of a sequence of \"segments\", each beginning with a \"marker\", each of which begins with a 0xFF byte, followed by a byte indicating what kind of marker it is. Some markers consist of just those two bytes; others are followed by two bytes (high then low), indicating the length of marker-specific payload data that follows. (The length includes the two bytes for the length, but not the two bytes for the marker.) Some markers are followed by entropy-coded data; the length of such a marker does not include the entropy-coded data. Note that consecutive 0xFF bytes are used as fill bytes for padding purposes, although this fill byte padding should only ever take place for markers immediately following entropy-coded scan data (see JPEG specification section B.1.1.2 and E.1.2 for details; specifically \"In all cases where markers are appended after the compressed data, optional 0xFF fill bytes may precede the marker\").\nWithin the entropy-coded data, after any 0xFF byte, a 0x00 byte is inserted by the encoder before the next byte, so that there does not appear to be a marker where none is intended, preventing framing errors. Decoders must skip this 0x00 byte. This technique, called byte stuffing (see JPEG specification section F.1.2.3), is only applied to the entropy-coded data, not to marker payload data. Note however that entropy-coded data has a few markers of its own; specifically the Reset markers (0xD0 through 0xD7), which are used to isolate independent chunks of entropy-coded data to allow parallel decoding, and encoders are free to insert these Reset markers at regular intervals (although not all encoders do this).\nThere are other \"Start Of Frame\" markers that introduce other kinds of JPEG encodings.\nSince several vendors might use the same APP\"n\" marker type, application-specific markers often begin with a standard or vendor name (e.g., \"Exif\" or \"Adobe\") or some other identifying string.\nAt a restart marker, block-to-block predictor variables are reset, and the bitstream is synchronized to a byte boundary. Restart markers provide means for recovery after bitstream error, such as transmission over an unreliable network or file corruption. Since the runs of macroblocks between restart markers may be independently decoded, these runs may be decoded in parallel.\nJPEG codec example.\nAlthough a JPEG file can be encoded in various ways, most commonly it is done with JFIF encoding. The encoding process consists of several steps:\nThe decoding process reverses these steps, except the \"quantization\" because it is irreversible. In the remainder of this section, the encoding and decoding processes are described in more detail.\nEncoding.\nMany of the options in the JPEG standard are not commonly used, and as mentioned above, most image software uses the simpler JFIF format when creating a JPEG file, which among other things specifies the encoding method. Here is a brief description of one of the more common methods of encoding when applied to an input that has 24 bits per pixel (eight each of red, green, and blue). This particular option is a lossy data compression method. They are represented in matrices below.\nColor space transformation.\nFirst, the image should be converted from RGB (by default sRGB, but other color spaces are possible) into a different color space called Y\u2032CBCR (or, informally, YCbCr). It has three components Y', CB and CR: the Y' component represents the brightness of a pixel, and the CB and CR components represent the chrominance (split into blue and red components). This is basically the same color space as used by digital color television as well as digital video including video DVDs. The Y\u2032CBCR color space conversion allows greater compression without a significant effect on perceptual image quality (or greater perceptual image quality for the same compression). The compression is more efficient because the brightness information, which is more important to the eventual perceptual quality of the image, is confined to a single channel. This more closely corresponds to the perception of color in the human visual system. The color transformation also improves compression by statistical decorrelation.\nA particular conversion to Y\u2032CBCR is specified in the JFIF standard, and should be performed for the resulting JPEG file to have maximum compatibility. However, some JPEG implementations in \"highest quality\" mode do not apply this step and instead keep the color information in the RGB color model, where the image is stored in separate channels for red, green and blue brightness components. This results in less efficient compression, and would not likely be used when file size is especially important.\nDownsampling.\nDue to the densities of color- and brightness-sensitive receptors in the human eye, humans can see considerably more fine detail in the brightness of an image (the Y' component) than in the hue and color saturation of an image (the Cb and Cr components). Using this knowledge, encoders can be designed to compress images more efficiently.\nThe transformation into the Y\u2032CBCR color model enables the next usual step, which is to reduce the spatial resolution of the Cb and Cr components (called \"downsampling\" or \"chroma subsampling\"). The ratios at which the downsampling is ordinarily done for JPEG images are (no downsampling), (reduction by a factor of 2 in the horizontal direction), or (most commonly) (reduction by a factor of 2 in both the horizontal and vertical directions). For the rest of the compression process, Y', Cb and Cr are processed separately and in a very similar manner.\nBlock splitting.\nAfter subsampling, each channel must be split into 8\u00d78 blocks. Depending on chroma subsampling, this yields Minimum Coded Unit (MCU) blocks of size 8\u00d78 (4:4:4\u00a0\u2013 no subsampling), 16\u00d78 (4:2:2), or most commonly 16\u00d716 (4:2:0). In video compression MCUs are called macroblocks.\nIf the data for a channel does not represent an integer number of blocks then the encoder must fill the remaining area of the incomplete blocks with some form of dummy data. Filling the edges with a fixed color (for example, black) can create ringing artifacts along the visible part of the border;\nrepeating the edge pixels is a common technique that reduces (but does not necessarily eliminate) such artifacts, and more sophisticated border filling techniques can also be applied.\nDiscrete cosine transform.\nNext, each 8\u00d78 block of each component (Y, Cb, Cr) is converted to a frequency-domain representation, using a normalized, two-dimensional type-II discrete cosine transform (DCT), see Citation 1 in discrete cosine transform. The DCT is sometimes referred to as \"type-II DCT\" in the context of a family of transforms as in discrete cosine transform, and the corresponding inverse (IDCT) is denoted as \"type-III DCT\".\nAs an example, one such 8\u00d78 8-bit subimage might be:\nformula_1\nBefore computing the DCT of the 8\u00d78 block, its values are shifted from a positive range to one centered on zero. For an 8-bit image, each entry in the original block falls in the range formula_2. The midpoint of the range (in this case, the value 128) is subtracted from each entry to produce a data range that is centered on zero, so that the modified range is formula_3. This step reduces the dynamic range requirements in the DCT processing stage that follows.\nThis step results in the following values:\nformula_4\nThe next step is to take the two-dimensional DCT, which is given by:\nformula_5\nwhere\nIf we perform this transformation on our matrix above, we get the following (rounded to the nearest two digits beyond the decimal point):\nformula_17\nNote the top-left corner entry with the rather large magnitude. This is the DC coefficient (also called the constant component), which defines the basic hue for the entire block. The remaining 63 coefficients are the AC coefficients (also called the alternating components). The advantage of the DCT is its tendency to aggregate most of the signal in one corner of the result, as may be seen above. The quantization step to follow accentuates this effect while simultaneously reducing the overall size of the DCT coefficients, resulting in a signal that is easy to compress efficiently in the entropy stage.\nThe DCT temporarily increases the bit-depth of the data, since the DCT coefficients of an 8-bit/component image take up to 11 or more bits (depending on fidelity of the DCT calculation) to store. This may force the codec to temporarily use 16-bit numbers to hold these coefficients, doubling the size of the image representation at this point; these values are typically reduced back to 8-bit values by the quantization step. The temporary increase in size at this stage is not a performance concern for most JPEG implementations, since typically only a very small part of the image is stored in full DCT form at any given time during the image encoding or decoding process.\nQuantization.\nThe human eye is good at seeing small differences in brightness over a relatively large area, but not so good at distinguishing the exact strength of a high frequency brightness variation. This allows one to greatly reduce the amount of information in the high frequency components. This is done by simply dividing each component in the frequency domain by a constant for that component, and then rounding to the nearest integer. This rounding operation is the only lossy operation in the whole process (other than chroma subsampling) if the DCT computation is performed with sufficiently high precision. As a result of this, it is typically the case that many of the higher frequency components are rounded to zero, and many of the rest become small positive or negative numbers, which take many fewer bits to represent.\nThe elements in the quantization matrix control the compression ratio, with larger values producing greater compression. A typical quantization matrix (for a quality of 50% as specified in the original JPEG Standard), is as follows:\nformula_18\nThe quantized DCT coefficients are computed with\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 is the unquantized DCT coefficients; formula_21 is the quantization matrix above; and formula_22 is the quantized DCT coefficients.\nUsing this quantization matrix with the DCT coefficient matrix from above results in:\nformula_23\nFor example, using \u2212415 (the DC coefficient) and rounding to the nearest integer\nformula_24\nNotice that most of the higher-frequency elements of the sub-block (i.e., those with an \"x\" or \"y\" spatial frequency greater than 4) are quantized into zero values.\nEntropy coding.\nEntropy coding is a special form of lossless data compression. It involves arranging the image components in a \"zigzag\" order employing run-length encoding (RLE) algorithm that groups similar frequencies together, inserting length coding zeros, and then using Huffman coding on what is left.\nThe JPEG standard also allows, but does not require, decoders to support the use of arithmetic coding, which is mathematically superior to Huffman coding. However, this feature has rarely been used, as it was historically covered by patents requiring royalty-bearing licenses, and because it is slower to encode and decode compared to Huffman coding. Arithmetic coding typically makes files about 5\u20137% smaller.\nThe previous quantized DC coefficient is used to predict the current quantized DC coefficient. The difference between the two is encoded rather than the actual value. The encoding of the 63 quantized AC coefficients does not use such prediction differencing.\nThe zigzag sequence for the above quantized coefficients are shown below. (The format shown is just for ease of understanding/viewing.)\nIf the \"i\"-th block is represented by formula_25 and positions within each block are represented by formula_26 where formula_27 and formula_28, then any coefficient in the DCT image can be represented as formula_29. Thus, in the above scheme, the order of encoding pixels (for the i-th block) is formula_30, formula_31, formula_32, formula_33, formula_34, formula_35, formula_36, formula_37 and so on.\nThis encoding mode is called baseline \"sequential\" encoding. Baseline JPEG also supports \"progressive\" encoding. While sequential encoding encodes coefficients of a single block at a time (in a zigzag manner), progressive encoding encodes similar-positioned batch of coefficients of all blocks in one go (called a \"scan\"), followed by the next batch of coefficients of all blocks, and so on. For example, if the image is divided into N 8\u00d78 blocks formula_38, then a 3-scan progressive encoding encodes DC component, formula_30 for all blocks, i.e., for all formula_40, in first scan. This is followed by the second scan which encoding a few more components (assuming four more components, they are formula_31 to formula_34, still in a zigzag manner) coefficients of all blocks (so the sequence is: formula_43), followed by all the remained coefficients of all blocks in the last scan.\nOnce all similar-positioned coefficients have been encoded, the next position to be encoded is the one occurring next in the zigzag traversal as indicated in the figure above. It has been found that \"baseline progressive\" JPEG encoding usually gives better compression as compared to \"baseline sequential\" JPEG due to the ability to use different Huffman tables (see below) tailored for different frequencies on each \"scan\" or \"pass\" (which includes similar-positioned coefficients), though the difference is not too large.\nIn the rest of the article, it is assumed that the coefficient pattern generated is due to sequential mode.\nIn order to encode the above generated coefficient pattern, JPEG uses Huffman encoding. The JPEG standard provides general-purpose Huffman tables; encoders may also choose to generate Huffman tables optimized for the actual frequency distributions in images being encoded.\nThe process of encoding the zig-zag quantized data begins with a run-length encoding explained below, where:\nThe run-length encoding works by examining each non-zero AC coefficient x and determining how many zeroes came before the previous AC coefficient. With this information, two symbols are created:\nBoth \"RUNLENGTH\" and \"SIZE\" rest on the same byte, meaning that each only contains four bits of information. The higher bits deal with the number of zeroes, while the lower bits denote the number of bits necessary to encode the value of x.\nThis has the immediate implication of \"Symbol 1\" being only able store information regarding the first 15 zeroes preceding the non-zero AC coefficient. However, JPEG defines two special Huffman code words. One is for ending the sequence prematurely when the remaining coefficients are zero (called \"End-of-Block\" or \"EOB\"), and another when the run of zeroes goes beyond 15 before reaching a non-zero AC coefficient. In such a case where 16 zeroes are encountered before a given non-zero AC coefficient, \"Symbol 1\" is encoded \"specially\" as: (15, 0)(0).\nThe overall process continues until \"EOB\"\u00a0\u2013 denoted by (0, 0)\u00a0\u2013 is reached.\nWith this in mind, the sequence from earlier becomes:\n(0, 2)(-3);(1, 2)(-3);(0, 2)(-2);(0, 3)(-6);(0, 2)(2);(0, 3)(-4);(0, 1)(1);(0, 2)(-3);(0, 1)(1);(0, 1)(1);\n(0, 3)(5);(0, 1)(1);(0, 2)(2);(0, 1)(-1);(0, 1)(1);(0, 1)(-1);(0, 2)(2);(5, 1)(-1);(0, 1)(-1);(0, 0);\nFrom here, frequency calculations are made based on occurrences of the coefficients. In our example block, most of the quantized coefficients are small numbers that are not preceded immediately by a zero coefficient. These more-frequent cases will be represented by shorter code words.\nCompression ratio and artifacts.\nThe resulting compression ratio can be varied according to need by being more or less aggressive in the divisors used in the quantization phase. Ten to one compression usually results in an image that cannot be distinguished by eye from the original. A compression ratio of 100:1 is usually possible, but will look distinctly artifacted compared to the original. The appropriate level of compression depends on the use to which the image will be put.\nThose who use the World Wide Web may be familiar with the irregularities known as compression artifacts that appear in JPEG images, which may take the form of noise around contrasting edges (especially curves and corners), or \"blocky\" images. These are due to the quantization step of the JPEG algorithm. They are especially noticeable around sharp corners between contrasting colors (text is a good example, as it contains many such corners). The analogous artifacts in MPEG video are referred to as \"mosquito noise,\" as the resulting \"edge busyness\" and spurious dots, which change over time, resemble mosquitoes swarming around the object.\nThese artifacts can be reduced by choosing a lower level of compression; they may be completely avoided by saving an image using a lossless file format, though this will result in a larger file size. The images created with ray-tracing programs have noticeable blocky shapes on the terrain. Certain low-intensity compression artifacts might be acceptable when simply viewing the images, but can be emphasized if the image is subsequently processed, usually resulting in unacceptable quality. Consider the example below, demonstrating the effect of lossy compression on an edge detection processing step.\nSome programs allow the user to vary the amount by which individual blocks are compressed. Stronger compression is applied to areas of the image that show fewer artifacts. This way it is possible to manually reduce JPEG file size with less loss of quality.\nSince the quantization stage \"always\" results in a loss of information, JPEG standard is always a lossy compression codec. (Information is lost both in quantizing and rounding of the floating-point numbers.) Even if the quantization matrix is a matrix of ones, information will still be lost in the rounding step.\nDecoding.\nDecoding to display the image consists of doing all the above in reverse.\nTaking the DCT coefficient matrix (after adding the difference of the DC coefficient back in)\nformula_44\nand taking the entry-for-entry product with the quantization matrix from above results in\nformula_45\nwhich closely resembles the original DCT coefficient matrix for the top-left portion.\nThe next step is to take the two-dimensional inverse DCT (a 2D type-III DCT), which is given by:\nformula_46\nwhere\nRounding the output to integer values (since the original had integer values) results in an image with values (still shifted down by 128)\nformula_57\nand adding 128 to each entry\nformula_58\nThis is the decompressed subimage. In general, the decompression process may produce values outside the original input range of formula_2. If this occurs, the decoder needs to clip the output values so as to keep them within that range to prevent overflow when storing the decompressed image with the original bit depth.\nThe decompressed subimage can be compared to the original subimage (also see images to the right) by taking the difference (original \u2212 uncompressed) results in the following error values:\nformula_60\nwith an average absolute error of about 5 values per pixels (i.e., formula_61).\nThe error is most noticeable in the bottom-left corner where the bottom-left pixel becomes darker than the pixel to its immediate right.\nRequired precision.\nThe required implementation precision of a JPEG codec is implicitly defined through the requirements formulated for compliance to the JPEG standard. These requirements are specified in ITU.T Recommendation T.83 | ISO/IEC 10918-2. Unlike MPEG standards and many later JPEG standards, the above document defines both required implementation precisions for the encoding and the decoding process of a JPEG codec by means of a maximal tolerable error of the forwards and inverse DCT in the DCT domain as determined by reference test streams. For example, the output of a decoder implementation must not exceed an error of one quantization unit in the DCT domain when applied to the reference testing codestreams provided as part of the above standard. While unusual, and unlike many other and more modern standards, ITU.T T.83 | ISO/IEC 10918-2 does not formulate error bounds in the image domain.\nEffects of JPEG compression.\nJPEG compression artifacts blend well into photographs with detailed non-uniform textures, allowing higher compression ratios. Notice how a higher compression ratio first affects the high-frequency textures in the upper-left corner of the image, and how the contrasting lines become more fuzzy. The very high compression ratio severely affects the quality of the image, although the overall colors and image form are still recognizable. However, the precision of colors suffer less (for a human eye) than the precision of contours (based on luminance). This justifies the fact that images should be first transformed in a color model separating the luminance from the chromatic information, before subsampling the chromatic planes (which may also use lower quality quantization) in order to preserve the precision of the luminance plane with more information bits.\nSample photographs.\nFor information, the uncompressed 24-bit RGB bitmap image below (73,242 pixels) would require 219,726 bytes (excluding all other information headers). The filesizes indicated below include the internal JPEG information headers and some metadata. For highest quality images (Q=100), about 8.25 bits per color pixel is required. On grayscale images, a minimum of 6.5 bits per pixel is enough (a comparable Q=100 quality color information requires about 25% more encoded bits). The highest quality image below (Q=100) is encoded at nine bits per color pixel, the medium quality image (Q=25) uses one bit per color pixel. For most applications, the quality factor should not go below 0.75 bit per pixel (Q=12.5), as demonstrated by the low quality image. The image at lowest quality uses only 0.13 bit per pixel, and displays very poor color. This is useful when the image will be displayed in a significantly scaled-down size. A method for creating better quantization matrices for a given image quality using PSNR instead of the Q factor is described in Minguill\u00f3n &amp; Pujol (2001).\nThe medium quality photo uses only 4.3% of the storage space required for the uncompressed image, but has little noticeable loss of detail or visible artifacts. However, once a certain threshold of compression is passed, compressed images show increasingly visible defects. See the article on rate\u2013distortion theory for a mathematical explanation of this threshold effect. A particular limitation of JPEG in this regard is its non-overlapped 8\u00d78 block transform structure. More modern designs such as JPEG 2000 and JPEG XR exhibit a more graceful degradation of quality as the bit usage decreases\u00a0\u2013 by using transforms with a larger spatial extent for the lower frequency coefficients and by using overlapping transform basis functions.\nLossless further compression.\nFrom 2004 to 2008, new research emerged on ways to further compress the data contained in JPEG images without modifying the represented image. This has applications in scenarios where the original image is only available in JPEG format, and its size needs to be reduced for archiving or transmission. Standard general-purpose compression tools cannot significantly compress JPEG files.\nTypically, such schemes take advantage of improvements to the naive scheme for coding DCT coefficients, which fails to take into account:\nSome standard but rarely used options already exist in JPEG to improve the efficiency of coding DCT coefficients: the arithmetic coding option, and the progressive coding option (which produces lower bitrates because values for each coefficient are coded independently, and each coefficient has a significantly different distribution). Modern methods have improved on these techniques by reordering coefficients to group coefficients of larger magnitude together; using adjacent coefficients and blocks to predict new coefficient values; dividing blocks or coefficients up among a small number of independently coded models based on their statistics and adjacent values; and most recently, by decoding blocks, predicting subsequent blocks in the spatial domain, and then encoding these to generate predictions for DCT coefficients.\nTypically, such methods can compress existing JPEG files between 15 and 25 percent, and for JPEGs compressed at low-quality settings, can produce improvements of up to 65%.\nA freely available tool called packJPG is based on the 2007 paper \"Improved Redundancy Reduction for JPEG Files.\" As of version 2.5k of 2016, it reports a typical 20% reduction by transcoding. JPEG XL (ISO/IEC 18181) of 2018 reports a similar reduction in its transcoding.\nDerived formats for stereoscopic 3D.\nJPEG Stereoscopic.\nJPS is a stereoscopic JPEG image used for creating 3D effects from 2D images. It contains two static images, one for the left eye and one for the right eye; encoded as two side-by-side images in a single JPEG file.\nJPEG Stereoscopic (JPS, extension .jps) is a JPEG-based format for stereoscopic images. It has a range of configurations stored in the JPEG APP3 marker field, but usually contains one image of double width, representing two images of identical size in cross-eyed (i.e. left frame on the right half of the image and vice versa) side-by-side arrangement. This file format can be viewed as a JPEG without any special software, or can be processed for rendering in other modes.\nJPEG Multi-Picture Format.\nJPEG Multi-Picture Format (MPO, extension .mpo) is a JPEG-based format for storing multiple images in a single file. It contains two or more JPEG files concatenated together. It also defines a JPEG APP2 marker segment for image description. Various devices use it to store 3D images, such as Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D W1, HTC Evo 3D, JVC GY-HMZ1U AVCHD/MVC extension camcorder, Nintendo 3DS, Panasonic Lumix DMC-TZ20, DMC-TZ30, DMC-TZ60, DMC-TS4 (FT4), and Sony DSC-HX7V. Other devices use it to store \"preview images\" that can be displayed on a TV.\nIn the last few years, due to the growing use of stereoscopic images, much effort has been spent by the scientific community to develop algorithms for stereoscopic image compression.\nImplementations.\nA very important implementation of a JPEG codec is the free programming library libjpeg of the Independent JPEG Group. It was first published in 1991 and was key for the success of the standard. This library was used in countless applications. The development went quiet in 1998; when libjpeg resurfaced with the 2009 version 7, it broke ABI compatibility with previous versions. Version 8 of 2010 introduced non-standard extensions, a decision criticized by the original IJG leader Tom Lane.\nlibjpeg-turbo, forked from the 1998 libjpeg 6b, improves on libjpeg with SIMD optimizations. Originally seen as a maintained fork of libjpeg, it has become more popular after the incompatible changes of 2009. In 2019, it became the ITU|ISO/IEC reference implementation as ISO/IEC 10918-7 and ITU-T T.873.\nISO/IEC Joint Photographic Experts Group maintains the other reference software implementation under the JPEG XT heading. It can encode both base JPEG (ISO/IEC 10918-1 and 18477\u20131) and JPEG XT extensions (ISO/IEC 18477 Parts 2 and 6\u20139), as well as JPEG-LS (ISO/IEC 14495). In 2016, \"JPEG on steroids\" was introduced as an option for the ISO JPEG XT reference implementation.\nThere is persistent interest in encoding JPEG in unconventional ways that maximize image quality for a given file size. In 2014, Mozilla created MozJPEG from libjpeg-turbo, a slower but higher-quality encoder intended for web images. In March 2017, Google released the open source project Guetzli, which trades off a much longer encoding time for smaller file size (similar to what Zopfli does for PNG and other lossless data formats).\nIn April 2024, Google introduced Jpegli, a new JPEG coding library that offers enhanced capabilities and a 35% compression ratio improvement at high quality compression settings, while the coding speed is comparable with MozJPEG.\nSuccessors.\nThe Joint Photographic Experts Group has developed several newer standards meant to complement or replace the functionality of the original JPEG format.\nJPEG LS.\nOriginating in 1993 and published as ISO-14495-1/ITU-T.87, JPEG LS offers a low-complexity lossless file format which was more efficient than JPEG's original lossless implementation. It also features a lossy mode close to lossless. Its functionality is largely limited to that, and largely shares the same limitations of the original JPEG in other aspects.\nJPEG 2000.\nJPEG 2000 was published as ISO/IEC 15444 in December 2000. It is based on a discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and was designed to completely replace the original JPEG standard and exceed it in every way. It allows up to 38 bits per colour channel and 16384 channels, more than any other format, with a multitude of colour spaces, and thus high dynamic range (HDR). Furthermore, it supports alpha transparency coding, billions-by-billions pixel images, which is also more than any other format, and lossless compression. It has significantly improved lossy compression ratio with significantly less visible artefacts at strong compression levels.\nJPEG XT.\nJPEG XT (ISO/IEC 18477) was published in June 2015; it extends base JPEG format with support for higher integer bit depths (up to 16 bit), high dynamic range imaging and floating-point coding, lossless coding, and alpha channel coding. Extensions are backward compatible with the base JPEG/JFIF file format and 8-bit lossy compressed image. JPEG XT uses an extensible file format based on JFIF. Extension layers are used to modify the JPEG 8-bit base layer and restore the high-resolution image. Existing software is forward compatible and can read the JPEG XT binary stream, though it would only decode the base 8-bit layer.\nJPEG XL.\nJPEG XL (ISO/IEC 18181) was published in 2021\u20132022. It replaces the JPEG format with a new DCT-based royalty-free format and allows efficient transcoding as a storage option for traditional JPEG images. The new format is designed to exceed the still image compression performance shown by HEIF HM, Daala and WebP. It supports billion-by-billion pixel images, up to 32-bit-per-component high dynamic range with the appropriate transfer functions (PQ and HLG), patch encoding of synthetic images such as bitmap fonts and gradients, animated images, alpha channel coding, and a choice of RGB/YCbCr/ICtCp color encoding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16010", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16010", "title": "Joseph Severn", "text": "English painter\nJoseph Severn (7 December 1793 \u2013 3 August 1879) was an English portrait and subject painter and a personal friend of the English poet John Keats. He exhibited portraits, Italian genre, literary and biblical subjects, and a selection of his paintings can today be found in some of the most important museums in London, including the National Portrait Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum and Tate Britain.\nBackground.\nThe eldest son of a music teacher, Severn was born in Hoxton, near London, and apprenticed at the age of 14 to William Bond, an engraver. Severn was one of seven children; two of his brothers, Thomas (1801\u20131881) and Charles (1806\u20131894), became professional musicians, and Severn himself was an adroit pianist. During his early years he practised portraiture as a miniaturist.\nEarly years in London 1815-1820.\nIn 1815, he was admitted to the Royal Academy Schools in London and exhibited his first work in oil, \"Hermia and Helena\", a subject from \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", along with a portrait miniature, \"J. Keats, Esq\", in the Royal Academy Exhibition of 1819. He probably first met the poet John Keats in the spring of 1816.\nIn 1819, Severn was awarded the gold medal of the Royal Academy for his painting \"Una and the Red Cross Knight in the Cave of Despair\" which was inspired by the epic poem The Faerie Queene by Edmund Spenser. It was the first time the prize had been awarded in eight years, and the painting was exhibited at the Academy in 1820. This award also allowed Severn to apply for a three years' travelling studentship, paid for by the Royal Academy. The painting was purchased by Lord Houghton, the first biographer of Keats; although it was recorded as sold by Christie's in June 1963, it has since disappeared from public view and there are no reproductions of it in the public domain.\nAccording to a new edition of Severn's letters and memoirs, Severn fathered an illegitimate child named Henry (b. 31 Aug 1819) about a year before leaving England for Italy. In 1826 there were plans for father and son to reunite, but Henry died, aged 11, before he could make the journey to Rome.\nJourney to Italy with John Keats, 1820\u20131821.\n On 17 September 1820, Severn set sail aboard the \"Maria Crowther\" from England to Italy with the English poet John Keats. Keats and Severn had known one another in England, but they were only passing acquaintances. Yet it was Severn who agreed to accompany the poet to Rome when all others could, or would, not. The trip was intended to cure Keats's lingering illness, which he suspected was tuberculosis; however, his friends and several doctors disagreed and urged him to spend some time in a warm climate. After a harrowing voyage, they arrived in the Bay of Naples on 21 October, only to be placed in quarantine for ten days. The two men remained in Naples for a week before travelling to Rome in a small carriage, where they arrived mid-November 1820 and met Keats's physician, Dr. James Clark. In Rome they lived in an apartment at number 26 Piazza di Spagna, just at the bottom right of the Spanish Steps and overlooking Bernini's Barcaccia fountain.\nSevern had left England against his father's wishes and with little money. In fact, his father was so incensed by his departure that, as Severn reported in a late memoir, \"in his insane rage he struck me a blow which fell me to the ground.\" He was never to see his father again. While in Rome during the winter of 1820-21, Severn wrote numerous letters about Keats to their mutual friends in England, in particular William Haslam and Charles Armitage Brown, who then shared them with other members of the Keats circle, including the poet's fianc\u00e9e, Fanny Brawne. These journal-letters now represent the only surviving account of the poet's final months and as a consequence are used as the primary historical source for biographers of Keats' last days.\nSevern nursed Keats until his death on 23 February 1821, three months after they had arrived in Rome. As he reported to John Taylor two weeks afterwards, \"Each day he would look up in the doctors face to discover how long he should live -- he would say -- \"how long will this posthumous life of mine last\"\u2014that look was more than we could ever bear\u2014the extreme brightness of his eyes\u2014with his poor pallid face\u2014were not earthly --\" Severn's ordeal was recognised by Keats himself, who, a month before his death, said, \"Severn I can see under your quiet look -- immense twisting and contending -- you dont know what you are reading -- you are induring [\"sic\"] for me more than I'd have you -- O! that my last hour was come --\" He was later thanked for his devotion by the poet Percy B. Shelley in the preface to his elegy, Adonais, which was written for Keats in 1821. It was also at this time that Severn met, among other notables, the sculptors John Gibson and Antonio Canova, and Lord Byron's friend, the adventurer Edward John Trelawny. Severn made a sketch of Trelawny in 1838.\nLife and work after the death of Keats.\nUntil recently, it was believed that Severn's life culminated in his association with Keats and that he lived on this fame for the rest of his long life. In reality, Severn launched his own successful artistic career soon after Keats died, becoming a versatile painter in Rome during the 1820s and 1830s. He painted miniatures and altarpieces, landscapes and frescoes, historical and religious scenes, and subjects from the Bible, Greek mythology and Shakespeare. His pictures of Italian peasant life and pastoral genre scenes became very popular with British visitors on the continent and attracted many commissions for his work.\nSevern was also instrumental in helping to found the British Academy of Arts in Rome, which drew the support of such influential figures as the Duke of Devonshire, John Flaxman and Sir Thomas Lawrence. Severn's spacious apartment in the Via di San Isidoro became the busy centre of Academy life. Among those who joined the academy were Charles Eastlake, Richard Westmacott (the younger), William Bewick and Thomas Uwins. Perhaps the most dedicated patron of Severn's work in the 1830s was William Gladstone, who was drawn to Severn more for his reputation as a painter than as Keats's friend.\nOn his return to England in 1841 Severn fell on hard times, trying desperately to earn enough money to support his growing family by painting portraits. Although he was never able to match his early artistic success in Rome and eventually had to flee his creditors for the Isle of Jersey in 1853, between 1819 and 1857, Severn exhibited 53 paintings at the Royal Academy in London.\nIn 1861, Severn was appointed British Consul in Rome during the ferment over Italian unification. A few months before his arrival Garibaldi had seized the Kingdom of Naples, and all of Southern Italy and Sicily had been annexed to the new Kingdom of Italy. Many of the kingdoms, principalities and dukedoms in the Italian peninsula had come together under the leadership of Victor Emmanuel II, but Rome and its surroundings remained as the rump of the Papal States. This was the case throughout the majority of Severn's tenure as Consul, as Pope Pius IX managed to retain a fragile hold on power, relying on a garrison of French troops to control Rome. Although the official position of the British government on \"The Roman Question\" was neutrality and nonintervention, Severn often took diplomatic action that his superiors viewed as exceeding his mandate as Consul. On several occasions, such as when he used his office to liberate Italian political prisoners in 1864, he was rebuked by the Foreign Office. His knowledge of the Italian language and his affability and good humour, however, often helped in mediating between the papal regime and the British government. He welcomed British visitors to Rome, such as Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning, telling them about the time he nursed Keats, and he was able on many occasions to offer advice and protection for British visitors who found themselves in awkward scrapes. He eventually retired as Consul in 1872.\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1828 Severn married Elizabeth Montgomerie, the natural (i.e. illegitimate) daughter of Archibald, Lord Montgomerie (1773\u20131814) and the ward of the Countess of Westmoreland, one of the artist's patrons in Rome. Together they had seven children, three of whom became noteworthy artists: Walter and Arthur Severn, and Ann Mary Newton, who married the archeologist and Keeper of Antiquities at the British Museum, Charles Thomas Newton. Mary had a successful painting career in England, supporting the family for a time, and executing a number of portraits of the Royal Family. Her early death from measles at the age of 32 affected Severn. In 1871, Arthur Severn married Joan Ruskin Agnew, a cousin of the Victorian art and social critic John Ruskin. The Severns had another child, Arthur, who died as an infant in a crib accident. He is buried between Keats and Severn in the Protestant Cemetery in Rome.\nDeath.\nSevern died on 3 August 1879 at the age of 85, and was buried in the Protestant Cemetery alongside John Keats. Both gravestones are still standing today. Shelley and Trelawny are also buried side by side in the same cemetery.\nPaintings.\nSevern is best known for his many portraits of Keats, the most famous being the miniature portrait in The Fitzwilliam Museum (1819), the pen-and-ink sketch, \"Keats on his Deathbed\" (1821), in the Keats-Shelley house, Rome, and the oil painting of the poet reading, \"John Keats at Wentworth Place\" (1821\u201323), in the National Portrait Gallery. A later painting, \"Keats, at Hampstead, when he first imagined his Ode to a Nightingale\" (1849), now at Keats House, is also notable. In the 1860s Severn produced a number of copies and memory portraits as Keats' reputation continued to grow. The most influential of Severn's early Italian genre paintings are \"The Vintage\", commissioned by the Duke of Bedford in 1825, and \"The Fountain\" (Royal Palace, Brussels) commissioned by Leopold I of Belgium in 1826. The latter picture probably influenced J. M. W. Turner's major work, \"View of Orvieto\". One of his most remarkably inventive works is the \"Rime of the Ancient Mariner\" (1839), based on Samuel Coleridge's famous poem, which recently sold at Sotheby's for \u00a332,400. Another historical subject, \"The Abdication of Mary, Queen of Scots\", sold for \u00a3115,250 at Sotheby's Gleneagles sale on 26 August 2008.\nSevern also painted such works as \"Cordelia Watching by the Bed of Lear\", \"Shepherds in the Campagna\", \"Shelley Composing Prometheus Unbound\", \"Isabella and the Pot of Basil\", \"Portia with the Casket\", \"Ariel\", \"Rienzi\", \"The Infant of the Apocalypse Saved from the Dragon\", a large altarpiece for the church of San Paolo fuori le Mura at Rome, and many portraits of statesman and aristocrats, including Baron Bunsen and William Gladstone. The last picture he exhibited at the Royal Academy was a scene from Oliver Goldsmith's \"The Deserted Village\" in 1857.\nBiographies and books.\nIn 1892 the first significant collection of Severn's papers was published by William Sharp in \"The Life and Letters of Joseph Severn\". Modern critics have cast doubt on the accuracy of Sharp's transcriptions and noted important omissions and embellishments.\nIn 1965, Sheila Birkenhead published \"Illustrious Friends: The story of Joseph Severn and his son Arthur\".\nIn 2005, Grant F. Scott published \"Joseph Severn: Letters and Memoirs\" in which he re-edited the original material, added hundreds of newly discovered letters, included numerous reproductions of Severn's paintings, and prefaced this material with a critical introduction and commentary.\nIn 2009, Sue Brown published the biography \"Joseph Severn, A Life: The Rewards of Friendship\" using Scott's new information to provide a reassessment of Severn's character, his friendship with Keats, and his own subsequent artistic and diplomatic career.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16011", "revid": "43378583", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16011", "title": "January 19", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 19 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16012", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16012", "title": "John Paul Stapp", "text": ""}
{"id": "16014", "revid": "1305337703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16014", "title": "Jetsprint", "text": "Form of motorboat racing\nJetsprint or sprint boat racing is a form of motorboat racing in which jetboats, with a crew of two, race individually against the clock through a twisting series of channels in less than a metre of water.\nTracks are typically designed for spectators, and racing is fast and loud, with boat motors usually powered by V8s developing well over 500\u00a0hp.\nHistory.\nJetsprinting as an organised sport originated in New Zealand in 1981 by Pat Quinn and his wife, Margaret. Margaret spectated jet boat Marathons which Pat competed in, but wanted to see more of the race, suggesting a smaller, more condensed track. Events were originally held in the same natural braided rivers that had inspired Sir William Hamilton to develop the jetboat, but when the sport was introduced to Australia in the mid-1980s, permanent artificial courses were used\u2014and this is now the norm even in New Zealand.\nThere is now a world championship under the auspices of the Union Internationale Motonautique, with hosting rotating between New Zealand, Australia and the U.S.A.\nFormat.\nThe race itself consists of a predefined course through the channels with 25 to 30 changes of direction. These races generally take just 45\u201360 seconds. Once qualifying is completed, the competitors each run the course with the fastest qualifiers running last. The fastest 16 (typically depending on the number of competitions) proceed to the next round. This is then reduced to the top 12, Top 8 then the top 5 and finally the fastest three.\nBoats.\nA jetsprint hull is typically short - just 3.8 to 4.0 metres (12\u00bd to 13 feet) long. The hull's vee is usually 23 to 25 degrees with several strakes on each side. A short hull is preferred, as a longer hull takes more distance to turn and usually must be turned at a slower speed. The strakes provide \"traction' by stopping the boat from sliding sideways across the water when turning at high speed.\nA rollcage must be fitted to the boat.\nCrew.\nA crew consists of the driver and a navigator, whose responsibility is to guide the driver through the course - typically via simple hand signals, pointing the hand in the direction that the boat must go at the next intersection.\nClasses.\nThere are two internationally recognised classes\nGroup A - engines in Group A boats are restricted to either 6.7-litre (412 cubic inch) engines with cast iron blocks and heads, or 6-litre (365 cubic inch) engines with aluminium heads. Both engines are only allowed two push-rod operated valves per cylinder. Furthermore, the engine must be normally aspirated, using a four-barrel carburetor. Fuel is 100+ octane aviation fuel. Typically these engines produce up to 650 horsepower\nSuper Boats - engines in the Super Boat class have no maximum size, but instead have a minimum size restriction. Normally aspirated engines must have a displacement of 6.5 litres (400 cubic inches), while forced induction (turbocharged or supercharged) engines must be at least 3.8 liters (235 cubic inches) in displacement. These engines typically are fuel injected and run methanol fuel. The small-block engines typically produce 950+ horsepower, while the big blocks can produce between 1000 and 1600 horsepower.\nNitromethane and nitrous oxide are not allowed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16016", "revid": "16218039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16016", "title": "Jainism", "text": "Indian religion\nJainism ( ), also known as Jain Dharma, is an Indian religion which teaches a path toward spiritual purity and enlightenment through disciplined non-violence (') to all living creatures. The tradition is spiritually guided by twenty-four ' (ford-makers), supreme teachers who have conquered the cycle of rebirth and attained omniscience ('). The core of Jain philosophy is established on three ethical pillars: ' (nonviolence), ' (non-absolutism or many-sided reality), and ' (non-possession). While its ultimate spiritual goal is ' (liberation from '), these ethical principles have historically fostered a community renowned for its high literacy, trusted role in commerce, and distinct intellectual culture.\nJain philosophy distinguishes itself through the doctrine of ', which asserts that truth and reality are complex and always have multiple aspects; thus, no single viewpoint can claim absolute truth. This framework encourages intellectual humility and conflict resolution, contrasting with the \"one-sided\" (') views rejected by the tradition. Ethically, the vow of ' (non-attachment) requires monks to renounce all property, while encouraging laypersons to limit their possessions and voluntarily limit their desires ('). Historically, the application of non-violence drove the Jain community away from agriculture and warfare toward trade and banking, where they became a dominant mercantile force in ancient and medieval India, supporting a vast network of temples, libraries, and charitable institutions.\nThe tradition views itself as eternal, with the guiding every cosmic time cycle. In the current cycle, the first ' was \"Rishabhanatha\", credited in tradition with establishing civilized society. The 23rd ', P\u0101r\u015bvan\u0101tha, is dated by historians to the c.\u20098th or 7th century BCE, making him likely the earliest historical figure of the tradition. The 24th and final ', Mahavira c.\u20096th or 5th century BCE, was a contemporary of the Buddha and a central figure in the ' movement of Greater Magadha, which rejected the authority of the Vedas and established the current ascetic order.\nJainism has between four and five million followers, known as Jains or Jainas, residing mostly in India, with significant diaspora communities in North America, Europe, and East Asia. The community is divided into two major sub-traditions, the ' (\"sky-clad\") and ' (\"white-clad\"), which differ on ascetic practices, gender, and canonical texts, though they share the same core philosophy. Despite their small numbers, Jains have exerted a disproportionate influence on Indian culture, contributing significantly to the development of logic, art, architecture, and the legal and ethical frameworks of modern India. Major festivals include ' or ', ', ', and \"\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Jainism\" comes from \"ji\" (Sanskrit), \"to conquer,\" referring to the battle against the passions and bodily desires, aiming to reach omniscience. Those few who accomplish this are called \"jina\", \"conqueror.\" Adherents are called \"jain\" or \"jaina\", \"follower of the conquerors,\" a term which replaced the older name \"nirgrantha\", bondless, which was only used for ascetic wanderers.\nFollowers of Jainism are called \"Jains\", a word derived from the Sanskrit verbal root \"ji\", which means to conquer. In the Jain context, monks have to conquer their senses and karma for liberation. Those who have succeeded are \"jinas\" (victors), which means an omniscient person who teaches the path of salvation, and their followers are Jains.\nJain Doctrine and Philosophy.\n\"Ratnatraya\" (The Three Jewels).\nIts salvational goal for ascetics is to reach \"moksha\" (liberation), while for most Jain laypersons it is to accumulate good \"karma\" that leads to better rebirth and a step closer to liberation. Purification of soul and liberation can be achieved through the three jewels (\"ratnatraya\"): \"samyak dar\u015bana\", right vision or faith in the Jain teachings or scriptures, more specifically the seven tattvas; \"samyak gyana\", right knowledge and understanding of the Jain teachings, more specifically of self (\"jiva\") and non-self (\"ajiva\"); and \"samyak charitra\", correct conduct, behavior consistent with these teachinngs and the five vows. Jain texts often add \"samyak tapas\" (correct asceticism) as a fourth jewel, emphasizing belief in ascetic practices as the means to liberation (moksha). The four jewels are called \"Moksha Marga\" (the path of liberation).\nThe core of Jainism is also summarized in the three tenets of ' (nonviolence), ' (asceticism), and \"\", a rejection of all simplistic and one-sided views of truth and reality.\nCore Principles (The Vows).\nJainism teaches five ethical duties, which it calls five vows. These are called \"anuvratas\" (small vows) for Jain laypersons, and \"mahavratas\" (great vows) for Jain mendicants. For both, its moral precepts preface that the Jain has access to a \"guru\" (teacher, counsellor), \"deva\" (Jina, god), doctrine, and that the individual is free from five offences: doubts about the faith, indecisiveness about the truths of Jainism, insincerity of desire for Jain teachings, non-recognition of fellow Jains, and insufficient admiration of fellow Jains' spiritual endeavors. Such a person undertakes the following Five vows of Jainism:\nJainism prescribes seven supplementary vows, including three \"gu\u0146a vratas\" (merit vows) and four \"\u015bik\u015f\u0101 vratas\". The \"Sallekhana\" (or \"Santhara\") vow is a \"religious death\" ritual observed at the end of life, historically by Jain monks and nuns, but rare in the modern age. In this vow, there is voluntary and gradual reduction of food and liquid intake to end one's life by choice and with dispassion, This is believed to reduce negative karma that affects a soul's future rebirths.\n\"Ahimsa\" - non-violence.\nThe principle of \"ahimsa\" (non-violence or non-injury) is a fundamental tenet of Jainism. It holds that one must abandon all violent activity and that without such a commitment to non-violence all religious behavior is worthless. In Jain theology, it does not matter how correct or defensible the violence may be, one must not kill or harm any being, and non-violence is the highest religious duty. Jain texts such as \"\u0100c\u0101r\u0101\u1e45ga S\u016btra\" and \"Tattvarthas\u016btra\" state that one must renounce all killing of living beings, whether tiny or large, movable or immovable. Its theology teaches that one must neither kill another living being, nor cause another to kill, nor consent to any killing directly or indirectly.\nFurthermore, Jainism emphasizes non-violence against all beings not only in action but also in speech and in thought. It states that instead of hate or violence against anyone, \"all living creatures must help each other\".\nJains believe that violence negatively affects and destroys one's soul, particularly when the violence is done with intent, hate or carelessness, or when one indirectly causes or consents to the killing of a human or non-human living being.\nThe doctrine exists in Hinduism and Buddhism, but is most highly developed in Jainism. The theological basis of non-violence as the highest religious duty has been interpreted by some Jain scholars not to \"be driven by merit from giving or compassion to other creatures, nor a duty to rescue all creatures\", but resulting from \"continual self-discipline\", a cleansing of the soul that leads to one's own spiritual development which ultimately affects one's salvation and release from rebirths. Jains believe that causing injury to any being in any form creates bad karma which affects one's rebirth, future well-being and causes suffering.\nLate medieval Jain scholars re-examined the \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\" doctrine when faced with external threat or violence. For example, they justified violence by monks to protect nuns. According to Dundas, the Jain scholar Jinadattasuri wrote during a time of destruction of temples and persecution that \"anybody engaged in a religious activity who was forced to fight and kill somebody would not lose any spiritual merit but instead attain deliverance\".\nHowever, examples in Jain texts that condone fighting and killing under certain circumstances are relatively rare.\n\"Aparigraha\" - non-attachment.\nThe third main principle in Jainism is \"aparigraha\" which means non-attachment to worldly possessions. For monks and nuns, Jainism requires a vow of complete non-possession of any property, relations and emotions. The ascetic is a wandering mendicant in the Digambara tradition, or a resident mendicant in the \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara tradition. For Jain laypersons, it recommends limited possession of property that has been honestly earned, and giving excess property to charity. According to Natubhai Shah, \"aparigraha\" applies to both the material and the psychic. Material possessions refer to various forms of property. Psychic possessions refer to emotions, likes and dislikes, and attachments of any form. Unchecked attachment to possessions is said to result in direct harm to one's personality.\nMetaphysics and Cosmology.\nJain metaphysics explains the nature of the universe and its interaction with the soul (\"jiva\"). It posits that the soul is an eternal entity that is separate from the body and the physical world. Their interaction is what defines the cycle of rebirth (\"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\").\nSoul and karma.\nAccording to Jain beliefs, vibrational energy (\"virya\") draws karmic particles to the soul and creates bondages. Purification of soul from karmic particles and thereby liberation can be achieved through \"ratnatraya\", the path of the three jewels, namely \"samyak dar\u015bana\", correct faith in the Jain teachings; \"samyak gyana\", correct knowledge and understanding of those teachings; and \"samyak charitra\", correct conduct, behavior consistent with the five vows.\nJainism, like other Indian religions, believes in \"karma\", but with a unique and fundamental difference. It is the only tradition that conceives of \"karma\" as a physical, material substance \u2014 subtle, invisible particles of matter (\"pudgala\") that exist in the universe. These particles are drawn to the soul (\"jiva\") by its actions, thoughts, and words.\nThis \"\"karmic\" dirt\" then sticks to the soul, obscuring its innate, pure qualities of consciousness and bliss. This bondage of \"karma\" is the cause of the soul's entrapment in \"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" and its repeated cycles of birth and death.\nThe \"Tattvas\" (Fundamental Truths).\nThe \"tattvas\" are the seven (or nine) fundamental truths that form the basis of the entire Jain path. They describe the step-by-step process of \"karmic\" bondage and liberation:\nSome texts add two more categories, \"Punya\" (good \"karma\") and \"Paapa\" (bad \"karma\"), as sub-types of \"\u0100srava\" and \"Bandha\", making nine \"tattvas\" in total.\n\"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" (Cycle of Rebirth).\n\"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" is the doctrine of the worldly cycle of birth, death, and rebirth, through which the soul transmigrates based on its \"karma\". This cycle is considered the natural state of existence, but it is also one of suffering, and the ultimate aim of Jainism is liberation (\"Moksha\") from it.\nAccording to Jain tradition, souls can be reborn in one of four states of existence (\"gatis\"): as heavenly beings, humans, animals/plants, or hellish beings. Jain theosophy also describes a vast number of potential birth-situations, traditionally 8.4 million, through which the unliberated soul cycles. Jain philosophy also uniquely posits the existence of \"abhavya\" (incapable) souls, a category of souls that are eternally trapped in \"Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" and can never attain liberation.\nCosmology: Substance, Time, and Realms.\nJain cosmology views the universe as an uncreated, eternal, and self-sustaining entity. It was never created by a god and will never be destroyed.\nThis universe is composed of six eternal substances known as \"dravya\":\n\"K\u0101la\" (time) is itself conceived as a boundless, eternal wheel (\"k\u0101lachakra\") that rotates ceaselessly. It is divided into two half-cycles: an ascending arc (\"utsarpi\u1e47\u012b\") of progressive happiness and virtue, and a descending arc (\"avasarpi\u1e47\u012b\") of progressive sorrow and decline.\nThe universe itself is structurally divided into three realms, or \"lokas\": the \"Urdhva Loka\" (upper world of heavenly beings), the \"Madhya Loka\" (middle world of humans, animals, and plants), and the \"Adho Loka\" (lower world of hellish beings). All unliberated souls, including gods and demons, transmigrate through these three realms based on their karma.\nEpistemology (Philosophy of Knowledge).\nJain philosophy accepts three reliable means of knowledge (\"pramana\"). It holds that correct knowledge is based on perception (\"pratyaksa\"), inference (\"anumana\"), and testimony (\"sabda\" or the word of scriptures). These ideas are elaborated in Jain texts such as \"Tattvarthas\u016btra\", \"Parvacanasara\", \"Nandi\" and \"Anuyogadvarini\". Some Jain texts add analogy (\"upamana\") as the fourth reliable means, in a manner similar to epistemological theories found in other Indian religions.\nIn Jainism, \"jn\u0101na\" (knowledge) is said to be of five kinds\u2014\"mati j\u00f1\u0101na\" (sensory knowledge), \"\u015brutu j\u00f1\u0101na\" (scriptural knowledge), \"avadhi j\u00f1\u0101na\" (clairvoyance), \"manah pray\u0101ya J\u00f1\u0101na\" (telepathy) and \"kevala jnana\" (omniscience). According to the Jain text \"Tattvartha s\u016btra\", the first two are indirect knowledge, and the remaining three are direct knowledge.\n\"Anek\u0101ntav\u0101da\" - many-sided reality.\nThe second main principle of Jainism is \"anek\u0101ntav\u0101da\", from \"anek\u0101nta\" (\"many-sidedness,\" etymologically \"non-oneness\" or \"not being one\") and \"vada\" (\"doctrine\"). The doctrine states that truth and reality are complex and always have multiple aspects. It further states that reality can be experienced, but cannot be fully expressed with language. It suggests that human attempts to communicate are \"Naya\", \"partial expression of the truth\". According to it, one can experience the taste of truth, but cannot fully express that taste through language. It holds that attempts to express experience are \"sy\u0101t\", or valid \"in some respect\", but remain \"perhaps, just one perspective, incomplete\". It concludes that in the same way, spiritual truths can be experienced but not fully expressed. It suggests that the great error is belief in \"ek\u0101nta\" (one-sidedness), where some relative truth is treated as absolute. The doctrine is ancient, found in Buddhist texts such as the \"Sama\u00f1\u00f1aphala Sutta\". The Jain Agamas suggest that Mah\u0101v\u012bra's approach to answering all metaphysical philosophical questions was a \"qualified yes\" (\"sy\u0101t\"). These texts identify \"anek\u0101ntav\u0101da\" as a key difference from the Buddha's teachings. The Buddha taught the Middle Way, rejecting extremes of the answer \"it is\" or \"it is not\" to metaphysical questions. The Mah\u0101v\u012bra, in contrast, taught his followers to accept both \"it is\", and \"it is not\", qualified with \"perhaps\", to understand Absolute Reality. The permanent being is conceptualized as \"jiva\" (soul) and \"ajiva\" (matter) within a dualistic \"anek\u0101ntav\u0101da\" framework.\nAccording to Paul Dundas, in contemporary times the \"anek\u0101ntav\u0101da\" doctrine has been interpreted by some Jains as intending to \"promote a universal religious tolerance\", and a teaching of \"plurality\" and \"benign attitude to other [ethical, religious] positions\". Dundas states this is a misreading of historical texts and Mah\u0101v\u012bra's teachings. According to him, the \"many pointedness, multiple perspective\" teachings of the Mah\u0101v\u012bra is about the nature of absolute reality and human existence. He claims that it is not about condoning activities such as killing animals for food, nor violence against disbelievers or any other living being as \"perhaps right\". The five vows for Jain monks and nuns, for example, are strict requirements and there is no \"perhaps\" about them. Similarly, since ancient times, Jainism co-existed with Buddhism and Hinduism according to Dundas, but Jainism disagreed, in specific areas, with the knowledge systems and beliefs of these traditions, and vice versa.\nConcept of God (and Tirthankaras).\nJainism is a transtheistic religion, holding that the universe was not created, and will exist forever. The universe is independent, having no creator, governor, judge, or destroyer. In this, it is unlike the Abrahamic religions and the theistic strands of Hinduism, but similar to Buddhism. However, Jainism believes in the world of heavenly and hellish beings who are born, die, and reborn like earthly beings. The souls who live happily in the body of a heavenly celestial do so because of their positive karma. It is further stated that they possess a more transcendent knowledge about material things and can anticipate events in the human realms. However, once their past karmic merit is exhausted, it is explained that their souls are reborn again as humans, animals, or other beings. The perfect enlightened souls \"with\" a body are called \"Arihants\" (victors) and perfect souls \"without\" a body are called \"Siddhas\" (liberated souls). Only a soul with a human body can attain enlightenment and liberation. The liberated beings are the supreme beings and are worshipped by all heavenly, earthly, and hellish beings who aspire to attain liberation themselves.\nHistory.\nJainism is a religion founded in ancient India. Jains trace their history through twenty-four \"tirthankaras\" and revere Rishabhanatha as the first \"tirthankara\" (in the present time-cycle). Some artifacts found in the Indus River Valley civilization have been suggested as a link to ancient Jain culture, but very little is known about the Indus Valley iconography and script. The last two \"tirthankaras\", the 23rd \"tirthankara\" Parshvanatha (c. 9th\u20138th century BCE) and the 24th \"tirthankara\" Mahavira (c.\u2009599 \u2013 c.\u2009527 BCE) are historical figures. Mahavira was a contemporary of the Buddha. According to Jain texts, the 22nd \"Tirthankara\" Neminatha lived about 85,000 years ago and was the cousin of Krishna.\nOrigins: Parshvanatha and Mahavira.\nJainism is an ancient Indian religion of obscure origins. Jains claim it to be eternal, and consider the first \"tirthankara\" Rishabhanatha as the reinforcer of Jain Dharma in the current time cycle. It is one of the \"\u015arama\u1e47a\" traditions of ancient India, those that rejected the Vedas, and according to the twentieth-century scholar of comparative religion Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Jainism was in existence before the Vedas were composed.\nThe first twenty two tirthankaras are not considered by non-Jain scholars as historical figures. The 23rd Tirthankara, Parshvanatha, was likely a historical being, dated by the Jain tradition to the ninth century BCE; historians date him to the eighth or seventh century BCE. Parshvanatha may have founded a proto-Jain ascetic community which subsequently got revived and reformed by Mahavira.\nMah\u0101v\u012bra is considered a contemporary of the Buddha, in around the sixth or 5th century BCE. The interaction between the two religions began with the Buddha; later, they competed for followers and the merchant trade networks that sustained them. Buddhist and Jain texts sometimes have the same or similar titles but present different doctrines.\nKings Bimbisara (c.\u2009558\u2013491 BCE), Ajatashatru (c.\u2009492\u2013460 BCE), and Udayin (c.\u2009460\u2013440 BCE) of the Haryanka dynasty were patrons of Jainism. Jain tradition states that Chandragupta Maurya (322\u2013298 BCE), the founder of the Mauryan Empire and grandfather of Ashoka, became a monk and disciple of Jain ascetic Bhadrabahu in the later part of his life. Jain texts state that he died intentionally at Shravanabelagola by fasting.\nEpigraphic and Archaeological Evidence.\nThe historicity of Jainism is supported by epigraphic and archaeological evidence. The Hathigumpha Inscription at the Udayagiri Caves in Odisha, dated to the 2nd century BCE, is a key piece of early evidence. This inscription, from King Kharavela of Kalinga, details his patronage of Jain monks. It also provides a historical reference by mentioning the retrieval of a Jina idol taken from Kalinga by a Nanda dynasty king (c. 4th century BCE).\nAdditionally, excavations at Kankali Tila in Mathura have provided extensive archaeological evidence of an early Jain center. The site yielded numerous Jain stupas, statues, and \"ayagapatas\" (votive tablets) dating from the 2nd century BCE to the 2nd century CE. These tablets, commissioned by lay followers (\"\u015br\u0101vakas\"), represent early physical evidence of an organized \"sangha\" (community) that included monks, nuns, and laity.\nThe third century BCE emperor Ashoka, in his pillar edicts, mentions the \"Niganthas\" (Jains). \"Tirthankara\" statues date back to the second century BCE. Archeological evidence suggests that Mathura was an important Jain center from the second century BCE. onwards. Inscriptions from as early as the first century CE already show the schism between Digambara and \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara. There is inscriptional evidence for the presence of Jain monks in south India by the second or first centuries BCE, and archaeological evidence of Jain monks in Saurashtra in Gujarat by the second century CE.\nSects and Traditions (The Primary Division).\nThe Jain community is divided into two major denominations, \"Digambara\" and \"\u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara\". This schism is ancient and centers on differing monastic disciplines, canonical scriptures, and core doctrines (such as the liberation of women).\nThe Great Schism: Traditional Accounts.\nThe \"Digambara\" tradition places the origin of the schism around the 4th century BCE. According to their account, \"Acharya\" Bhadrabahu predicted a twelve-year famine in Magadha and led a migration of monks to Karnataka. Sthulabhadra, a pupil, remained behind with other monks. The Digambara tradition holds that Sthulabhadra's northern group relaxed the original practice of nudity and began wearing white clothes, which was unacceptable to the returning monks who had preserved the \"m\u016bla sangha\" (original community). In this view, the \"Digambaras\" preserved the original \"achailakya\" (nude) practice of Mahavira, while the \"Svetambaras\" adopted a more lax, clothed practice.\nThe earliest record of Digambara beliefs is contained in the Prakrit \"Suttapahuda\" of Kundakunda.\nThe \"Svetambara\" tradition, in texts like the \"Vi\u015be\u1e63\u0101va\u015byaka Bh\u0101\u1e63ya\" (5th cent. CE), places the schism much later. Their account states the \"Digambara\" sect arose 609 years after Mahavira's \"nirvana\" (c. 1st-2nd cent. CE), founded by a monk named Sivabhuti. The narrative states that Sivabhuti, in a \"fit of pique,\" adopted nudity, which his original tradition rejected. Svetambara texts accuse this new sect of \"eight concealments,\" including the rejection of the canonical texts preserved by their tradition and the new doctrine that women could not attain liberation. The \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara tradition in turn has two sub-traditions: Deravasi, also known as \"Mandirmargis\", and \"Sth\u0101nakavas\u012b\". \nScholarly Analysis and Solidification.\nMost modern scholars, such as Padmanabh Jaini and Paul Dundas, conclude that the schism was not a single \"event\" but a gradual hardening of differences over several centuries. Monastic nudity and the wearing of robes likely co-existed as acceptable monastic options for some time. Archaeological evidence from Mathura, for instance, shows nude \"tirthankara\" images from the Kushan Empire (c. 1st century CE).\nThe definitive, formal split is often associated with the Council of Vallabhi in the 5th century CE. This council was organized by the \"Svetambara\" tradition to formally codify their canonical scriptures (the \"Agamas\"). The \"Digambara\" tradition, which had its own (and different) scriptural canon, did not attend and rejected the authenticity of these texts, solidifying the schism.\nKey Doctrinal and Practical Differences.\nDigambaras and \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara differ in their practices and dress code, interpretations of teachings, and on Jain history especially concerning the \"tirthankaras\". Their monasticism rules differ, as does their iconography. \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara has had more female than male mendicants, where Digambara has mostly had male monks and considers males closest to the soul's liberation. The \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbaras believe that women can also achieve liberation through asceticism and state that the 19th \"Tirthankara\" M\u0101ll\u012bn\u0101tha was female, which Digambara rejects. Early Jain images from Mathura depict Digambara iconography until late fifth century CE where Svetambara iconography starts appearing.\nSeveral scholars and scriptures of other religions as well as those of their counterpart \u015avet\u0101mbara Jains criticize Digambara sect's practices of public nudity as well as their belief that women are incapable of attaining spiritual liberation.\nExcavations at Mathura revealed Jain statues from the time of the Kushan Empire (c.1st century CE). \"Tirthankara\" represented without clothes, and monks with cloth wrapped around the left arm, are identified as the \"Ardhaphalaka\" (half-clothed) mentioned in texts. The Yapaniyas, believed to have originated from the \"Ardhaphalaka\", followed Digambara nudity along with several \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara beliefs. In the modern era, according to Fl\u00fcgel, new Jain religious movements that are a \"primarily devotional form of Jainism\" have developed which resemble \"Jain Mahayana\" style devotionalism.\nMedieval Patronage and Decline.\nRoyal patronage has been a key factor in the growth and decline of Jainism. In the second half of the first century CE, Hindu kings of the Rashtrakuta dynasty sponsored major Jain cave temples. King Harshavardhana of the seventh century championed Jainism, Buddhism and all traditions of Hinduism. The Pallava King Mahendravarman I (600\u2013630 CE) converted from Jainism to Shaivism. His work \"Mattavilasa Prahasana\" ridicules certain Shaiva sects and the Buddhists and expresses contempt for Jain ascetics. The Yadava dynasty built many temples at the Ellora Caves between 700 and 1000 CE. King \u0100ma of the eighth century converted to Jainism, and the Jain pilgrimage tradition was well established in his era. Mularaja (10th century CE), the founder of the Chalukya dynasty, constructed a Jain temple, even though he was not a Jain. During the 11th century, Basava, a minister to the Jain Kalachuri king Bijjala, converted many Jains to the Lingayat Shaivite sect. The Lingayats destroyed Jain temples and adapted them to their use. The Hoysala King Vishnuvardhana (c.\u20091108\u20131152 CE) became a Vaishnavite under the influence of Ramanuja, and Vaishnavism then grew rapidly in what is now Karnataka.\nJainism faced persecution during and after the Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent. The scholarship in context of Jain relations with the ruler of Delhi Sultanate remains scarce, notwithstanding there were several instances of cordial relations of Jains with prominent rulers of the Sultanate. Alauddin Khalji (1296\u20131316), as attested by the Jain texts held discussions with Jain sages and once specially summoned Acharya Mahasena to Delhi. One more prominent Jain figure Acharya Ramachandra Suri was also honored by him. During his reign, his governor of Gujarat, Alp Khan permitted the reconstruction of the temples razed during earlier Muslim conquests and himself made huge donation for the renovation of Jain temples. Muhammad bin Tughluq (1325\u20131351) according to the Jain chronicles favoured the Jain scholars.\nThe Mughal emperors in general were influenced by the Jain scholars and made patronage and grants for their pilgrimage sites under Humayun (1540\u20131556), Akbar (1556\u20131605), Jahangir (1605\u20131627) and even Aurangzeb (1658\u20131707). Despite this, there were instances of religious bigotry during the Mughal rule towards Jains. Babur (1526\u20131530), the first Mughal emperor ordered the destruction of various Jain idols in Gwalior. In 1567, Akbar ravaged the fort of Chittor. After the conquest of the fort, Akbar ordered the destruction of several Jain shrines and temples in Chittor. Similarly there were instances of desecration of Jain religious shrines under Jahangir, Shah Jahan and most notably under Aurangzeb.\nThe Jain community were the traditional bankers and financiers, and this significantly impacted the Muslim rulers. However, they rarely were a part of the political power during the Islamic rule period of the Indian subcontinent.\nColonial era.\nA Gujarati Jain scholar, Virchand Gandhi, represented Jainism at the first World Parliament of Religions in 1893, held in America during the Chicago World's Fair. He worked to defend the rights of Jains and wrote and lectured extensively on Jainism.\nShrimad Rajchandra, a mystic, poet and philosopher from Gujarat is believed to have attained \"jatismaran gnana\" (ability to recollect past lives) at the age of seven. Virchand Gandhi mentioned this feat at the Parliament of the World's Religions. He is best known because of his association with Mahatma Gandhi. Shrimad Rajchandra composed Shri Atmasiddhi Shastra, considered his magnum opus, containing the essence of Jainism in a single sitting of 1.5\u20132 hours. He expounds on the six fundamental truths of the soul:\nColonial era reports and Christian missions variously viewed Jainism as a sect of Hinduism, a sect of Buddhism, or a distinct religion. Christian missionaries were frustrated at Jain people without pagan creator gods refusing to convert to Christianity, while colonial era Jain scholars such as Champat Rai Jain defended Jainism against criticism and misrepresentation by Christian activists. Missionaries of Christianity and Islam considered Jain traditions idolatrous and superstitious. These criticisms, states John E. Cort, were flawed and ignored similar practices within sects of Christianity.\nThe British colonial government in India and Indian princely states promoted religious tolerance. However, laws were passed that made roaming naked by anyone an arrestable crime. This drew popular support from the majority Hindu population, but particularly impacted Digambara monks. The Akhil Bharatiya Jain Samaj opposed this law, claiming that it interfered with Jain religious rights. Acharya Shantisagar entered Bombay (now Mumbai) in 1927, but was forced to cover his body. He then led an India-wide tour as the naked monk with his followers, to various Digambara sacred sites, and was welcomed by kings of the Maharashtra provinces. Shantisagar fasted to oppose the restrictions imposed on Digambara monks by the British Raj and prompted their discontinuance. The laws were abolished by India after independence.\nModern era.\nThe texts attributed to Kundakunda inspired two contemporary lay-movements within Jainism with his notion of two truths and his emphasis on direct insight into \"ni\u015bcayanaya\" or \u2018ultimate perspective\u2019, also called \u201csupreme\u201d (param\u0101rtha) and \u201cpure\u201d (\u015buddha). \nShrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901) was a Jain poet and mystic who was inspired by works of Kundakunda and Digambara mystical tradition. Nominally belonging to the Digambara tradition, his followers sometimes consider his teaching as a new path of Jainism, neither \u015avet\u0101mbara nor Digambara, and revere him as a saint. His path is sometimes referred as \"Raj Bhakta Marg\", \"Kavipanth\", or \"Shrimadiya\", which has mostly lay followers as was Rajchandra himself. His teachings influenced Kanji Swami, Dada Bhagwan, Rakesh Jhaveri (Shrimad Rajchandra Mission), Saubhagbhai, Lalluji Maharaj (Laghuraj Swami), Atmanandji and several other religious figures. \nKanji Panth is a lay movement founded by Kanji Swami (1890-1980). Nominally it belongs to the \u015avet\u0101mbara but is inspired by Kundakunda and Shrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901), though \"lacking a place in any Digambara ascetic lineage descending from Kundakunda.\" Kanji Swami has many followers in the Jain diaspora. They generally regard themselves simply as Digambara Jains, more popularly known as \"Mumukshu\", following the mystical tradition of Kundakunda and Pandit Todarmal. \nBauer notes that \"[in] recent years there has been a convergence of the Kanji Swami Panth and the Shrimad Rajcandra movement, part of trend toward a more eucumenical and less sectarian Jainism among educated, mobile Jains living overseas.\"\nThe Akram Vignan Movement established by Dada Bhagwan draws inspiration from teachings of Rajchandra and other Jain scriptures, though it is considered as a Jain-Vaishnava Hindu syncretistic movement.\nGreatly influenced by Shrimad Rajchandra, the leader of the campaign for Indian independence, Mahatma Gandhi stated regarding Jainism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No religion in the World has explained the principle of \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\" so deeply and systematically as is discussed with its applicability in every human life in Jainism. As and when the benevolent principle of \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\" or non-violence will be ascribed for practice by the people of the world to achieve their end of life in this world and beyond, Jainism is sure to have the uppermost status and Mah\u0101v\u012bra is sure to be respected as the greatest authority on \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\".\nChandanaji became the first Jain woman to receive the title of Acharya in 1987.\nPractices.\nThe Four-Fold Community (\"Caturvidha Sa\u1e45gha\").\nOf the major Indian religions, Jainism has had the strongest ascetic tradition. Ascetic life may include nakedness, symbolizing non-possession even of clothes, fasting, body mortification, and penance, to burn away past karma and stop producing new karma, both of which are believed essential for reaching \"siddha\" and \"moksha\" (\"liberation from rebirths\" and \"salvation\").\nJain texts like \"Tattvartha S\u016btra\" and \"Uttaradhyayana S\u016btra\" discuss austerities in detail. Six outer and six inner practices are oft-repeated in later Jain texts. Outer austerities include complete fasting, eating limited amounts, eating restricted items, abstaining from tasty foods, mortifying the flesh, and guarding the flesh (avoiding anything that is a source of temptation). Inner austerities include expiation, confession, respecting and assisting mendicants, studying, meditation, and ignoring bodily wants in order to abandon the body. Lists of internal and external austerities vary with the text and tradition. Asceticism is viewed as a means to control desires, and to purify the \"jiva\" (soul). According to tradition, the \"tirthankaras\" such as the Mah\u0101v\u012bra (Vardhamana) set an example by performing severe austerities for twelve years.\nMonastic organization, \"sangh\", has a four-fold order consisting of \"sadhu\" (male ascetics, \"muni\"), \"sadhvi\" (female ascetics, \"aryika\"), \"\u015br\u0101vaka\" (laymen), and \"\u015br\u0101vik\u0101\" (laywomen). The latter two support the ascetics and their monastic organizations called \"gacch\" or \"samuday\", in autonomous regional Jain congregations. Jain monastic rules have encouraged the use of mouth cover, as well as the \"Dandasan\" \u2013 a long stick with woolen threads \u2013 to gently remove ants and insects that may come in their path.\nIn Jainism, six essential duties (\"avashyakas\") are prescribed for \"\u015br\u0101vakas\" (householders). The six duties are:\nThese duties became fundamental ritual activities of a Jain householder. Such as spreading the grain for the birds in the morning, and filtering or boiling the water for the next few hours' use became ritual acts of charity and non-violence. \"Samayika\" was used as a word for all spiritual activity including icon worship during medieval times.\n\"Ahimsa\" in Practice: The Jain Diet.\nThe practice of non-violence towards all living beings has led to Jain culture being vegetarian. Devout Jains practice lacto-vegetarianism, meaning that they eat no eggs, but accept dairy products if there is no violence against animals during their production. Veganism is encouraged if there are concerns about animal welfare. Jain monks, nuns and some followers avoid root vegetables such as potatoes, onions, and garlic because tiny organisms are injured when the plant is pulled up, and because a bulb or tuber's ability to sprout is seen as characteristic of a higher living being. Jain monks and advanced lay people avoid eating after sunset, observing a vow of \"ratri-bhojana-tyaga-vrata\". Monks observe a stricter vow by eating only once a day.\nJains fast particularly during festivals. This practice is called \"upavasa\", \"tapasya\" or \"vrata\", and may be practiced according to one's ability. Digambaras fast for \"Dasa-laksana-parvan\", eating only one or two meals per day, drinking only boiled water for ten days, or fasting completely on the first and last days of the festival, mimicking the practices of a Jain mendicant for the period. \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara Jains do similarly in the eight day \"paryusana\" with \"samvatsari-pratikramana\". The practice is believed to remove karma from one's soul and provides merit (\"punya\"). A \"one day\" fast lasts about 36 hours, starting at sunset before the day of the fast and ending 48 minutes after sunrise the day after. Among laypeople, fasting is more commonly observed by women, as it shows their piety and religious purity, gains merit earning and helps ensure future well-being for their family. Some religious fasts are observed in a social and supportive female group. Long fasts are celebrated by friends and families with special ceremonies.\nMeditation - \"s\u0101m\u0101yika\".\nJainism considers meditation (\"dhyana\") a necessary practice, but it never has been a central practice. In Jainism, meditation is concerned more with stopping karmic attachments and activity, not as a means to transformational insights or self-realization in other Indian religions. \nAccording to Padmanabh Jaini, \"S\u0101m\u0101yika\" is a practice of \"brief periods in meditation\" in Jainism that is a part of \"siksavrata\" (ritual restraint). The goal of \"S\u0101m\u0101yika\" is to achieve equanimity, and it is the second \"siksavrata\". The \"samayika\" ritual is practiced at least three times a day by mendicants, while a layperson includes it with other ritual practices such as \"Puja\" in a Jain temple and doing charity work. According to Johnson, as well as Jaini, \"samayika\" connotes more than meditation, and for a Jain householder is the voluntary ritual practice of \"assuming temporary ascetic status\".\nDevotion, Worship, and Prayer.\nThere are many rituals in Jainism's various sects. According to Dundas, the ritualistic lay path among \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara Jains is \"heavily imbued with ascetic values\", where the rituals either revere or celebrate the ascetic life of tirthankaras, or progressively approach the psychological and physical life of an ascetic. The ultimate ritual is \"sallekhana\", a religious death through ascetic abandonment of food and drinks. The Digambara Jains follow the same theme, but the life cycle and religious rituals are closer to a Hindu liturgy. The overlap is mainly in the life cycle (rites-of-passage) rituals, and likely developed because Jain and Hindu societies overlapped, and rituals were viewed as necessary and secular.\nJains ritually worship numerous deities, especially the \"Jinas\". In Jainism a \"Jina\" as \"deva\" is not an avatar (incarnation), but the highest state of omniscience that an ascetic \"tirthankara\" achieved. Out of the 24 tirthankaras, Jains predominantly worship four: Mah\u0101v\u012bra, Parshvanatha, Neminatha and Rishabhanatha. Among the non-\"tirthankara\" saints, devotional worship is common for Bahubali among the Digambaras. The \"Panch Kalyanaka\" rituals remember the five life events of the \"tirthankaras\", including the \"Panch Kalyanaka Pratishtha Mahotsava\", \"Panch Kalyanaka Puja\" and \"Snatrapuja\".\nThe basic ritual is \"darsana\" (seeing) of \"deva\", which includes Jina, or other yaksas, gods and goddesses such as Brahmadeva, 52 Viras, Padmavati, Ambika and 16 Vidyadevis (including Sarasvati and Lakshmi). Terapanthi Digambaras limit their ritual worship to tirthankaras. The worship ritual is called \"devapuja\", and is found in all Jain sub-traditions. Typically, the Jain layperson enters the Derasar (Jain temple) inner sanctum in simple clothing and bare feet with a plate filled with offerings, bows down, says the namaskar, completes his or her litany and prayers, sometimes is assisted by the temple priest, leaves the offerings and then departs.\nJain practices include performing \"abhisheka\" (ceremonial bath) of the images. Some Jain sects employ a \"pujari\" (also called \"upadhye\"), who may be a Hindu, to perform priestly duties at the temple. More elaborate worship includes offerings such as rice, fresh and dry fruits, flowers, coconut, sweets, and money. Some may light up a lamp with camphor and make auspicious marks with sandalwood paste. Devotees also recite Jain texts, particularly the life stories of the tirthankaras.\nTraditional Jains, like Buddhists and Hindus, believe in the efficacy of mantras and that certain sounds and words are inherently auspicious, powerful and spiritual. The most famous of the mantras, broadly accepted in various sects of Jainism, is the \"five homage\" (\"panca namaskara\") mantra which is believed to be eternal and existent since the first tirthankara's time. Medieval worship practices included making tantric diagrams of the \"Rishi-mandala\" including the \"tirthankaras\". The Jain tantric traditions use mantra and rituals that are believed to accrue merit for rebirth realms.\nFestivals.\nThe most important annual Jain festival is called the \"Paryushana\" by Svetambaras and \"Dasa lakshana parva\" by the Digambaras. It is celebrated from the 12th day of the waning moon in the traditional lunisolar month of Bhadrapada in the Indian calendar. This typically falls in August or September of the Gregorian calendar. It lasts eight days for Svetambaras, and ten days among the Digambaras. It is a time when lay people fast and pray. The five vows are emphasized during this time. Svetambaras recite the \"Kalpas\u016btras\", while Digambaras read their own texts. The festival is an occasion where Jains make active effort to stop cruelty towards other life forms, freeing animals in captivity and preventing the slaughter of animals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForgiveness\n&lt;poem&gt;\nI forgive all living beings,\nmay all living beings forgive me.\nAll in this world are my friends,\nI have no enemies.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n\u2014 \"Jain festival prayer on the last day\"\nThe last day involves a focused prayer and meditation session known as \"Samvatsari\". Jains consider this a day of atonement, granting forgiveness to others, seeking forgiveness from all living beings, physically or mentally asking for forgiveness and resolving to treat everyone in the world as friends. Forgiveness is asked by saying \"\"Micchami Dukkadam\" or \"Khamat khamna\"\" to others. This means, \"If I have offended you in any way, knowingly or unknowingly, in thought, word or action, then I seek your forgiveness.\" The literal meaning of \"Paryushana\" is \"abiding\" or \"coming together\".\nMahavir Janma Kalyanak celebrates the birth of Mah\u0101v\u012bra. It is celebrated on the 13th day of the lunisolar month of Chaitra in the traditional Indian calendar. This typically falls in March or April of the Gregorian calendar. The festivities include visiting Jain temples, pilgrimages to shrines, reading Jain texts and processions of Mah\u0101v\u012bra by the community. At his legendary birthplace of Kundagrama in Bihar, north of Patna, special events are held by Jains. The next day of Dipawali is observed by Jains as the anniversary of Mah\u0101v\u012bra's attainment of \"moksha\". The Hindu festival of Diwali is also celebrated on the same date (\"Kartika Amavasya\"). Jain temples, homes, offices, and shops are decorated with lights and \"diyas\" (small oil lamps). The lights are symbolic of knowledge or removal of ignorance. Sweets are often distributed. On Diwali morning, \"Nirvan Ladoo\" is offered after praying to Mah\u0101v\u012bra in all Jain temples across the world. The Jain new year starts right after Diwali. Some other festivals celebrated by Jains are Akshaya Tritiya and Raksha Bandhan, similar to those in the Hindu communities.\nScriptures and texts.\nJain canonical scriptures are called \"Agamas\". They are believed to have been verbally transmitted, much like the ancient Buddhist and Hindu texts, and to have originated from the sermons of the \"tirthankaras\", whereupon the \"Ganadharas\" (chief disciples) transmitted them as \"\u015ahrut Jn\u0101na\" (heard knowledge). The spoken scriptural language is believed to be \"Ardhamagadhi\" by the \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara Jains, and a form of sonic resonance by the Digambara Jains.\nThe \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbaras believe that they have preserved 45 of the 50 original Jain scriptures (having lost an Anga text and four Purva texts), while the Digambaras believe that all were lost, and that \u0100ch\u0101rya Bhutabali was the last ascetic who had partial knowledge of the original canon. According to them, Digambara \"\u0100ch\u0101ryas\" recreated the oldest-known Digambara Jain texts, including the four \"anuyoga\". The Digambara texts partially agree with older \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara texts, but there are also gross differences between the texts of the two major Jain traditions. The Digambaras created a secondary canon between 600 and 900 CE, compiling it into four groups or \"Vedas\": history, cosmography, philosophy and ethics.\nThe most popular and influential texts of Jainism have been its non-canonical literature. Of these, the \"Kalpa S\u016btras\" are particularly popular among \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbaras, which they attribute to Bhadrabahu (c. 300 BCE). This ancient scholar is revered in the Digambara tradition, and they believe he led their migration into the ancient south Karnataka region and created their tradition. \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbaras believe instead that Bhadrabahu moved to Nepal. Both traditions consider his \"Niryuktis\" and \"Samhitas\" important. The earliest surviving Sanskrit text by Umaswati, the \"Tattvarthas\u016btra\" is considered authoritative by all traditions of Jainism. In the Digambara tradition, the texts attributed to Kundakunda are highly revered and have been historically influential, while the oldest being \"Kasayapahuda\" and \"Shatkhandagama\" attributed to Acharya pushpdanta and Bhutbali. Other important Digambara Jain texts include: \"Samayasara\", \"Ratnakaranda \u015br\u0101vak\u0101c\u0101ra\", and \"Niyamasara\".\nThe Digambara-texts attributed to Kundakunda inspired Shrimad Rajchandra (1867-1901), who in turn influenced Kanji Swami (Kanji Path), Dada Bhagwan, Rakesh Jhaveri (Shrimad Rajchandra Mission), Saubhagbhai, Lalluji Maharaj (Laghuraj Swami), Atmanandji and several other religious figures. According to Bauer, \"[in] recent years there has been a convergence of the Kanji Swami Panth and the Shrimad Rajcandra movement, part of trend toward a more eucumenical and less sectarian Jainism among educated, mobile Jains living overseas.\"\nCulture (Art, Architecture).\nJainism has contributed significantly to Indian art and architecture. Jain arts depict life legends of \"tirthankara\" or other important people, particularly with them in a seated or standing meditative posture. \"Yakshas\" and \"yakshinis\", attendant spirits who guard the \"tirthankara\", are usually shown with them. The earliest known Jain image is in the Patna museum. It is dated approximately to the third century BCE. Bronze images of P\u0101r\u015bva can be seen in the Prince of Wales Museum, Mumbai, and in the Patna museum; these are dated to the second century BCE.\n\"Ayagapata\" is a type of votive tablet used in Jainism for donation and worship in the early centuries. These tablets are decorated with objects and designs central to Jain worship such as the \"stupa\", \"dharmacakra\" and \"triratna\". They present simultaneous trends or image and symbol worship. Numerous such stone tablets were discovered during excavations at ancient Jain sites like Kankali Tila near Mathura in Uttar Pradesh, India. The practice of donating these tablets is documented from first century BCE to the third century CE. \"Samavasarana\", a preaching hall of \"tirthankaras\" with various beings concentrically placed, is an important theme of Jain art.\nThe Jain tower in Chittor, Rajasthan, is a good example of Jain architecture. Decorated manuscripts are preserved in Jain libraries, containing diagrams from Jain cosmology. Most of the paintings and illustrations depict historical events, known as \"Panch Kalyanaka\", from the life of the \"tirthankara\". Rishabha, the first \"tirthankara\", is usually depicted in either the lotus position or \"kayotsarga\", the standing position. He is distinguished from other \"tirthankara\" by the long locks of hair falling to his shoulders. Bull images also appear in his sculptures. In paintings, incidents from his life, like his marriage and Indra marking his forehead, are depicted. Other paintings show him presenting a pottery bowl to his followers; he is also seen painting a house, weaving, and being visited by his mother Marudevi. Each of the twenty-four \"tirthankara\" is associated with distinctive emblems, which are listed in such texts as \"Tiloyapannati\", \"Kahavaali\" and \"Pravacanasaarodhara\".\nTemples.\nA Jain temple, a \"Derasar\" or \"Basadi\", is a place of worship. Temples contain \"tirthankara\" images, some fixed, others moveable. These are stationed in the inner sanctum, one of the two sacred zones, the other being the main hall. One of the images is marked as the \"moolnayak\" (primary deity). A \"manastambha\" (column of honor) is a pillar that is often constructed in front of Jain temples. Temple construction is considered a meritorious act.\nAncient Jain monuments include the Udaigiri Hills near Bhelsa (Vidisha) and Pataini temple in Madhya Pradesh, the Ellora in Maharashtra, the Palitana temples in Gujarat, and the Jain temples at Dilwara Temples near Mount Abu, Rajasthan. Chaumukha temple in Ranakpur is considered one of the most beautiful Jain temples and is famous for its detailed carvings. According to Jain texts, Shikharji is the place where twenty of the twenty-four Jain \"T\u012brtha\u1e45karas\" along with many other monks attained \"moksha\" (died without being reborn, with their soul in \"Siddhashila\"). The Shikharji site in northeastern Jharkhand is therefore a revered pilgrimage site. The Palitana temples are the holiest shrine for the \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara Murtipujaka sect. Along with Shikharji the two sites are considered the holiest of all pilgrimage sites by the Jain community. The Jain complex, Khajuraho and Jain Narayana temple are part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Shravanabelagola, Saavira Kambada Basadi or \"1000 pillars\" and Brahma Jinalaya are important Jain centers in Karnataka. In and around Madurai, there are 26 caves, 200 stone beds, 60 inscriptions, and over 100 sculptures.\nThe second\u2013first century BCE Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves are rich with carvings of \"tirthanakars\" and deities with inscriptions including the Elephant Cave inscription. Jain cave temples at Badami, Mangi-Tungi and the Ellora Caves are considered important. The Sittanavasal Cave temple is a fine example of Jain art with an early cave shelter, and a medieval rock-cut temple with excellent fresco paintings comparable to Ajantha. Inside are seventeen stone beds with second century BCE. Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions. The eighth century Kazhugumalai temple marks the revival of Jainism in South India.\nPilgrimages.\nJain \"Tirtha\" (pilgrim) sites are divided into the following categories:\nOutside contemporary India, Jain communities built temples in locations such as Nagarparkar, Sindh (Pakistan). However, according to a UNESCO tentative world heritage site application, Nagarparkar was not a \"major religious centre or a place of pilgrimage\" for Jainism, but it was once an important cultural landscape before \"the last remaining Jain community left the area in 1947 at Partition\".\nStatues and sculptures.\nJain sculptures usually depict one of the twenty-four \"t\u012brtha\u1e45karas\"; Parshvanatha, Rishabhanatha and Mah\u0101v\u012bra are among the more popular, often seated in lotus position or \"kayotsarga\", along with \"Arihant\", Bahubali, and protector deities like Ambika. Quadruple images are also popular. \"Tirthankar\" idols look similar, differentiated by their individual symbol, except for Parshvanatha whose head is crowned by a snake. Digambara images are naked without any beautification, whereas \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara depictions are clothed and ornamented.\nA monolithic, statue of Bahubali, \"Gommateshvara\", built in 981 CE by the Ganga minister and commander Chavundaraya, is situated on a hilltop in Shravanabelagola in Karnataka. This statue was voted first in the SMS poll Seven Wonders of India conducted by \"The Times of India\". The tall Statue of Ahi\u1e43s\u0101 (depicting Rishabhanatha) was erected in the Nashik district in 2015. Idols are often made in \"Ashtadhatu\" (literally \"eight metals\"), namely Akota Bronze, brass, gold, silver, stone monoliths, rock cut, and precious stones.\nSymbols.\nJain icons and arts incorporate symbols such as the swastika, \"Om\", and the \"Ashtamangala\". In Jainism, \"Om\" is a condensed reference to the initials \"A-A-A-U-M\" of the five parameshthis: \"\"Arihant\", \"Ashiri\", \"Acharya\", \"Upajjhaya\", \"Muni\"\". The \"Ashtamangala\" is a set of eight auspicious symbols: in the Digambara tradition, these are chatra, \"dhvaja\", \"kalasha\", fly-whisk, mirror, chair, hand fan and vessel. In the \u015av\u0113t\u0101mbar tradition, they are Swastika, \"Srivatsa\", \"Nandavarta\", \"Vardhmanaka\" (food vessel), \"Bhadrasana\" (seat), \"Kalasha\" (pot), \"Darpan\" (mirror) and pair of fish.\nThe hand with a wheel on the palm symbolizes \"ahims\u0101\". The wheel represents the \"dharmachakra\", which stands for the resolve to halt the \"sa\u1e43s\u0101ra\" (wandering) through the relentless pursuit of \"ahims\u0101\". The five colours of the Jain flag represent the \"Pa\u00f1ca-Parame\u1e63\u1e6dhi\" and the five vows. The swastika's four arms symbolise the four realms in which rebirth occurs according to Jainism: humans, heavenly beings, hellish beings and non-humans. The three dots on the top represent the three jewels mentioned in ancient texts: correct faith, correct understanding and correct conduct, believed to lead to spiritual perfection.\nIn 1974, on the 2500th anniversary of the nirvana of Mah\u0101v\u012bra, the Jain community chose a single combined image for Jainism. It depicts the three \"lokas\", heaven, the human world and hell. The semi-circular topmost portion symbolizes \"Siddhashila\", a zone beyond the three realms. The Jain swastika and the symbol of \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\" are included, with the Jain mantra \"Parasparopagraho J\u012bv\u0101n\u0101m\" from s\u016btra 5.21 of Umaswati's \"Tattvarthas\u016btra\", meaning \"souls render service to one another\".\nJainism and ecology.\nJainism, one of the world's oldest religions, offers a profound ecological philosophy rooted in its core principles. As noted in the Jain Declaration on Nature, \"Jainism is fundamentally a religion of ecology and has turned ecology into a religion. It has enabled Jains to create an environment-friendly value system and code of conduct.\" Central to Jain ethics is \"ahimsa\" (non-violence), which extends beyond human interactions to encompass all living beings. \"All breathing, existing, living, sentient beings should not be slain, nor treated with violence, nor abused, nor tormented, nor driven away. This is the pure, unchangeable, eternal law.\" \nThe Jain concept of \"parasparopagrahoj\u012bv\u0101n\u0101m\" in the Tattvarth Sutra, the most authoritative sacred text of Jains, teaches that all souls are responsible for one another and underscores the mutual interdependence of all life forms. Mahavira, the founder of Jainism taught, \"One who neglects or disregards the existence of earth, air, fire, water and vegetation disregards his own existence which is entwined with them.\" This principle is not merely philosophical but is reflected in daily practices. For instance, Jain monks and nuns often wear masks to prevent inhaling and harming microscopic organisms, demonstrating meticulous care for even the smallest forms of life.\nJainism also emphasizes \"aparigraha\" (non-possessiveness), advocating for minimal consumption and a lifestyle that avoids excess. This principle encourages individuals to live sustainably, reducing their ecological footprint. \"Using any resource beyond one's needs and misuse of any part of nature is considered a form of theft. Indeed, the Jain faith goes one radical step further and declares unequivocally that waste and creating pollution are acts of violence.\" \nIn contemporary times, Jain communities continue to uphold these ecological principles through various initiatives. These include tree planting, wildlife conservation, and promoting vegetarianism, all aimed at fostering a harmonious relationship with nature. Such practices exemplify the enduring relevance of Jain teachings in addressing modern environmental challenges. \nThrough its unwavering commitment to non-violence, interdependence, and minimalism, Jainism offers a holistic framework for ecological sustainability, emphasizing the sacredness of all life and the importance of living in harmony with the environment.\nComparison with other religions.\nAll four Dharmic religions\u2014Jainism, Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism\u2014share concepts and doctrines such as karma and rebirth. They do not believe in eternal heaven or hell or judgment day, and leave it up to individual discretion to choose whether or not to believe in gods, to disagree with core teachings, and to choose whether to participate in prayers, rituals and festivals. They all consider values such as \"ahimsa\" (non-violence) to be important, link suffering to craving, individual's actions, intents, and karma, and believe spirituality is a means to enlightened peace, bliss and eternal liberation (\"moksha\").\nJainism differs from both Buddhism and Hinduism in its ontological premises: While all three believe in impermanence, Buddhism incorporates the premise of \"anatta\" (\"no eternal self or soul\") while Hinduism maintains the concept of an eternal unchanging \"atman\" (\"soul\"); by contrast, Jainism incorporates an eternal but changing \"jiva\" (\"soul\"). In Jain thought, there are infinite eternal \"jivas\", predominantly in cycles of rebirth, and a few \"siddhas\" (liberated ones). Unlike Jainism, Hindu philosophies encompass nondualism where all souls are identical as Brahman and posited as interconnected one Jainism rejected the non-dual concept, stating that if there were only one universal consciousness which was already liberated, the purpose of dharma would be nullified. Additionally, the need and desire for an infinitely blissful consciousness to create the universe would imply a limitation within that consciousness. Jainism also criticized Vedanta's inability to explain how an intangible consciousness could create a material universe, filled with countless living beings who experience suffering. Jain scholar Dr. Hukumchand Bharill explains that, according to both Jainism and Vedanta, only consciousness can perceive itself, while the mind and body are incapable of recognizing and experiencing the soul. In Jainism, the soul, in its state of ignorance, mistakenly identifies with the body and consequently experiences suffering. When the soul realizes its true nature, it attains enlightenment, gaining infinite knowledge and bliss. If there were only a singular, universal consciousness, Bharill questions, who attains realization as the consciousness is already liberated, and the mind is incapable of experiencing soul's boundless knowledge-bliss nature.\nWhile both Hinduism and Jainism believe \"soul exists\" to be a self-evident truth, most Hindu systems consider it to be eternally present, infinite and constant (\"vibhu\"), but some Hindu scholars propose soul to be atomic. Hindu thought generally discusses Atman and Brahman through a monistic or dualistic framework. In contrast, Jain thought denies the Hindu metaphysical concept of Brahman, and Jain philosophy considers the soul to be ever changing and bound to the body or matter for each lifetime, thereby having a finite size that infuses the entire body of a living being.\nJainism is similar to Buddhism in not recognizing the primacy of the Vedas and the Hindu Brahman. Jainism and Hinduism, however, both believe \"soul exists\" as a self-evident truth. Jains and Hindus have frequently intermarried, particularly in northern, central and western regions of India. Some early colonial scholars stated that Jainism like Buddhism was, in part, a rejection of the Hindu caste system, but later scholars consider this a Western error. A caste system not based on birth has been a historic part of Jain society, and Jainism focused on transforming the individual, not society.\nMonasticism is similar in all three traditions, with similar rules, hierarchical structure, not traveling during the four-month monsoon season, and celibacy, originating before the Buddha or the Mah\u0101v\u012bra. Jain and Hindu monastic communities have traditionally been more mobile and had an itinerant lifestyle, while Buddhist monks have favored belonging to a \"sangha\" (monastery) and staying in its premises. Buddhist monastic rules forbid a monk to go outside without wearing the sangha's distinctive ruddy robe, or to use wooden bowls. In contrast, Jain monastic rules have either required nakedness (Digambara) or white clothes (\u015av\u0113t\u0101mbara), and they have disagreed on the legitimacy of the wooden or empty gourd as the begging bowl by Jain monks.\nJains have similar views with Hindus that violence in self-defence can be justified, and that a soldier who kills enemies in combat is performing a legitimate duty. Jain communities accepted the use of military power for their defence; there were Jain monarchs, military commanders, and soldiers. The Jain and Hindu communities have often been very close and mutually accepting. Some Hindu temples have included a Jain \"Tirthankara\" within its premises in a place of honour, while temple complexes such as the Badami cave temples and Khajuraho feature both Hindu and Jain monuments.\nFynes (1996) argues that various Jain influences, particularly ideas on the existence of plant souls, were transmitted from Western Kshatrapa territories to Mesopotamia and then integrated into Manichaean beliefs.\nDemographics.\nWith an estimated four to five million followers worldwide, the vast majority of Jains reside in India. According to the 2011 Census of India, there were 4.45 million Jains in the country, constituting 0.37% of the total population. The community is highly concentrated, with 78.2% of Indian Jains living in four states: Maharashtra (31.5%), Rajasthan (14.0%), Gujarat (13.0%) and Madhya Pradesh (12.7%). Other states with significant populations include Karnataka (9.9%), Uttar Pradesh (4.8%), Delhi (3.7%) and Tamil Nadu (2.0%). In 2014, the Government of India granted Jainism \"national minority\" status.\nGlobal Diaspora.\nSignificant Jain communities exist globally, largely tracing their origins to Indian migration. The oldest of these is in East Africa, particularly Kenya and Uganda, where Jain merchants settled in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Political instability in those countries in the 1960s and 1970s led to a secondary migration, primarily to the United Kingdom, which now has a community estimated at 25,000 to 30,000. The first Jain temple consecrated outside India was in Leicester.\nThe largest diaspora community is in the United States, with estimates ranging from 80,000 to 100,000, and a significant population also resides in Canada (est. 12,000+). A notable community exists in Antwerp, Belgium, where Jains have played a prominent role in the global diamond trade since the mid-20th century. In recent decades, Jainism has also attracted converts in other nations, such as Japan.\nSocio-Economic Profile.\nThe Jain community is a distinct socio-economic group within India. Data from the 2015\u201316 National Family Health Survey (NFHS-4) identified Jains as the wealthiest religious community in the country. This is strongly correlated with high educational attainment. According to the 2011 census, Jains have the highest literacy rate in India at 86.7% (for ages 7+), and this figure exceeded 97% for the population excluding the retired. Jains also have the highest percentage of college graduates of any religious community.\nScholars often attribute this socio-economic profile to the theological principles of the faith. The rigorous observance of \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\" (non-violence) historically discouraged professions like agriculture, which involve the harming of insects and microbes. This steered the community toward mercantile pursuits, such as commerce, banking, jewelry, and trade. A notable historical example of this financial prominence was the Jagat Seth family, a Jain banking house that served as state bankers to the Nawabs of Bengal and the East India Company in the 18th century.\nIn the modern era, this focus has translated to high representation in business, finance, and professional fields. Foundational industrialists like Walchand Hirachand, who established India's first modern shipyard and aircraft factory, emerged from the community. In finance, the merchant Premchand Roychand was a key 19th-century founder of the Bombay Stock Exchange. This prominence in large-scale industry continues with contemporary figures such as Gautam Adani, founder of the Adani Group, and the Patni family of Kishangarh, founders of RK Marble, a major global stone processor. This representation also extends to technology and the sciences. Narendra Patni, for instance, was a pioneer of the Indian IT services industry with the founding of Patni Computer Systems. In science, physicist Vikram Sarabhai, founder of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), is widely regarded as the \"father of the Indian space program.\"\nCommunity and Philanthropy.\nA defining characteristic of the Jain community is its highly organized and historical practice of \"d\u0101na\" (charity). This is a central religious duty for laypersons (\"\u015br\u0101vakas\"), who are motivated by two key theological concepts. Firstly, scholars identify \"d\u0101na\" as the primary mechanism for the laity to acquire good \"karma\" (\"punya\"), which is sought to ensure worldly well-being and a favorable rebirth. Secondly, this practice is the main expression of the householder's vow of \"Aparigraha\" (non-attachment). This dual motivation has resulted in a long-standing tradition of institutional philanthropy.\nThis is most famously expressed in the establishment of \"panjrapoles\" (animal hospitals and sanctuaries), which provide care for animals in accordance with the principle of \"Ahi\u1e43s\u0101\". The community has also historically funded and managed \"dharamshalas\" (pilgrim rest-houses), educational institutions, and \"bhandaras\" (manuscript libraries), which have been crucial in preserving tens of thousands of ancient and medieval texts.\nIn the 20th century, this philanthropic tradition of supporting educational institutions evolved to include the founding of major national bodies. Industrialist Kasturbhai Lalbhai, for example, was a key co-founder of the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad (IIM-A) and the Physical Research Laboratory. In the field of public policy, physicist Daulat Singh Kothari chaired the influential Kothari Commission (1964\u20131966), which provided the comprehensive framework for the modernization of India's education policy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "16017", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16017", "title": "Joanna Russ", "text": "American writer and academic (1937\u20132011)\nJoanna Russ (February 22, 1937 \u2013 April 29, 2011) was an American writer, academic and feminist. She is the author of a number of works of science fiction, fantasy and feminist literary criticism such as \"How to Suppress Women's Writing\", as well as a contemporary novel, \"On Strike Against God\", and one children's book, \"Kittatinny\". She is best known for \"The Female Man\", a novel combining utopian fiction and satire, and the story \"When It Changed\".\nBackground.\nJoanna Russ was born in The Bronx, New York City, to Evarett I. and Bertha (n\u00e9e Zinner) Russ, both teachers. Her family was Jewish. She began creating works of fiction at a very early age. Over the following years she filled countless notebooks with stories, poems, comics and illustrations, often hand-binding the material with thread.\nAs a senior at William Howard Taft High School, Russ was selected as one of the top ten Westinghouse Science Talent Search winners. She graduated from Cornell University, where she studied with Vladimir Nabokov, in 1957, and received her MFA from the Yale Drama School in 1960. She was briefly married to Albert Amateau.\nRuss taught at Queensborough Community College from 1966 to 1967, at Cornell from 1967 to 1972, SUNY Binghamton, from 1972 to 1975, and at the University of Colorado, Boulder, from 1975 to 1977. In 1977 she started teaching at the University of Washington. She became a full professor in 1984 and retired in 1991. Russ was awarded a National Endowment for the Humanities fellowship in 1974-1975.\nScience fiction and other writing.\nRuss came to be noticed in the science fiction world in the late 1960s, in particular for her award-nominated novel \"Picnic on Paradise\". At the time, SF was a field dominated by male authors, writing for a predominantly male audience, but women were starting to enter the field in larger numbers. Russ was one of the most outspoken female authors to challenge male dominance of the field, and is generally regarded as one of the leading feminist science fiction scholars and writers. She was also one of the first major science fiction writers to take slash fiction and its cultural and literary implications seriously. She published over fifty short stories. Russ was associated with the American New Wave of science fiction.\nAlong with her work as a writer of prose fiction, Russ was also a playwright, essayist, and author of nonfiction works, generally literary criticism and feminist theory, including the essay collection \"Magic Mommas, Trembling Sisters, Puritans &amp; Perverts\"; \"How to Suppress Women's Writing\"; and the book-length study of modern feminism, \"What Are We Fighting For?\". Her essays and articles have been published in \"Women's Studies Quarterly\", \"Signs\", \"Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies\", \"Science Fiction Studies\", and \"College English\". Russ was a self-described socialist feminist, expressing particular admiration for the work and theories of Clara Fraser and her Freedom Socialist Party. Both fiction and nonfiction, for Russ, were modes of engaging theory with the real world; in particular, \"The Female Man\" can be read as a theoretical or narrative text. The short story \"When It Changed\", which became a part of the novel, explores the constraints of gender and asks if gender is necessary in a society.\nRuss's writing is characterized by anger interspersed with humor and irony. James Tiptree Jr, in a letter to her, wrote, \"Do you imagine that anyone with half a functional neuron can read your work and not have his fingers smoked by the bitter, multi-layered anger in it? It smells and smoulders like a volcano buried so long and deadly it is just beginning to wonder if it can explode.\" In a letter to Susan Koppelman, Russ asks of a young feminist critic \"where is her anger?\" and adds \"I think from now on, I will not trust anyone who isn't angry.\"\nFor nearly 15 years she was an influential (if intermittent) review columnist for \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\". Though by then she was no longer an active member of science fiction fandom, she was interviewed by phone during Wiscon (the feminist science fiction convention in Madison, Wisconsin) in 2006 by her friend and member of the same cohort, Samuel R. Delany.\nHer first SF story was \"Nor Custom Stale\" in F&amp;SF (1959). Notable short works include Hugo winner and Nebula Award finalist \"Souls\" (1982), Nebula Award and Tiptree Award winner \"When It Changed\" (1972), Nebula Award finalists \"The Second Inquisition\" (1970), \"Poor Man, Beggar Man\" (1971), \"The Extraordinary Voyages of Am\u00e9lie Bertrand\" (1979), and \"The Mystery of the Young Gentlemen\" (1982). Her fiction has been nominated for nine Nebula and three Hugo Awards, and her genre-related scholarly work was recognized with a Pilgrim Award in 1988. Her story \"The Autobiography of My Mother\" was one of the 1977 O. Henry Prize stories.\nShe wrote several contributions to feminist thinking about pornography and sexuality, including \"Pornography by Women, for Women, with Love\" (1985), \"Pornography and the Doubleness of Sex for Women\", and \"Being Against Pornography\", which can be found in her archival pieces located in the University of Oregon's Special Collections. These essays include very detailed descriptions of her views on pornography and how influential it was to feminist thought in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Specifically, in \"Being Against Pornography\", she calls pornography a feminist issue. Her issues with pornography range from feminist critiques to women's sexuality in general, maintaining that porn prevents women from freely expressing their sexual selves like men can. Russ believed that anti-pornography activists were not addressing how women experienced pornography created by men, a topic that she addressed in \"Being Against Pornography\".\nReputation and legacy.\nHer work is widely taught in courses on science fiction and feminism throughout the English speaking world. Russ is the subject of Farah Mendlesohn's book \"On Joanna Russ\" and Jeanne Cortiel's \"Demand My Writing: Joanna Russ, Feminism, Science Fiction\". Russ and her work are prominently featured in Sarah LeFanu's\" In the Chinks of the World Machine: Feminism and Science Fiction\" (1988). She was named to the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2013.\nGwyneth Jones wrote a 2019 book about Joanna Russ that was part of the University of Illinois Press series called Modern Masters of Science Fiction.\nIn a 2004 essay about the connections between Russ's work and D. W. Griffith's film \"Intolerance\", Samuel R. Delany describes her as being \"one of the finest - and most necessary - writers of American fiction\" since she published her first professional short story in 1959.\nHer papers are part of the University of Oregon's Special Collections and University Archives.\nCritical writings.\nThe late 1960s and 1970s marked the beginnings of feminist SF scholarship\u2014a field of inquiry that was all but created single-handedly by Russ, who wrote many essays on feminism and science fiction that appeared in journals such as \"College English\" and \"Science Fiction Studies\". She also contributed 25 reviews to \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", covering more than 100 books of all genres. In their article \"Learning the 'Prophet Business': The Merril-Russ Intersection,\" Newell and Tallentire described Russ as an \"intelligent, tough-minded reviewer who routinely tempered harsh criticism with just the sort of faint praise she handed out to Judith Merril,\" who in turn was among the foremost editors and critics in American science fiction in the late 1960s. Russ was also described as a fearless, incisive, and radical person, whose writing was often characterized as acerbic and angry.\nRuss was acclaimed as one of science fiction's most revolutionary and accomplished writers. Helen Merrick claimed that Russ is an inescapable figure in science fiction history. James Tiptree Jr. once commented on how Russ could be an \"absolute delight\" one minute, but then she \"rushes out and bites my ankles with one sentence.\" For example, Russ criticized Ursula K. Le Guin's 1969 \"The Left Hand of Darkness\", which won both the 1969 Nebula and 1970 Hugo awards for best science fiction novel, arguing that gender discriminations that permeated science fiction by men showed up just as frequently in science fiction by women. According to Russ, Le Guin's novel represented these stereotypes.\nRuss felt that science fiction gives something to its readers that cannot be easily acquired anywhere else. She maintained that science should be accurate, and seriousness is a virtue. She insisted on the unique qualities of her chosen genre, maintaining that science fiction shared certain qualities with art and its flexibility compared to other forms of writing. Russ was also interested in demonstrating the unique potentials of women science fiction writers. As her career moved into its second decade in the 1980s, she started to worry about reviewing standards. She once said, \"The reviewer's hardest task is to define standards.\"\nRuss's reviewing style was characterized by logic. She was attacked by readers because of her harsh reviews of Stephen R. Donaldson's \"Lord Foul's Bane\" (1977) and Joy Chant's \"The Grey Mane of Morning\" (1977). She organized these attacks into seven categories, taken from the cited article:\nHowever, she felt guilty about dire criticism. She apologized for her harsh words on Lloyd Biggle's \"The Light That Never Was\" (1972), saying, \"It's narsty to beat up on authors who are probably starving to death on turnip soup (\"ghoti\" soup) but critics ought to be honest.\"\nPersonal life.\nAround the time of the publication of \"The Female Man\" in 1975, Russ came out as a lesbian. However, Russ remained protective of her personal life, and as late as a December 1981 interview with Charles Platt, she was still evasive on the subject for the first third of the interview.\nHealth.\nIn her later life she published little, largely because she had chronic pain and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS).\nOn April 27, 2011, it was reported that Russ had been admitted to a hospice after suffering a series of strokes. Samuel R. Delany was quoted as saying that Russ was \"slipping away\" and had long had a \"do not resuscitate\" order on file. She died early in the morning on April 29, 2011.\nSelected works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16018", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16018", "title": "July 14", "text": "Events on calendar date 14 July\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJuly 14 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16019", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16019", "title": "Japan Constitution", "text": ""}
{"id": "16020", "revid": "50646306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16020", "title": "Jackson, Michigan", "text": "Jackson is a city in Jackson County, Michigan, United States, and its county seat. The population was 31,309 at the 2020 census. It is served by Interstate 94 and U.S. Route 127. It is approximately east of Kalamazoo, west of Ann Arbor, west of Detroit and south of Lansing. Jackson is the core city of the Jackson metropolitan area, which includes all of Jackson County and has a population of 160,248.\nThe city was founded in 1829 and named after President Andrew Jackson. Michigan's first prison, Michigan State Prison (or Jackson State Prison), opened in 1838 and remains in operation.\nJackson was historically regarded as the \"birthplace of the (state) Republican Party\" due to a meeting held there in 1854, during which political figures gathered to oppose the expansion of slavery. At the beginning of the twentieth century, Jackson became an early automotive manufacturing center that attracted southerners and immigrants to the city's numerous factories; this resulted in a rapid, marked population increase.\nHistory.\nOn July 3, 1829, Horace Blackman, accompanied by Alexander Laverty, a land surveyor, and \"Pewytum\", an Indian guide, forded the Grand River and made camp for the night at a site now marked as Trail and N. Jackson Street. They arrived there along a well-traveled Native American trail leading west from Ann Arbor. Blackman had hired Laverty and Pewytum to guide him west. Returning to Ann Arbor and Monroe, Blackman registered his claim for at two dollars an acre.\nHe returned to the Jackson area in August 1829 with his brother Russell. Together they cleared land and built a cabin at what would become the corner of Ingham and Trail streets. The town was first called Jacksonopolis. Later, it was renamed Jacksonburgh. Finally in 1838, the town's name was changed to simply Jackson.\nBirthplace of the Republican Party \u2013 \"Under the Oaks\".\nJackson is one of the birthplaces of the Republican Party. The first official meeting of the group that called itself \"Republican\" was held in Jackson on July 6, 1854. A Michigan historical marker at what is now the northwest corner of Second and Franklin streets in Jackson commemorates an anti-slavery county convention held that day. Meeting outside to avoid a hot, overcrowded hall, the group ultimately selected a slate of candidates for state elections. The marker identifies this as the birth of the Republican Party. The site, an oak grove on \"Morgan's Forty\", then on the outskirts of town, became known as \"Under the Oaks\".\nThe political party formally recognizes its birthplace as being Ripon, Wisconsin, where the name \"Republican\" was first suggested in March 1854. But, Republican presidents have visited Jackson and this marker.\nCrawfordsville, Iowa also has a claim as the birthplace of the party: the first private meeting of what would become the Republican Party occurred when Whig Party defectors met privately in Crawfordsville in February 1854. The meeting was to lay the groundwork for the creation of a new political party.\nAuto industry.\nBefore Detroit began building cars on assembly lines in 1910, Jackson factories were making parts for cars and assembling them. By 1910, the auto industry had become Jackson's main industry. More than 20 different brands of cars were once made in Jackson, including: Reeves, Jaxon, Jackson, CarterCar, Orlo, Whiting, Butcher and Gage; Buick, Janney, Globe, Steel Swallow, C.V.I., Imperial, Ames-Dean, Cutting, Standard Electric, Duck, Briscoe, Argo, Hollier, Hackett, Marion-Handly, Gem, Earl, Wolverine, and Kaiser-Darrin. \nYe Ole Carriage Shop in Spring Arbor displays more than 60 antique and classic cars, including five one-and-onlys and 16 made in Jackson. One of these is a 1902 JAXON. Today the auto parts industry remains one of the largest employers of skilled machine operators in Jackson County. The city was also an early site for the moped parts industry.\nBirthplace of the Coney Island hot dog.\nIn 1914 Macedonian immigrant George Todoroff founded the first \"Coney Island restaurant\" and created his famous Coney Island hot dog topping. His Coney Island restaurant was located directly in front of the railroad station on East Michigan Avenue and was open 24 hours. The restaurant proved to be a popular dining option for rail passengers. Over the course of 31 years, Todoroff sold more than 17 million Coney Island hot dogs.\nToday two \"Coney Island\" restaurants unaffiliated with Todoroff's are located in a building near the train station on East Michigan Avenue: Virginia Coney Island and Jackson Coney Island. In addition, several area restaurants throughout the Jackson area offer their own version of the Coney Island hot dog, or just \"coney\", as it is referred to by local residents. Jackson's version of the coney dog is distinctly different from those featured in Detroit-area Coney Island restaurants or other Coney Island restaurants throughout Michigan and the Midwest. In 2014 Todoroff's Coney Island celebrated its centenary.\nMichigan's first state prison (1838\u20131934).\nThe legislature authorized Michigan's first state prison in 1838. A temporary wooden prison, enclosed by a fence of tamarack poles, was built on 60 acres donated for that purpose inside the city limits of Jackson. In 1839 the first 35 prisoners were received. A permanent prison was built three years later.\nBeginning in the 1850s, Warden H.F. Hatch placed more emphasis on the education and rehabilitation of prisoners. By 1882, Michigan's First State Prison (1838\u20131934) had developed as the largest walled prison in the world. Within its walls, the factories and surrounding farms, manned by cheap inmate labor, made Jackson one of the leading industrial cities in the nation. In 1934 a new prison was completed just north of Jackson's city limit in Blackman Township; it took all of the state prisoners.\nThe historic building is now used as an artists' resident community, known as the Armory Arts Village. Tours of the original prison site on Cooper Street are available through the http://. A closed, fully intact cell block at the modern prison in Blackman Township was operated as the http:// from 2014-2019. Independently operated by the accredited http://, this was the only museum where visitors could enter a closed cell block on the grounds of an active prison for a self-guided tour.\nCorset industry (1860s\u20131920s).\nNumerous railroad connections were constructed to Jackson, linking it to many markets. The local invention of the duplex corset by Bortree helped make Jackson a center of corset manufacturing. By the early 20th century, as many as 16 manufacturers of women's corsets operated here; the majority were located on Cortland and Pearl streets.\nAs elastics were adopted in manufacturing and fashions changed, the corset industry quickly declined. The majority of the corset manufacturers in Jackson closed their doors by 1920. Only three of the original corset companies survived past the 1920s, by changing their production to therapeutic and prosthetic support garments and devices.\n\"The First\"\nMoses Bortree founded the Bortree Corset Company, the first corset manufacturer outside of New York, in 1868 at 112 W. Cortland. Founded to make crinoline skirts and bustles (hoop skirts!), they began manufacturing Bortree's newest creation, the Duplex Corset, in 1875. Within five years, production rose from 50,000 to 300,000 corsets per year.\n\"The Biggest\"\nFounded in 1884, the Jackson Corset Co. became the largest manufacturer of corset and waist garments in the US. Located at 209-215 W. Cortland St., they employed almost 300 people by 1895.\n\"Woman-Owned\"\nThe Coronet Corset Manufactory opened in 1880 at 146 W. Main St. and later moved to 131-133 W. Pearl St. Coronet had the distinction of being run by the first and only female president, Mrs. C.A. McGee, who invented and patented the Coronet Corset.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (1.09%) is water.\nClimate.\nThis climate region is typified by large seasonal temperature differences, with warm to hot (and often humid) summers and cold (sometimes severely cold) winters. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Jackson has a humid continental climate, abbreviated \"Dfb\" on climate maps.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 33,534 people, 13,294 households, and 7,872 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 15,457 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 71.4% White, 20.4% African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 1.6% from other races, and 5.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 5.3% of the population.\nThere were 13,294 households, of which 35.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.7% were married couples living together, 22.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.1% had a male householder with no wife present, and 40.8% were non-families. 33.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 3.14.\nThe median age in the city was 32.2 years. 28.5% of residents were under the age of 18; 10.5% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 27.7% were from 25 to 44; 23.1% were from 45 to 64; and 10.3% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.7% male and 52.3% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 36,316 people, 14,210 households, and 8,668 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 15,241 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.87% White, 19.70% Black or African American, 0.56% Native American, 0.51% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 1.65% from other races, and 3.67% from two or more races. 4.05% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 14,210 households, out of which 33.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.8% were married couples living together, 19.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.0% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 3.12.\nIn the city, 29.7% of the population was under the age of 18, 9.8% was from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 18.2% from 45 to 64, and 11.9% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $31,294, and the median income for a family was $39,072. Males had a median income of $31,957 versus $23,817 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,230. About 15.2% of families and 19.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.9% of those under age 18 and 11.0% of those age 65 or over.\nReligion.\nJackson has a number of notable historic churches, several of which were established prior to the American Civil War. The First Baptist Church was established in 1839; the present building, a Romanesque Revival structure, was dedicated in March 1872. The First Congregational Church is housed in a monumental Romanesque Revival building constructed in 1859. A basement was added after the structure had been in operation for several years. In 1871 the building was raised eight feet to accommodate lower-level classrooms. Its congregation has actively participated in local social reform efforts, becoming part of the antislavery movement in the 1840s and later supporting the temperance and the civil rights movement. St. Paul's Episcopal Church was also founded in 1839. The congregation's first church building, constructed in 1840, was replaced by a Romanesque Revival building in 1853; it is one of the oldest Episcopal Church structures in southern Michigan.\nConstructed in 1857, St. John's the Evangelist Church is the oldest Roman Catholic church in the city. It was established as a mission in 1836 to serve a congregation that was originally predominately Irish immigrants. Given the following waves of Catholic immigrants from other countries, its congregation today is more diverse. St. Mary Star of the Sea was established in 1881 as Jackson's second Catholic church. The present building, a limestone Romanesque structure built between 1923 and 1926, incorporates elements of the parish's first church as well as stained glass windows, marble altars and communion rails imported from Italy and Austria. The first and only Eastern Orthodox Church is St. Demetrius Orthodox Church, founded in 1958. Among the modern churches in the town is Westwinds Community Church, a non-denominational, evangelical Christian church. Founded in 1865 in a blacksmith shop, Community Jackson African Methodist Episcopal Church became the first place of worship for African Americans in Jackson County.\nLate 19th-century immigrants included Jews from Germany and eastern Europe. Jackson is home to Temple Beth Israel, a Reform synagogue founded in 1862 by German Jewish immigrants.\nEconomy.\nRestructuring in heavy industry in the mid-20th century caused a decline in jobs and population in many industrial cities, including Jackson. There are three major private employers in the city. CMS Energy provides natural gas and electrical services to much of Michigan and has its international headquarters in the city. The next two major employers are Henry Ford Health (formerly Foote Hospital) and the Eaton Corporation.\nMichigan Automotive Compressor, Inc. (MACI) is the largest manufacturer in Jackson County and its fourth-largest individual employer. In February 2009, due to the Great Recession, it began offering voluntary buyouts to employees.\nFamily-owned food manufacturer and distributor Dawn Foods has been based in Jackson since 1920.\nJackson Flexible Products, just outside the city, has been one of North America's premier custom-molded rubber specialists since 1969. The company employs over 35 people, providing components for the aerospace, automotive and defense industries.\nJackson's state prison complex includes the first state prison building, which was expanded and became known as the largest walled prison in the world. Portions of the prison complex closed in 2007, including the Annex of the Charles Egeler Reception and Guidance Center Annex (RGC) and the Southern Michigan Correctional Facility (JMF). One of the closed cell blocks at JMF has been adapted and re-opened as the http://.\nThe other facilities in the complex, including two in the old walled building, remain open: the G. Robert Cotton Correctional Facility (JCF), the Cooper Street Correctional Facility (JCS), the Charles Egeler Reception and Guidance Center (RGC), and the Parnall Correctional Facility (SMT).\nParks and recreation.\nJackson's parks and recreation department includes a golf course, swimming pool, sporting fields, and 26 parks, totaling 645 acres.\nSports.\nJAX 60 Lanes in Jackson has hosted multiple professional ten-pin bowling events for the PBA Tour and PBA50 Tour. On July 16\u201323, 2023, the center hosted the inaugural PBA50 World Series of Bowling.\nGovernment.\nThe city levies an income tax of 1 percent on residents and 0.5 percent on nonresidents. Federally, Jackson is located in Michigan's 5th congressional district, represented by Republican Tim Walberg.\nEducation.\nJackson is served by Jackson Public Schools. The Jackson urbanized area is home to approximately 16 elementary public schools, as well as about 16 private or parochial schools. It also has a large public middle school (The Middle School at Parkside). It has nine high schools: the public Jackson High School, East Jackson Secondary School (Public), Parma Western High School, and Northwest High School, T. A. Wilson Academy, Napoleon High School, and Vandercook Lake High School; and the private DaVinci Institute (Charter), Jackson Preparatory and Early College (Charter), and Jackson Christian School (Non-Denom), and Lumen Christi Catholic School (Catholic).\nThe city is also home to institutions of adult and higher education: Jackson College (formerly Jackson Community College), Baker College, https://, and Spring Arbor University. An additional 15 higher education institutions are within a one-hour drive of Jackson County.\nTransportation.\nFrom the late nineteenth century into the mid-twentieth century, Jackson was a major railway hub and for over a century has been known as the crossroads of Michigan. Today the Michigan Central Railroad Jackson Depot on East Michigan Avenue is the nation's oldest train station in continuous active use. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2002.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Jackson, operating its Wolverine three times daily in each direction between Chicago and Pontiac, Michigan, via Detroit.\nJackson and Lansing Railroad (JAIL) owns a line from Jackson to Lansing, Michigan. Norfolk Southern (NS) owns a yard in Jackson as well.\nMajor highways.\nThe junction of I-94 and US 127 was built at Jackson.\nAirport.\nReynolds Field at Jackson County Airport is the main airport for the city. It hosted commercial service, primarily under the North Central Airlines banner, until 1984. With the \"Blue Goose\" aircraft now gone, the airport today operates as a general aviation facility. The 700-acre airport, equipped with an ILS system, is located just south of I-94 ( Airport Road exit #137). More than 100 general aviation aircraft are housed here, ranging from single-engine planes to business/corporate jet aircraft.\nThe Airport is home to many related businesses, including the Jackson College Flight School, a restaurant, bar, and car rental. The Jackson Blues Festival is held here annually in June.\nPublic transportation.\nJackson Area Transportation Authority operates ten routes Monday through Saturday out of a central station located downtown. Indian Trails and Greyhound Lines offer intercity service from the JATA station. In addition to the publicly funded JATA, there are four private taxicab companies operating in town.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16021", "revid": "48832709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16021", "title": "John Irving", "text": "American and Canadian novelist and screenwriter (born 1942)\nJohn Winslow Irving (born John Wallace Blunt Jr.; March 2, 1942) is an American and Canadian novelist, short story writer, and screenwriter.\nIrving achieved critical and popular acclaim after the international success of his fourth novel \"The World According to Garp\" in 1978. Many of Irving's novels, including \"The Hotel New Hampshire\" (1981), \"The Cider House Rules\" (1985), \"A Prayer for Owen Meany\" (1989), and \"A Widow for One Year\" (1998), have been bestsellers. He won the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay at the 72nd Academy Awards in 2000 for his script of the film adaptation of \"The Cider House Rules\".\nFive of his novels have been fully or partially adapted into the films \"The World According to Garp\" (1982), \"The Hotel\" \"New Hampshire\" (1984), \"Simon Birch\" (1998), \"The Cider House Rules\" (1999), and \"The Door in the Floor\" (2004). Several of Irving's books and short stories have been set in and around New England, in fictional towns resembling Exeter, New Hampshire.\nEarly life.\nIrving was born John Wallace Blunt Jr. in Exeter, New Hampshire, the son of Helen Frances (n\u00e9e Winslow) and John Wallace Blunt Sr., a writer and executive recruiter; the couple separated during pregnancy. Irving was raised by his mother and stepfather, Colin Franklin Newell Irving, who was a Phillips Exeter Academy faculty member. His uncle Hammy Bissell was also part of the faculty. John Irving was in the Phillips Exeter wrestling program as a student athlete and as an assistant coach, and wrestling features prominently in his books, stories, and life. While a student at Exeter, Irving was taught by author and Christian theologian Frederick Buechner, whom he quoted in an epigraph in \"A Prayer for Owen Meany\". Irving has dyslexia.\nIrving never met his biological father, who was a pilot in the Army Air Forces during World War II. In July 1943, John Blunt Sr. was shot down over Burma but survived. The incident was incorporated into \"The Cider House Rules\". Irving did not find out about his father's heroism until 1981, when he was almost 40 years old.\nCareer.\nIrving's career began at the age of 26 with the publication of his first novel, \"Setting Free the Bears\" (1968). The novel was reasonably well reviewed but failed to gain a large readership. In the late 1960s, he studied under Kurt Vonnegut at the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop. His second and third novels, \"The Water-Method Man\" (1972) and \"The 158-Pound Marriage\" (1974), were similarly received. In 1975, Irving accepted a position as assistant professor of English at Mount Holyoke College.\nFrustrated at the lack of promotion his novels were receiving from his first publisher, Random House, Irving offered his fourth novel, \"The World According to Garp\" (1978), to Dutton, which promised him stronger commitment to marketing. The novel became an international bestseller and cultural phenomenon. It was a finalist for the National Book Award for Fiction in 1979 (which ultimately went to Tim O'Brien for \"Going After Cacciato\") and its first paperback edition won the Award the next year. \"Garp\" was later made into a film directed by George Roy Hill, starring Robin Williams in the title role and Glenn Close as his mother; it garnered several Academy Award nominations, including nominations for Close and John Lithgow. Irving makes a brief cameo appearance in the film as the referee in one of Garp's high school wrestling matches.\n \"The World According to Garp\" was among three books recommended to the Pulitzer Advisory Board for consideration for the 1979 Award in Fiction in the Pulitzer Jury Committee report, although the award was given to \"The Stories of John Cheever\" (1978).\n\"Garp\" transformed Irving from an obscure literary writer to a household name, and his subsequent books were bestsellers. The next was \"The Hotel New Hampshire\" (1981), which sold well despite mixed reviews from critics. Like \"Garp\", the novel was quickly made into a film, this time directed by Tony Richardson and starring Jodie Foster, Rob Lowe, and Beau Bridges. \"Interior Space\", a short story originally published in \"Fiction\" magazine in 1980, was selected for the 1981 O. Henry Prize Stories collection.\nIn 1985, Irving published \"The Cider House Rules\". An epic set in a Maine orphanage, the novel's central topic is abortion. Many drew parallels between the novel and Charles Dickens' \"Oliver Twist\" (1838). Irving's next novel was \"A Prayer for Owen Meany\" (1989), another New England family epic about religion set in a New England boarding school and in Toronto, Ontario. The novel was influenced by \"The Tin Drum\" (1959) by G\u00fcnter Grass, and the plot contains further allusions to \"The Scarlet Letter\" (1850) by Nathaniel Hawthorne and the works of Dickens. In \"Owen Meany,\" Irving for the first time examined the consequences of the Vietnam War\u2014particularly mandatory conscription, which Irving avoided because he was a married father when of age for the draft. \"Owen Meany\" became Irving's best selling book since \"Garp.\"\nIrving returned to Random House for his next book, \"A Son of the Circus\" (1995). Arguably his most complicated and difficult book, and a departure from the themes and settings of his previous novels, it received ambivalent reviews by American critics but became a national and international bestseller on the strength of Irving's reputation for fashioning literate, engrossing page-turners. Irving returned in 1998 with \"A Widow for One Year\", which was named a \"New York Times\" Notable Book.\nIn 1999, after nearly 10 years in development, Irving's screenplay for \"The Cider House Rules\" was made into a film directed by Lasse Hallstr\u00f6m, starring Michael Caine, Tobey Maguire, Charlize Theron, and Delroy Lindo. Irving also made a cameo appearance as a disapproving stationmaster. The film was nominated for several Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and earned Irving an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.\nIrving wrote \"My Movie Business\", a memoir about his involvement in creating the film version of \"The Cider House Rules\". After its publication in 1999, he appeared on the CBC Television program \"Hot Type\" to promote the book. During the interview, he was asked about author Tom Wolfe proclaiming the death of the modern novel. Irving responded, \"I don't read Tom Wolfe, so I didn't hear what he said.\" The episode then cut to a photo of Wolfe, and Irving elaborating that Wolfe \"can't write\" and his writing made Irving gag. When asked about his statements subsequently, Irving has said he believed the \"Hot Type\" interview was over and he was speaking off the record, and that footage from the interview had been manipulated. Wolfe appeared on \"Hot Type\" later in 1999, calling Irving, Norman Mailer, and John Updike his \"three stooges\" who were panicked by his newest novel, \"A Man in Full\" (1998).\nIrving's 10th book, \"The Fourth Hand\" (2001), also became a bestseller. In 2004, \"A Sound Like Someone Trying Not to Make a Sound\", a children's picture book originally included in \"A Widow for One Year\", was published with illustrations by Tatjana Hauptmann. Irving's 11th novel, \"Until I Find You\", was released on July 12, 2005.\nOn June 28, 2005, \"The New York Times\" published an article revealing that \"Until I Find You\" (2005) contains two personal elements about his life that he had never discussed publicly: his sexual abuse at age 11 by an older woman, and the entrance in his life of his biological father's family.\nIn his 12th novel, \"Last Night in Twisted River\", published in 2009, Irving's central character is a novelist with, as critic Boyd Tonkin puts it, \"a career that teasingly follows Irving's own.\"\nIrving has had four novels reach number one on the bestseller list of \"The New York Times\": \"The Hotel New Hampshire\" (September 27, 1981), which stayed number one for seven weeks, and was in the top 15 for over 27 weeks; \"The Cider House Rules\" (June 16, 1985); \"A Widow for One Year\" (June 14, 1998); and \"The Fourth Hand\" (July 29, 2001).\nOther projects.\nBefore the publication of \"Garp\", Irving accepted short-term teaching positions (including one at his \"alma mater\", the Iowa Writers' Workshop). He also served as an assistant coach on his sons' high school wrestling teams until he was 47 years old. Irving was inducted into the National Wrestling Hall of Fame as an Outstanding American in 1992.\nIn addition to his novels, he has also published \"Trying to Save Piggy Sneed\" (1996), a collection of his writings including a brief memoir and unpublished short fiction, \"My Movie Business\", an account of the protracted process of bringing \"The Cider House Rules\" to the big screen, and \"The Imaginary Girlfriend\", a short memoir focusing on writing and wrestling. In 2000, Irving revealed that he and Tod \"Kip\" Williams were co-writing a screenplay for an adaptation of the novel \"A Widow for One Year\" (1998). This adaptation became \"The Door in the Floor\", starring Jeff Bridges and Kim Basinger, released in 2004, directed by Williams.\nIn 2002, his four most highly regarded novels, \"The World According to Garp\", \"The Cider House Rules\", \"A Prayer for Owen Meany\", and \"A Widow for One Year\", were published in Modern Library editions. \"Owen Meany\" was adapted into the 1998 film \"Simon Birch\" (Irving required that the title and character names be changed because the screenplay's story was \"markedly different\" from that of the novel; Irving is on record as having enjoyed the film, however).\nIn 2005, Irving received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nIn a \"New York Magazine\" interview in 2009, Irving stated that he had begun work on his 13th novel inspired by Shakespeare's \"Richard II.\" Simon &amp; Schuster \"In One Person\" (2012), taking over from Random House. \"In One Person\" is a first-person narrative. He uses the same perspective in \"A Prayer for Owen Meany.\" He also used first person in \"Until I Find You\" but changed it to third person less than a year before publication. \"In One Person\" features a 60-year-old, bisexual protagonist named William, looking back on his life in the 1950s and '60s. The novel shares a similar theme and concern with \"The World According to Garp\", the latter being in part about \"people who hate you for your sexual differences,\" said Irving.\nHe won a Lambda Literary Award in 2013 in the Bisexual Fiction category for \"In One Person\", and was also awarded the organization's Bridge Builder Award to honor him as an ally of the LGBT community.\nOn June 10, 2013, Irving announced his 14th novel, \"Avenue of Mysteries\", named for a street in Mexico City. In an interview the previous year, he had revealed the last line of the book: \"Not every collision course comes as a surprise.\"\nOn December 19, 2014, Irving posted a message on Facebook that he had \"finished 'Avenue of Mysteries.' It is a shorter novel for me, comparable in length to 'In One Person.'\" Simon &amp; Schuster published the book in November, 2015.\nOn November 3, 2015, Irving revealed that HBO and Warner Brothers asked him to reconstruct \"The World According to Garp\" as a miniseries. He described the project as being in the early stages. According to the byline of a February 2017 essay for The Hollywood Reporter, Irving had completed his teleplay for the five-part series based on \"The World According to Garp\" and was working on his fifteenth novel.\nOn June 28, 2017, Irving revealed on Facebook that his new novel was primarily a ghost story. \"...I have a history of being interested in ghosts. And here come the ghosts again. In my new novel, my fifteenth, the ghosts are more prominent than before; the novel begins and ends with them. Like \"A Widow for One Year\", this novel is constructed as a play in three acts. I'm calling Act I 'Early Signs.' I began writing it on New Year's Eve\u2014not a bad night to start a ghost story.\"\nIn an interview with Mike Kilen for \"The Des Moines Register\" on October 26, 2017, Irving revealed that the title of his novel-in-progress was \"Darkness As a Bride.\" The title was taken from Shakespeare's play, \"Measure for Measure:\" \"If I must die, / I will encounter darkness as a bride, / and hug it in mine arms.\" He later changed the title to \"The Last Chairlift\", keeping Claudio\u2019s line about embracing death as the epigraph. The novel was published by Simon &amp; Schuster in October 2022.\nIrving received the Richard C. Holbrooke Distinguished Achievement Award at the annual Dayton Literary Peace Prize gala on October 28, 2018.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1964, Irving married Shyla Leary, whom he had met at Harvard in 1963 while taking a summer course in German, before traveling to Vienna with IES Abroad. They have two sons, Colin and Brendan. The couple divorced in the early 1980s. In 1987, he married Janet Turnbull, who had been his publisher at Bantam-Seal Books and is now one of his literary agents. They have one daughter, actor and writer Eva Everett Irving.\nIrving has homes in Toronto and Pointe au Baril, Ontario. On December 13, 2019, Irving became a Canadian citizen. He has said he plans to keep his U.S. citizenship, reserving the right to be outspoken about the United States and his dislike of Donald Trump.\nIrving was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2007 and subsequently had a radical prostatectomy.\nIrving is a second cousin of academic Amy Bishop, who was convicted of perpetrating the 2010 University of Alabama in Huntsville shooting.\nIn 2018, Irving was an honorary degree recipient at Williams College.\nFollowing the publication of his novel \"Queen Esther,\" Irving cites a visit to Israel in 1981 at the invitation of the Jerusalem International Book Fair and his meeting with a Holocaust survivor who invented a technique for growing asparagus in the desert, as a source of inspiration in his writing. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16022", "revid": "106670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16022", "title": "January 16", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 16 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16023", "revid": "11851222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16023", "title": "Juno", "text": "Juno commonly refers to:\nJuno may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "16024", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16024", "title": "Justus von Liebig", "text": "German chemist (1803\u20131873)\nJustus \"Freiherr\" von Liebig (12 May 1803 \u2013 18 April 1873) was a German scientist who made major contributions to the theory, practice, and pedagogy of chemistry, as well as to agricultural and biological chemistry; he is considered one of the principal founders of organic chemistry. As a professor at the University of Giessen, he devised the modern laboratory-oriented teaching method, and for such innovations, he is regarded as one of the most outstanding chemistry teachers of all time. He has been described as the \"father of the fertilizer industry\" for his emphasis on nitrogen and minerals as essential plant nutrients, and his popularization of the law of the minimum, which states that plant growth is limited by the scarcest nutrient resource, rather than the total amount of resources available. He also developed a manufacturing process for beef extracts, and with his consent a company, called Liebig Extract of Meat Company, was founded to exploit the concept; it later introduced the Oxo brand beef bouillon cube. He popularized an earlier invention for condensing vapors, which came to be known as the Liebig condenser.\nEarly life and education.\nJustus Liebig was born in Darmstadt into the middle-class family of Johann Georg Liebig and Maria Caroline M\u00f6ser in early May 1803. His father was a drysalter and hardware merchant who compounded and sold paints, varnishes, and pigments, which he developed in his own workshop. From childhood, Justus was fascinated with chemistry.\nAt the age of 13, Liebig lived through the year without a summer, when the majority of food crops in the Northern Hemisphere were destroyed by a volcanic winter. Germany was among the hardest-hit nations in the global famine that ensued, and the experience is said to have shaped Liebig's later work. Due in part to Liebig's innovations in fertilizers and agriculture, the 1816 famine became known as \"the last great subsistence crisis in the Western world\".\nLiebig attended grammar school at the Ludwig-Georgs-Gymnasium in Darmstadt, from the ages of 8 to 14. Leaving without a certificate of completion, he was apprenticed for several months to the apothecary Gottfried Pirsch (1792\u20131870) in Heppenheim before returning home, possibly because his father could not afford to pay his indentures (a legal contract that reflects or covers a debt or purchase obligation). He worked with his father for the next two years, then attended the University of Bonn, studying under Karl Wilhelm Gottlob Kastner, his father's business associate. When Kastner moved to the University of Erlangen, Liebig followed him.\nLiebig left Erlangen in March 1822, in part because of his involvement with the radical Korps Rhenania (a nationalist student organization), but also because of his hopes for more advanced chemical studies. The circumstances are clouded by possible scandal. Some scholars argue that he fled to Paris because of his involvement in radical student groups. In late October 1822, Liebig went to Paris to study on a grant obtained for him by Kastner from the Hessian government. He worked in the private laboratory of Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and was also befriended by Alexander von Humboldt and Georges Cuvier (1769\u20131832). Liebig's doctorate from Erlangen was conferred on 23 June 1823, a considerable time after he left, as a result of Kastner's intervention on his behalf. Kastner pleaded that the requirement of a dissertation be waived and the degree granted \"in absentia\".\nResearch and development.\nLiebig left Paris to return to Darmstadt in April 1824. On 26 May 1824, at the age of 21 and with Humboldt's recommendation, Liebig became a professor \"extraordinarius\" at the University of Giessen. Liebig's appointment was part of an attempt to modernize the University of Giessen and attract more students. He received a small stipend, without laboratory funding or access to facilities.\nThe presence of existing faculty complicated his situation: Professor Wilhelm Zimmermann (1780\u20131825) taught general chemistry as part of the philosophy faculty, leaving medical chemistry and pharmacy to Professor Philipp Vogt in the medical faculty. Vogt was happy to support a reorganization in which pharmacy was taught by Liebig and became the responsibility of the faculty of arts, rather than the faculty of medicine. Zimmermann found himself competing unsuccessfully with Liebig for students and their lecture fees. He refused to allow Liebig to use existing space and equipment and finally committed suicide on 19 July 1825. The deaths of Zimmermann and Professor Blumhof, who taught technology and mining, opened the way for Liebig to apply for a full professorship. Liebig was appointed to the \"Ordentlicher\" chair in chemistry on 7 December 1825, receiving a considerably increased salary and a laboratory allowance.\nLiebig married Henriette \"Jettchen\" Moldenhauer (1807\u20131881), the daughter of a state official, in May 1826. They had five children: Georg (1827\u20131903), Agnes (1828\u20131862), Hermann (1831\u20131894), Johanna (1836\u20131925), and Marie (1845\u20131920). Although Liebig was Lutheran and Jettchen Catholic, their differences in religion appear to have been resolved amicably by bringing their sons up in the Lutheran faith and their daughters as Catholics.\nTransforming chemistry education.\nLiebig and several associates proposed to create an institute for pharmacy and manufacturing within the university. The Senate, however, uncompromisingly rejected their idea, stating that training \"apothecaries, soapmakers, beer-brewers, dyers and vinegar-distillers\" was not the university's task. As of 17 December 1825, they ruled that any such institution would have to be a private venture. This decision worked to Liebig's advantage. As an independent venture, he could ignore university rules and accept matriculated and unmatriculated students. Liebig's institute was widely advertised in pharmaceutical journals and opened in 1826. Its classes in practical chemistry and laboratory procedures for chemical analysis were taught in addition to Liebig's formal courses at the university.\nFrom 1825 to 1835, the laboratory was housed in the guardroom of a disused barracks on the edge of town. The main laboratory space was about in size and included a small lecture room, a storage closet, and a main room with ovens and work tables. An open colonnade outside could be used for dangerous reactions. Liebig could work there with eight or nine students at a time. He lived in a cramped apartment with his wife and children on the floor above.\nLiebig was one of the first chemists to organize a laboratory in its present form, engaging with students in empirical research on a large scale through a combination of research and teaching. His methods of organic analysis enabled him to direct the analytical work of many graduate students. Liebig's students were from many of the German states, as well as Britain and the United States. They helped create an international reputation for their \"Doktorvater.\" His laboratory became renowned as a model institution for the teaching of practical chemistry. It was also significant for its emphasis on applying discoveries in fundamental research to the development of specific chemical processes and products.\nIn 1833, Liebig convinced chancellor Justin von Linde to include the institute within the university. In 1839, he obtained government funds to build a lecture theatre and two separate laboratories designed by architect Paul Hofmann. The new chemistry laboratory featured innovative glass-fronted fume cupboards and venting chimneys. By 1852, when he left Giessen for Munich, more than 700 students of chemistry and pharmacy had studied with Liebig.\nInstrumentation.\nA significant challenge facing 19th-century organic chemists was the lack of instruments and methods of analysis to support accurate, replicable analyses of organic materials. Many chemists worked on the problem of organic analysis, including French Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Swedish J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius, before Liebig developed his version of an apparatus for determining the carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen content of organic substances in 1830. It involved an array of five glass bulbs, called a Kaliapparat, to trap the oxidation product of the carbon in the sample following its combustion. Before reaching the Kaliapparat, the combustion gases were conducted through a tube containing hygroscopic calcium chloride, which absorbed and retained the oxidation product of the hydrogen of the sample, namely water vapor. Next, in the Kaliapparat, carbon dioxide was absorbed in a potassium hydroxide solution in the three lower bulbs and used to measure the weight of carbon in the sample. For any substance consisting only of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, the percentage of oxygen was found by subtracting the carbon and hydrogen percentages from 100%; the remainder must be the percentage of oxygen. A charcoal furnace (a sheet steel tray in which the combustion tube was laid) was used for the combustion. Weighing carbon and hydrogen directly, rather than estimating them volumetrically, significantly increased the method's accuracy of measurement. Liebig's assistant, Carl Ettling, perfected glass-blowing techniques for producing the Kaliapparat and demonstrated them to visitors. Liebig's kaliapparat simplified the method of quantitative organic analysis and rendered it routine. Brock suggests that the availability of a superior technical apparatus was one reason why Liebig was able to attract so many students to his laboratory. His method of combustion analysis was used pharmaceutically, and certainly made possible many contributions to organic, agricultural and biological chemistry.\nLiebig also popularized the use of a counter-current water-cooling system for distillation, still referred to as a Liebig condenser. Liebig himself attributed the vapor condensation device to German pharmacist Johann Friedrich August Gottling, who had made improvements in 1794 to a design discovered independently by German chemist Christian Ehrenfried Weigel in 1771, by French scientist P. J. Poisonnier in 1779, and by Finnish chemist Johan Gadolin in 1791.\nAlthough it was not widely adopted until after Liebig's death, when safety legislation finally prohibited the use of mercury in making mirrors, Liebig proposed a process for silvering that eventually became the basis of modern mirror-making. In 1835, he reported that aldehydes reduce silver salts to metallic silver. After working with other scientists, Carl August von Steinheil approached Liebig in 1856 to see if he could develop a silvering technique capable of producing high-quality optical mirrors for use in reflecting telescopes. Liebig developed blemish-free mirrors by adding copper to ammoniated silver nitrate and sugar. An attempt to commercialize the process and \"drive out mercury mirror-making and its injurious influence on workers' health\" was unsuccessful. Liebig's mirrors struggled commercially due to poor glass, which produced an off-color, greenish-yellow reflection. Rudely, Liebig commented that Frenchwomen especially hated his mirrors because Frenchwomen already looked yellow and sickly, and the mirrors just reminded them how ugly they were.\nOrganic chemistry.\nOne of Liebig's frequent collaborators was Friedrich W\u00f6hler. They met in 1826 in Frankfurt, after independently reporting on the preparation of two substances, cyanic acid and fulminic acid, that apparently had the same composition, but very different characteristics. The silver fulminate investigated by Liebig was explosive, whereas the silver cyanate found by W\u00f6hler was not. After reviewing the disputed analyses together, they agreed that both were valid. The discovery of these and other substances led J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius to suggest the idea of isomers, substances that are defined not simply by the number and kind of atoms in the molecule, but also by the arrangement of those atoms.\nIn 1832, Liebig and Friedrich W\u00f6hler published an investigation of the oil of bitter almonds. They transformed pure oil into several halogenated compounds, which were further transformed in other reactions. Throughout these transformations, \"a single compound\" (which they named benzoyl) \"preserves its nature and composition unchanged in nearly all its associations with other bodies.\" Their experiments proved that a group of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms could behave like an element, take the place of an element, and can be exchanged for elements in chemical compounds. This laid the foundation for the doctrine of compound radicals, which can be seen as an early step in the development of structural chemistry.\nThe 1830s were a period of intense investigation of organic compounds by Liebig and his students, and of vigorous debate about the theoretical implications of their results. Liebig published on a wide variety of topics, personally averaging 30 papers per year between 1830 and 1840. Liebig not only isolated individual substances, but also studied their interrelationships and the ways in which they degraded and metamorphosed into other substances, looking for clues to the understanding of both chemical composition and physiological function. Other significant contributions by Liebig during this time include his examination of\nthe nitrogen content of bases;\nthe study of chlorination and the isolation of chloral (1832);\nthe identification of the ethyl radical (1834);\nthe oxidation of alcohol and formation of aldehyde (1835);\nthe polybasic theory of organic acids (1838);\nand the degradation of urea (1837).\nWriting about the analysis of urine, a complex organic product, he made a declaration that reveals both the changes that were occurring in chemistry over a short time and the impact of his own work. At a time when many chemists such as J\u00f6ns Jakob Berzelius still insisted on a hard and fast separation between the organic and inorganic, Liebig asserted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The production of all organic substances no longer belongs just to living organisms. It must be seen as not only probable, but as certain, that we shall be able to produce them in our laboratories. Sugar, salicin, and morphine will be artificially produced. Of course, we do not yet know how to do this, because we do not yet know the precursors from which these compounds arise, but we shall come to know them.\"\u2014\u200a\nLiebig's arguments against any chemical distinction between living (physiological) and dead chemical processes proved a great inspiration to several of his students and others who were interested in materialism. Though Liebig distanced himself from the direct political implications of materialism, he tacitly supported the work of Carl Vogt (1817\u20131895), Jacob Moleschott (1822\u20131893), and Ludwig B\u00fcchner (1824\u20131899).\nPlant nutrition.\nBy the 1840s, Liebig was attempting to apply theoretical knowledge from organic chemistry to real-world problems of food availability. His book \"Die organische Chemie in ihrer Anwendung auf Agricultur und Physiologie\" (\"Organic Chemistry in its Application to Agriculture and Physiology\") (1840) promoted the idea that chemistry could revolutionize agricultural practice, increasing yields and lowering costs. It was widely translated, vociferously critiqued, and highly influential.\nLiebig's book discussed chemical transformations within living systems, both plant and animal, outlining a theoretical approach to agricultural chemistry. The book's first part focused on plant nutrition; the second was on chemical mechanisms of putrefaction and decay. Liebig's awareness of both synthesis and degradation led him to become an early advocate of conservation, promoting ideas such as the recycling of sewage.\nLiebig argued against prevalent theories about role of humus in plant nutrition, which held that decayed plant matter was the primary source of carbon for plant nutrition. Fertilizers were believed to act by breaking down humus, making it easier for plants to absorb. Associated with such ideas was the belief that some sort of \"vital force\" distinguished reactions involving organic as opposed to inorganic materials.\nEarly studies of photosynthesis had identified carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen as important, but disagreed over their sources and mechanisms of action. Carbon dioxide was known to be taken in and oxygen released during photosynthesis, but researchers suggested that oxygen was obtained from carbon dioxide, rather than from water. Hydrogen was believed to come primarily from water. Researchers disagreed about whether sources of carbon and nitrogen were atmospheric or soil-based. Nicolas-Th\u00e9odore de Saussure's experiments, reported in \"Recherches Chimiques sur la V\u00e9g\u00e9tation\" (1804), suggested that carbon was obtained from atmospheric rather than soil-based sources. It also indicated that water was a likely source of hydrogen. He also studied the absorption of minerals by plants, and observed that mineral concentrations in plants tended to reflect their presence in the soil in which the plants were grown. However, the implications of De Saussure's results for theories of plant nutrition were neither clearly discussed nor easily understood.\nLiebig reaffirmed the importance of De Saussure's findings, and used them to critique humus theories, while regretting the limitations of De Saussure's experimental techniques. Using more precise methods of measurement as a basis for estimation, he pointed out contradictions such as the inability of existing soil humus to provide enough carbon to support the plants growing in it. By the late 1830s, researchers such as Karl Sprengel were using Liebig's methods of combustion analysis to assess manures, concluding that their value could be attributed to their constituent minerals. Liebig synthesized ideas about the mineral theory of plant nutrition and added his own conviction that inorganic materials could provide nutrients as effectively as organic sources.\nIn his theory of mineral nutrients, Liebig identified the chemical elements of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) as essential to plant growth. He reported that plants acquire carbon (C) and hydrogen (H) from the atmosphere and from water (H2O). In addition to emphasizing the importance of minerals in the soil, he argued that plants feed on nitrogen compounds derived from the air. This assertion was a source of contention for many years, and turned out to be true for legumes, but not for other plants.\nLiebig also popularized Carl Sprengel's \"theorem of minimum\" (known as the law of the minimum), stating that plant growth is not determined by the total resources available, but by the scarcest available resource. A plant's development is limited by the one essential mineral that is in the relatively shortest supply. This concept of limitation can be visualized as \"Liebig's barrel\", a metaphorical barrel in which each stave represents a different element. A nutrient stave that is shorter than the others will cause the liquid contained in the barrel to spill out at that level. This is a qualitative version of the principles used for determining the application of fertilizer in modern agriculture.\n\"Organic Chemistry\" was not intended as a guide to practical agriculture. Liebig's lack of experience in practical applications, and differences between editions of the book, fueled considerable criticism. Nonetheless, Liebig's writings had a profound impact on agriculture, spurring experiment and theoretical debate in Germany, England, and France.\nOne of his most recognized accomplishments is the development of nitrogen-based fertilizer. In the first two editions of his book (1840, 1842), Liebig reported that the atmosphere contained insufficient nitrogen, and argued that nitrogen-based fertilizer was needed to grow the healthiest possible crops. Liebig believed that nitrogen could be supplied in the form of ammonia, and recognized the possibility of substituting chemical fertilizers for natural ones (animal dung, etc.)\nHe later became convinced that nitrogen was sufficiently supplied by precipitation of ammonia from the atmosphere, and argued vehemently against the use of nitrogen-based fertilizers for many years. An early commercial attempt to produce his own fertilizers was unsuccessful, due to lack of nitrogen in the mixtures. When tested in a farmer's field, Liebig's manure was found to have no appreciable effect.\nLiebig's difficulties in reconciling theory and practice reflected that the real world of agriculture was more complex than was at first realized. By the publication of the seventh German edition of \"Agricultural Chemistry\" he had moderated some of his views, admitting some mistakes and returning to the position that nitrogen-based fertilizers were beneficial or even necessary.He was instrumental in the use of guano for nitrogen. In 1863 he published the book \"Es ist ja die Spitze meines lebens\" in which he revised his early perceptions, now appreciating soil life and in particular the biological nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen fertilizers are now widely used throughout the world, and their production is a substantial segment of the chemical industry.\nPlant and animal physiology.\nLiebig's work on applying chemistry to plant and animal physiology was especially influential. By 1842, he had published \"Chimie organique appliqu\u00e9e \u00e0 la physiologie animale et \u00e0 la pathologie\", published in English as \" Animal Chemistry, or, Organic Chemistry in its Applications to Physiology and Pathology\", presenting a chemical theory of metabolism. The experimental techniques used by Liebig and others often involved controlling and measuring diet, and monitoring and analyzing the products of animal metabolism, as indicators of internal metabolic processes. Liebig saw similarities between plant and animal metabolism, and suggested that nitrogenous animal matter was similar to, and derived from, plant matter. He categorized foodstuffs into two groups, nitrogenous materials which he believed were used to build animal tissue, and non-nitrogenous materials which he believed were involved in separate processes of respiration and generation of heat.\nFrench researchers such as Jean-Baptiste Dumas and Jean-Baptiste Boussingault believed that animals assimilated sugars, proteins, and fats from plant materials and that animals could not synthesize complex molecules. Liebig's work suggested a common ability of plants and animals to synthesize complex molecules from simpler ones. His experiments on fat metabolism convinced him that animals must be able to synthesize fats from sugars and starches. Other researchers built upon his work, confirming the abilities of animals to synthesize sugar and build fat.\nLiebig also studied respiration, at one point measuring the \"ingesta and excreta\" of 855 soldiers, a bodyguard of the Grand Duke of Hessen-Darmstadt, for an entire month. He outlined an extremely speculative model of equations in which he attempted to explain how protein degradation might balance within a healthy body and result in pathological imbalances in cases of illness or inappropriate nutrition. This proposed model was justifiably criticized. Berzelius stingingly stated that \"this facile kind of physiological chemistry is created at the writing table\". Some of the ideas that Liebig had enthusiastically incorporated were not supported by further research. The third and last edition of \"Animal Chemistry\" (1846) was substantially revised and did not include the equations.\nThe third area discussed in \"Animal Chemistry\" was fermentation and putrefaction. Liebig proposed chemical explanations for processes such as eremacausis (organic decomposition), describing the rearrangement of atoms as a result of unstable \"affinities\" reacting to external causes such as air or already decaying substances. Liebig identified the blood as the site of the body's \"chemical factory\", where he believed processes of synthesis and degradation took place. He presented a view of disease in terms of chemical process, in which healthy blood could be attacked by external contagia; secreting organs sought to transform and excrete such substances; and failure to do so could lead to their elimination through the skin, lungs, and other organs, potentially spreading contagion. Again, although the world was much more complicated than his theory, and many of his individual ideas were later proved wrong, Liebig managed to synthesize existing knowledge in a way that had implications for doctors, sanitarians, and social reformers. The English medical journal \"The Lancet\" reviewed Liebig's work and translated his chemical lectures as part of its mission to establish a new era of medicine. Liebig's ideas stimulated medical research, led to the development of better techniques for testing experimental models of metabolism, and pointed to chemistry as fundamental to the understanding of health and disease.\nIn 1850, Liebig investigated spontaneous human combustion, dismissing the simplistic explanations based on ethanol due to alcoholism.\nLiebig and the chemistry of food.\nMethods of cookery.\nLiebig drew upon his work in plant nutrition and plant and animal metabolism to develop a theory of nutrition, which had implications for cookery. In his \"Researches on the Chemistry of Food\" (1847) Liebig argued that eating not only meat fibre, but also meat juices, which contained various inorganic chemicals, was important. These vital ingredients would be lost during conventional boiling or roasting in which cooking liquids were discarded. For optimum nutritional quality, Liebig advised that cooks should either sear the meat initially to retain fluids, or retain and use cooking liquids (as in soups or stews).\nLiebig was acclaimed in \"The Lancet\" for revealing \"the true principles of cookery\", and physicians promoted \"rational diets\" based on his ideas. Well-known British cookery writer Eliza Acton responded to Liebig by modifying the cookery techniques in the third edition of her \"Modern Cookery for Private Families\", and subtitling the edition accordingly. Liebig's idea that \"searing meat seals in the juices\", though still widely believed, is not true.\nLiebig's Extract of Meat Company.\nBuilding on his theories of the nutritional value of meat fluids, and seeking an inexpensive nutrition source for Europe's poor, Liebig developed a formula for producing beef extract. The details were published in 1847 so that \"the benefit of it should ... be placed at the command of as large a number of persons as possible by the extension of the manufacture, and consequently a reduction in the cost\".\nProduction was not economically feasible in Europe, where meat was expensive, but in Uruguay and New South Wales, meat was an inexpensive byproduct of the leather industry. In 1865, Liebig partnered with Belgian engineer George Christian Giebert, and was named scientific director of Liebig's Extract of Meat Company, located in Fray Bentos in Uruguay.\nOther companies also attempted to market meat extracts under the name \"Liebig's Extract of Meat\". In Britain, a competitor's right to use the name was successfully defended on the grounds that the name had fallen into general use and become a generic term before the creation of any particular company. The judge asserted that \"Purchasers must use their eyes\", and considered the presentation of the products to be sufficiently different to enable the discriminating consumer to determine which of the products bore Liebig's signature and was supported by Liebig himself.\nLiebig's company initially promoted their \"meat tea\" for its curative powers and nutritional value as a cheap, nutritious alternative to real meat. But such claims did not hold up to scrutiny. In 1868 the German physiologist https:// ran an experiment involving feeding the extract to dogs, every one of which died. After claims of its nutritional value were questioned, the company emphasized its convenience and flavor, marketing it as a comfort food.\nThe Liebig company worked with popular cookery writers in various countries to popularize their products. German cookery writer Henriette Davidis wrote recipes for \"Improved and Economic Cookery\" and other cookbooks. Katharina Prato wrote an Austro-Hungarian recipe book, \"Die Praktische Verwerthung Kochrecepte\" (1879). Hannah M. Young was commissioned in England to write \"Practical Cookery Book\" for the Liebig Company. In the United States, Maria Parloa extolled the benefits of Liebig's extract. Colorful calendars and trading cards were also marketed to popularize the product.\nThe company also worked with British chemist Henry Enfield Roscoe to develop a related product, which it registered some years after Liebig's death, under the \"Oxo\" trademark. Oxo was trademarked worldwide in 1899 and in the United Kingdom in 1900. Originally a liquid, Oxo was released in cubed solid form in 1911.\nMarmite.\nLiebig studied other foods, as well. He promoted the use of baking powder to make lighter bread, studied the chemistry of coffee-making and oatmeal. He is considered to have made possible the invention of Marmite, because of his discovery that yeast could be concentrated to form yeast extract.\nInfant Formula\nLiebig produced some of the world's first infant formula, a breast-milk substitute for babies who could not breast-feed. However, the product proved controversial, even though Liebig did not make any royalties off it. Liebig first came up with the idea based on the struggles of his favorite daughter, Johanna, who struggled to breastfeed her daughter, Carolina, who was born in 1864. (Johanna did not want to seek a wet-nurse, a common but controversial practice at the time.) Carolina, according to Liebig, thrived on the formula. But other scientists were skeptical. One of them, a French doctor in Paris named Jean-Anne-Henri Depaul, decided to test his formula on four infants whose mothers could not suckle.\nLiebig himself prepared the first batches of formula. Depaul first gave it to a set of twins, who were born somewhat premature and weighed 2.24 kilograms (4.93 pounds) and 2.64\u00a0kg (5.82\u00a0lbs.). Both died within two days. Depaul tried it on a third baby, born full-term at 3.37\u00a0kg (7.43\u00a0lbs.); it soon began passing green \"https://\" and died within three days. A fourth child, weighing 2.76\u00a0kg, also developed green stools and died within four days. At this point, Depaul stopped the experiment.\nAt first, Depaul kept the experiment to himself. But he attended a meeting of the French Academy of Medicine. And while didn't want to say anything at first, he felt he had to after another member of the Academy rose to speak, a pharmacist named Nicholas-Jean-Baptiste-Gaston Guibourt. Guibourt had grave doubts about Liebig's artificial milk, calling it \"fake milk\" (in French, \"lait factice\"). As historian https:// has written, \"He [i.e., Guibourt] worried that the substance would either spoil in liquid form or lose its nutritive quality and convenience in solid form.\" Upon hearing Guibourt speak, Depaul felt it incumbent upon him to speak as well, and mentioned his experiments with Liebig's formula.\nMany ethical questions were quickly raised. Publications in France generally supported Depaul, while German publications rallied to Liebig's defense.\nMajor works.\nLiebig founded the journal \"Annalen der Chemie\", which he edited from 1832. Originally titled \"Annalen der Pharmacie\", it became \"Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie\" to more accurately reflect its content. It became the leading journal of organic chemistry, and still exists, albeit under the name \"European Journal of Organic Chemistry\" after several mergers with other journals. The volumes from his lifetime are often referenced just as \"Liebigs Annalen\"; following his death the title was officially changed to \"Justus Liebig's Annalen der Chemie\".\nLiebig published widely in \"Liebigs Annalen\" and elsewhere, in newspapers and journals. Most of his books were published concurrently in both German and English, and many were translated into other languages, as well. Some of his most influential titles include:\nIn addition to books and articles, he wrote thousands of letters, most of them to other scientists.\nLiebig also directly influenced the German publication of John Stuart Mill's \"Logic.\" Liebig had a close friendship with the Vieweg family publishing house. He arranged for his former student Jacob Schiel (1813\u20131889) to translate Mill's important work for German publication. Liebig liked Mill's \"Logic\" in part because it promoted science as a means to social and political progress, but also because Mill featured several examples of Liebig's research as an ideal for the scientific method. In this way, he sought to reform politics in the German states.\nLater life.\nIn 1852, after asking Hermann Kopp to take over management of the \"Annalen der Chemie\", Liebig accepted an appointment from King Maximilian II of Bavaria to the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich. He also became the Royal scientific advisor to King Maximilian II, who hoped to transform the University of Munich into a center for scientific research and development. In part, Liebig accepted the post because, at age 50, he was finding supervision of large numbers of laboratory students increasingly difficult. His new accommodations in Munich reflected this shift in focus. They included a comfortable house suitable for extensive entertaining, a small laboratory, and a newly built lecture theatre capable of holding 300 people with a demonstration laboratory at the front. There, he gave lectures to the university and fortnightly to the public. In his position as a promoter of science, Liebig was appointed president of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities, becoming perpetual president of the Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences in 1858.\nIn the 1850s, Liebig moved next door to the noted classics scholar and philologist Friederich Thiersch in the city of Munich. Liebig had previously scorned philologists like Thiersch in articles. (Liebig promoted science over supposedly impractical fields like the classics.) But Liebig's most beloved daughter, Johanna, fell in love with Thiersch's second son, Karl, who had studied medicine in several cities, including Berlin and Vienna. Johanna and Karl reportedly had a happy marriage, producing six children: four daughters and two sons. It was fairly common for the sons and daughters of academics to marry in Germany then.\nLiebig enjoyed a personal friendship with Maximilian II, who died on 10 March 1864. After Maximilian's death, Liebig and other liberal Protestant scientists in Bavaria were increasingly opposed by ultramontane Catholics.\nLiebig died in Munich in 1873, and is buried in the Alter S\u00fcdfriedhof in Munich.\nAwards and honors.\nLiebig was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1837.\nHe became a first-class member of the Ludwig Order, founded by Ludwig I, and awarded by Ludwig II on 24 July 1837.\nIn 1838, he became a correspondent of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands; when that became the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1851, he joined as a foreign member.\nThe British Royal Society awarded him the Copley Medal \"for his discoveries in organic chemistry, and particularly for his development of the composition and theory of organic radicals\" in 1840.\nIn 1841, botanist Stephan Friedrich Ladislaus Endlicher (1804\u20131849) published a genus of flowering plants from Malesia, belonging to the family Gesneriaceae, as \"Liebigia\" in his honour.\nKing Ludwig II of Bavaria ennobled Liebig on 29 December 1845, conferring on him the hereditary title of \"Freiherr\" von Liebig. In English, the closest translation is Baron von Liebig.\nIn 1850, he received the French \"L\u00e9gion d'honneur\", presented by chemist Jean-Baptiste Dumas, the French trade minister.\nHe was honored with the Prussian Order of Merit for Science by Friedrich Wilhelm IV of Prussia in 1851.\nHe was elected as a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1862.\nIn 1869, Liebig was awarded the Albert Medal by the Royal Society of Arts, \"for his numerous valuable researches and writings, which have contributed most importantly to the development of food-economy and agriculture, to the advancement of chemical science, and to the benefits derived from that science by Arts, Manufactures, and Commerce.\"\nPosthumous honors.\nLiebig's portrait appeared on the 100\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01 banknote issued by the Reichsbank from 1935 until 1945. Printing ceased in 1945 but the note remained in circulation until the issue of the Deutsche Mark on 21 June 1948.\nIn 1946, after the end of World War II, the University of Giessen was officially renamed after him, \"Justus-Liebig-Universit\u00e4t Giessen\".\nIn 1953, the West German post office issued a stamp in his honor.\nIn 1953, the third General Assembly of the International Scientific Centre of Fertilizers (CIEC), founded in 1932, was organized in Darmstadt to honor Justus von Liebig on the 150th anniversary of his birth.\nA portrait of Liebig hangs in the Burlington House headquarters of the Royal Society of Chemistry. It was presented to the society's forerunner, the Chemical Society, by his god-daughter, Mrs Alex Tweedie, n\u00e9e Harley, daughter of Emma Muspratt.\nLiebig medals.\nSome organizations have granted medals in honor of Liebig. In 1871, the Versammlung deutscher Land- und Forstwirte (Assembly of German Farmers and Foresters) was first awarded a Liebig Gold Medal, given to Theodor Reuning. The image was struck from a portrait commissioned in 1869 from Friedrich Brehmer.\nFor several years, the Liebig Trust Fund, established by Baron Liebig, was administered by the Royal Bavarian Academy of Sciences at Munich and members of the Liebig family. They were empowered to award gold and silver Liebig Medals to deserving German scientists \"for the purpose of encouraging research in agricultural science\". Silver medals could be awarded to scientists from other countries. Some of those who received medals include:\nIn 1903, the Verein deutscher Chemiker (Association of German Chemists) also had a medal struck using Brehmer's portrait. Their Liebig Medal was first awarded in 1903 to Adolf von Baeyer, and in 1904 to Dr. Rudolf Knietsch of the Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik. As of 2024[ [update]], it continues to be awarded.\nAt the third World Congress of CIEC, held at Heidelberg in 1957, the \"Sprengel-Liebig Medal\" was awarded to Dr. E. Feisst, president of CIEC, for outstanding contributions in agricultural chemistry.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16025", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16025", "title": "January 20", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearJanuary 20 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nNotes.\nIn ancient astrology, it is the cusp day between Capricorn and Aquarius.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "16026", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16026", "title": "J K Rowling", "text": ""}
