{"id": "12232", "revid": "50942774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12232", "title": "Gustave Eiffel", "text": "French civil engineer (1832\u20131923)\nAlexandre Gustave Eiffel ( , ; n\u00e9 Bonickhausen dit Eiffel; 15 December 1832 \u2013 27 December 1923) was a French civil engineer. A graduate of \u00c9cole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures, he made his name with various bridges for the French railway network, most famously the Garabit Viaduct. He is best known for the Eiffel Tower, designed by his company and built for the 1889 Universal Exposition in Paris, and his contribution to building the Statue of Liberty in New York. After his retirement from engineering, Eiffel focused on research into meteorology and aerodynamics, making significant contributions in both fields. \nEarly life.\nAlexandre Gustave Eiffel was born in France, in the C\u00f4te-d'Or, the first child of Catherine-M\u00e9lanie (n\u00e9e Moneuse) and Alexandre Bonickhausen dit Eiffel. He was a descendant of Jean-Ren\u00e9 B\u00f6nickhausen, who had emigrated from the German town of Marmagen and settled in Paris at the beginning of the 18th century. The family adopted the name Eiffel as a reference to the Eifel mountains in the region from which they had come. Although the family always used the name Eiffel, Gustave's name was registered at birth as Bonickhausen dit Eiffel, and was not formally changed to Eiffel until 1880.\nAt the time of Gustave's birth, his father, an ex-soldier, was working as an administrator for the French Army; but shortly after his birth his mother expanded a charcoal business she had inherited from her parents to include a coal-distribution business, and soon afterwards his father gave up his job to assist her. Due to his mother's business commitments, Gustave spent his childhood living with his grandmother, but nevertheless remained close to his mother, who was to remain an influential figure until her death in 1878. The business was successful enough for Catherine Eiffel to sell it in 1843 and retire on the proceeds. Eiffel was not a studious child, and thought his classes at the Lyc\u00e9e Royal in Dijon boring and a waste of time, although in his last two years, influenced by his teachers for history and literature, he began to study seriously, and he gained his baccalaur\u00e9ats in humanities and science.\nAn important part in his education was played by his uncle, Jean-Baptiste Mollerat, who had invented a process for distilling vinegar and had a large chemical works near Dijon, and one of his uncle's friends, the chemist Michel Perret. Both men spent a lot of time with the young Eiffel, teaching him about everything from chemistry and mining to theology and philosophy.\nEiffel went on to attend the Coll\u00e8ge Sainte-Barbe in Paris, to prepare for the difficult entrance exams set by engineering colleges in France, and qualified for entry to two of the most prestigious schools \u2013 \u00c9cole polytechnique and \u00c9cole Centrale des Arts et Manufactures \u2013 and ultimately entered the latter. During his second year he chose to specialize in chemistry, and graduated ranking at 13th place out of 80 candidates in 1855. This was the year that Paris hosted a World's Fair, and Eiffel's mother bought him a season ticket .\nEarly career.\nAfter graduation, Eiffel had hoped to find work in his uncle's workshop in Dijon, but a family dispute made this impossible. After a few months working as an unpaid assistant to his brother-in-law, who managed a foundry, Eiffel approached the railway engineer Charles Nepveu, who gave Eiffel his first paid job as his private secretary. However, shortly afterwards Nepveu's company went bankrupt, Nepveu found Eiffel a job designing a sheet iron bridge for the Saint Germaine railway. Some of Nepveu's businesses were then acquired by the Compagnie Belge de Mat\u00e9riels de Chemin de Fer: Nepveu was appointed the managing director of the two factories in Paris, and offered Eiffel a job as head of the research department. In 1857 Nepveu negotiated a contract to build a railway bridge over the river Garonne at Bordeaux, connecting the Paris-Bordeaux line to the lines running to S\u00e8te and Bayonne, which involved the construction of a iron girder bridge supported by six pairs of masonry piers on the river bed. These were constructed with the aid of compressed air caissons and hydraulic rams, both innovative techniques at the time. Eiffel was initially given the responsibility of assembling the metalwork and eventually took over the management of the entire project from Nepveu, who resigned in March 1860.\nFollowing the completion of the project on schedule Eiffel was appointed as the principal engineer of the Compagnie Belge. His work had also gained the attention of several people who were later to give him work, including Stanislas de la Roche Toulay, who had prepared the design for the metalwork of the Bordeaux bridge, Jean Baptiste Krantz and Wilhelm Nordling. Further promotion within the company followed, but the business began to decline, and in 1865 Eiffel, seeing no future there, resigned and set up as an independent consulting engineer. He was already working independently on the construction of two railway stations, at Toulouse and Agen, and in 1866 he was given a contract to oversee the construction of 33 locomotives for the Egyptian government, a profitable but undemanding job in the course of which he visited Egypt, where he visited the Suez Canal which was being constructed by Ferdinand de Lesseps. At the same time he was employed by Jean-Baptiste Kranz to assist him in the design of the exhibition hall for the Exposition Universelle which was to be held in 1867. Eiffel's principal job was to draw up the arch girders of the Galerie des Machines. In order to carry out this work, Eiffel and Henri Treca, the director of the Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers, conducted valuable research on the structural properties of cast iron, definitively establishing the modulus of elasticity applicable to compound castings.\nEiffel et Cie.\nAt the end of 1866 Eiffel managed to borrow enough cash to set up his own workshops at 48 Rue Fouquet in Levallois-Perret. His first important commission was for two viaducts for the railway line between Lyon and Bordeaux, and the company also began to undertake work in other countries, including St. Mark's Cathedral in Arica, Peru, which was an all-metal prefabricated building, manufactured in France and shipped to South America in pieces to be assembled on site; first it was intended for the city of Anc\u00f3n, a beach near Lima, but the Peruvian Government of President Jos\u00e9 Balta changed the final destination to Arica because the old church was destroyed by an earthquake on 13 August 1868. Because of this, a committee of ladies of Arica asked Balta to relocate Eiffel's structure to Arica.\nOn 6 October 1868 he entered into partnership with Th\u00e9ophile Seyrig, a fellow graduate of the \u00c9cole Centrale, forming the company Eiffel et Cie.\nIn 1875, Eiffel et Cie were given two important contracts, one for the Budapest Nyugati railway station for the Vienna to Budapest railway and the other for a bridge over the river Douro in Portugal. The station in Budapest was an innovative design. The usual pattern for building a railway terminus was to conceal the metal structure behind an elaborate facade: Eiffel's design for Budapest used the metal structure as the centerpiece of the building, flanked on either side by conventional stone and brick-clad structures housing administrative offices.\nThe bridge over the Douro came about as the result of a competition held by the Royal Portuguese Railroad Company. The task was a demanding one: the river was fast-flowing, up to deep, and had a bed formed of a deep layer of gravel which made the construction of piers on the river bed impossible, and so the bridge had to have a central span of . This was greater than the longest arch span which had been built at the time.\nEiffel's proposal was for a bridge whose deck was supported by five iron piers, with the abutments of the pair on the river bank also bearing a central supporting arch. The price quoted by Eiffel was FF.965,000, far below the nearest competitor and so he was given the job, although since his company was less experienced than his rivals the Portuguese authorities appointed a committee to report on Eiffel et Cie's suitability. The members included Jean-Baptiste Krantz, Henri Dion and L\u00e9on Molinos, both of whom had known Eiffel for a long time: their report was favorable, and Eiffel got the job. On-site work began in January 1876 and was complete by the end of October 1877: the bridge was ceremonially opened by King Lu\u00eds I and Queen Maria Pia, after whom the bridge was named, on 4 November.\nThe Exposition Universelle in 1878 firmly established his reputation as one of the leading engineers of the time. As well as exhibiting models and drawings of work undertaken by the company, Eiffel was also responsible for the construction of several of the exhibition buildings. One of these, a pavilion for the Paris Gas Company, was Eiffel's first collaboration with Stephen Sauvestre, who was later to become the head of the company's architectural office.\nIn 1879 the partnership with Seyrig was dissolved, and the company was renamed the Compagnie des \u00c9tablissements Eiffel.\nThe same year the company was given the contract for the Garabit viaduct, a railway bridge near Ruynes en Margeride in the Cantal d\u00e9partement. Like the Douro bridge, the project involved a lengthy viaduct crossing the river valley as well as the river itself, and Eiffel was given the job without any process of competitive tendering due to his success with the bridge over the Douro. To assist him in the work he took on several people who were to play important roles in the design and construction of the Eiffel Tower, including Maurice Koechlin, a young graduate of the Zurich Polytechnikum, who was engaged to undertake calculations and make drawings, and \u00c9mile Nouguier, who had previously worked for Eiffel on the construction of the Douro bridge.\nThe same year Eiffel started work on a system of standardised prefabricated bridges, an idea that was the result of a conversation with the governor of Cochin-China. These used a small number of standard components, all small enough to be readily transportable in areas with poor or non-existent roads, and were joined using bolts rather than rivets, reducing the need for skilled labour on site. A number of different types were produced, ranging from footbridges to standard-gauge railway bridges.\nIn 1881 Eiffel was contacted by Auguste Bartholdi who was in need of an engineer to help him to realise the Statue of Liberty. Some work had already been carried out by Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc, but he had died in 1879. Eiffel was selected because of his experience with wind stresses. Eiffel devised a structure consisting of a four legged pylon to support the copper sheeting which made up the body of the statue. The entire statue was erected at the Eiffel works in Paris before being dismantled and shipped to the United States.\nIn 1886 Eiffel also designed the dome for the Astronomical Observatory in Nice. This was the most important building in a complex designed by Charles Garnier, later among the most prominent critics of the Tower. The dome, with a diameter of , was the largest in the world when built and used an ingenious bearing device: rather than running on wheels or rollers, it was supported by a ring-shaped hollow girder floating in a circular trough containing a solution of magnesium chloride in water. This had been patented by Eiffel in 1881.\nThe Eiffel Tower.\nThe design of the Eiffel Tower was originated by Maurice Koechlin and Emile Nouguier, who had discussed ideas for a centrepiece for the 1889 Exposition Universelle. In May 1884 Koechlin, working at his home, made an outline drawing of their scheme, described by him as \"a great pylon, consisting of four lattice girders standing apart at the base and coming together at the top, joined together by metal trusses at regular intervals\". Initially Eiffel showed little enthusiasm, although he did sanction further study of the project, and the two engineers then asked Stephen Sauvestre to add architectural embellishments. Sauvestre added the decorative arches to the base, a glass pavilion to the first level and the cupola at the top. The enhanced idea gained Eiffel's support for the project, and he bought the rights to the patent on the design which Koechlin, Nougier and Sauvestre had taken out. The design was exhibited at the Exhibition of Decorative Arts in the autumn of 1884, and on 30 March 1885 Eiffel read a paper on the project to the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Ing\u00e9nieurs Civils. After discussing the technical problems and emphasising the practical uses of the tower, he finished his talk by saying that the tower would symbolise&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"not only the art of the modern engineer, but also the century of Industry and Science in which we are living, and for which the way was prepared by the great scientific movement of the eighteenth century and by the Revolution of 1789, to which this monument will be built as an expression of France's gratitude.\"\nLittle happened until the beginning of 1886, but with the re-election of Jules Gr\u00e9vy as president and his appointment of Edouard Lockroy as Minister for Trade decisions began to be made. A budget for the Exposition was passed and on 1 May Lockroy announced an alteration to the terms of the open competition which was being held for a centerpiece for the exposition, which effectively made the choice of Eiffel's design a foregone conclusion: all entries had to include a study for a four-sided metal tower on the Champ de Mars. On 12 May a commission was set up to examine Eiffel's scheme and its rivals and on 12 June it presented its decision, which was that only Eiffel's proposal met their requirements. After some debate about the exact site for the tower, a contract was signed on 8 January 1887. This was signed by Eiffel acting in his own capacity rather than as the representative of his company, and granted him one and a half million francs toward the construction costs. This was less than a quarter of the estimated cost of six and a half million francs. Eiffel was to receive all income from the commercial exploitation during the exhibition and for the following twenty years. Eiffel later established a separate company to manage the tower.\nThe tower had been a subject of some controversy, attracting criticism both from those who did not believe it feasible and from those who objected on artistic grounds. Just as work began at the Champ de Mars, the \"Committee of Three Hundred\" (one member for each metre of the tower's height) was formed, led by Charles Garnier and including some of the most important figures of the French arts establishment, including Adolphe Bouguereau, Guy de Maupassant, Charles Gounod and Jules Massenet: a petition was sent to Jean-Charles Adolphe Alphand, the Minister of Works, and was published by \"Le Temps\". &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"To bring our arguments home, imagine for a moment a giddy, ridiculous tower dominating Paris like a gigantic black smokestack, crushing under its barbaric bulk Notre Dame, the Tour Saint-Jacques, the Louvre, the Dome of les Invalides, the Arc de Triomphe, all of our humiliated monuments will disappear in this ghastly dream. And for twenty years ... we shall see stretching like a blot of ink the hateful shadow of the hateful column of bolted sheet metal\"\nWork on the foundations started on 28 January 1887. Those for the east and south legs were straightforward, each leg resting on four concrete slabs, one for each of the principal girders of each leg but the other two, being closer to the river Seine were more complicated: each slab needed two piles installed by using compressed-air caissons long and in diameter driven to a depth of to support the concrete slabs, which were thick. Each of these slabs supported a limestone block, each with an inclined top to bear the supporting shoe for the ironwork. These shoes were anchored by bolts 10\u00a0cm (4\u00a0in) in diameter and long.\nWork on the foundations was complete by 30 June and the erection of the iron work was started. Although no more than 250 men were employed on the site, a prodigious amount of exacting preparatory work was entailed: the drawing office produced 1,700 general drawings and 3,629 detail drawings of the 18,038 different parts needed. The task of drawing the components was complicated by the complex angles involved in the design and the degree of precision required: the positions of rivet holes were specified to within 0.1\u00a0mm (0.004\u00a0in) and angles worked out to one second of arc. The components, some already riveted together into sub-assemblies, were first bolted together, the bolts being replaced by rivets as construction progressed. No drilling or shaping was done on site: if any part did not fit it was sent back to the factory for alteration. The four legs, each at an angle of 54\u00b0 to the ground, were initially constructed as cantilevers, relying on the anchoring bolts in the masonry foundation blocks. Eiffel had calculated that this would be satisfactory until they approached halfway to the first level: accordingly work was stopped for the purpose of erecting a wooden supporting scaffold. This gave ammunition to his critics, and lurid headlines including \"Eiffel Suicide!\" and \"Gustave Eiffel has gone mad: he has been confined in an Asylum\" appeared in the popular press. At this stage a small \"creeper\" crane was installed in each leg, designed to move up the tower as construction progressed and making use of the guides for the elevators which were to be fitted in each leg. After this brief pause erection of the metalwork continued, and the critical operation of linking the four legs was successfully completed by March 1888. In order to precisely align the legs so that the connecting girders could be put into place, a provision had been made to enable precise adjustments by placing hydraulic jacks in the footings for each of the girders making up the legs.\nThe main structural work was completed at the end of March 1889 and, on 31 March, Eiffel celebrated by leading a group of government officials, accompanied by representatives of the press, to the top of the tower. Since the lifts were not yet in operation, the ascent was made by foot, and took over an hour, Eiffel frequently stopping to make explanations of various features. Most of the party chose to stop at the lower levels, but a few, including Nouguier, Compagnon, the President of the City Council and reporters from \"Le Figaro\" and \"Le Monde Illustr\u00e9\" completed the climb. At 2.35 Eiffel hoisted a large tricolour, to the accompaniment of a 25-gun salute fired from the lower level.\nThe Panama Scandal.\nIn 1887, Eiffel became involved with the French effort to construct a canal across the Panama Isthmus. The French Panama Canal Company, headed by Ferdinand de Lesseps, had been attempting to build a sea-level canal, but came to the realization that this was impractical. The plan was changed to one using locks, which Eiffel was contracted to design and build. The locks were on a large scale, most having a change of level of . Eiffel had been working on the project for little more than a year when the company suspended payments of interest on 14 December 1888, and shortly afterwards was put into liquidation. Eiffel's reputation was badly damaged when he was implicated in the financial and political scandal which followed. Although he was simply a contractor, he was charged along with the directors of the project with raising money under false pretenses and misappropriation of funds. On 9 February 1893, Eiffel was found guilty on the charge of misuse of funds and was fined 20,000 francs and sentenced to two years in prison, although he was acquitted on appeal. The later American-built canal used new lock designs (see History of the Panama Canal).\nShortly before the trial, Eiffel had announced his intention to resign from the Board of Directors of the Compagnie des Etablissements Eiffel and did so at a General Meeting held on 14 February, saying, \"I have absolutely decided to abstain from any participation in any manufacturing business from now on, and so that no one can be misled and to make it most evident I intend to remain uninvolved with the establishments that bears my name, and insist that it be removed from the company's name.\" The company changed its name to La Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Constructions Levallois-Perret, with Maurice Koechlin as managing director. The name was changed to the Anciens Etablissements Eiffel in 1937.\nLater career.\nAfter his retirement from the Compagnie des Etablissements Eiffel, Eiffel went on to do important work in meteorology and aerodynamics. Eiffel's interest in these areas was a consequence of the problems he had encountered with the effects of wind forces on the structures he had built.\nHis first aerodynamic experiments, investigating the air resistance of surfaces, were carried out by dropping the surface to be investigated together with a measuring apparatus down a vertical cable stretched between the second level of the Eiffel Tower and the ground. Using this Eiffel definitely established that the air resistance of a body was very closely related to the square of the airspeed. He then built a laboratory on the Champ de Mars at the foot of the tower in 1905, building his first wind tunnel there in 1909. The wind tunnel was used to investigate the characteristics of the airfoil sections used by the early pioneers of aviation such as the Wright Brothers, Gabriel Voisin and Louis Bl\u00e9riot. Eiffel established that the lift produced by an airfoil was the result of a reduction of air pressure above the wing rather than an increase of pressure acting on the under surface. Following complaints about noise from people living nearby, he moved his experiments to a new establishment at Auteuil in 1912. Here it was possible to build a larger wind tunnel, and Eiffel began to make tests using scale models of aircraft designs.\nIn 1913 Eiffel was awarded the Samuel P. Langley Medal for Aerodromics by the Smithsonian Institution. In his speech at the presentation of the medal, Alexander Graham Bell said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...his writings upon the resistance of the air have already become classical. His researches, published in 1907 and 1911, on the resistance of the air in connection with aviation, are especially valuable. They have given engineers the data for designing and constructing flying machines upon sound, scientific principles\nEiffel had meteorological measuring equipment placed on the tower in 1889, and also built a weather station at his house in S\u00e8vres. Between 1891 and 1892 he compiled a complete set of meteorological readings, and later extended his record-taking to include measurements from 25 different locations across France.\nEiffel died on 27 December 1923, while listening to Beethoven's 5th symphony \"andante\", in his mansion on Rue Rabelais in Paris. He was buried in the family tomb in Levallois-Perret Cemetery.\nInfluence.\nGustave Eiffel's career was a result of the Industrial Revolution. For a variety of economic and political reasons, this had been slow to make an impact in France, and Eiffel had the good fortune to be working at a time of rapid industrial development in France. Eiffel's importance as an engineer was twofold. Firstly he was ready to adopt innovative techniques first used by others, such as his use of compressed-air caissons and hollow cast-iron piers, and secondly he was a pioneer in his insistence on basing all engineering decisions on thorough calculation of the forces involved, combining this analytical approach with an insistence on a high standard of accuracy in drawing and manufacture.\nThe growth of the railway network had an immense effect on people's lives, but although the enormous number of bridges and other work undertaken by Eiffel were an important part of this, the two works that did most to make him famous are the Statue of Liberty and the Eiffel Tower, both projects of immense symbolic importance and today internationally recognized landmarks. The Tower is also important because of its role in establishing the aesthetic potential of structures whose appearance is largely dictated by practical considerations.\nHis contribution to the science of aerodynamics is probably of equal importance to his work as an engineer.\nHeritage protection efforts.\nA number of works of Gustave Eiffel are in danger today. Some have already been destroyed, like in Vietnam.\nA proposal to demolish the railway bridge of Bordeaux (also known as the \"passerelle St Jean\"), the first major work of Gustave Eiffel, resulted in a large response from the public. Actions to protect the bridge were taken as early as 2002 by the \"Association of the Descendants of Gustave Eiffel\", joined from 2005 onwards by the Association \"Sauvons la Passerelle Eiffel\" (\"Save the Eiffel Bridge\"). They led, in 2010, to the decision to list Eiffel's Bordeaux bridge as a French Historical Monument.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12233", "revid": "10773111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12233", "title": "Greenpeace", "text": "Non-governmental environmental organization\nGreenpeace is an independent global campaigning network, founded in Canada in 1971 by a group of environmental activists. Greenpeace states its goal is to \"ensure the ability of the Earth to nurture life in all its diversity\", and focuses its campaigning on worldwide issues such as climate change, deforestation, overfishing, commercial whaling, genetic engineering, anti-war, and anti-nuclear issues. It uses direct action, advocacy, research, and ecotage to achieve its goals. The network comprises 26 independent national/regional organisations in over 55 countries across Europe, the Americas, Africa, Asia, Australia and the Pacific, as well as a coordinating body, Greenpeace International, based in Amsterdam, Netherlands.\nThe global network does not accept funding from governments, corporations, or political parties, relying on three million individual supporters and foundation grants. Greenpeace has a general consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council and is a founding member of the INGO Accountability Charter, an international non-governmental organization that intends to foster accountability and transparency of non-governmental organizations.\nGreenpeace is known for its nonviolent direct actions and has been described as one of the most visible environmental organizations in the world. It has raised environmental issues to public awareness and knowledge, and influenced both the private and the public sector. The organization has received criticism; it was the subject of an open letter from more than 100 Nobel laureates urging Greenpeace to end its campaign against genetically modified organisms (GMOs).\nThe organization's direct actions have sparked legal actions against Greenpeace itself and activists. In March 2025, a nine-person North Dakota jury found Greenpeace liable for more than $660 million in damages and defamation for the 2016 to 2017 Standing Rock Protests against the Dakota Access Pipeline. Additionally, activists received fines and suspended sentences for destroying a test plot of genetically modified wheat, and according to the Peruvian Government prosecutors and the court's decision for damaging the Nazca Lines, a UN World Heritage site.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nIn the late 1960s, the U.S. had planned its \"Cannikin\" underground nuclear weapon test in the tectonically unstable island of Amchitka in Alaska; the plans raised some concerns of the test triggering earthquakes and causing a tsunami. Some 7,000 people blocked the Peace Arch Border Crossing between British Columbia and Washington, carrying signs reading \"Don't Make A Wave. It's Your Fault If Our Fault Goes\". and \"Stop My Ark's Not Finished\". The protests did not stop the U.S. from detonating the bomb.\nWhile no earthquake or tsunami followed the test, the opposition grew when the U.S. announced they would detonate a bomb five times more powerful than the first one. Among the opponents were Jim Bohlen, a veteran who had served in the U.S. Navy, and Irving Stowe and Dorothy Stowe, who had recently become Quakers. They were frustrated by the lack of action by the Sierra Club Canada, of which they were members. From Irving Stowe, Jim Bohlen learned of a form of passive resistance, \"bearing witness\", where objectionable activity is protested simply by mere presence. Jim Bohlen's wife Marie came up with the idea to sail to Amchitka, inspired by the anti-nuclear voyages of Albert Bigelow in 1958. The idea ended up in the press and was linked to The Sierra Club. The Sierra Club did not like this connection and in 1970 the Don't Make a Wave Committee was established for the protest. Early meetings were held in the Shaughnessy home of Robert Hunter and his wife Bobbi Hunter. Subsequently, the Stowe home at 2775 Courtenay Street in Vancouver became the headquarters. As Rex Weyler put it in his chronology, \"Greenpeace\", in 1969, the Stowes' quiet home on Courtenay Street \"would soon become a hub of monumental, global significance\". Some of the first Greenpeace meetings were held there. The first office was opened in a backroom storefront on Cypress and West Broadway southeast corner in Kitsilano, Vancouver. Within half a year Greenpeace moved in to share the upstairs office space with The Society Promoting Environmental Conservation on the second floor at 2007, 4th Ave. and Maple in Kitsilano.\nIrving Stowe arranged a benefit concert (supported by Joan Baez) that took place on 16 October 1970 at the Pacific Coliseum in Vancouver. The concert created the financial basis for the first Greenpeace campaign. Amchitka, the 1970 concert that launched Greenpeace was published by Greenpeace in November 2009 on CD and is also available as an mp3 download via the Amchitka concert website. Using the money raised with the concert, the Don't Make a Wave Committee chartered a ship, the \"Phyllis Cormack\" owned and sailed by John Cormack. The ship was renamed \"Greenpeace\" for the protest after a term coined by activist Bill Darnell. The complete crew included: Captain John Cormack (the boat's owner), Jim Bohlen, Bill Darnell, Patrick Moore, Dr Lyle Thurston, Dave Birmingham, Terry A. Simmons, Richard Fineberg, Robert Hunter (journalist), Ben Metcalfe (journalist), Bob Cummings (journalist) and Bob Keziere (photographer).\nOn 15 September 1971, the ship sailed towards Amchitka and faced the U.S. Coast Guard ship \"Confidence\", which forced the activists to turn back. Because of this and the increasingly bad weather the crew decided to return to Canada only to find out that the news about their journey and reported support from the crew of the \"Confidence\" had generated sympathy for their protest. After this, Greenpeace tried to navigate to the test site with other vessels until the U.S. detonated the bomb. The nuclear test was criticized, and the U.S. decided not to continue with their test plans at Amchitka.\nFounders and founding time of Greenpeace.\nEnvironmental historian Frank Zelko dates the formation of the \"Don't Make a Wave Committee\" to 1969 and, according to Jim Bohlen, the group adopted the name \"Don't Make a Wave Committee\" on 28 November 1969. According to the Greenpeace web site, The Don't Make a Wave Committee was established in 1970. The certificate of incorporation of The Don't Make a Wave Committee dates the incorporation to the fifth of October, 1970. Researcher Vanessa Timmer dates the official incorporation to 1971. Greenpeace itself calls the protest voyage of 1971 as \"the beginning\". According to Patrick Moore, who was an early member and has since mutually distanced himself from Greenpeace, and Rex Weyler, the name of \"The Don't Make a Wave Committee\" was officially changed to Greenpeace Foundation in 1972.\nVanessa Timmer has referred to the early members as \"an unlikely group of loosely organized protestors\". Frank Zelko has commented that \"unlike Friends of the Earth, for example, which sprung fully formed from the forehead of David Brower, Greenpeace developed in a more evolutionary manner. There was no single founder\". Greenpeace itself says on its web page that \"there's a joke that in any bar in Vancouver, British Columbia, you can sit down next to someone who claims to have founded Greenpeace. In fact, there was no single founder: name, idea, spirit and tactics can all be said to have separate lineages\". Patrick Moore has said that \"the truth is that Greenpeace was always a work in progress, not something definitively founded like a country or a company. Therefore there are a few shades of gray about who might lay claim to being a founder of Greenpeace.\" Early Greenpeace director Rex Weyler says on his homepage that the insiders of Greenpeace have debated about the founders since the mid-1970s.\nThe current Greenpeace web site lists the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee as Dorothy and Irving Stowe, Marie and Jim Bohlen, Ben and Dorothy Metcalfe, and Robert Hunter. According to both Patrick Moore and an interview with Dorothy Stowe, Dorothy Metcalfe, Jim Bohlen and Robert Hunter, the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee were Paul Cote, Irving and Dorothy Stowe and Jim and Marie Bohlen.\nPaul Watson, founder of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society maintains that he also was one of the founders of The Don't Make a Wave Committee and Greenpeace. Greenpeace has stated that Watson was an influential early member, but not one of the founders of Greenpeace. Watson has since accused Greenpeace of rewriting their history. Because Patrick Moore was among the crew of the first protest voyage, Moore also considers himself one of the founders. Greenpeace claims that although Moore was a significant early member, he was not among the founders of Greenpeace.\nAfter Amchitka.\nAfter the office in the Stowe home, (and after the first concert fund-raiser) Greenpeace functions moved to other private homes and held public meetings weekly on Wednesday nights at the Kitsilano Neighborhood House before settling, in the autumn of 1974, in a small office shared with the SPEC environmental group at 2007 West 4th at Maple in Kitsilano. When the nuclear tests at Amchitka were over, Greenpeace moved its focus to the French atmospheric nuclear weapons testing at the Moruroa Atoll in French Polynesia. The young organization needed help for their protests and were contacted by David McTaggart, a former businessman living in New Zealand. In 1972 the yacht \"Vega\", a ketch owned by David McTaggart, was renamed \"Greenpeace III\" and sailed in an anti-nuclear protest into the exclusion zone at Moruroa to attempt to disrupt French nuclear testing. This voyage was sponsored and organized by the New Zealand branch of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. The French Navy tried to stop the protest in several ways, including assaulting David McTaggart. McTaggart was supposedly beaten to the point that he lost sight in one of his eyes. However, one of McTaggart's crew members photographed the incident and went public. After the assault was publicized, France announced it would stop the atmospheric nuclear tests.\nIn the mid-1970s some Greenpeace members started an independent campaign, Project Ahab, against commercial whaling, since Irving Stowe was against Greenpeace focusing on other issues than nuclear weapons. After Irving Stowe died in 1975, the \"Phyllis Cormack\" sailed from Vancouver to face Soviet whalers on the coast of California. Greenpeace activists disrupted the whaling by placing themselves between the harpoons and the whales, and footage of the protests spread across the world. Later in the 1970s, the organization widened its focus to include toxic waste and commercial seal hunting. The \"Greenpeace Declaration of Interdependence\" was published by Greenpeace in the \"Greenpeace Chronicles\" (Winter 1976\u201377). This declaration was a condensation of a number of ecological manifestos Bob Hunter had written over the years.\nOrganizational development.\nGreenpeace evolved from a group of Canadian and American protesters into a less conservative group of environmentalists who were more reflective of the counterculture and hippie youth movements of the 1960s and 1970s. The social and cultural background from which Greenpeace emerged heralded a period of de-conditioning away from Old World antecedents and sought to develop new codes of social, environmental and political behavior.\nIn the mid-1970s independent groups using the name Greenpeace started springing up worldwide. By 1977, there were 15 to 20 Greenpeace groups around the world, including Great Lakes Greenpeace at Michigan State University. At the same time the Canadian Greenpeace office was heavily in debt. Disputes between offices over fund-raising and organizational direction split the global movement as the North American offices were reluctant to be under the authority of the Canada office.\nAfter the incidents of Moruroa Atoll, David McTaggart had moved to France to battle in court with the French state and helped to develop the cooperation of European Greenpeace groups. David McTaggart lobbied the Canadian Greenpeace Foundation to accept a new structure bringing the scattered Greenpeace offices under the auspices of a single global organization. The European Greenpeace paid the debt of the Canadian Greenpeace office and on 14 October 1979, Greenpeace International came into existence. Under the new structure, the local offices contributed a percentage of their income to the international organization, which took responsibility for setting the overall direction of the movement with each regional office having one vote. Some Greenpeace groups, namely London Greenpeace (dissolved in 2001) and the US-based Greenpeace Foundation (still operational) however decided to remain independent from Greenpeace International.\nAlong with several other NGOs, Greenpeace was the subject of an improper and baseless investigation by the US Federal Bureau of Investigation between 2001 and 2005. The Inspector General of the US Justice Department determined that there was little or no basis for the investigation and that it resulted in the FBI making inaccurate and misleading claims to the United States Congress. In 2015, Greenpeace UK launched an investigative journalism publication called \"Unearthed\".\nOrganizational structure.\nGovernance.\nGreenpeace consists of \"Greenpeace International\" (officially Stichting Greenpeace Council) based in Amsterdam, Netherlands, and 25 regional offices operating in 55 countries. The regional offices work largely autonomously under the supervision of Greenpeace International. The executive director of Greenpeace is elected by the board members of Greenpeace International. The current international executive director of Greenpeace International is Mads Flarup Christensen and the current Chair of the Board is David Tong. Greenpeace has a staff of 2,400, and around 15,000 volunteers globally.\nEach regional office is led by a regional executive director elected by the regional board of directors. The regional boards also appoint a trustee to The Greenpeace International Annual General Meeting, where the trustees elect or remove the board of directors of Greenpeace International. The annual general meeting's role is also to discuss and decide the overall principles and strategically important issues for Greenpeace in collaboration with the trustees of regional offices and Greenpeace International board of directors.\nFunding.\nGreenpeace receives its funding from individual supporters and foundations. It screens all major donations in order to ensure it does not receive unwanted donations. Other than the Netherlands' National Postcode Lottery, the biggest government-sponsored lottery in that country, the organization does not accept money from governments, intergovernmental organizations, political parties or corporations in order to avoid their influence.\nDonations from foundations which are funded by political parties or receive most of their funding from governments or intergovernmental organizations are rejected. Foundation donations are also rejected if the foundations attach unreasonable conditions, restrictions or constraints on Greenpeace activities or if the donation would compromise the independence and aims of the organization. Since in the mid-1990s the number of supporters started to decrease, Greenpeace pioneered the use of face-to-face fundraising where fundraisers actively seek new supporters at public places, subscribing them for a monthly direct debit donation. In 2008, most of the \u20ac202.5 million received by the organization was donated by about 2.6 million regular supporters, mainly from Europe. In 2014, the organization's annual revenue was reported to be about \u20ac300 million (US$400 million) although they lost about \u20ac4 million (US$5 million) in currency speculation that year.\nIn September 2003, Public Interest Watch (PIW) complained to the Internal Revenue Service that Greenpeace US's A tax returns were inaccurate and in violation of the law. The IRS conducted an extensive review and concluded in December 2005 that Greenpeace USA continued to qualify for its tax-exempt status. In March 2006 \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported that PIW's \"federal tax filing, covering August 2003 to July 2004, stated that $120,000 of the $124,095 the group received in contributions during that period came from ExxonMobil\". In 2013, after the IRS performed a follow-up audit, which again was clean, and, following claims of politically motivated IRS audits of groups affiliated with the Tea Party movement, Greenpeace U.S. Executive Director Phil Radford called for a Congressional investigation into all politically motivated audits \u2013 including those allegedly targeting the Tea Party Movement, the NAACP, and Greenpeace.\nDigital transformation.\nInternational Executive Director Kumi Naidoo declared the 2009 Copenhagen Climate Change Conference a \"colossal failure\" and indicated the organization faced a \"burning platform\" moment. Naidoo encouraged Greenpeace's international executive directors to embrace new strategies and tactics or risk becoming irrelevant.\nTo implement a new strategy approved in 2010, Greenpeace hired Michael Silberman to build a \"Digital Mobilisation Centre of Excellence\" in 2011, which turned into the Mobilisation Lab (\"MobLab\"). Designed as a source of best practices, testing, and strategy development, the MobLab also focused on increasing digital capacity and promoting community-based campaigning in 42 countries. In March 2017, the MobLab spun out of Greenpeace through a joint investment by Greenpeace and CIVICUS World Alliance for Citizen Participation.\"\nSummary of priorities and campaigns.\nOn its International website, Greenpeace defines its mission as the following:\nGreenpeace is an independent campaigning organisation, which uses non-violent, creative confrontation to expose global environmental problems, and develop solutions for a green and peaceful future. Our goal is to ensure the ability of the earth to nurture life in all its diversity. That means we want to:\nClimate and energy.\nGreenpeace was one of the first parties to formulate a sustainable development scenario for climate change mitigation, which it did in 1993. According to sociologists Marc Mormont and Christine Dasnoy, the organization played a significant role in raising public awareness of global warming in the 1990s. Greenpeace has also focused on CFCs, because of both their global warming potential and their effect on the ozone layer. It was one of the leading participants advocating early phase-out of ozone depleting substances in the Montreal Protocol. In the early 1990s, Greenpeace developed a CFC-free refrigerator technology, \"Greenfreeze\" for mass production together with the refrigerator industry. United Nations Environment Programme awarded Greenpeace for \"outstanding contributions to the protection of the Earth's ozone layer\" in 1997. In 2011 two-fifths of the world's total production of refrigerators were based on Greenfreeze technology, with over 600 million units in use.\nCurrently Greenpeace considers global warming to be the greatest environmental problem facing the Earth. It calls for global greenhouse gas emissions to peak in 2015 and to decrease as close to zero as possible by 2050. To reach these numbers, Greenpeace has called for the industrialized countries to cut their emissions at least 40% by 2020 (from 1990 levels) and to give substantial funding for developing countries to build a sustainable energy capacity, to adapt to the inevitable consequences of global warming, and to stop deforestation by 2020. Together with EREC, Greenpeace has formulated a global energy scenario, \"Energy [R]evolution\", where 80% of the world's total energy is produced with renewables, and the emissions of the energy sector are decreased by over 80% of the 1990 levels by 2050.\nUsing direct action, members Greenpeace have protested several times against coal by occupying coal power plants and blocking coal shipments and mining operations, in places such as New Zealand, Svalbard, Australia, and the United Kingdom. Greenpeace is also critical of extracting petroleum from oil sands and has used direct action to block operations at the Athabasca oil sands in Canada.\nGreen Planet Energy.\nIn 1999, Greenpeace Germany (NGO) founded Greenpeace Energy, a renewable electricity cooperative that supplied customers with fossil gas starting from 2011. After a 2021 media outcry about an entity associated with Greenpeace selling fossil fuel which has been described as greenwashing, the cooperative changed its name to Green Planet Energy. The Greenpeace Germany NGO retains one share in the cooperative, which has been criticized for \"greenwashing\" Russian gas.\nKingsnorth court case.\nIn October 2007, six Greenpeace protesters were arrested for breaking into the Kingsnorth power station in Kent, England; climbing the smokestack, painting the name Gordon on the chimney (in reference to former UK Prime Minister, Gordon Brown), and causing an estimated \u00a330,000 damage. At their subsequent trial they admitted trying to shut the station down, but argued that they were legally justified because they were trying to prevent climate change from causing greater damage to property elsewhere around the world. Evidence was heard from David Cameron's environment adviser Zac Goldsmith, climate scientist James E. Hansen and an Inuk leader from Greenland, all saying that climate change was already seriously affecting life around the world. The six activists were acquitted. It was the first case where preventing property damage caused by climate change has been used as part of a \"lawful excuse\" defense in court. Both \"The Daily Telegraph\" and \"The Guardian\" described the acquittal as an embarrassment to the Brown Ministry. In December 2008 \"The New York Times\" listed the acquittal in its annual list of the most influential ideas of the year.\n\"Go Beyond Oil\".\nAs part of their stance on renewable energy commercialisation, Greenpeace have launched the \"Go Beyond Oil\" campaign. The campaign is focused on slowing, and eventually ending, the world's consumption of oil; with activist activities taking place against companies that pursue oil drilling as a venture. Much of the activities of the \"Go Beyond Oil\" campaign have been focused on drilling for oil in the Arctic and areas affected by the \"Deepwater Horizon\" disaster. The activities of Greenpeace in the Arctic have mainly involved the Edinburgh-based oil and gas exploration company, Cairn Energy; and range from protests at the Cairn Energy's headquarters, to scaling their oil rigs in an attempt to halt the drilling process. The \"Go Beyond Oil\" campaign also involves applying political pressure on the governments who allow oil exploration in their territories; with the group stating that one of the key aims of the \"Go Beyond Oil\" campaign is to \"work to expose the lengths the oil industry is willing to go to squeeze the last barrels out of the ground and put pressure on industry and governments to move beyond oil.\"\nNuclear power.\nGreenpeace is opposed to nuclear power because it views it as \"dangerous, polluting, expensive and non-renewable\". The organization highlights the Chernobyl nuclear disaster of 1986 and Fukushima nuclear disaster of 2011 as evidence of the risk nuclear power can pose to people's lives, the environment and the economy. Greenpeace views the benefits of nuclear power to be relatively minor in comparison to its major problems and risks, such as environmental damage and risks from uranium mining, nuclear weapons proliferation, and unresolved questions concerning nuclear waste.\nThe organization argues that the potential of nuclear power to mitigate global warming is marginal, referring to the IEA energy scenario where an increase in world's nuclear capacity from 2608\u00a0TWh in 2007 to 9857\u00a0TWh by 2050 would cut global greenhouse gas emissions less than 5% and require 32 nuclear reactor units of 1000\u00a0MW capacity built per year until 2050. According to Greenpeace, the slow construction times, construction delays, and hidden costs all negate nuclear power's mitigation potential. This makes the IEA scenario technically and financially unrealistic. They also argue that binding massive amounts of investments on nuclear energy would take funding away from more effective solutions. Greenpeace views the construction of Olkiluoto 3 nuclear power plant in Finland as an example of the problems on building new nuclear power.\nIn 2022, Greenpeace threatened to sue the European Union after it proposed to categorize nuclear power as a \"green\" technology that helps countries reduce CO2 emissions. Greenpeace celebrated the phaseout of nuclear power in Germany in 2023. At the time, Germany was experiencing an energy crisis and relying heavily on coal and gas for power generation.\nAnti-nuclear advertisement.\nIn 1994, Greenpeace published an anti-nuclear newspaper advert which included a claim that nuclear facilities in Sellafield would kill 2,000 people in the next 10 years, and an image of a hydrocephalus-affected child said to be a victim of nuclear weapons testing in Kazakhstan. Advertising Standards Authority viewed the claim concerning Sellafield as unsubstantiated, lacking any scientific base. This resulted in the banning of the advert. Greenpeace did not admit fault, stating that a Kazakhstan doctor had said that the child's condition was due to nuclear testing even though no nuclear weapons testing is performed in Sellafield.\nEDF spying conviction and appeal.\nIn 2011, a French court fined \u00c9lectricit\u00e9 de France (EDF) \u20ac1.5m and jailed two senior employees for spying on Greenpeace, including hacking into Greenpeace's computer systems. Greenpeace was awarded \u20ac500,000 in damages. Although EDF claimed that a security firm had only been employed to monitor Greenpeace, the court disagreed, jailing the head and deputy head of EDF's nuclear security operation for three years each. EDF appealed the conviction, the company was cleared of conspiracy to spy on Greenpeace and the fine was cancelled. Two employees of the security firm, Kargus, run by a former member of France's secret services, received sentences of three and two years respectively.\nOzone layer and Greenfreeze.\nThe ozone layer surrounding the Earth absorbs significant amounts of ultraviolet radiation. A 1976 report by the US Academy of Sciences supported the ozone \"depletion hypothesis\". Its suffering large losses from chlorinated and nitrogenous compounds was reported in 1985. Earlier studies had led some countries to enact bans on aerosol sprays, so that the Vienna Convention was signed in 1985 the Montreal Protocol was signed in 1987 to go in force two years later. The use of CFCs and HCFCs in refrigeration were and are among the banned technologies.\nA German technological institute developed an ozone-safe hydrocarbon alternative refrigerant that came to a Greenpeace campaigner's attention around 1992. The rights to the technology were donated to Greenpeace, which maintained it as an open source patent. The technology was subsequently used in Germany, then China, elsewhere in Europe, and after some years in Japan and South America, and finally in the US by 2012.\nAction against new oil licences in the UK.\nIn August 2023, Greenpeace highlighted the grant of new oil exploration licences in the United Kingdom, in an action in Yorkshire where they covered the facade of the home of the Prime Minister Rishi Sunak, in black fabric.\nForest campaign.\nGreenpeace aims to protect intact primary forests from deforestation and degradation with the target of zero deforestation by 2020. The organization has accused several corporations, such as Unilever, Nike, KFC, Kit Kat and McDonald's of having links to the deforestation of the tropical rainforests, resulting in policy changes in several of the companies. Greenpeace, together with other environmental NGOs, also campaigned for ten years for the EU to ban import of illegal timber. The EU decided to ban illegal timber in July 2010. As deforestation contributes to global warming, Greenpeace has demanded that REDD (Reduced Emission from Deforestation and Forest Degradation) should be included in the climate treaty following the Kyoto Protocol.\nAnother Greenpeace movement concerning the rain forests is discouraging palm oil industries. The movement has been the most active in Indonesia where already are used for palm oil plantation and had plans for another by 2015. Acknowledging that mass production of palm oil may be disastrous on biodiversity of forests, Greenpeace is actively campaigning against the production, urging the industries and the government to turn to other forms of energy resources. One of the positive results of the campaign was GAR (Golden Agri-Resources), the world's second largest palm oil production company, deciding to commit itself to forest conservation. The company signed an agreement which prevents them from developing plantations in areas where large amounts of carbon are locked up.\nOn the promotional side, an example of Greenpeace's success in the area is a viral video from 2016 protesting Nestl\u00e9's use of palm oil in Kit Kat bars. The video received over 1 million views, and resulted in a public statement by Nestl\u00e9 claiming to no longer use such practices in their products. In 2018, Greenpeace released an animated short starring a fictional orangutan named \"Rang-tan\" ahead of the World Orangutan Day. In November 2018, UK's Clearcast have denied a version of Rang-tan video as submitted by Iceland Foods Ltd.\nRemoval of an ancient tree.\nIn June 1995, Greenpeace took a trunk of a tree from the forests of the proposed national park of Koitajoki in Ilomantsi, Finland and put it on display at exhibitions held in Austria and Germany. Greenpeace said in a press conference that the tree was originally from a logged area in the ancient forest which was supposed to be protected. Mets\u00e4hallitus accused Greenpeace of theft and said that the tree was from a normal forest and had been left standing because of its old age. Mets\u00e4hallitus also said that the tree had actually crashed over a road during a storm. The incident received publicity in Finland, for example in the large newspapers \"Helsingin Sanomat\" and \"Ilta-Sanomat\". Greenpeace replied that the tree had fallen down because the protective forest around it had been clearcut, and that they wanted to highlight the fate of old forests in general, not the fate of one particular tree. Greenpeace also highlighted that Mets\u00e4hallitus admitted the value of the forest afterwards as Mets\u00e4hallitus currently refers to Koitajoki as a distinctive area because of its old growth forests.\nWilmar International palm-oil issue.\nA 2018 investigation conducted by Greenpeace International found that Wilmar International (the world's largest palm-oil trader) was still linked to forest destruction in the Indonesian province of Papua. The connected company, Gama, run by senior Wilmar executives, had caused deforestation twice the size of Paris. Greenpeace also called Wilmar out for breaking their 2013 commitment to end deforestation, in which they promised to incorporate organic and sustainable ways to collect palm oil. Greenpeace press releases connected Gama-produced palm oil to global brands including Procter &amp; Gamble, Nestl\u00e9 and Unilever.\nResolute Forest Products issue.\nThe logging company Resolute Forest Products sued Greenpeace several times since 2013. In 2020, a court in California ordered Resolute to pay US$816,000 to the organization to cover the costs of the legal process after the claims of the company were mostly rejected in one 2019 lawsuit. Greenpeace claims that the activity of the company is hurting the Boreal forest of Canada. Greenpeace claims that Boreal Forests contain even more carbon than Tropical Forests and therefore are very important to protecting the global climate.\nTokyo Two.\nIn 2008, two Greenpeace anti-whaling activists, Junichi Sato and Toru Suzuki, stole a case of whale meat from a delivery depot in Aomori prefecture, Japan. Their intention was to expose what they considered embezzlement of the meat collected during whale hunts. After a brief investigation of their allegations was ended, Sato and Suzuki were charged with theft and trespassing. Amnesty International said that the arrests and following raids on Greenpeace Japan office and homes of five of Greenpeace staff members were aimed at intimidating activists and non-governmental organizations. They were convicted of theft and trespassing in September 2010 by the Aomori District Court.\nGenetically modified organisms (GMOs).\nGreenpeace has also supported the rejection of GM food from the US in famine-stricken Zambia as long as supplies of non-genetically engineered grain exist, stating that the US \"should follow in the European Union's footsteps and allow aid recipients to choose their food aid, buying it locally if they wish. This practice can stimulate developing economies and creates more robust food security\", adding that, \"if Africans truly have no other alternative, the controversial GE maize should be milled so it can't be planted. It was this condition that allowed Zambia's neighbours Zimbabwe and Malawi to accept it.\"\nAfter Zambia banned all GM food aid, the former agricultural minister of Zambia criticized, \"how the various international NGOs that have spoken approvingly of the government's action will square the body count with their various consciences.\" Concerning the decision of Zambia, Greenpeace has stated that, \"it was obvious to us that if no non-GM aid was being offered then they should absolutely accept GM food aid. But the Zambian government decided to refuse the GM food. We offered our opinion to the Zambian government and, as many governments do, they disregarded our advice.\"\nIn 2007 Greenpeace funded research by Gilles-\u00c9ric S\u00e9ralini into MON 863 genetically engineered maize which concluded it caused health issues to the rats used in the study. European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and French Commission du G\u00e9nie Biomol\u00e9culaire (AFBV) evaluation indicated serious methodological errors in the publication. Further research by S\u00e9ralini on GMO resulted in widespread criticism of scientific fraud and retractions of his publications.\nAlso in 2007, Greenpeace similarly publicized results of \u00c1rp\u00e1d Pusztai which were retracted too.\nGreenpeace on golden rice.\nGreenpeace opposes the planned use of golden rice, a variety of \"Oryza sativa\" rice produced through genetic engineering to biosynthesize beta-carotene, a precursor of pro-vitamin A in the edible parts of rice. The addition of beta-carotene to the rice is seen as preventive to loss of sight in poverty stricken countries where golden rice is intended for distribution. According to Greenpeace, golden rice has not managed to do anything about malnutrition for 10 years during which alternative methods are already tackling malnutrition. The alternative proposed by Greenpeace is to discourage monocropping and to increase production of crops which are naturally nutrient-rich (containing other nutrients not found in golden rice in addition to beta-carotene). Greenpeace argues that resources should be spent on programs that are already working and helping to relieve malnutrition. The renewal of these concerns coincided with the publication of a paper in the journal \"Nature\" about a version of golden rice with much higher levels of beta carotene. This \"golden rice 2\" was developed and patented by Syngenta, which provoked Greenpeace to renew its allegation that the project is driven by profit motives and to serve as propaganda aimed at increasing public opinion of GMO products.\nAlthough Greenpeace stated that the golden rice program's true efficiency in treating malnourished populations was its primary concern as early as 2001, statements from March and April 2005 also continued to express concern over human health and environmental safety. In particular, Greenpeace has expressed concern over the lack of safety testing being done on GMO crops such as golden rice and of \"playing with the lives of people...using Golden Rice to promote more GMOs\". In June 2016, a conglomeration of 107 Nobel Laureates signed an open letter urging Greenpeace to end its campaign against genetically modified crops and Golden Rice in particular. In the letter, they also called upon governments of the world to \"do everything in their power to oppose Greenpeace's actions and accelerate the access of farmers to all the tools of modern biology, especially seeds improved through biotechnology.\" The letter states: \"Opposition based on emotion and dogma contradicted by data must be stopped.\" Greenpeace responded stating that \"Accusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered 'Golden' rice are false\" and that they support \"investing in climate-resilient ecological agriculture and empowering farmers to access a balanced and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money down the drain for GE 'Golden' rice.\"\nToxic waste.\nIn July 2011, Greenpeace released its Dirty Laundry report accusing some of the world's top fashion and sportswear brands of releasing toxic waste into China's rivers. The report profiles the problem of water pollution resulting from the release of toxic chemicals associated with the country's textile industry. Investigations focused on industrial wastewater discharges from two facilities in China; one belonging to the Youngor Group located on the Yangtze River Delta and the other to Well Dyeing Factory Ltd. located on a tributary of the Pearl River Delta. Scientific analysis of samples from both facilities revealed the presence of hazardous and persistent hormone disruptor chemicals, including alkylphenols, perfluorinated compounds and perfluorooctane sulfonate. The report goes on to assert that the Youngor Group and Well Dyeing Factory Ltd. (the two companies behind the facilities) have commercial relationships with a range of major clothing brands, including Abercrombie &amp; Fitch, Adidas, Bauer Hockey, Calvin Klein, Converse, Cortefiel, H&amp;M, Lacoste, Li Ning, Metersbonwe Group, Nike, Phillips-Van Heusen, and Puma.\nIn 2013, Greenpeace launched the \"Detox Fashion\" campaign, which signed up some fashion brands to stop the discharge of toxic chemicals into rivers as a result of the production of their clothes. Greenpeace's Detox Fashion campaign successfully led to commitments from several global brands to eliminate hazardous chemicals like nonylphenol ethoxylates from their supply chains. The campaign also brought attention to the broader issue of water pollution caused by textile production, urging industry-wide transparency and the adoption of zero-discharge policies.\nGuide to Greener Electronics.\nIn August 2006, Greenpeace released the first edition of Guide to Greener Electronics, a magazine where mobile and PC manufacturers were ranked for their green performance, mainly based on the use of toxic materials in their products and e-waste. In November 2011, the criteria were updated, as the industry had progressed since 2006, with the objective to get companies to set goals for greenhouse gas reduction, the use of renewable power up to 100 percent, producing long-lasting products free of hazardous substances and increasing sustainable practices. To ensure the transparency of the ranking the companies are assessed based only on their public information. For proving companies' policies and practices, Greenpeace uses chemical testing of products, reports from industry observers, media reports and testing of consumer programs to check if they match with their actions. Since the Guide was released in 2006, along with other similar campaigns has driven numerous improvements, when companies ranked eliminate toxic chemicals from their products and improve their recycling schemes. The last published edition of Guide to Greener Electronics was in 2017. The 2017 version included 17 major IT companies and ranked them on three criteria: energy use, resource consumption and chemical elimination.\nSave the Arctic.\nIn continuity of the successful campaign to reach the Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, in 2012 and 2013 protests with \"Save the Arctic\" banners were started. To stop oil- and gas-drilling, industrial fishing and military operations in the Arctic region completely, a \"global sanctuary in the high arctic\" was demanded from the World leaders at the UN General Assembly: \"We want them to pass a UN resolution expressing international concern for the Arctic.\" A resolution to protect the very vulnerable wildlife and ecosystem. 30 activists from MV \"Arctic Sunrise\" were arrested on 19 September 2013 by the Russian Coast Guard while protesting at Gazprom's Prirazlomnaya platform. Greenpeace members were originally charged with piracy, then later downgraded to hooliganism, before being dropped altogether following the passage of an amnesty law by the Russian government.\nIn July 2014, Greenpeace launched a global boycott campaign to persuade Lego to cease producing toys carrying the oil company Shell's logo in response to Shell's plans to drill for oil in the Arctic. The organisation launched a video with over 9 million views (on YouTube alone) denouncing the impacts of this alliance. The video was entitled \"LEGO: Everything is NOT awesome\". Lego's partnership with Shell dates back to the 1960s, although the LEGO company created a fictional oil company called Octan. Octan has appeared in countless sets, computer and console games, can be seen at Legoland parks, and is featured as the corporation headed by the villain President Business in The Lego Movie.\nNorway.\nThere is a conflict over oil rigs in the Arctic Ocean between the Norwegian Government and Greenpeace. In 2013, three activists of Greenpeace got on a Statoil's oil rig, wearing bear suits. According to a spokesman from Greenpeace Russia, they stayed on the rig for about three hours. The activists in bear suits \"were escorted\" to the shore. Statoil reportedly did not intend to file a suit against them. Greenpeace had argued that Statoil's drilling plans posed a threat to Bear Island, an uninhabited wildlife sanctuary that is home to rare species including polar bears, because an oil spill would be nearly impossible to clean up in the Arctic due to the harsh conditions. Greenpeace regards the petroleum activities of Statoil as \"illegal\". Statoil denies the Greenpeace statement. According to The Maritime Executive (2014), Statoil says \"Statoil respects people's right to make a legal protest, and we feel it is important to have a democratic debate around the oil industry. We have established robust plans for the operation, and feel confident they can be carried out safely and without accidents.\"\nOn 27 May 2014, Greenpeace's ship, MV \"Esperanza\", took over Transocean Spitsbergen, oil rig of Statoil in the Barents Sea such that it became incapable of operating. After that, the manager of Greenpeace Norway Truls Gulowsen answered a phone interview, stating that \"Five protesters left the rig by helicopter last night and three returned to a nearby Greenpeace ship.\" There were seven more protesters on the rig at the time, but the Norwegian police could not remove them immediately because the rig was a flag of convenience ship registered in the Marshall Islands and thus regarded as a ship in the open sea, as long as it did not begin drilling. On 29 May, however, the seven activists from Greenpeace were peacefully captured by Norwegian police on the rig. Soon after, according to Reuters, all the activists were set free without any fine. On 30 May, the Norwegian Coast Guard finally towed away \"Esperanza\", though in the morning Greenpeace submitted a plea on which more than 80,000 signatures to the Norwegian Environment Minister Tine Sundtoft in Oslo were written. Norwegian government and police reportedly allowed the coast guard to tow the Greenpeace ship.\nThe Norwegian police stated that Statoil asked Greenpeace to stop preventing its activities, but Greenpeace ignored the warning. The police have stated that Greenpeace's interference with the petroleum activities of Statoil was the contrary to Norwegian law and ordered Greenpeace to leave the Barents Sea site. Statoil said delays to the start of drilling cost the company about $1.26 million per day. According to Reuters, Statoil was slated to begin drilling \"three oil wells in the Apollo, Atlantis and Mercury prospects in the Hoop area, [which is] some 300\u00a0km away from the mainland [of Norway]\" in the summer of 2014. Greenpeace has continued to criticize the big oil company for their \"green wash\", arguing that Statoil hid the truth that it is doing the risky oil drilling by sponsoring FIRST Lego League and distracting people's attention from the company's project; it also argues that Statoil has to alter its attitude toward environments.\nMoratorium on deep sea mining in international waters.\nGreenpeace has joined with other environmental organizations to call for a moratorium on exploratory deep sea mining authorized by the International Seabed Authority (ISA) under the auspices of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Greenpeace says exploratory and commercial mining of polymetallic nodules could wreak havoc on the world's oceans, which act as a carbon sink absorbing a quarter of the world's carbon emissions each year. The organization says deep sea mining also disrupts the habitats of newly reported species, from crabs to whales to snails that survive without eating and congregate near bioluminescent thermal vents. Greenpeace has urged the International Seabed Authority to further develop UNCLOS' foundational Article 136 principle \"of common heritage to all mankind\" to revise regulations and set conservation targets. In a 2018 Greenpeace Research Laboratories report the organization stressed the importance of protecting marine biodiversity from toxins released during seabed mining for natural gas and rare metals for photovoltaic cells.\nGreenpeace maintains the \"pro-exploitation\" ISA is not the appropriate authority to regulate deep sea mining (DSM). In 2019 Greenpeace activists protested outside the annual meeting of the International Seabed Authority in Jamaica, calling for a global ocean treaty to ban deep sea mining in ocean sanctuaries. Some of the activists had sailed to Jamaica aboard Greenpeace's ship, the Esperanza, which travelled from the \"Lost City in the mid-Atlantic\", an area Greenpeace says is threatened by exploratory mining.\nAlternative economy.\nGreenpeace promotes alternatives to the current economic and social system. According to the organization, the current system is not friendly to people and the planet, so Greenpeace tries to find a better alternative in collaboration with \"communities, academics and organisations\".\nShips.\nSince Greenpeace was founded, seagoing ships have played a vital role in its campaigns. Greenpeace has chartered additional ships as needed. At least one non-Greenpeace owned ship was used during the organization's 2008\u201311 campaign to disrupt trawling in the North Sea by placing large boulders on the seafloor and then providing local authorities with updated charts of where the boulders were placed.\nPreviously in service.\nFirst \"Rainbow Warrior\".\nIn 1978, Greenpeace launched the original \"Rainbow Warrior\", a , former fishing trawler named after the book \"Warriors of the Rainbow\", which inspired early activist Robert Hunter on the first voyage to Amchitka. Greenpeace purchased the \"Rainbow Warrior\" (originally launched as the \"Sir William Hardy\" in 1955) at a cost of \u00a340,000. Volunteers restored and refitted it over a period of four months. First deployed to disrupt the hunt of the Icelandic whaling fleet, the \"Rainbow Warrior\" quickly became a mainstay of Greenpeace campaigns. Between 1978 and 1985, crew members also engaged in direct action against the ocean-dumping of toxic and radioactive waste, the grey seal hunt in Orkney and nuclear testing in the Pacific. In May 1985, the vessel was instrumental for 'Operation Exodus', the evacuation of about 300 Rongelap Atoll islanders whose home had been contaminated with nuclear fallout from a US nuclear test two decades earlier which had never been cleaned up and was still having severe health effects on the locals.\nLater in 1985 the \"Rainbow Warrior\" was to lead a flotilla of protest vessels into the waters surrounding Moruroa atoll, site of French nuclear testing. The sinking of the \"Rainbow Warrior\" occurred when the French government secretly bombed the ship in Auckland harbour on orders from Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand himself. This killed Dutch freelance photographer Fernando Pereira, who thought it was safe to enter the boat to get his photographic material after a first small explosion, but drowned as a result of a second, larger explosion. The attack was a public relations disaster for France after it was quickly exposed by the New Zealand police. The French Government in 1987 agreed to pay New Zealand compensation of NZ$13 million and formally apologised for the bombing. The French Government also paid \u20a32.3 million compensation to the family of the photographer. Later, in 2001, when the Institute of Cetacean Research of Japan called Greenpeace \"eco-terrorists\", Gert Leipold, then executive director of Greenpeace, detested the claim, saying \"calling non-violent protest terrorism insults those who were injured or killed in the attacks of real terrorists, including Fernando Pereira, killed by State terrorism in the 1985 attack on the \"Rainbow Warrior\"\".\nSecond \"Rainbow Warrior\".\nIn 1989 Greenpeace commissioned a replacement Rainbow Warrior vessel, sometimes referred to as \"Rainbow Warrior II\". It retired from service on 16 August 2011, to be replaced by the third generation vessel. In 2005 the \"Rainbow Warrior II\" ran aground on and damaged the Tubbataha Reef in the Philippines while inspecting the reef for coral bleaching. Greenpeace was fined US$7,000 for damaging the reef and agreed to pay the fine saying they felt responsible for the damage, although Greenpeace stated that the Philippines government had given it outdated charts. The park manager of Tubbataha appreciated the quick action Greenpeace took to assess the damage to the reef.\nReactions and responses to Greenpeace activities.\nLawsuits have been filed against Greenpeace for lost profits, reputation damage, and \"sailormongering\". The latter case, brought under a law not prosecuted since 1890, was widely viewed as an attempt at revenge by the Bush administration for Greenpeace's criticism of its environmental policies. The case was dismissed when the prosecution rested, having failed to prove its case. In 2004 it was revealed that the Australian government was willing to offer a subsidy to Southern Pacific Petroleum on the condition that the oil company would take legal action against Greenpeace, which had campaigned against the Stuart Oil Shale Project. In March 2024, a lawsuit of Total, following Greenpeace publication about the underestimate of Total's GHG emissions in 2019, was dismissed in the Parisian court. Greenpeace said the decision is important because there are other similar cases pending in courts.\nSome corporations, such as Royal Dutch Shell, BP, and \u00c9lectricit\u00e9 de France have reacted to Greenpeace campaigns by spying on Greenpeace activities and infiltrating Greenpeace offices. Greenpeace activists have also been targets of phone tapping, death threats, violence and even state terrorism in the case of the bombing of the \"Rainbow Warrior\". On 19 May 2023, Russia's Prosecutor-General's Office designated Greenpeace as an undesirable organisation, accusing it of interfering with Russia's internal affairs, undermining the country's economy, and financing the activities of Russian organizations recognized as \"foreign agents\".\nCriticism.\nBy Patrick Moore.\nPatrick Moore, an early Greenpeace member, left the organization in 1986 when it, according to Moore, decided to support a universal ban on chlorine in drinking water. Moore has argued that Greenpeace today is motivated by politics rather than science and that none of his \"fellow directors had any formal science education\". Bruce Cox, Director of Greenpeace Canada, responded that Greenpeace has never demanded a universal chlorine ban and that Greenpeace does not oppose use of chlorine in drinking water or in pharmaceutical uses, adding that \"Mr. Moore is alone in his recollection of a fight over chlorine and/or use of science as his reason for leaving Greenpeace.\" Paul Watson, an early member of Greenpeace has said that Moore \"uses his status as a so-called co-founder of Greenpeace to give credibility to his accusations. I am also a co-founder of Greenpeace and I have known Patrick Moore for 35 years. ... Moore makes accusations that have no basis in fact.\"\nPatrick Moore reversed his position on nuclear power in 1976, first opposing it and now supporting it. In Australian newspaper \"The Age\", he writes \"Greenpeace is wrong\u2014we must consider nuclear power\". He argues that any realistic plan to reduce reliance on fossil fuels or greenhouse gas emissions needs increased use of nuclear energy. Phil Radford, executive director of Greenpeace US responded that nuclear energy is too risky, takes too long to build to address climate change, and claims that most countries, including the U.S., could shift to nearly 100% renewable energy while phasing out nuclear power by 2050. In 2013, Moore criticized Greenpeace's stance on golden rice, an issue where Moore has been joined by other environmentalists such as Mark Lynas, stating that Greenpeace has \"waged a campaign of misinformation, trashed the scientists who are working to bring Golden Rice to the people who need it, and supported the violent destruction of Golden Rice field trials.\"\nBrent Spar tanker.\nAn editorial comment in natural science journal \"Nature\" accused Greenpeace of not caring for facts when it criticized the dumping of the Brent Spar tanker, and accused the group of exaggerating the volume of oil that was stored in the tanker. Greenpeace had claimed that the tanker contained 5,500 tonnes of crude oil, while Shell estimated it only contained 50 tonnes. However, the measurements had been made under duress during a protest occupation of the platform, since Shell had refused permission, and Greenpeace activists had been under attack by water cannons and the like. The BBC issued an apology to Greenpeace for having reported that the NGO lied.\nShell UK took three years to evaluate the disposal options, concluding that the disposal of the tanker in the deep ocean was the \"Best Practicable Environmental Option\" (BPEO), an option which gained some support within some portion of the scientific community, as it was found by some to be of \"negligible\" environmental impact. British government and Oslo and Paris Commissions (OSPAR) accepted the solution.\nThe resulting NGO campaign against Shell's proposals included letters, boycotts which escalated to vandalism in Germany, and lobbying at intergovernmental conferences. Binding moratoriums supporting Greenpeace's, ecosystem protection, and the precautionary principle position were issued in more than one intergovernmental meeting, and at the 1998 OSPAR Convention, WWF presented a study of toxic effects on deep sea ecosystems. The meeting confirmed a general prohibition on ocean dumping. Shell had transported the rig to the dumping site, but in the last hours canceled the operation and announced that it had failed in communicating its plans sufficiently to the public, admitting they had underestimated the strength of public opinion. In January 1998, Shell issued a new BPEO indicating recycling the rig as a quay in Norway.\nIn 1999, the Brent Spar container was decommissioned and one side issue that emerged was that the legs of the structure were found to contain cold-water coral species (\"Lophelia pertusa\"). As a result, the possibility was suggested of keeping the legs of such platforms on the sea bed in future, to serve as habitat. A Greenpeace representative opposed the suggestion, citing the fact that the reefs formed by the coral are at risk, not the coral itself, and that such a move would not promote development of such reefs, and expose coral species to toxic substances found in oil. \"If I was to dump a car in a wood, moss would grow on it, and if I was lucky a bird may even nest in it. But this is not justification to fill our forests with disused cars,\" said Greenpeace campaigner Simon Reddy.\nPascal Husting commute.\nIn 2013 reports noted that Pascal Husting, the director of Greenpeace International's \"international programme\" was commuting to work by plane, despite Greenpeace's activism to reduce air travel due to carbon footprint. Greenpeace has said \"the growth in aviation is ruining our chances of stopping dangerous climate change\". After a \"public uproar\" Greenpeace announced that Husting would commute by train.\nNazca Lines.\nIn December 2014, Greenpeace activists damaged rock related to the Nazca Lines in Peru while setting up a banner within the lines of one of the famed geoglyphs, and there were concerns that the harm might be irreparable. The activists damaged an area around the hummingbird by walking near the glyph without regulation footwear. Access to the area around the lines is strictly prohibited and special shoes must be worn to avoid damaging the UN World Heritage site. Greenpeace said the activists were \"absolutely careful to protect the Nazca lines,\" but this is contradicted by video and photographs showing the activists wearing conventional shoes (not special protective shoes) while walking on the site.\nGreenpeace has apologized to the Peruvian people, but Loise Jamie Castillo, Peru's Vice Minister of Cultural Heritage called the apology \"a joke\", because Greenpeace refused to identify the vandals or accept responsibility. Culture Minister Diana \u00c1lvarez-Calder\u00f3n said that evidence gathered during an investigation by the government will be used as part of a legal suit against Greenpeace. At a news conference, she said: \"The damage done is irreparable and the apologies offered by the environmental group aren't enough.\" By January 2015, Greenpeace had presented statements of four members of the NGO involved in the action.\nAnti-whaling campaign in Norway in the 1990s.\nDuring the 1990s Greenpeace conducted many anti-whaling expeditions in Norway. Critics have said that Greenpeace only campaigned against whaling to gain economic donations from the U.S., and it had little to do with saving the environment or the lives of the whales. For example, shark hunting was a more pressing issue at the time, but since sharks are widely feared in the United States, activism to help sharks does not receive as much financial support. Greenpeace has rejected this claim. However, in Norwegian newspaper \"Dagbladet\" on 11 April 2015, then\u2013International Executive Director Kumi Naidoo admitted that the anti-whaling campaign was a \"miscalculation.\" Greenpeace holds that whaling was only resumed by Norway after the IWC ban because of political election motives, and faces many explicit hurdles, including decreased demand in Japan and toxic chemical contamination.\nOpen letter from Nobel laureates.\nIn June 2016, 107 Nobel laureates signed an open letter, urging Greenpeace to end its opposition to genetically modified organisms (GMOs). The letter stated:We urge Greenpeace and its supporters to re-examine the experience of farmers and consumers worldwide with crops and foods improved through biotechnology, recognize the findings of authoritative scientific bodies and regulatory agencies, and abandon their campaign against \"GMOs\" in general and Golden Rice in particular. Scientific and regulatory agencies around the world have repeatedly and consistently found crops and foods improved through biotechnology to be as safe as, if not safer than those derived from any other method of production. There has never been a single confirmed case of a negative health outcome for humans or animals from their consumption. Their environmental impacts have been shown repeatedly to be less damaging to the environment, and a boon to global biodiversity. ... We call upon governments of the world to ... do everything in their power to oppose Greenpeace's actions and accelerate the access of farmers to all the tools of modern biology, especially seeds improved through biotechnology. ... Opposition based on emotion and dogma contradicted by data must be stopped.Greenpeace responded stating \"[a]ccusations that anyone is blocking genetically engineered 'Golden' rice are false\" and that they support \"investing in climate-resilient ecological agriculture and empowering farmers to access a balanced and nutritious diet, rather than pouring money down the drain for GE 'Golden' rice.\"\nEfforts to curb Arctic oil exploration.\nIn December 2020, Norway's Supreme Court refused to interfere in the work of ongoing oil exploration endeavors which was challenged jointly by Greenpeace and Nature and Youth Norway on the ground that the activity related to oil explorations violate human rights due to its contributing aspect towards carbon emission. The ruling said that the permission granted during 2016 will remain valid as it was not found to violate either Norwegian Constitution's rights or the European Convention on Human Rights. Greta Thunberg reportedly contributed $29,000 as the lawsuit cost on behalf of the plaintiff Greenpeace and Nature and Youth Norway.\nArchives.\nThere is a Greenpeace Canada fonds at Library and Archives Canada. Archival reference number is R4377.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12234", "revid": "41163249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12234", "title": "George Whipple", "text": "American biomedical researcher (1878\u20131976)\nGeorge Hoyt Whipple (August 28, 1878 \u2013 February 1, 1976) was an American physician, pathologist, biomedical researcher, and medical school educator and administrator. Whipple shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1934 with George Richards Minot and William Parry Murphy \"for their discoveries concerning liver therapy in cases of anemia\". This makes Whipple the first of several Nobel laureates affiliated with the University of Rochester.\nEarly life.\nWhipple was born to Ashley Cooper Whipple and Frances Anna Hoyt in Ashland, New Hampshire. Ashley Cooper Whipple was a physician, and his father (George's paternal grandfather) was a physician and President of the New Hampshire Medical Society. Whipple's father died from pneumonia or typhoid fever when George was just shy of two years old. His maternal grandfather also died when Whipple was two years old, and his paternal grandfather died a year later. This left Whipple to be raised by his mother, Frances, and grandmother, Frances Moody Hoyt, who impressed on him the value of hard work and education.\nWhipple attended Andover prep school and began attending Yale University as an undergraduate in 1896, earning A.B. degree in 1900. During these years, he developed as an outdoorsman, an affinity he would hold lifelong. He wrote in his autobiography about growing up in a lake district, \"I feel very fortunate that I grew up in the country...I became interested in wild life and camping, also hiking, snowshoeing, skating, bob sledding, canoeing, fishing, hunting\u2014all this was an essential part of my life\". He even credited his love for the outdoors as a contributor to his successes in work, study, and teaching. In the summers of prep school and undergrad, he worked at a drugstore and at Squam Lake and Lake Winnipesaukee in New Hampshire providing help and ferry services to the tourists and campers. Of his summer experiences, Whipple said, \"I sometimes think I learned as much during the summer work periods as during the school terms.\"\nEducation.\nAs an undergraduate, he became a member of Beta Theta Pi fraternity, and proved to be a prize-winning gymnast, oarsman, and an outstanding science student. His excellence in science was exemplified by his election to Sigma Xi honor society and graduation with senior honors. The interactions Whipple had with biochemists Russell Henry Chittenden and Lafayette Mendel during his senior year at Yale left an indelible mark on his life and career. In his autobiography, Whipple describes Mendel as \"an unusual man who exerted a strong influence on me ... work with him was exciting and never to be forgotten\".\nWith a shortage of funds to finance further education, Whipple took a year off after graduating Yale. During this year, he worked at Dr. Holbrook Military School in Ossining, New York, teaching mathematics and science, and serving as an athletic coach.\nIn 1901, under the advice, persuasion, and guidance of his mother, Whipple attended medical school at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. He received his M.D. degree in 1905. To gain experience and subsidize his medical school studies, Whipple applied for and was accepted to a teaching assistantship in John J. Abel's Department of Physiological Chemistry. Later, his performance in his first year anatomy course earned him a second-year appointment as a student instructor in anatomy. During this time, his interest in histology developed. Under the mentorship of William Welch, Eugene Opie, and William McCallum, Whipple was inspired to correlate clinical illness and disease, to the tissue findings discovered on autopsy. Together, McCallum and Welch conspired to offer Whipple a position as junior member of the pathology department with the hope it would lead to Whipple become a pediatric pathologist. Ultimately, Whipple accepted the position which shaped his career aspirations to become a pathologist.\nCareer.\nIn 1905, Whipple joined the pathology department at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine as an assistant in pathology. He was promoted successively to Assistant, Instructor, Associate and associate professor in pathology until he left in 1914. During this time, he spent a year in Panama at Ancon Hospital as a pathologist. In Panama, he worked with Samuel Darling, a resident pathologist, and General Gorgas to gain experience in tropical diseases. This experience afforded him the opportunity to study massive hemolysis associated with blackwater fever. Before returning to Johns Hopkins School of Medicine after his time in Panama, Whipple traveled to Europe and spent time in the laboratories of Krehl and Morawitz in Heidelberg, where he learned about anemia in rabbits. In 1911, Whipple went to Vienna to study hepatic portal vein blood flow and its effects on hepatic functions in the dog with Hans Meyer.\nIn 1914, at 34 years old, Whipple married Katherine Ball Waring of Charleston, South Carolina. They had two children. He was also appointed Professor of Research Medicine, and Director of the Hooper Foundation for Medical Research at the University of California San Francisco medical school. He was dean of that medical school in 1920 and 1921.\nIn 1921, through the persistence of University of Rochester President Benjamin Rush Rhees, Whipple agreed to become a Professor and Chairman of Pathology, and the founding Dean of the yet-to-be-built medical school (URMC). Rhees was so determined to recruit Whipple, he personally flew to UC San Francisco to offer him the opportunity to build the medical school from the ground up. Whipple found this offer attractive because it would fulfil his passion to create a program which fostered an exchange between clinical and preclinical disciplines. His vision for the school included housing the medical school and hospital at the same site to facilitate this exchange. The first students entered URMC in 1925.\nWhipple categorically discriminated against African-American students during his time as dean, and would send a form letter to applicants rejecting their admission and requesting they apply elsewhere. In 1939, A commission of the New York State Legislature found this practice to be in violation of New York's anti-discrimination laws, after which the URMC began to admit African-American medical students.\nRetirement.\nIn 1953, at 75 years old, Whipple retired from the Deanship, and retirement from the university would follow in 1955. He was remembered as a superb teacher. In his autobiography, \"A Dozen Doctors\", Whipple wrote, \"I would be remembered as a teacher\". He spent his retirement years dabbling in pathology department and medical school activities at the University of Rochester, but returned to his outdoors-man roots, filling his time with pheasant hunting, salmon fishing on the Margaree River, and tarpon fishing off the coast in Florida.\nWhipple died in 1976 at the age of 97 and his ashes were scattered in Rochester's Mount Hope Cemetery.\nThough he was not related to Allen Whipple, who described the Whipple procedure and Whipple's triad, the two were lifelong friends. The Whipples also had a deep friendship with George Eastman, founder of Rochester-based Eastman Kodak.\nWhipple's research.\nOver the course of his career, Whipple authored or co-authored more than 300 publications.\nWhipple's research interests during his career primarily included anemia and the physiology and pathology of the liver. But he also researched and made significant contributions to tuberculosis, pancreatitis, chloroform poisoning in animals, the metabolism of bile pigments and iron, the constituents of the bile, and the regeneration of plasma protein, protein metabolism, and the stroma of the red blood cells.\nOne of his first publications described the role of the lungs, lymphatic system, and gastrointestinal tract in the spread of tubercle bacillus causing tuberculosis. Another one of his early publications described autopsy results from a patient with an accumulation of fatty acids in the walls of the small intestine and lymph nodes. He named this abnormality lipodystrophia intestinalis (intestinal lipodystrophy), and correctly pointed to the bacterial cause of the lipid deposits, resulting in the disease being named Whipple's disease.\nWhen Whipple first joined Johns Hopkins School of Medicine as an assistant, he worked under William H. Welch, focusing on the repair and regeneration of liver cells. His research in dogs demonstrated that liver cells had an almost unlimited ability to regenerate. Through his chloroform liver injury studies, Whipple demonstrated that the liver was the site of fibrinogen synthesis. His research elucidated the route by which bile pigments enter circulation and produce jaundice in various parts of the body.\nLater, he studied bile pigments and their production outside the liver by way of bile fistulas at the Hooper Foundation at UC San Francisco. His interests soon extended to understanding the production of hemoglobin to gain a better understand of how it is metabolized into bile pigments. Co-authored with Hooper, Whipple published 12 papers, from 1915 to 1917, reporting the following:\nAt the University of Rochester, Whipple's research focus became studying the various factors in diets which contributed to recovery of long-term anemia, particularly in anemic dogs. Along with his research assistant, Frieda Robscheit-Robbins (formally Frieda Robbins), they co-authored 21 publications, from 1925 to 1930, reporting the following:\nWhipple and Robscheit-Robbins were regarded as having one of the \"great creative partnerships in medicine\".\nIn his landmark studies, published as a series \"Blood Regeneration in Severe Anemia\" beginning in 1925, Whipple demonstrated that raw liver fed to anemic dogs was the most effective diet additive for reversing the anemia by boosting the production of red blood cells. He would go on to show that foods derived from animal tissue, and cooked apricots also had a positive effect of increasing red blood cells during anemia. Based on these data, Whipple associated the iron content in these dietary factors to the potency of red blood cell regeneration. This data led directly to successful liver treatment of pernicious anemia by George R. Minot and William P. Murphy, despite the main therapeutic mechanism being through B12 rather than iron. This was a remarkable discovery since previously, pernicious anemia was invariably fatal at a young age. For his contribution to this body of work, he was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine in 1934 along with Minot and Murphy.\nIn 1937, Whipple collaborated with William B. Hawkins to determine the life-span of the red blood cell in dogs. Simultaneously, with the advent of radioactive iron, Whipple, Paul F. Hahn, and William F. Bale collaborated to study iron absorption and utilization. They demonstrated that iron absorption was highly regulated in the small intestine and was influenced by the amount of iron stores in the body. They also demonstrated that insignificant amounts of iron were normally excreted or lost in the urine, feces, or bile. During this time, Whipple also formulated his theory on \"the dynamic equilibrium between blood and tissue proteins\" based on earlier plasmapheresis experiments he had performed (in the early 1930s) which demonstrated the importance of dietary protein on production of plasma proteins. This formed the foundation of research into mammalian protein metabolism, and led Rudolf Schoenheimer to write \"The Dynamic State of the Body Constituents,\" marking the modern era of biochemistry and biology.\nBetween 1939 and 1943 Leon L. Miller and Whipple collaborated to study the hepato-toxic effects of chloroform anesthesia on dogs. They found that dogs in a protein depleted state sustained lethal liver injury from within anesthesia fifteen minutes; but that feeding these depleted dogs a protein rich meal, particularly rich in L-methionine or L-cystine, prior to anesthesia was protective. This and other studies, led Whipple to the conclusion that S-containing amino acids are protective against liver against toxic agents.\nDuring World War II, Whipple tested combinations of dietary amino acids, administered, orally or parenterally, and their effects on plasma protein synthesis. He was able to characterize amino acid mixtures that could satisfy the metabolic requirements necessary to maintain weight, nitrogen balance, and plasma protein and hemoglobin regeneration in the dog. This would ultimately led to human clinical trials which demonstrated that these amino acid mixtures, along with enzymatic digest of casein, could sustain nourishment in patients who could not intake nutrients through the normal gastrointestinal route for extended periods. Intravenous nutrition, referred to as parenteral nutrition, is routinely used today.\nNobel Prize, honors and distinctions.\nWhipple shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1934 with George R. Minot and William P. Murphy \"for their discoveries concerning liver therapy in cases of anemia\".\nIn presenting the Nobel Prize, Professor I. Holmgren of the Nobel committee observed that \"Of the three prize winners, it was Whipple who first occupied himself with the investigations for which the prize is now awarded. ... Whipple's experiments were planned exceedingly well, and carried out very accurately, and consequently their results can lay claim to absolute reliability. These investigations and results of Whipple's gave Minot and Murphy the idea that an experiment could be made to see whether favorable results might also be obtained in the case of pernicious anemia...by making use of the foods of the kind that Whipple had found to yield favorable results in his experiments regarding anemia from loss of blood.\"\nWhipple received honorary doctorates from several American and international Universities, including the Universities of Athens and Glasgow. In 1930, along with Minot, he received the Popular Science Monthly Gold Medal and Annual Award. In 1934, he was awarded the William Wood Gerhard Gold Medal of the Pathological Society of Philadelphia.\nHe also was a member of the following organizations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12235", "revid": "12104074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12235", "title": "G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks", "text": "Turkic people in Inner Asia\nThe G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks (; ), also known as T\u00fcrks, Celestial Turks or Blue Turks, were a Turkic people in medieval Inner Asia. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, under the leadership of Bumin Qaghan (d. 552) and his sons, succeeded the Rouran Khaganate as the main power in the region and established the First Turkic Khaganate, one of several nomadic dynasties that would shape the future geolocation, culture, and dominant beliefs of Turkic peoples.\nEtymology.\nOrigin.\nAs an ethnonym, the etymology of \"Turk\" is unknown. It is generally believed that the name \"T\u00fcrk\" may have come from the Old Turkic migration-term , which means 'created, born'.\nAs a word in Turkic languages, \"Turk\" may mean \"strong, strength, ripe\" or \"flourishing, in full strength\". It may also mean ripe as for a fruit or \"in the prime of life, young, and vigorous\" for a person.\nThe name \"G\u00f6k-t\u00fcrk\" emerged from the modern Turkish reading of the word \"K\u00f6k\" as \"G\u00f6k\" with assumption of equivalence to \"sky\" in modern Turkish (\"G\u00f6k\"). The actual meaning of \"K\u00f6k\" in \"K\u00f6k-t\u00fcrk\" is debated due to single attestation, with differing opinions as \"big, great\" or \"blue\" as a reference to \"Ashina\", the endonym of the ruling clan of the historical ethnic group which was attested in Old Turkic as , or .\nThey were known in Middle Chinese historical sources as the \"T\u016bju\u00e9\" (; reconstructed in Middle Chinese as *\"dw\u0259t-ku\u0251t\" &gt; \"t\u0266ut-kyat\"). The ethnonym was also recorded in various other East Asian languages, Rouran \"To\u0324ro\u0324x\"/\"T\u00fcr\u01d6g\", Manchu \"Tule/Turuhe,\" Korean \"\"/\"Dolgwol\", and Old Tibetan \"Drugu\".\nIn Indo-Iranian languages Turks were recorded under various forms. In Sogdian *\"T\u00fcrkit ~ T\u00fcrk\u00fct\", \"tr'wkt\", \"trwkt\", \"turkt\" &gt; \"trwkc\", \"truk\u010d\"; Khotanese Saka \"Tt\u016brka\"/\"Ttr\u016bka,\" Middle Persian \ud802\udf72\ud802\udf65\ud802\udf6b\ud802\udf6a\ud802\udf60\ud802\udf6d T\u00fcrk\u0101n\"~T\u00fcrk.\"\nDefinition.\nAccording to Chinese sources, \"T\u016bju\u00e9\" meant \"combat helmet\" (), reportedly because the shape of the Altai Mountains, where they lived, was similar to a combat helmet. R\u00f3na-Tas (1991) pointed to a Khotanese-Saka word, \"tturak\u00e4\" 'lid', semantically stretchable to 'helmet', as a possible source for this folk etymology, yet Golden thinks this connection requires more data.\nG\u00f6kt\u00fcrk is sometimes interpreted as either \"Celestial Turk\" or \"Blue Turk\" (i.e., because sky blue is associated with celestial realms). This is consistent with \"the cult of heavenly ordained rule\" which was a recurrent element of Altaic political culture and as such may have been imbibed by the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks from their predecessors in Mongolia. \"Blue\" is traditionally associated with the East as it used in the cardinal system of central Asia, thus meaning \"Turks of the East\". The name of the ruling Ashina clan may derive from the Khotanese Saka term for \"deep blue\", \"\u0101\u0161\u0161\u026ana\".\nAccording to the American Heritage Dictionary, the word T\u00fcrk meant \"strong\" in Old Turkic; though Gerhard Doerfer supports this theory, Gerard Clauson points out that \"the word T\u00fcrk is never used in the generalized sense of 'strong'\" and that the noun T\u00fcrk originally meant \"'the culminating point of maturity' (of a fruit, human being, etc.), but more often used as an [adjective] meaning (of a fruit) 'just fully ripe'; (of a human being) 'in the prime of life, young, and vigorous'\". Hakan Aydemir (2022) also contends that T\u00fcrk originally did not mean \"strong, powerful\" but \"gathered; united, allied, confederated\" and was derived from Pre-Proto-Turkic verb *\"t\u00fcr\u00fc\" 'heap up, collect, gather, assemble'.\nThe name as used by the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks only applied to themselves (i.e. the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk khanates), their subjects, and splinter groups. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks did not consider other Turkic speaking groups such as the Uyghurs, Tiele, and Kyrgyz to be T\u00fcrks. In the Orkhon inscriptions, the Toquz Oghuz and the Yenisei Kyrgyz are not referred to as T\u00fcrks. Similarly, the Uyghurs called themselves Uyghurs and used \"T\u00fcrk\" exclusively for the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, whom they portrayed as enemy aliens in their royal inscriptions. Chinese historiographers transcribed the Khazars' name as and , whose element suggests that the Khazars might have kept the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk tradition alive. When tribal leaders built their khanates, ruling over assorted tribes and tribal unions, the collected people identified themselves politically with the leadership. Turk became the designation for all subjects of the Turk empires. Nonetheless, subordinate tribes and tribal unions retained their original names, identities, and social structures. Memory of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and the Ashina had faded by the turn of the millennium. The Karakhanids, Qocho Uyghurs, and Seljuks did not claim descent from the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk rulers originated from the Ashina clan, who were first attested to in 439. The \"Book of Sui\" reports that on 18 October 439, the Tuoba ruler Emperor Taiwu of Northern Wei overthrew Juqu Mujian of the Northern Liang in eastern Gansu, whence 500 Ashina families fled northwest to the Rouran Khaganate in the vicinity of Gaochang.\nAccording to the \"Book of Zhou\" and \"History of the Northern Dynasties\", the Ashina clan was a component of the Xiongnu confederation, specifically, the northern Xiongnu tribes or southern Xiongnu \"who settled along the northern Chinese frontier\", according to Edwin G. Pulleyblank. However, this view is contested. G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks were also posited as having originated from an obscure Suo state (\u7d22\u570b) (MC: *\"s\u00e2k\") which was situated north of the Xiongnu and had been founded by the Sakas or Xianbei. According to the \"Book of Sui\" and the \"Tongdian\", they were \"mixed Hu (barbarians)\" (\u96dc\u80e1) from Pingliang (\u5e73\u6dbc), now in Gansu, Northwest China. Pointing to the Ashina's association with the northern tribes of the Xiongnu, some researchers (e.g. Duan, Lung, etc.) proposed that G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks belonged in particular to the Tiele confederation, likewise Xiongnu-associated, by ancestral lineage. However, Lee and Kuang (2017) state that Chinese sources do not describe the Ashina-led G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks as descending from the Dingling or belonging to the Tiele confederation.\nChinese sources linked the Hu on their northern borders to the Xiongnu just as Graeco-Roman historiographers called the Pannonian Avars, Huns and Hungarians, \"Scythians\". Such archaizing was a common literary topos, implying similar geographic origins and nomadic lifestyle but not direct filiation.\nAs part of the heterogeneous Rouran Khaganate, the Turks lived for generations north of the Altai Mountains, where they 'engaged in metal working for the Rouran'. According to Denis Sinor, the rise to power of the Ashina clan represented an 'internal revolution' in the Rouran Khaganate rather than an external conquest.\nAccording to Charles Holcombe, the early Turk population was rather heterogeneous and many of the names of Turk rulers, including the two founding members, are not even Turkic. This is supported by evidence from the Orkhon inscriptions, which include several non-Turkic lexemes, possibly representing Uralic or Yeniseian words. Peter Benjamin Golden points out that the khaghans of the Turkic Khaganate, the Ashina, who were of an undetermined ethnic origin, adopted Iranian and Tokharian (or non-Altaic) titles. German Turkologist W.-E. Scharlipp points out that many common terms in Turkic are Iranian in origin. Whatever language the Ashina may have spoken originally, they and those they ruled would all speak Turkic, in a variety of dialects, and create, in a broadly defined sense, a common culture.\nExpansion.\nThe G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks reached their peak in the late 6th century and began to invade the Sui dynasty of China. However, the war ended due to the division of Turkic nobles and their civil war for the title of khagan. With the support of Emperor Wen of Sui, Yami Qaghan won the competition. However, the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk empire was divided into eastern and western empires. Weakened by the civil war, Yami Qaghan declared allegiance to the Sui dynasty. When the Sui began to decline, Shibi Khagan began to assault its territory and even surrounded Emperor Yang of Sui at the Siege of Yanmen (615 AD) with 100,000 cavalry troops. After the collapse of the Sui dynasty, the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks intervened in the ensuing Chinese civil wars, providing support to the northeastern rebel Liu Heita against the rising Tang in 622 and 623. Liu enjoyed a long string of success but was finally routed by Li Shimin and other Tang generals and executed. The Tang dynasty was then established.\nConquest by the Tang.\nAlthough the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Khaganate had once provided support to the Tang dynasty in the early period of the civil war during the collapse of the Sui dynasty, the conflicts between the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and the Tang broke out whilst the Tang were gradually reunifying China proper. The G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks began to attack and raid the northern border of the Tang Empire and once marched their main force of 100,000 soldiers to Chang'an, the capital of the Tang. Emperor Taizong of Tang, in spite of the limited resources at his disposal, managed to turn them back. Later, Taizong sent his troops to Mongolia and defeated the main force of G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk army in Battle of Yinshan four years later and captured Illig Qaghan in 630 AD. With the submission of the Turkic tribes, the Tang conquered the Mongolian Plateau. From then on, the Eastern Turks were subjugated to China.\nAfter a vigorous court debate, Emperor Taizong decided to pardon the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk nobles and offered them positions as imperial guards. However, the proposition was ended by a plan to assassinate the Emperor. On 19 May 639 Ashina Jiesheshuai and his tribesmen directly assaulted Emperor Taizong at Jiucheng Palace (\u4e5d\u6210\u5bae, in present-day Linyou County, Baoji, Shaanxi). However, they did not succeed and fled north, but were caught by pursuers near the Wei River and were killed. On 13 August 639, following Jiesheshuai's unsuccessful raid, Taizong installed Qilibi Khan and ordered the settled Turkic people to follow him north of the Yellow River to settle between the Great Wall of China and the Gobi Desert. However, many G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk generals still remained loyal in service to the Tang Empire.\nRevival.\nIn 679, Ashide Wenfu and Ashide Fengzhi, who were Turkic leaders of the Chanyu Protectorate (\u55ae\u4e8e\u5927\u90fd\u8b77\u5e9c), declared Ashina Nishufu qaghan and revolted against the Tang dynasty. In 680, Pei Xingjian defeated Ashina Nishufu and his army. Ashina Nishufu was killed by his men. Ashide Wenfu made Ashina Funian a qaghan and again revolted against the Tang dynasty. Ashide Wenfu and Ashina Funian surrendered to Pei Xingjian. On 5 December 681, 54 G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, including Ashide Wenfu and Ashina Funian, were publicly executed in the eastern market of Chang'an. In 682, Ilterish Qaghan and Tonyukuk revolted and occupied Heisha Castle (northwest of present-day Hohhot, Inner Mongolia) with the remnants of Ashina Funian's men. The restored the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Khaganate and intervened in the war between the Tang and Khitan tribes. However, after the death of Bilge Qaghan, the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks could no longer subjugate other Turkic tribes in the grasslands. In 744, allied with the Tang dynasty, the Uyghur Khaganate defeated the last G\u00f6kt\u00fcrk Khaganate and controlled the Mongolian Plateau.\nRulers.\nThe Ashina tribe of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks ruled the First Turkic Khaganate, which then split into the Eastern Turkic Khaganate and the Western Turkic Khaganate, and later the Second Turkic Khaganate, controlling much of Central Asia and the Mongolian Plateau between 552 and 745. The rulers were called \"qaghans\".\nReligion.\nTheir religion was polytheistic. The great god was the sky, Tengri, who dispensed the viaticum for the journey of life (qut) and fortune (ulug) and watched over the cosmic order and the political and social order. People prayed to him and sacrificed to him a white horse as the offering. The khagan, who came from him and derived his authority from him, was raised on a felt saddle to meet him. \nTengri issued decrees, brought pressure to bear on human beings, and enforced capital punishment, often by striking the offender with lightning. The many secondary powers \u2013 sometimes named deities, sometimes spirits or simply said to be sacred, and almost always associated with Tengri were the Earth, the Mountain, Water, the Springs, and the Rivers; the possessors of all objects, particularly of the land and the waters of the nation; trees, cosmic axes, and sources of life; fire. The symbol of the family and alterego of the shaman; the stars, particularly the sun and the moon, the Pleiades, and Venus, whose image changes over time.\nUmay, the mother goddess who is none other than the placenta; the threshold and the doorjamb; personifications of Time, the Road, Desire, etc.; heroes and ancestors embodied in the banner, in tablets with inscriptions, and in idols; and spirits wandering or fixed in Penates or in all kinds of holy objects. These and other powers have an uneven force which increases as objects accumulate, as trees form a forest, stones form a cairn, arrows form a quiver, and drops of water form a lake.\nLegacy.\nMembers of the Turk-lead Ashina dynasty also ruled the Basmyls, and the Karluk Yabghu State; and possibly also the Khazars and Karakhanids (if the first Karakhanid ruler Bilge Kul Qadir Khan indeed descended from the Karluk Yabghus). According to some researchers, the Second Bulgarian Empire's Asen dynasty might be descendants of Ashina. The Kyrgyz subgroup of T\u00fcrkatalar claim to be direct descendants of the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks and to have inherited their name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12236", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12236", "title": "GDP (disambiguation)", "text": "GDP, short for gross domestic product, is the basic measure of a country's overall economic output.\nGDP may also refer to:\nGdP may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12238", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12238", "title": "General Relativity", "text": ""}
{"id": "12239", "revid": "40638945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12239", "title": "Guilt (emotion)", "text": "Cognitive or an emotional experience\nGuilt is a moral emotion that occurs when a person believes or realizes\u2014accurately or not\u2014that they have compromised their own standards of conduct or have violated universal moral standards and bear significant responsibility for that violation.\nGuilt is closely related to the concepts of remorse, regret, and shame.\nGuilt is an important factor in perpetuating obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder symptoms.\nEtymology.\nThe word developed its modern spelling from the Old English form \"gylt\" (\"crime, sin, fault, fine, debt\"), which is possibly derived from Old English \"gieldan\" (\"to pay for, debt\"). \"Guilty\" is similarly from Old English \"gyltig\", itself from \"gylt\".\nIts development into a \"sense of guilt\" is in 1690 as a variation of its original meaning. \"Guilt by association\" is first recorded in 1941.\nPsychology.\nGuilt and its associated causes, advantages, and disadvantages are common themes in psychology and psychiatry. Both in specialized and in ordinary language, guilt is an affective state in which one experiences conflict at having done something that one believes one should not have done (or conversely, having not done something one believes one should have done). It gives rise to a feeling which does not go away easily, driven by 'conscience'. Sigmund Freud described this as the result of a struggle between the ego and the superego\u00a0\u2013 parental imprinting. Freud rejected the role of God as punisher in times of illness or rewarder in time of wellness. While removing one source of guilt from patients, he described another. This was the unconscious force within the individual that contributed to illness, Freud in fact coming to consider \"the obstacle of an unconscious sense of guilt...as the most powerful of all obstacles to recovery.\" For his later explicator, Jacques Lacan, guilt was the inevitable companion of the signifying subject who acknowledged normality in the form of the Symbolic order.\nAlice Miller claims that \"many people suffer all their lives from this oppressive feeling of guilt, the sense of not having lived up to their parents' expectations...no argument can overcome these guilt feelings, for they have their beginnings in life's earliest period, and from that they derive their intensity.\" This may be linked to what Les Parrott has called \"the disease of false guilt...At the root of false guilt is the idea that what you \"feel\" must be true.\"\nTherapists recognized similar feelings of guilt in individuals that survived traumatic events that involved a loved one perishing called survivor's guilt.\nThe philosopher Martin Buber underlined the difference between the Freudian notion of guilt, based on internal conflicts, and \"existential guilt\", based on actual harm done to others.\nGuilt is often associated with anxiety. In mania, according to Otto Fenichel, the patient succeeds in applying to guilt \"the defense mechanism of denial by overcompensation...re-enacts being a person without guilt feelings.\"\nIn psychological research, guilt can be measured by using questionnaires, such as the Differential Emotions Scale (Izard's DES), or the Dutch Guilt Measurement Instrument.\nDefenses.\nAccording to psychoanalytic theory, defenses against feeling guilt can become an overriding aspect of one's personality. The methods that can be used to avoid guilt are multiple. They include:\nBehavioral responses.\nGuilt proneness is a personality trait that reflects a tendency to feel negative emotions about one's own misdeeds, even when they are not known by others. Guilt proneness is reliably associated with moral character. Similarly, feelings of guilt can prompt subsequent virtuous behavior. People who feel guilty may be more likely to exercise restraint, avoid self-indulgence, and exhibit less prejudice. Guilt appears to prompt reparatory behaviors to alleviate the negative emotions that it engenders. People appear to engage in targeted and specific reparatory behaviors toward the persons they wronged or offended. Guilt proneness is also an important predictor of trustworthiness. The sense of responsibility of guilt-prone people is strong and this makes them trustworthy.\nLack of guilt in psychopaths.\nIndividuals high in psychopathy lack any true sense of guilt or remorse for harm they may have caused others. Instead, they rationalize their behavior, blame someone else, or deny it outright. People with psychopathy have a tendency to be harmful to themselves and to others. They have little ability to plan ahead for the future. An individual with psychopathy will never find themselves at fault because they will do whatever it takes to benefit themselves without reservation. A person that does not feel guilt or remorse would have no reason to find themselves at fault for something that they did with the intention of hurting another person. To a person high in psychopathy, their actions can always be rationalized to be the fault of another person. This is seen by psychologists as part of a lack of moral reasoning (in comparison with the majority of humans), an inability to evaluate situations in a moral framework, and an inability to develop emotional bonds with other people due to a lack of empathy.\nOne study on psychopaths found that, under certain circumstances, they could willfully empathize with others, and that their empathic reaction initiated the same way it does for controls. Psychopathic criminals were brain-scanned while watching videos of a person harming another individual. The psychopaths' empathic reaction initiated the same way it did for controls when they were instructed to empathize with the harmed individual, and the area of the brain relating to pain was activated when the psychopaths were asked to imagine how the harmed individual felt. The research suggests psychopaths can switch empathy on at will, which would enable them to be both callous and charming. The team who conducted the study say they do not know how to transform this willful empathy into the spontaneous empathy most people have, though they propose it might be possible to rehabilitate psychopaths by helping them to activate their \"empathy switch\". Others suggested that it remains unclear whether psychopaths' experience of empathy was the same as that of controls, and also questioned the possibility of devising therapeutic interventions that would make the empathic reactions more automatic.\nNeuroscientist Antonio R. Damasio and his colleagues showed that subjects with damage to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex lack the ability to empathically feel their way to moral answers, and that when confronted with moral dilemmas, these brain-damaged patients coldly came up with \"end-justifies-the-means\" answers, leading Damasio to conclude that the point was not that they reached immoral conclusions, but that when they were confronted by a difficult issue \u2013 in this case as whether to shoot down a passenger plane hijacked by terrorists before it hits a major city \u2013 these patients appear to reach decisions without the anguish that afflicts those with normally functioning brains. According to Adrian Raine, a clinical neuroscientist also at the University of Southern California, one of this study's implications is that society may have to rethink how it judges immoral people: \"Psychopaths often feel no empathy or remorse. Without that awareness, people relying exclusively on reasoning seem to find it harder to sort their way through moral thickets. Does that mean they should be held to different standards of accountability?\"\nCauses.\nEvolutionary theories.\nSome evolutionary psychologists theorize that guilt and shame helped maintain beneficial relationships, such as reciprocal altruism. If a person feels guilty when he harms another or fails to reciprocate kindness, he is more likely not to harm others or become too selfish. In this way, he reduces the chances of retaliation by members of his tribe, and thereby increases his survival prospects, and those of the tribe or group. As with any other emotion, guilt can be manipulated to control or influence others. As highly social animals living in large, relatively stable groups, humans need ways to deal with conflicts and events in which they inadvertently or purposefully harm others. If someone causes harm to another, and then feels guilt and demonstrates regret and sorrow, the person harmed is likely to forgive. Thus, guilt makes it possible to forgive, and helps hold the social group together.\nCollective guilt.\nCollective guilt (or group guilt) is the unpleasant and often emotional reaction that results among a group of individuals when it is perceived that the group illegitimately harmed members of another group. It is often the result of \"sharing a social identity with others whose actions represent a threat to the positivity of that identity\". For an individual to experience collective guilt, he must identify himself as a part of the in-group. \"This produces a perceptual shift from thinking of oneself in terms of 'I' and 'me' to 'us' or 'we'.\u201d\nComparison with shame.\nGuilt and shame are two closely related concepts, but they have key differences that should not be overlooked. Cultural Anthropologist Ruth Benedict describes shame as the result of a violation of cultural or social values, while guilt is conjured up internally when one's personal morals are violated. To put it more simply, the primary difference between shame and guilt is the source that creates the emotion. Shame arises from a real or imagined negative perception coming from others and guilt arises from a negative perception of one's own thoughts or actions.\nPsychoanalyst Helen Block Lewis stated that, \"The experience of shame is directly about the self, which is the focus of evaluation. In guilt, the self is not the central object of negative evaluation, but rather the thing done is the focus.\" An individual can still possess a positive perception of themselves while also feeling guilt for certain actions or thoughts they took part in. Contrary to guilt, Shame has a more inclusive focus on the individual as a whole. Fossum and Mason's ideas clearly outline this idea in their book Facing Shame. They state that \"While guilt is a painful feeling of regret and responsibility for one's actions, shame is a painful feeling about oneself as a person\".\nShame can almost be described as looking at yourself unfavorably through the eyes of others. Psychiatrist Judith Lewis Herman portrays this idea by stating that \"Shame is an acutely self-conscious state in which the self is 'split,' imagining the self in the eyes of the other; by contrast, in guilt the self is unified\". Both shame and guilt are directly related to self-perception, only shame causes the individual to account for the cultural and social beliefs of others.\u00a0\nPaul Gilbert talks about the powerful hold that shame can take over someone in his article Evolution, Social Roles, and the Differences in Shame and Guilt. He says that \"The fear of shame and ridicule can be so strong that people will risk serious physical injury or even death to avoid it. One of the reasons for this is because shame can indicate serious damage to social acceptance and a breakdown in a variety of social relationships. The evolutionary root of shame is in a self-focused, social threat system related to competitive behavior and the need to prove oneself acceptable/desirable to others\" Guilt on the other hand evolved from a place of Care-Giving and avoidance of any act that harms others.\nCultural views.\nTraditional Japanese society, Korean society and Chinese culture are sometimes said to be \"shame-based\" rather than \"guilt-based\", in that the social consequences of \"getting caught\" are seen as more important than the individual feelings or experiences of the agent (see the work of Ruth Benedict). The same has been said of Ancient Greek society, a culture where, in Bruno Snell's words, if \"honour is destroyed the moral existence of the loser collapses.\"\nThis may lead to more of a focus on etiquette than on ethics as understood in Western civilization, leading some in Western civilizations to question why the word \"ethos\" was adapted from Ancient Greek with such vast differences in cultural norms. Christianity and Islam inherit most notions of guilt from Judaism, Persian, and Roman ideas, mostly as interpreted through Augustine, who adapted Plato's ideas to Christianity. The Latin word for guilt is \"culpa\", a word sometimes seen in law literature, for instance in \"mea culpa\" meaning \"my fault (guilt)\".\nIn literature.\nGuilt is a main theme in John Steinbeck's \"East of Eden\", Fyodor Dostoyevsky's \"Crime and Punishment\", Tennessee Williams' \"A Streetcar Named Desire\", William Shakespeare's play \"Macbeth\", Edgar Allan Poe's \"The Tell-Tale Heart\" and \"The Black Cat\", and many other works of literature. In Sartre's \"The Flies\", the Furies (in the form of flies) represent the morbid, strangling forces of neurotic guilt which bind us to authoritarian and totalitarian power.\nGuilt is a major theme in many works by Nathaniel Hawthorne, and is an almost universal concern of novelists who explore inner life and secrets.\nIn Epicurean Philosophy.\nIn his Kyriai Doxai (Principal Doctrines) 17 and 35, Epicurus teaches that we may identify and diagnose guilt by its signs and perturbations. Within his ethical system based on pleasure and pain, guilt manifests as constant fear of detection that emerges from \"secretly doing something contrary to an agreement to not harm one another or be harmed\".\nSince Epicurus rejects supernatural claims, the easiest way to avoid this perturbation is to avoid the antisocial behavior in order to continue enjoying ataraxia (the state of no-perturbation). However, once guilt is unavoidable, Epicurean Guides recommended confession of one's offenses as a practice that helps to purge the character from its evil tendencies and reform the character. According to Norman DeWitt, author of \"St Paul and Epicurus\", confession was one of the Epicurean practices that was later appropriated by the early Christian communities.\nIn the Christian Bible.\nGuilt in the Christian Bible is not merely an emotional state; it is also a legal state of deserving punishment. The Hebrew Bible does not have a unique word for guilt, but uses a single word to signify: \"sin, the guilt of it, the punishment due unto it, and a sacrifice for it.\" The Greek New Testament uses a word for guilt that means \"standing exposed to judgment for sin\" (e. g., Romans 3:19). In what Christians call the \"Old Testament\", Christians believe the Bible teaches that, through sacrifice, one's sins can be forgiven (Judaism categorically rejects this idea, holding that forgiveness of sin is exclusively through repentance, and the role of sacrifices was for atonement of sins committed by accident or ignorance).\nThe New Testament says that forgiveness is given as written in 1 Corinthians 15:3\u20134: \"3 For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, for that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures.\" In both the Old Testament and the New Testament, salvation is granted based on God's grace and forgiveness (Gen 6:8; 19:19; Exo 33:12\u201317; 34:6\u20137).\nThe New Testament says that, in Jesus Christ, God took upon Himself the sins of the world and died on the cross to pay mankind's debt (Rom 6:23). Those who repent and accept Christ's sacrifice for their sins, will be redeemed by God and thus not guilty before Him. They will be granted eternal life which will take effect after the Second Coming of Christ (1 Thess 4:13\u201318).\nThe Bible agrees with pagan cultures that guilt creates a cost that someone must pay (Heb 9:22). (This assumption was expressed in the previous section, \"Defences\": \"Guilty people punish themselves if they have no opportunity to compensate the transgression that caused them to feel guilty. It was found that self-punishment did not occur if people had an opportunity to compensate the victim of their transgression.\") Unlike pagan deities who demanded that debts for sin be paid by humans, God, according to the Bible, loved humanity enough to pay it Himself (Mat 5:45).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12240", "revid": "46066408", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12240", "title": "Gold", "text": "element with atomic number 79 (Au)\nGold is a chemical element; it has chemical symbol Au (from Latin ) and atomic number 79. In its pure form, it is a bright-metallic-yellow, dense, soft, malleable, and ductile metal. Chemically, gold is a transition metal, a group 11 element, and one of the noble metals. It is one of the least reactive chemical elements, being the second lowest in the reactivity series, with only platinum ranked as less reactive. Gold is solid under standard conditions.\nGold often occurs as the free element (native state), as nuggets or grains, in rocks, veins, and alluvial deposits. It occurs in a solid solution series with the native element silver (as in electrum), naturally alloyed with other metals like copper and palladium, and mineral inclusions such as within pyrite. Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as gold compounds, often with tellurium (gold tellurides).\nGold is resistant to most acids, though it does dissolve in aqua regia (a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid), forming a soluble tetrachloroaurate anion. Gold is insoluble in nitric acid alone, which dissolves silver and base metals, a property long used to refine gold and confirm the presence of gold in metallic substances, giving rise to the term \"acid test\". Gold dissolves in alkaline solutions of cyanide, which are used in mining and electroplating. Gold also dissolves in mercury, forming amalgam alloys, and as the gold acts simply as a solute, this is not a chemical reaction.\nA relatively rare element when compared to silver (though thirty times more common than platinum), gold is a precious metal that has been used for coinage, jewelry, and other works of art throughout recorded history. In the past, a gold standard was often implemented as a monetary policy. Gold coins ceased to be minted as a circulating currency in the 1930s, and the world gold standard was abandoned for a fiat currency system after the Nixon shock measures of 1971.\nIn 2023, the world's largest gold producer was China, followed by Russia and Australia. As of 2020[ [update]], a total of around 201,296 tonnes of gold exist above ground. If all of this gold were put together into a cube shape, each of its sides would measure . The world's consumption of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry. Gold's high malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions, as well as conductivity of electricity have led to its continued use in corrosion-resistant electrical connectors in all types of computerized devices (its chief industrial use). Gold is also used in infrared shielding, the production of colored glass, gold leafing, and tooth restoration. Certain gold salts are still used as anti-inflammatory agents in medicine.\nEtymology.\n\"Gold\" is cognate with similar words in many Germanic languages, deriving via Proto-Germanic *\"gul\u00fe\u0105\" from Proto-Indo-European *\"\u01f5\u02b0elh\u2083-\" 'to shine, to gleam; to be yellow or green'.\nThe symbol \"Au\" is from the Latin 'gold'. The Proto-Indo-European ancestor of \"aurum\" was \"*h\u2082\u00e9-h\u2082us-o-\", meaning 'glow'. This word is derived from the same root (Proto-Indo-European \"*h\u2082u\u032fes-\" 'to dawn') as \"*h\u2082\u00e9u\u032fs\u014ds\", the ancestor of the Latin word 'dawn'. This etymological relationship is presumably behind the frequent claim in scientific publications that meant 'shining dawn'.\nCharacteristics.\nGold is the most malleable metal. It can be drawn into a wire of single-atom width, and then stretched considerably before it breaks. Such nanowires distort via the formation, reorientation, and migration of dislocations and crystal twins without noticeable hardening. A single gram of gold can be beaten into a sheet of , and an avoirdupois ounce into . Gold leaf can be beaten thin enough to become semi-transparent. Light transmitted through gold appears greenish-blue, because gold strongly reflects yellow and red. Such semi-transparent sheets also strongly reflect infrared light, making them useful as infrared (radiant heat) shields in the visors of heat-resistant suits and in sun visors for spacesuits. Gold is a good conductor of heat and electricity.\nGold has a density of 19.3\u00a0g/cm3, almost identical to that of tungsten at 19.25\u00a0g/cm3; as such, tungsten has been used in the counterfeiting of gold bars, such as by plating a tungsten bar with gold. By comparison, the density of lead is 11.34\u00a0g/cm3, and that of the densest element, osmium, is .\nColor.\nWhereas most metals are gray or silvery white, gold is slightly reddish-yellow. This color is determined by the frequency of plasma oscillations among the metal's valence electrons, in the ultraviolet range for most metals but in the visible range for gold due to relativistic effects affecting the orbitals around gold atoms. Similar effects impart a golden hue to metallic caesium.\nCommon colored gold alloys include the distinctive eighteen-karat rose gold created by the addition of copper. Alloys containing palladium or nickel are also important in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold alloys. Fourteen-karat gold-copper alloy is nearly identical in color to certain bronze alloys, and both may be used to produce police and other badges. Fourteen- and eighteen-karat gold alloys with silver alone appear greenish-yellow and are referred to as green gold. Blue gold can be made by alloying with iron, and purple gold can be made by alloying with aluminium. Less commonly, addition of manganese, indium, and other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold for various applications.\nColloidal gold, used by electron-microscopists, is red if the particles are small; larger particles of colloidal gold are blue.\nIsotopes.\nGold has only one stable isotope, 197Au, which is also its only naturally occurring isotope, so gold is both a mononuclidic and monoisotopic element. Thirty-six radioisotopes have been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 169 to 205. The most stable of these is 195Au with a half-life of 186.1 days. The least stable is 171Au, which decays by proton emission with a half-life of 30 \u03bcs. Most of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses below 197 decay by some combination of proton emission, \u03b1 decay, and \u03b2+ decay. The exceptions are 195Au, which decays by electron capture, and 196Au, which decays most often by electron capture (93%) with a minor \u03b2\u2212 decay path (7%). All of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by \u03b2\u2212 decay.\nAt least 32 nuclear isomers have also been characterized, ranging in atomic mass from 170 to 200. Within that range, only 178Au, 180Au, 181Au, 182Au, and 188Au do not have isomers. Gold's most stable isomer is 198m2Au with a half-life of 2.27 days. Gold's least stable isomer is 177m2Au with a half-life of only 7\u00a0ns. 184m1Au has three decay paths: \u03b2+ decay, isomeric transition, and alpha decay. No other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths.\nSynthesis.\nThe possible production of gold from a more common element, such as lead, has long been a subject of human inquiry, and the ancient and medieval discipline of alchemy often focused on it; however, the transmutation of the chemical elements did not become possible until the understanding of nuclear physics in the 20th century. The first synthesis of gold was conducted by Japanese physicist Hantaro Nagaoka, who synthesized gold from mercury in 1924 by neutron bombardment. An American team, working without knowledge of Nagaoka's prior study, conducted the same experiment in 1941, achieving the same result and showing that the isotopes of gold produced by it were all radioactive. In 1980, Glenn Seaborg transmuted several thousand atoms of bismuth into gold at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Gold can be manufactured in a nuclear reactor, but doing so is highly impractical and would cost far more than the value of the gold that is produced.\nChemistry.\nAlthough gold is the most noble of the noble metals, it still forms many diverse compounds. The oxidation state of gold in its compounds ranges from \u22121 to +5, but Au(I) and Au(III) dominate its chemistry. Au(I), referred to as the aurous ion, is the most common oxidation state with soft ligands such as thioethers, thiolates, and organophosphines. Au(I) compounds are typically linear. A good example is , which is the soluble form of gold encountered in mining. The binary gold halides, such as AuCl, form zigzag polymeric chains, again featuring linear coordination at Au. Most drugs based on gold are Au(I) derivatives.\nAu(III) (referred to as auric) is a common oxidation state, and is illustrated by gold(III) chloride, . The gold atom centers in Au(III) complexes, like other d8 compounds, are typically square planar, with chemical bonds that have both covalent and ionic character. Gold(I,III) chloride is also known, an example of a mixed-valence complex.\nGold does not react with oxygen at any temperature and, up to 100\u00a0\u00b0C, is resistant to attack from ozone:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nSome free halogens react to form the corresponding gold halides. Gold is strongly attacked by fluorine at dull-red heat to form gold(III) fluoride . Powdered gold reacts with chlorine at 180\u00a0\u00b0C to form gold(III) chloride . Gold reacts with bromine at 140\u00a0\u00b0C to form a combination of gold(III) bromide and gold(I) bromide AuBr, but reacts very slowly with iodine to form gold(I) iodide AuI:\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 3 F2 -&gt;[\\Delta] 2 AuF3&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 3 Cl2 -&gt;[\\Delta] 2 AuCl3&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 2 Br2 -&gt;[\\Delta] AuBr3{} + AuBr&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + I2 -&gt;[\\Delta] 2 AuI&lt;/chem&gt;\nGold does not react with sulfur directly, but gold(III) sulfide can be made by passing hydrogen sulfide through a dilute solution of gold(III) chloride or chlorauric acid.\nUnlike sulfur, phosphorus reacts directly with gold at elevated temperatures to produce gold phosphide (Au2P3).\nGold readily dissolves in mercury at room temperature to form an amalgam, and forms alloys with many other metals at higher temperatures. These alloys can be produced to modify the hardness and other metallurgical properties, to control melting point or to create exotic colors.\nGold is unaffected by most acids. It does not react with hydrofluoric, hydrochloric, hydrobromic, hydriodic, sulfuric, or nitric acid. It does react with selenic acid, and is dissolved by aqua regia, a 1:3 mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid. Nitric acid oxidizes the metal to +3 ions, but only in minute amounts, typically undetectable in the pure acid because of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction. However, the ions are removed from the equilibrium by hydrochloric acid, forming ions, or chloroauric acid, thereby enabling further oxidation:\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 6 H2SeO4 -&gt;[200^\\circ\\text{C}] Au2(SeO4)3{} + 3 H2SeO3{} + 3 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;\n&lt;chem display=block&gt;Au{} + 4HCl{} + HNO3 -&gt; HAuCl4{} + NO\\uparrow + 2H2O &lt;/chem&gt;\nGold is similarly unaffected by most bases. It does not react with aqueous, solid, or molten sodium or potassium hydroxide. It does, however, react with sodium or potassium cyanide under alkaline conditions when oxygen is present to form soluble complexes.\nCommon oxidation states of gold include +1 (gold(I) or aurous compounds) and +3 (gold(III) or auric compounds). Gold ions in solution are readily reduced and precipitated as metal by adding any other metal as the reducing agent. The added metal is oxidized and dissolves, allowing the gold to be displaced from solution and be recovered as a solid precipitate.\nRare oxidation states.\nLess common oxidation states of gold include \u22121, +2, and +5.\nThe \u22121 oxidation state occurs in aurides, compounds containing the anion. Caesium auride (CsAu), for example, crystallizes in the caesium chloride motif; rubidium, potassium, and tetramethylammonium aurides are also known. Gold has the highest electron affinity of any metal, at 222.8\u00a0kJ/mol, making a stable species, analogous to the halides.\nGold also has a \u20131 oxidation state in covalent complexes with the group 4 transition metals, such as in titanium tetraauride and the analogous zirconium and hafnium compounds. These chemicals are expected to form gold-bridged dimers in a manner similar to titanium(IV) hydride.\nGold(II) compounds are usually diamagnetic with Au\u2013Au bonds such as [. The evaporation of a solution of in concentrated produces red crystals of gold(II) sulfate, . Originally thought to be a mixed-valence compound, it has been shown to contain cations, analogous to the better-known mercury(I) ion, . A gold(II) complex, the tetraxenonogold(II) cation, which contains xenon as a ligand, occurs in . In September 2023, a novel type of metal-halide perovskite material consisting of Au3+ and Au2+ cations in its crystal structure has been found. It has been shown to be unexpectedly stable at normal conditions.\nGold pentafluoride, along with its derivative anion, , and its difluorine complex, gold heptafluoride, is the sole example of gold(V), the highest verified oxidation state.\nSome gold compounds exhibit \"aurophilic bonding\", which describes the tendency of gold ions to interact at distances that are too long to be a conventional Au\u2013Au bond but shorter than van der Waals bonding. The interaction is estimated to be comparable in strength to that of a hydrogen bond.\nWell-defined cluster compounds are numerous. In some cases, gold has a fractional oxidation state. A representative example is the octahedral species .\nOrigin.\nGold production in the universe.\nGold in the universe is produced through several cosmic processes and was present in the dust from which the Solar System formed. Scientists have identified three main cosmic sources for gold formation: supernova nucleosynthesis, neutron star collisions, and magnetar flares.\nAll three sources involve a process called the r-process (rapid neutron capture), which forms elements heavier than iron. For decades, scientists believed supernova nucleosynthesis was the primary mechanism for gold formation. More recently, research has shown that neutron star collisions produce significant quantities of gold through the r-process.\nIn August 2017, the spectroscopic signatures of heavy elements, including gold, were directly observed by electromagnetic observatories during the GW170817 neutron star merger event. This confirmed neutron star mergers as a source of gold, after years of only indirect detection. This single event generated between 3 and 13 Earth masses of gold, suggesting that neutron star mergers might produce enough gold to account for most of this element in the universe.\nHowever, neutron star mergers alone cannot explain all cosmic gold, particularly in older stars, because these mergers occur relatively late in galactic history and are infrequent (approximately once every 100,000 years). This created a timing paradox in explaining the presence of gold in stars formed early in the universe.\nIn 2025, researchers resolved this paradox by confirming that giant flares from magnetars (highly magnetic neutron stars) are also a significant source of gold formation. Analysis of a 2004 magnetar flare showed these events produce heavy elements through the same r-process as neutron star mergers. The amount of heavy elements created in a single magnetar flare can exceed the mass of Mars. Since magnetars existed earlier in cosmic history and flare more frequently than neutron star mergers occur, they help explain gold's presence in older stars. Scientists estimate magnetar flares may contribute approximately 1\u201310% of all elements heavier than iron in our galaxy, including gold.\nAsteroid origin theories.\nBecause the Earth was molten when it was formed, almost all of the gold present in the early Earth probably sank into the planetary core. Therefore, as hypothesized in one model, most of the gold in the Earth's crust and mantle is thought to have been delivered to Earth by asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment, about 4 billion years ago.\nGold which is reachable by humans has, in one case, been associated with a particular asteroid impact. The asteroid that formed Vredefort impact structure 2.020\u00a0billion years ago is often credited with seeding the Witwatersrand basin in South Africa with the richest gold deposits on earth. However, this scenario is now questioned. The gold-bearing Witwatersrand rocks were laid down between 700 and 950\u00a0million years before the Vredefort impact. These gold-bearing rocks had furthermore been covered by a thick layer of Ventersdorp lavas and the Transvaal Supergroup of rocks before the meteor struck, and thus the gold did not actually arrive in the asteroid/meteorite. What the Vredefort impact achieved, however, was to distort the Witwatersrand basin in such a way that the gold-bearing rocks were brought to the present erosion surface in Johannesburg, on the Witwatersrand, just inside the rim of the original diameter crater caused by the meteor strike. The discovery of the deposit in 1886 launched the Witwatersrand Gold Rush. Some 22% of all the gold that is ascertained to exist today on Earth has been extracted from these Witwatersrand rocks.\nMantle return theories.\nMuch of the rest of the gold on Earth is thought to have been incorporated into the planet since its very beginning, as planetesimals formed the mantle. In 2017, an international group of scientists established that gold \"came to the Earth's surface from the deepest regions of our planet\", the mantle, as evidenced by their findings at Deseado Massif in the Argentinian Patagonia.\nOccurrence.\nOn Earth, gold is found in ores in rock formed from the Precambrian time onward. It most often occurs as a native metal, typically in a metal solid solution with silver (i.e. as a gold/silver alloy). Such alloys usually have a silver content of 8\u201310%. Electrum is elemental gold with more than 20% silver, and is commonly known as white gold. Electrum's color runs from golden-silvery to silvery, dependent upon the silver content. The more silver, the lower the specific gravity.\nNative gold occurs as very small to microscopic particles embedded in rock, often together with quartz or sulfide minerals such as \"fool's gold\", which is a pyrite. These are called lode deposits. The metal in a native state is also found in the form of free flakes, grains or larger nuggets that have been eroded from rocks and end up in alluvial deposits called placer deposits. Such free gold is always richer at the exposed surface of gold-bearing veins, owing to the oxidation of accompanying minerals followed by weathering; and by washing of the dust into streams and rivers, where it collects and can be welded by water action to form nuggets.\nGold sometimes occurs combined with tellurium as the minerals calaverite, krennerite, nagyagite, petzite and sylvanite (see telluride minerals), and as the rare bismuthide maldonite () and antimonide aurostibite (). Gold also occurs in rare alloys with copper, lead, and mercury: the minerals auricupride (), novodneprite () and weishanite ().\nA 2004 research paper suggests that microbes can sometimes play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets that collect in alluvial deposits.\nA 2013 study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake, depositing gold. When an earthquake strikes, it moves along a fault. Water often lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs. About below the surface, under very high temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold. During an earthquake, the fault jog suddenly opens wider. The water inside the void instantly vaporizes, flashing to steam and forcing silica, which forms the mineral quartz, and gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces.\nSeawater.\nThe world's oceans contain gold. Measured concentrations of gold in the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific are 50\u2013150 femtomol/L or 10\u201330 parts per quadrillion (about 10\u201330\u00a0g/km3). In general, gold concentrations for south Atlantic and central Pacific samples are the same (~50 femtomol/L) but less certain. Mediterranean deep waters contain slightly higher concentrations of gold (100\u2013150 femtomol/L), which is attributed to wind-blown dust or rivers. At 10 parts per quadrillion, the Earth's oceans would hold 15,000 tonnes of gold. These figures are three orders of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to 1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier data.\nA number of people have claimed to be able to economically recover gold from sea water, but they were either mistaken or acted in an intentional deception. Prescott Jernegan ran a gold-from-seawater swindle in the United States in the 1890s, as did an English fraudster in the early 1900s. Fritz Haber did research on the extraction of gold from sea water in an effort to help pay Germany's reparations following World War I. Based on the published values of 2 to 64 ppb of gold in seawater, a commercially successful extraction seemed possible. After analysis of 4,000 water samples yielding an average of 0.004 ppb, it became clear that extraction would not be possible, and he ended the project.\nHistory.\nThe earliest recorded metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found free or \"native\". Small amounts of natural gold have been found in Spanish caves used during the late Paleolithic period, c.\u200940,000 BC.\nThe oldest gold artifacts in the world are from Bulgaria and are dating back to the 5th millennium BC (4,600 BC to 4,200 BC), such as those found in the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna and the Black Sea coast, thought to be the earliest \"well-dated\" finding of gold artifacts in history.\nGold artifacts probably made their first appearance in Ancient Egypt at the very beginning of the pre-dynastic period, at the end of the fifth millennium BC and the start of the fourth, and smelting was developed during the course of the 4th millennium; gold artifacts appear in the archeology of Lower Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium. As of 1990, gold artifacts found at the Wadi Qana cave cemetery of the 4th millennium BC in West Bank were the earliest from the Levant. Gold artifacts such as the golden hats and the Nebra disk appeared in Central Europe from the 2nd millennium BC Bronze Age.\nThe oldest known map of a gold mine was drawn in the 19th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt (1320\u20131200 BC), whereas the first written reference to gold was recorded in the 12th Dynasty around 1900 BC. Egyptian hieroglyphs from as early as 2600 BC describe gold, which King Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed was \"more plentiful than dirt\" in Egypt. Egypt and especially Nubia had the resources to make them major gold-producing areas for much of history. One of the earliest known maps, known as the Turin Papyrus Map, shows the plan of a gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local geology. The primitive working methods are described by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, and included fire-setting. Large mines were also present across the Red Sea in what is now Saudi Arabia.\nGold is mentioned in the Amarna letters numbered 19 and 26 from around the 14th century BC.\nGold is mentioned frequently in the Old Testament, starting with Genesis 2:11 (at Havilah), the story of the golden calf, and many parts of the temple including the Menorah and the golden altar. In the New Testament, it is included with the gifts of the magi in the first chapters of Matthew. The Book of Revelation 21:21 describes the city of New Jerusalem as having streets \"made of pure gold, clear as crystal\". Exploitation of gold in the south-east corner of the Black Sea is said to date from the time of Midas, and this gold was important in the establishment of what is probably the world's earliest coinage in Lydia around 610 BC. The legend of the golden fleece dating from eighth century BC may refer to the use of fleeces to trap gold dust from placer deposits in the ancient world. From the 6th or 5th century BC, the Chu (state) circulated the Ying Yuan, one kind of square gold coin.\nIn Roman metallurgy, new methods for extracting gold on a large scale were developed by introducing hydraulic mining methods, especially in Hispania from 25 BC onwards and in Dacia from 106 AD onwards. One of their largest mines was at Las Medulas in Le\u00f3n, where seven long aqueducts enabled them to sluice most of a large alluvial deposit. The mines at Ro\u015fia Montan\u0103 in Transylvania were also very large, and until very recently, still mined by opencast methods. They also exploited smaller deposits in Britain, such as placer and hard-rock deposits at Dolaucothi. The various methods they used are well described by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia \"Naturalis Historia\" written towards the end of the first century AD.\nDuring Mansa Musa's (ruler of the Mali Empire from 1312 to 1337) hajj to Mecca in 1324, he passed through Cairo in July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by a camel train that included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade, causing high inflation. A contemporary Arab historian remarked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gold was at a high price in Egypt until they came in that year. The mithqal did not go below 25 dirhams and was generally above, but from that time its value fell and it cheapened in price and has remained cheap till now. The mithqal does not exceed 22 dirhams or less. This has been the state of affairs for about twelve years until this day by reason of the large amount of gold which they brought into Egypt and spent there [...].\u2014\u200a\nThe European exploration of the Americas was fueled in no small part by reports of the gold ornaments displayed in great profusion by Native American peoples, especially in Mesoamerica, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia. The Aztecs regarded gold as the product of the gods, calling it literally \"god excrement\" (\"teocuitlatl\" in Nahuatl), and after Moctezuma II was killed, most of this gold was shipped to Spain. However, for the indigenous peoples of North America gold was considered useless and they saw much greater value in other minerals which were directly related to their utility, such as obsidian, flint, and slate.\nEl Dorado is applied to a legendary story in which precious stones were found in fabulous abundance along with gold coins. The concept of El Dorado underwent several transformations, and eventually accounts of the previous myth were also combined with those of a legendary lost city. El Dorado, was the term used by the Spanish Empire to describe a mythical tribal chief (zipa) of the Muisca native people in Colombia, who, as an initiation rite, covered himself with gold dust and submerged in Lake Guatavita. The legends surrounding El Dorado changed over time, as it went from being a man, to a city, to a kingdom, and then finally to an empire.\nBeginning in the early modern period, European exploration and colonization of West Africa was driven in large part by reports of gold deposits in the region, which was eventually referred to by Europeans as the \"Gold Coast\". From the late 15th to early 19th centuries, European trade in the region was primarily focused in gold, along with ivory and slaves. The gold trade in West Africa was dominated by the Ashanti Empire, who initially traded with the Portuguese before branching out and trading with British, French, Spanish and Danish merchants. British desires to secure control of West African gold deposits played a role in the Anglo-Ashanti wars of the late 19th century, which saw the Ashanti Empire annexed by Britain.\nGold played a role in western culture, as a cause for desire and of corruption, as told in children's fables such as Rumpelstiltskin\u2014where Rumpelstiltskin turns hay into gold for the peasant's daughter in return for her child when she becomes a princess\u2014and the stealing of the hen that lays golden eggs in Jack and the Beanstalk.\nThe top prize at the Olympic Games and many other sports competitions is the gold medal.\n75% of the presently accounted for gold has been extracted since 1910, two-thirds since 1950.\nOne main goal of the alchemists was to produce gold from other substances, such as lead\u00a0\u2014 presumably by the interaction with a mythical substance called the philosopher's stone. Trying to produce gold led the alchemists to systematically find out what can be done with substances, and this laid the foundation for today's chemistry, which can produce gold (albeit uneconomically) by using nuclear transmutation. Their symbol for gold was the circle with a point at its center (\u2609), which was also the astrological symbol and the ancient Chinese character for the Sun.\nThe Dome of the Rock is covered with an ultra-thin golden glassier. The Sikh Golden temple, the Harmandir Sahib, is a building covered with gold. Similarly the Wat Phra Kaew emerald Buddhist temple (wat) in Thailand has ornamental gold-leafed statues and roofs. Some European king and queen's crowns were made of gold, and gold was used for the bridal crown since antiquity. An ancient Talmudic text circa 100 AD describes Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva, receiving a \"Jerusalem of Gold\" (diadem). A Greek burial crown made of gold was found in a grave circa 370 BC.\nCulture.\nIn popular culture gold is a high standard of excellence, often used in awards. Great achievements are frequently rewarded with gold, in the form of gold medals, gold trophies and other decorations. Winners of athletic events and other graded competitions are usually awarded a gold medal. Many awards such as the Nobel Prize are made from gold as well. Other award statues and prizes are depicted in gold or are gold plated (such as the Academy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Emmy Awards, the Palme d'Or, and the British Academy Film Awards).\nAristotle in his ethics used gold symbolism when referring to what is now known as the golden mean. Similarly, gold is associated with perfect or divine principles, such as in the case of the golden ratio and the Golden Rule. Gold is further associated with the wisdom of aging and fruition. The fiftieth wedding anniversary is golden. A person's most valued or most successful latter years are sometimes considered \"golden years\" or \"golden jubilee\". The height of a civilization is referred to as a golden age.\nReligion.\nThe first known prehistoric human usages of gold were religious in nature.\nIn some forms of Christianity and Judaism, gold has been associated both with the sacred and evil. In the Book of Exodus, the Golden Calf is a symbol of idolatry, while in the Book of Genesis, Abraham was said to be rich in gold and silver, and Moses was instructed to cover the Mercy Seat of the Ark of the Covenant with pure gold. In Byzantine iconography the halos of Christ, Virgin Mary and the saints are often golden.\nIn Islam, gold (along with silk) is often cited as being forbidden for men to wear. Abu Bakr al-Jazaeri, quoting a hadith, said that \"[t]he wearing of silk and gold are forbidden on the males of my nation, and they are lawful to their women\". This, however, has not been enforced consistently throughout history, e.g. in the Ottoman Empire. Further, small gold accents on clothing, such as in embroidery, may be permitted.\nIn ancient Greek religion and mythology, Theia was seen as the goddess of gold, silver and other gemstones.\nAccording to Christopher Columbus, those who had something of gold were in possession of something of great value on Earth and a substance to even help souls to paradise.\nWedding rings are typically made of gold. It is long lasting and unaffected by the passage of time and may aid in the ring symbolism of eternal vows before God and the perfection the marriage signifies. In Orthodox Christian wedding ceremonies, the wedded couple is adorned with a golden crown (though some opt for wreaths, instead) during the ceremony, an amalgamation of symbolic rites.\nOn 24 August 2020, Israeli archaeologists discovered a trove of early Islamic gold coins near the central city of Yavne. Analysis of the extremely rare collection of 425 gold coins indicated that they were from the late 9th century. Dating to around 1,100 years back, the gold coins were from the Abbasid Caliphate.\nProduction.\nAccording to the United States Geological Survey in 2016, about of gold has been accounted for, of which 85% remains in active use.\nMining and prospecting.\nSince the 1880s, South Africa has been the source of a large proportion of the world's gold supply, and about 22% of the gold presently accounted is from South Africa. Production in 1970 accounted for 79% of the world supply, about 1,480 tonnes. In 2007 China (with 276 tonnes) overtook South Africa as the world's largest gold producer, the first time since 1905 that South Africa had not been the largest.\nIn 2023, China was the world's leading gold-mining country, followed in order by Russia, Australia, Canada, the United States and Ghana.\nIn South America, the controversial project Pascua Lama aims at exploitation of rich fields in the high mountains of Atacama Desert, at the border between Chile and Argentina.\nIt has been estimated that up to one-quarter of the yearly global gold production originates from artisanal or small scale mining.\nThe city of Johannesburg located in South Africa was founded as a result of the Witwatersrand Gold Rush which resulted in the discovery of some of the largest natural gold deposits in recorded history. The gold fields are confined to the northern and north-western edges of the Witwatersrand basin, which is a thick layer of archean rocks located, in most places, deep under the Free State, Gauteng and surrounding provinces. These Witwatersrand rocks are exposed at the surface on the Witwatersrand, in and around Johannesburg, but also in isolated patches to the south-east and south-west of Johannesburg, as well as in an arc around the Vredefort Dome which lies close to the center of the Witwatersrand basin. From these surface exposures the basin dips extensively, requiring some of the mining to occur at depths of nearly , making them, especially the Savuka and TauTona mines to the south-west of Johannesburg, the deepest mines on Earth. The gold is found only in six areas where archean rivers from the north and north-west formed extensive pebbly Braided river deltas before draining into the \"Witwatersrand sea\" where the rest of the Witwatersrand sediments were deposited.\nThe Second Boer War of 1899\u20131901 between the British Empire and the Afrikaner Boers was at least partly over the rights of miners and possession of the gold wealth in South Africa.\nDuring the 19th century, gold rushes occurred whenever large gold deposits were discovered. The first documented discovery of gold in the United States was at the Reed Gold Mine near Georgeville, North Carolina in 1803. The first major gold strike in the United States occurred in a small north Georgia town called Dahlonega. Further gold rushes occurred in California, Colorado, the Black Hills, Otago in New Zealand, a number of locations across Australia, Witwatersrand in South Africa, and the Klondike in Canada.\nGrasberg mine located in Papua, Indonesia is the largest gold mine in the world.\nExtraction and refining.\nGold extraction is most economical in large, easily mined deposits. Ore grades as little as 0.5\u00a0parts per million (ppm) can be economical. Typical ore grades in open-pit mines are 1\u20135\u00a0ppm; ore grades in underground or hard rock mines are usually at least 3\u00a0ppm. Because ore grades of 30\u00a0ppm are usually needed before gold is visible to the naked eye, in most gold mines the gold is invisible.\nThe average gold mining and extraction costs were about $317 per troy ounce in 2007 (), but these can vary widely depending on mining type and ore quality; global mine production amounted to 2,471.1 tonnes.\nAfter initial production, gold is often subsequently refined industrially by the Wohlwill process which is based on electrolysis or by the Miller process, that is chlorination in the melt. The Wohlwill process results in higher purity, but is more complex and is only applied in small-scale installations. Other methods of assaying and purifying smaller amounts of gold include parting and inquartation as well as cupellation, or refining methods based on the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.\nRecycling.\nIn 1997, recycled gold accounted for approximately 20% of the 2700 tons of gold supplied to the market. Jewelry companies such as Generation Collection and computer companies including Dell conduct recycling.\nAs of 2020, the amount of carbon dioxide produced in mining a kilogram of gold is 16 tonnes, while recycling a kilogram of gold produces 53 kilograms of equivalent. Approximately 30 percent of the global gold supply is recycled and not mined as of 2020.\nConsumption.\nThe consumption of gold produced in the world is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry.\nAccording to the World Gold Council, China was the world's largest single consumer of gold in 2013, overtaking India.\nPollution.\nGold production is associated with contribution to hazardous pollution.\nLow-grade gold ore may contain less than one ppm gold metal; such ore is ground and mixed with sodium cyanide to dissolve the gold. Cyanide is a highly poisonous chemical, which can kill living creatures when exposed in minute quantities. Many cyanide spills from gold mines have occurred in both developed and developing countries which killed aquatic life in long stretches of affected rivers. Environmentalists consider these events major environmental disasters. Up to thirty tons of used ore can be dumped as waste for producing one troy ounce of gold. Gold ore dumps are the source of many heavy elements such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, arsenic, selenium and mercury. When sulfide-bearing minerals in these ore dumps are exposed to air and water, the sulfide transforms into sulfuric acid which in turn dissolves these heavy metals facilitating their passage into surface water and ground water. This process is called acid mine drainage. These gold ore dumps contain long-term, highly hazardous waste.\nIt was once common to use mercury to recover gold from ore, but today the use of mercury is largely limited to small-scale individual miners. Minute quantities of mercury compounds can reach water bodies, causing heavy metal contamination. Mercury can then enter into the human food chain in the form of methylmercury. Mercury poisoning in humans can cause severe brain damage.\nGold extraction is also a highly energy-intensive industry, extracting ore from deep mines and grinding the large quantity of ore for further chemical extraction requires nearly 25 kWh of electricity per gram of gold produced.\nMonetary use.\nGold has been widely used throughout the world as money, for efficient indirect exchange (versus barter), and to store wealth in hoards. For exchange purposes, mints produce standardized gold bullion coins, bars and other units of fixed weight and purity.\nThe first known coins containing gold were struck in Lydia, Asia Minor, around 600 BC. The \"talent\" coin of gold in use during the periods of Grecian history both before and during the time of the life of Homer weighed between 8.42 and 8.75\u00a0grams. From an earlier preference in using silver, European economies re-established the minting of gold as coinage during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.\nBills (that mature into gold coin) and gold certificates (convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank) added to the circulating stock of gold standard money in most 19th century industrial economies. In preparation for World War I the warring nations moved to fractional gold standards, inflating their currencies to finance the war effort. Post-war, the victorious countries, most notably Britain, gradually restored gold-convertibility, but international flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed; international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral trades or to pay war reparations.\nAfter World War II gold was replaced by a system of nominally convertible currencies related by fixed exchange rates following the Bretton Woods system. Gold standards and the direct convertibility of currencies to gold have been abandoned by world governments, led in 1971 by the United States' refusal to redeem its dollars in gold. Fiat currency now fills most monetary roles. Switzerland was the last country to tie its currency to gold; this was ended by a referendum in 1999.\nCentral banks continue to keep a portion of their liquid reserves as gold in some form, and metals exchanges such as the London Bullion Market Association still clear transactions denominated in gold, including future delivery contracts. Today, gold mining output is declining. With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century, and increasing foreign exchange, the world's gold reserves and their trading market have become a small fraction of all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold have been replaced by floating prices for gold and gold future contract. Though the gold stock grows by only 1% or 2% per year, very little metal is irretrievably consumed. Inventory above ground would satisfy many decades of industrial and even artisan uses at current prices.\nThe gold proportion (fineness) of alloys is measured by karat (k). Pure gold (commercially termed \"fine\" gold) is designated as 24 karat, abbreviated 24k. English gold coins intended for circulation from 1526 into the 1930s were typically a standard 22k alloy called crown gold, for hardness (American gold coins for circulation after 1837 contain an alloy of 0.900 fine gold, or 21.6 kt).\nOften the prices of various platinum group metals can be much higher than gold, although gold has been used as a standard for currencies to a greater degree than the platinum group metals. Gold has been used as a symbol for purity, value, royalty, and particularly roles that combine these properties. Gold as a sign of wealth and prestige was ridiculed by Thomas More in his treatise \"Utopia\". On that imaginary island, gold is so abundant that it is used to make chains for slaves, tableware, and lavatory seats. When ambassadors from other countries arrive, dressed in ostentatious gold jewels and badges, the Utopians mistake them for menial servants, paying homage instead to the most modestly dressed of their party.\nThe ISO 4217 currency code of gold is XAU. Many holders of gold store it in form of bullion coins or bars as a hedge against inflation or other economic disruptions. A paper by the National Bureau of Economic Research found that gold may be reliable as an inflation hedge over long timescales (centuries) but not over practical timescales. Modern bullion coins for investment or collector purposes do not require good mechanical wear properties; they are typically fine gold at 24k, although the American Gold Eagle and the British gold sovereign continue to be minted in 22k (0.92) metal in historical tradition, and the South African Krugerrand, first released in 1967, is also 22k (0.92).\nThe \"special issue\" Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin contains the highest purity gold of any bullion coin, at 99.999% or 0.99999, while the \"popular issue\" Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin has a purity of 99.99%. In 2006, the United States Mint began producing the American Buffalo gold bullion coin with a purity of 99.99%. The Australian Gold Kangaroos were first coined in 1986 as the Australian Gold Nugget but changed the reverse design in 1989. Other modern coins include the Austrian Vienna Philharmonic bullion coin and the Chinese Gold Panda.\nPrice.\nLike other precious metals, gold is measured by troy weight and by grams. The proportion of gold in the alloy is measured by \"karat\" (k), with 24 karat (24k) being pure gold (100%), and lower karat numbers proportionally less (18k = 75%). The purity of a gold bar or coin can also be expressed as a decimal figure ranging from 0 to 1, known as the millesimal fineness, such as 0.995 being nearly pure.\nThe price of gold is determined through trading in the gold and derivatives markets, but a procedure known as the Gold Fixing in London, originating in September 1919, provides a daily benchmark price to the industry. The afternoon fixing was introduced in 1968 to provide a price when US markets are open.\nHistory.\nHistorically gold coinage was widely used as currency; when paper money was introduced, it typically was a receipt redeemable for gold coin or bullion. In a monetary system known as the gold standard, a certain weight of gold was given the name of a unit of currency. For a long period, the United States government set the value of the US dollar so that one troy ounce was equal to $20.67 ($0.665 per gram, ), but in 1934 the dollar was devalued to $35.00 per troy ounce ($0.889/g, ). By 1961, it was becoming hard to maintain this price, and a pool of US and European banks agreed to manipulate the market to prevent further currency devaluation against increased gold demand.\nThe largest gold depository in the world is that of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank in New York, which holds about 3% of the gold known to exist and accounted for today, as does the similarly laden U.S. Bullion Depository at Fort Knox. In 2005 the World Gold Council estimated total global gold supply to be 3,859 tonnes and demand to be 3,754 tonnes, giving a surplus of 105 tonnes.\nAfter 15 August 1971 Nixon shock, the price began to greatly increase, and between 1968 and 2000 the price of gold ranged widely, from a high of $850 per troy ounce ($27.33/g, ) on 21 January 1980, to a low of $252.90 per troy ounce ($8.13/g, ) on 21 June 1999 (London Gold Fixing). Prices increased rapidly from 2001, but the 1980 high was not exceeded until 3 January 2008, when a new maximum of $865.35 per troy ounce was set (). Another record price was set on 17 March 2008, at $1023.50 per troy ounce ($32.91/g, ).\nOn 2 December 2009, gold reached a new high closing at $1,217.23 (). Gold further rallied hitting new highs in May 2010 after the European Union debt crisis prompted further purchase of gold as a safe asset. On 1 March 2011, gold hit a new all-time high of $1432.57 (), based on investor concerns regarding ongoing unrest in North Africa as well as in the Middle East.\nFrom April 2001 to August 2011, spot gold prices more than quintupled in value against the US dollar, hitting yet another new all-time high of $1,913.50 on 23 August 2011 (), prompting speculation that the long secular bear market had ended and a bull market had returned. However, the price then began a slow decline towards $1,200 per troy ounce in late 2014 and 2015 ().\nIn August 2020, the gold price picked up to US$2,060 per ounce () after a total growth of 59% from August 2018 to October 2020, a period during which it outplaced the Nasdaq total return of 54%.\nGold futures are traded on the COMEX exchange. These contacts are priced in USD per troy ounce (1 troy ounce = 31.1034768 grams). Below are the CQG contract specifications outlining the futures contracts:\nOther applications.\nJewelry.\nPure (24k) gold is often alloyed with other metals for use in jewelry, altering its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and other properties. Alloys with lower karat rating, typically 22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of copper, silver, or other base metals in the alloy. Nickel is toxic, and its release from nickel white gold is controlled by legislation in Europe. Palladium-gold alloys are more expensive than those using nickel. High-karat white gold alloys are more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver or sterling silver, though not as corrosion-proof as platinum jewelry. The Japanese craft of Mokume-gane exploits the color contrasts between laminated colored gold alloys to produce decorative wood-grain effects.\nGold solder is used for joining the components of gold jewelry by high-temperature hard soldering or brazing. If the work is to be of hallmarking quality, the gold solder alloy must match the fineness of the work, and alloy formulas are manufactured to color-match yellow and white gold. Gold solder is usually made in at least three melting-point ranges referred to as Easy, Medium and Hard. By using the hard, high-melting point solder first, followed by solders with progressively lower melting points, goldsmiths can assemble complex items with several separate soldered joints. Gold can also be made into thread and used in embroidery.\nElectronics.\nOnly 10% of the world consumption of new gold produced goes to industry, but by far the most important industrial use for new gold is in fabrication of corrosion-free electrical connectors in computers and other electrical devices. For example, according to the World Gold Council, a typical cell phone may contain 50\u00a0mg of gold, worth about three dollars. But since nearly one billion cell phones are produced each year, a gold value of US$2.82 () in each phone adds to US$2.82 billion in gold from just this application ().\nThough gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion in other environments (including resistance to non-chlorinated acids) has led to its widespread industrial use in the electronic era as a thin-layer coating on electrical connectors, thereby ensuring good connection. For example, gold is used in the connectors of the more expensive electronics cables, such as audio, video and USB cables. The benefit of using gold over other connector metals such as tin in these applications has been debated; gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply a marketing ploy. However, the use of gold in other applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with a very high failure cost (certain computers, communications equipment, spacecraft, jet aircraft engines) remains very common.\nBesides sliding electrical contacts, gold is also used in electrical contacts because of its resistance to corrosion, electrical conductivity, ductility and lack of toxicity. Switch contacts are generally subjected to more intense corrosion stress than are sliding contacts. Fine gold wires are used to connect semiconductor devices to their packages through a process known as wire bonding.\nThe concentration of free electrons in gold metal is 5.91\u00d71022\u00a0cm\u22123. Gold is highly conductive to electricity and has been used for electrical wiring in some high-energy applications (only silver and copper are more conductive per volume, but gold is the only of these three with zero corrosion). For example, gold electrical wires were used during some of the Manhattan Project's atomic experiments, but large high-current silver wires were used in the calutron isotope separator magnets in the project.\nIt is estimated that 16% of the world's presently-accounted-for gold and 22% of the world's silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.\nMedicine.\nThere are only two gold compounds currently employed as pharmaceuticals in modern medicine (sodium aurothiomalate and auranofin), used in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions in the US due to their anti-inflammatory properties. These drugs have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis, and also (historically) against tuberculosis and some parasites.\nHistorically, metallic and gold compounds have long been used for medicinal purposes. Gold, usually as the metal, is perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently by shamanic practitioners) and known to Dioscorides. In medieval times, gold was often seen as beneficial for the health, in the belief that something so rare and beautiful could not be anything but healthy.\nIn the 19th century gold had a reputation as an anxiolytic, a therapy for nervous disorders. Depression, epilepsy, migraine, and glandular problems such as amenorrhea and impotence were treated, and most notably alcoholism (Keeley, 1897).\nThe apparent paradox of the actual toxicology of the substance suggests the possibility of serious gaps in the understanding of the action of gold in physiology. Only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value, since elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body (e.g., ingested gold cannot be attacked by stomach acid).\nGold alloys are used in restorative dentistry, especially in tooth restorations, such as crowns and permanent bridges. The gold alloys' slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns. The use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others.\nColloidal gold preparations (suspensions of gold nanoparticles) in water are intensely red-colored, and can be made with tightly controlled particle sizes up to a few tens of nanometers across by reduction of gold chloride with citrate or ascorbate ions. Colloidal gold is used in research applications in medicine, biology and materials science. The technique of immunogold labeling exploits the ability of the gold particles to adsorb protein molecules onto their surfaces. Colloidal gold particles coated with specific antibodies can be used as probes for the presence and position of antigens on the surfaces of cells. In ultrathin sections of tissues viewed by electron microscopy, the immunogold labels appear as extremely dense round spots at the position of the antigen.\nGold, or alloys of gold and palladium, are applied as conductive coating to biological specimens and other non-conducting materials such as plastics and glass to be viewed in a scanning electron microscope. The coating, which is usually applied by sputtering with an argon plasma, has a triple role in this application. Gold's very high electrical conductivity drains electrical charge to earth, and its very high density provides stopping power for electrons in the electron beam, helping to limit the depth to which the electron beam penetrates the specimen. This improves definition of the position and topography of the specimen surface and increases the spatial resolution of the image. Gold also produces a high output of secondary electrons when irradiated by an electron beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly used signal source used in the scanning electron microscope.\nThe isotope gold-198 (half-life 2.7 days) is used in nuclear medicine, in some cancer treatments and for treating other diseases.\nCuisine.\nCake with edible gold decoration\nToxicity.\nPure metallic (elemental) gold is non-toxic and non-irritating when ingested and is sometimes used as a food decoration in the form of gold leaf. Metallic gold is also a component of the alcoholic drinks Goldschl\u00e4ger, Gold Strike, and Goldwasser. Metallic gold is approved as a food additive in the EU (E175 in the Codex Alimentarius). Although the gold ion is toxic, the acceptance of metallic gold as a food additive is due to its relative chemical inertness, and resistance to being corroded or transformed into soluble salts (gold compounds) by any known chemical process which would be encountered in the human body.\nSoluble compounds (gold salts) such as gold chloride are toxic to the liver and kidneys. Common cyanide salts of gold such as potassium gold cyanide, used in gold electroplating, are toxic by virtue of both their cyanide and gold content. There are rare cases of lethal gold poisoning from potassium gold cyanide. Gold toxicity can be ameliorated with chelation therapy with an agent such as dimercaprol.\nGold metal was voted Allergen of the Year in 2001 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society; gold contact allergies affect mostly women. Despite this, gold is a relatively non-potent contact allergen, in comparison with metals like nickel.\nA sample of the fungus \"Aspergillus niger\" was found growing from gold mining solution; and was found to contain cyano metal complexes, such as gold, silver, copper, iron and zinc. The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12241", "revid": "16364713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12241", "title": "Gallium", "text": "element with atomic number 31 (Ga)\nGallium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ga and atomic number 31. Discovered by the French chemist Paul-\u00c9mile Lecoq de Boisbaudran in Paris, France, 1875, \nelemental gallium is a soft, silvery metal at standard temperature and pressure. In its liquid state, it becomes silvery white. If enough force is applied, solid gallium may fracture conchoidally. Since its discovery in 1875, gallium has widely been used to make alloys with low melting points. It is also used in semiconductors, as a dopant in semiconductor substrates.\nThe melting point of gallium, , is used as a temperature reference point. Gallium alloys are used in thermometers as a non-toxic and environmentally friendly alternative to mercury, and can withstand higher temperatures than mercury. A melting point of , well below the freezing point of water, is claimed for the alloy galinstan (62\u2013\u206095% gallium, 5\u2013\u206022% indium, and 0\u2013\u206016% tin by weight), but that may be the freezing point with the effect of supercooling.\nGallium does not occur as a free element in nature, but rather as gallium(III) compounds in trace amounts in zinc ores (such as sphalerite) and in bauxite. Elemental gallium is a liquid at temperatures greater than , and will melt in a person's hands at normal human body temperature of .\nGallium is predominantly used in electronics. Gallium arsenide, the primary chemical compound of gallium in electronics, is used in microwave circuits, high-speed switching circuits, and infrared circuits. Semiconducting gallium nitride and indium gallium nitride produce blue and violet light-emitting diodes and diode lasers. Gallium is also used in the production of artificial gadolinium gallium garnet for jewelry. It has no known natural role in biology. Gallium(III) behaves in a similar manner to ferric salts in biological systems and has been used in some medical applications, including pharmaceuticals and radiopharmaceuticals.\nPhysical properties.\nElemental gallium is not found in nature, but it is easily obtained by smelting. Very pure gallium is a silvery blue metal that fractures conchoidally like glass. Gallium's volume expands by 3.10% when it changes from a liquid to a solid so care must be taken when storing it in containers that may rupture when it changes state. Gallium shares the higher-density liquid state with a short list of other materials that includes water, silicon, germanium, bismuth, and plutonium.\nGallium forms alloys with most metals. It readily diffuses into cracks or grain boundaries of some metals such as aluminium, aluminium\u2013zinc alloys and steel, causing extreme loss of strength and ductility called liquid metal embrittlement.\nThe melting point of gallium, at 302.9146\u00a0K (29.7646\u00a0\u00b0C, 85.5763\u00a0\u00b0F), is just above room temperature, and is approximately the same as the average summer daytime temperatures in Earth's mid-latitudes. This melting point (mp) is one of the formal temperature reference points in the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90) established by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM). The triple point of gallium, 302.9166\u00a0K (29.7666\u00a0\u00b0C, 85.5799\u00a0\u00b0F), is used by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in preference to the melting point.\nThe melting point of gallium allows it to melt in the human hand, and then solidify if removed. The liquid metal has a strong tendency to supercool below its melting point/freezing point: Ga nanoparticles can be kept in the liquid state below 90\u00a0K. Seeding with a crystal helps to initiate freezing. Gallium is one of the four non-radioactive metals (with caesium, rubidium, and mercury) that are known to be liquid at, or near, normal room temperature. Of the four, gallium is the only one that is neither highly reactive (as are rubidium and caesium) nor highly toxic (as is mercury) and can, therefore, be used in metal-in-glass high-temperature thermometers. It is also notable for having one of the largest liquid ranges for a metal, and for having (unlike mercury) a low vapor pressure at high temperatures. Gallium's boiling point, 2676\u00a0K, is nearly nine times higher than its melting point on the absolute scale, the greatest ratio between melting point and boiling point of any element. Unlike mercury, liquid gallium metal wets glass and skin, along with most other materials (with the exceptions of quartz, graphite, gallium(III) oxide and PTFE), making it mechanically more difficult to handle even though it is substantially less toxic and requires far fewer precautions than mercury. Gallium painted onto glass is a brilliant mirror. For this reason as well as the metal contamination and freezing-expansion problems, samples of gallium metal are usually supplied in polyethylene packets within other containers.\nGallium does not crystallize in any of the simple crystal structures. The stable phase under normal conditions is orthorhombic with 8 atoms in the conventional unit cell. Within a unit cell, each atom has only one nearest neighbor (at a distance of 244\u00a0pm). The remaining six unit cell neighbors are spaced 27, 30 and 39\u00a0pm farther away, and they are grouped in pairs with the same distance. Many stable and metastable phases are found as function of temperature and pressure.\nThe bonding between the two nearest neighbors is covalent; hence Ga2 dimers are seen as the fundamental building blocks of the crystal. This explains the low melting point relative to the neighbor elements, aluminium and indium. This structure is strikingly similar to that of iodine and may form because of interactions between the single 4p electrons of gallium atoms, further away from the nucleus than the 4s electrons and the [Ar]3d10 core. This phenomenon recurs with mercury with its \"pseudo-noble-gas\" [Xe]4f145d106s2 electron configuration, which is liquid at room temperature. The 3d10 electrons do not shield the outer electrons very well from the nucleus and hence the first ionisation energy of gallium is greater than that of aluminium. Ga2 dimers do not persist in the liquid state and liquid gallium exhibits a complex low-coordinated structure in which each gallium atom is surrounded by 10 others, rather than 11\u201312 neighbors typical of most liquid metals.\nThe physical properties of gallium are highly anisotropic, i.e. have different values along the three major crystallographic axes \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" (see table), producing a significant difference between the linear (\u03b1) and volume thermal expansion coefficients. The properties of gallium are strongly temperature-dependent, particularly near the melting point. For example, the coefficient of thermal expansion increases by several hundred percent upon melting.\nIsotopes.\nGallium has 30 known isotopes, ranging in mass number from 60 to 89. Only two isotopes are stable and occur naturally, gallium-69 and gallium-71. Gallium-69 is more abundant: it makes up about 60.1% of natural gallium, while gallium-71 makes up the remaining 39.9%. All the other isotopes are radioactive, with gallium-67 being the longest-lived (half-life 3.2617\u00a0days). Isotopes lighter than gallium-69 usually decay through beta plus decay (positron emission) or electron capture to isotopes of zinc, while isotopes heavier than gallium-71 decay through beta minus decay (electron emission), possibly with delayed neutron emission, to isotopes of germanium. Gallium-70 can decay both ways, to zinc-70 or to germanium-70.\nGallium-67 and gallium-68 (half-life 67.84\u00a0min) are both used for imaging in nuclear medicine (see gallium scan).\nChemical properties.\nGallium is found primarily in the +3 oxidation state. The +1 oxidation state is also found in some compounds, although it is less common than it is for gallium's heavier congeners indium and thallium. For example, the very stable GaCl2 contains both gallium(I) and gallium(III) and can be formulated as GaIGaIIICl4; in contrast, the monochloride is unstable above 0\u00a0\u00b0C, disproportionating into elemental gallium and gallium(III) chloride. Compounds containing Ga\u2013Ga bonds are true gallium(II) compounds, such as GaS (which can be formulated as Ga24+(S2\u2212)2) and the dioxane complex Ga2Cl4(C4H8O2)2.\nAqueous chemistry.\nStrong acids dissolve gallium, forming gallium(III) salts such as Ga(NO3)3 (gallium nitrate). Aqueous solutions of gallium(III) salts contain the hydrated gallium ion, [Ga(H2O)6]3+. Gallium(III) hydroxide, Ga(OH)3, may be precipitated from gallium(III) solutions by adding ammonia. Dehydrating Ga(OH)3 at 100\u00a0\u00b0C produces gallium oxide hydroxide, GaO(OH).\nAlkaline hydroxide solutions dissolve gallium, forming \"gallate\" salts (not to be confused with identically named gallic acid salts) containing the Ga(OH)4- anion. Gallium hydroxide, which is amphoteric, also dissolves in alkali to form gallate salts. Although earlier work suggested Ga(OH)63- as another possible gallate anion, it was not found in later work.\nOxides and chalcogenides.\nGallium reacts with the chalcogens only at relatively high temperatures. At room temperature, gallium metal is not reactive with air and water because it forms a passive, protective oxide layer. At higher temperatures, however, it reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form gallium(III) oxide, Ga2O3. Reducing Ga2O3 with elemental gallium in vacuum at 500\u00a0\u00b0C to 700\u00a0\u00b0C yields the dark brown gallium(I) oxide, Ga2O. Ga2O is a very strong reducing agent, capable of reducing H2SO4 to H2S. It disproportionates at 800\u00a0\u00b0C back to gallium and Ga2O3.\nGallium(III) sulfide, Ga2S3, has 3 possible crystal modifications. It can be made by the reaction of gallium with hydrogen sulfide (H2S) at 950\u00a0\u00b0C. Alternatively, Ga(OH)3 can be used at 747\u00a0\u00b0C:\n2 Ga(OH)3 + 3 H2S \u2192 Ga2S3 + 6 H2O\nReacting a mixture of alkali metal carbonates and Ga2O3 with H2S leads to the formation of \"thiogallates\" containing the [Ga2S4]2- anion. Strong acids decompose these salts, releasing H2S in the process. The mercury salt, HgGa2S4, can be used as a phosphor.\nGallium also forms sulfides in lower oxidation states, such as gallium(II) sulfide and the green gallium(I) sulfide, the latter of which is produced from the former by heating to 1000\u00a0\u00b0C under a stream of nitrogen.\nThe other binary chalcogenides, Ga2Se3 and Ga2Te3, have the zincblende structure. They are all semiconductors but are easily hydrolysed and have limited utility.\nNitrides and pnictides.\nGallium reacts with ammonia at 1050\u00a0\u00b0C to form gallium nitride, GaN. Gallium also forms binary compounds with phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony: gallium phosphide (GaP), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and gallium antimonide (GaSb). These compounds have the same structure as ZnS, and have important semiconducting properties. GaP, GaAs, and GaSb can be synthesized by the direct reaction of gallium with elemental phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony. They exhibit higher electrical conductivity than GaN. GaP can also be synthesized by reacting Ga2O with phosphorus at low temperatures.\nGallium forms ternary nitrides; for example:\nLi3Ga + N2 \u2192 Li3GaN2\nSimilar compounds with phosphorus and arsenic are possible: Li3GaP2 and Li3GaAs2. These compounds are easily hydrolyzed by dilute acids and water.\nHalides.\nGallium(III) oxide reacts with fluorinating agents such as HF or F2 to form gallium(III) fluoride, GaF3. It is an ionic compound strongly insoluble in water. However, it dissolves in hydrofluoric acid, in which it forms an adduct with water, GaF3\u00b73H2O. Attempting to dehydrate this adduct forms GaF2OH\u00b7\"n\"H2O. The adduct reacts with ammonia to form GaF3\u00b73NH3, which can then be heated to form anhydrous GaF3.\nGallium trichloride is formed by the reaction of gallium metal with chlorine gas. Unlike the trifluoride, gallium(III) chloride exists as dimeric molecules, Ga2Cl6, with a melting point of 78\u00a0\u00b0C. Equivalent compounds are formed with bromine and iodine, Ga2Br6 and Ga2I6.\nLike the other group 13 trihalides, gallium(III) halides are Lewis acids, reacting as halide acceptors with alkali metal halides to form salts containing GaX4- anions, where X is a halogen. They also react with alkyl halides to form carbocations and GaX4-.\nWhen heated to a high temperature, gallium(III) halides react with elemental gallium to form the respective gallium(I) halides. For example, GaCl3 reacts with Ga to form GaCl:\n2 Ga + GaCl3 \u21cc 3 GaCl (g)\nAt lower temperatures, the equilibrium shifts toward the left and GaCl disproportionates back to elemental gallium and GaCl3. GaCl can also be produced by reacting Ga with HCl at 950\u00a0\u00b0C; the product can be condensed as a red solid.\nGallium(I) compounds can be stabilized by forming adducts with Lewis acids. For example:\nGaCl + AlCl3 \u2192 Ga+[AlCl4]-\nThe so-called \"gallium(II) halides\", GaX2, are actually adducts of gallium(I) halides with the respective gallium(III) halides, having the structure Ga+[GaX4]-. For example:\nGaCl + GaCl3 \u2192 Ga+[GaCl4]-\nHydrides.\nLike aluminium, gallium also forms a hydride, GaH3, known as \"gallane\", which may be produced by reacting lithium gallium hydride (LiGaH4) with gallium(III) chloride at \u221230\u00a0\u00b0C:\n3 LiGaH4 + GaCl3 \u2192 3 LiCl + 4 GaH3\nIn the presence of dimethyl ether as solvent, GaH3 polymerizes to (GaH3)\"n\". If no solvent is used, the dimer Ga2H6 (\"digallane\") is formed as a gas. Its structure is similar to diborane, having two hydrogen atoms bridging the two gallium centers, unlike \u03b1-AlH3 in which aluminium has a coordination number of 6.\nGallane is unstable above \u221210\u00a0\u00b0C, decomposing to elemental gallium and hydrogen.\nOrganogallium compounds.\nOrganogallium compounds are of similar reactivity to organoindium compounds, less reactive than organoaluminium compounds, but more reactive than organothallium compounds. Alkylgalliums are monomeric. Lewis acidity decreases in the order Al &gt; Ga &gt; In and as a result organogallium compounds do not form bridged dimers as organoaluminium compounds do. Organogallium compounds are also less reactive than organoaluminium compounds. They do form stable peroxides. These alkylgalliums are liquids at room temperature, having low melting points, and are quite mobile and flammable. Triphenylgallium is monomeric in solution, but its crystals form chain structures due to weak intermolecluar Ga\u00b7\u00b7\u00b7C interactions.\nGallium trichloride is a common starting reagent for the formation of organogallium compounds, such as in carbogallation reactions. Gallium trichloride reacts with lithium cyclopentadienide in diethyl ether to form the trigonal planar gallium cyclopentadienyl complex GaCp3. Gallium(I) forms complexes with arene ligands such as hexamethylbenzene. Because this ligand is quite bulky, the structure of the [Ga(\u03b76-C6Me6)]+ is that of a half-sandwich. Less bulky ligands such as mesitylene allow two ligands to be attached to the central gallium atom in a bent sandwich structure. Benzene is even less bulky and allows the formation of dimers: an example is [Ga(\u03b76-C6H6)2] [GaCl4]\u00b73C6H6.\nHistory.\nIn 1871, the existence of gallium was first predicted by Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, who named it \"eka-aluminium\" from its position in his periodic table. He also predicted several properties of eka-aluminium that correspond closely to the real properties of gallium, such as its density, melting point, oxide character, and bonding in chloride.\nMendeleev further predicted that eka-aluminium would be discovered by means of the spectroscope, and that metallic eka-aluminium would dissolve slowly in both acids and alkalis and would not react with air. He also predicted that M2O3 would dissolve in acids to give MX3 salts, that eka-aluminium salts would form basic salts, that eka-aluminium sulfate should form alums, and that anhydrous MCl3 should have a greater volatility than ZnCl2. All of these predictions were later proven accurate.\nGallium was discovered using spectroscopy by French chemist Paul-\u00c9mile Lecoq de Boisbaudran in 1875 from its characteristic spectrum (two violet lines) in a sample of sphalerite. Later that year, Lecoq obtained the free metal by electrolysis of the hydroxide in potassium hydroxide solution.\nHe named the element \"gallia\", from Latin meaning 'Gaul', a name for his native land of France. It was later claimed that, in a multilingual pun of a kind favoured by men of science in the 19th century, he had also named gallium after himself: is French for 'the rooster', and the Latin word for 'rooster' is . In an 1877 article, Lecoq denied this conjecture.\nOriginally, de Boisbaudran determined the density of gallium as 4.7\u00a0g/cm3, the only property that failed to match Mendeleev's predictions; Mendeleev then wrote to him and suggested that he should remeasure the density, and de Boisbaudran then obtained the correct value of 5.9\u00a0g/cm3, that Mendeleev had predicted exactly.\nFrom its discovery in 1875 until the era of semiconductors, the primary uses of gallium were high-temperature thermometrics and metal alloys with unusual properties of stability or ease of melting (some such being liquid at room temperature).\nThe development of gallium arsenide as a direct bandgap semiconductor in the 1960s ushered in the most important stage in the applications of gallium. In the late 1960s, the electronics industry started using gallium on a commercial scale to fabricate light emitting diodes, photovoltaics and semiconductors, while the metals industry used it to reduce the melting point of alloys.\nFirst blue gallium nitride LED were developed in 1971\u20131973, but they were feeble. Only in the early 1990s Shuji Nakamura managed to combine GaN with indium gallium nitride and develop the modern blue LED, now making the basis of ubiquitous white LEDs, which Nichia commercialized in 1993. He and two other Japanese scientists received a Nobel in Physics in 2014 for this work.\nGlobal gallium production slowly grew from several tens of t/year in the 1970s til ca. 2010, when it passed 100 t/yr and rapidly accelerated, by 2024 reaching about 450 t/yr.\nOccurrence.\nGallium does not exist as a free element in the Earth's crust, and the few high-content minerals, such as gallite (CuGaS2), are too rare to serve as a primary source. The abundance in the Earth's crust is approximately 16.9\u00a0ppm. It is the 34th most abundant element in the crust. This is comparable to the crustal abundances of lead, cobalt, and niobium. Yet unlike these elements, gallium does not form its own ore deposits with concentrations of &gt; 0.1 wt.% in ore. Rather it occurs at trace concentrations similar to the crustal value in zinc ores, and at somewhat higher values (~ 50\u00a0ppm) in aluminium ores, from both of which it is extracted as a by-product. This lack of independent deposits is due to gallium's geochemical behaviour, showing no strong enrichment in the processes relevant to the formation of most ore deposits.\nThe United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that more than 1\u00a0million tons of gallium is contained in known reserves of bauxite and zinc ores. Some coal flue dusts contain small quantities of gallium, typically less than 1% by weight. However, these amounts are not extractable without mining of the host materials (see below). Thus, the availability of gallium is fundamentally determined by the rate at which bauxite, zinc ores, and coal are extracted.\nProduction and availability.\nGallium is produced exclusively as a by-product during the processing of the ores of other metals. Its main source material is bauxite, the chief ore of aluminium, but minor amounts are also extracted from sulfidic zinc ores (sphalerite being the main host mineral). In the past, certain coals were an important source.\nDuring the processing of bauxite to alumina in the Bayer process, gallium accumulates in the sodium hydroxide liquor. From this it can be extracted by a variety of methods. The most recent is the use of ion-exchange resin. Achievable extraction efficiencies critically depend on the original concentration in the feed bauxite. At a typical feed concentration of 50\u00a0ppm, about 15% of the contained gallium is extractable. The remainder reports to the red mud and aluminium hydroxide streams. Gallium is removed from the ion-exchange resin in solution. Electrolysis then gives gallium metal. For semiconductor use, it is further purified with zone melting or single-crystal extraction from a melt (Czochralski process). Purities of 99.9999% are routinely achieved and commercially available.\nIts by-product status means that gallium production is constrained by the amount of bauxite, sulfidic zinc ores (and coal) extracted per year. Therefore, its availability needs to be discussed in terms of supply potential. The supply potential of a by-product is defined as that amount which is economically extractable from its host materials \"per year\" under current market conditions (i.e. technology and price). Reserves and resources are not relevant for by-products, since they \"cannot\" be extracted independently from the main-products. Recent estimates put the supply potential of gallium at a minimum of 2,100\u00a0t/yr from bauxite, 85\u00a0t/yr from sulfidic zinc ores, and potentially 590 t/yr from coal. These figures are significantly greater than current production (375\u00a0t in 2016). Thus, major future increases in the by-product production of gallium will be possible without significant increases in production costs or price. The average price for low-grade gallium was $120 per kilogram in 2016 and $135\u2013140 per kilogram in 2017.\nIn 2017, the world's production of low-grade gallium was c.\u2009315 tons\u2014a decrease of 15% from 2016. China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, and Ukraine were the leading producers, while Germany ceased primary production of gallium in 2016. The yield of high-purity gallium was ca. 180 tons, mostly originating from China, Japan, Slovakia, UK and U.S. The 2017 world annual production capacity was estimated at 730 tons for low-grade and 320 tons for refined gallium.\nChina produced c.\u2009250 tons of low-grade gallium in 2016 and c.\u2009300 tons in 2017. It also accounted for more than half of global LED production. As of July 2023, China accounted for between 80% and 95% of its production. \nAs oft August 2023, China produced 80% of the world's gallium and 60% of germanium (source: Critical Raw Materials Alliance (CRMA)). China started restricting exports of both materials. They are key to the semiconductor industry and there is a 'chip war' between China and the US.\nIn 2025, Rio Tinto and Indium Corporation partnered to mine the first primary gallium in North America.\nIn July 2025, the US think tank Center for Strategic and International Studies wrote: \n\"China is increasingly weaponizing its chokehold over critical minerals amid intensifying economic and technological competition with the United States. The critical mineral gallium, which is crucial to defense industry supply chains and new energy technologies, has been at the front line of China\u2019s strategy.\"\nIn 2024, China produced 98 percent of the world\u2019s low-purity gallium (source: United States Geological Survey (USGS)).\nApplications.\nSemiconductor applications dominate the commercial demand for gallium, accounting for 98% of the total. The next major application is for gadolinium gallium garnets. As of 2022, 44% of world use went to light fixtures and 36% to integrated circuits, with smaller shares equal to ~7% going to photovoltaics and magnets each.\nSemiconductors.\nExtremely high-purity (&gt;99.9999%) gallium is commercially available to serve the semiconductor industry. Gallium arsenide (GaAs) and gallium nitride (GaN) used in electronic components represented about 98% of the gallium consumption in the United States in 2007. About 66% of semiconductor gallium is used in the U.S. in integrated circuits (mostly gallium arsenide), such as the manufacture of ultra-high-speed logic chips and MESFETs for low-noise microwave preamplifiers in cell phones. About 20% of this gallium is used in optoelectronics.\nWorldwide, gallium arsenide makes up 95% of the annual global gallium consumption. It amounted to $7.5\u00a0billion in 2016, with 53% originating from cell phones, 27% from wireless communications, and the rest from automotive, consumer, fiber-optic, and military applications. The recent increase in GaAs consumption is mostly related to the emergence of 3G and 4G smartphones, which employ up to 10 times the amount of GaAs in older models.\nGallium arsenide and gallium nitride can also be found in a variety of optoelectronic devices which had a market share of $15.3\u00a0billion in 2015 and $18.5\u00a0billion in 2016. Aluminium gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) is used in high-power infrared laser diodes. The semiconductors gallium nitride and indium gallium nitride are used in blue and violet optoelectronic devices, mostly laser diodes and light-emitting diodes. For example, gallium nitride 405\u00a0nm diode lasers are used as a violet light source for higher-density Blu-ray Disc compact data disc drives.\nOther major applications of gallium nitride are cable television transmission, commercial wireless infrastructure, power electronics, and satellites. The GaN radio frequency device market alone was estimated at $370\u00a0million in 2016 and $420\u00a0million in 2016.\nMultijunction photovoltaic cells, developed for satellite power applications, are made by molecular-beam epitaxy or metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy of thin films of gallium arsenide, indium gallium phosphide, or indium gallium arsenide. The Mars Exploration Rovers and several satellites use triple-junction gallium arsenide on germanium cells. Gallium is also a component in photovoltaic compounds (such as copper indium gallium selenium sulfide ) used in solar panels as a cost-efficient alternative to crystalline silicon.\nGalinstan and other alloys.\nGallium readily alloys with most metals, and is used as an ingredient in low-melting alloys. The nearly eutectic alloy of gallium, indium, and tin is a room temperature liquid used in medical thermometers. This alloy, with the trade-name \"Galinstan\" (with the \"-stan\" referring to the tin, in Latin), has a low melting point of \u221219\u00a0\u00b0C (\u22122.2\u00a0\u00b0F). this family of alloys can also be used to cool computer chips in place of water, and as a replacement for thermal paste in high-performance computing. Gallium alloys have been evaluated as substitutes for mercury dental amalgams, but these materials have yet to see wide acceptance. Liquid alloys containing mostly gallium and indium have been found to precipitate gaseous CO2 into solid carbon and are being researched as potential methodologies for carbon capture and possibly carbon removal.\nBecause gallium wets glass or porcelain, gallium can be used to create brilliant mirrors. When the wetting action of gallium-alloys is not desired (as in Galinstan glass thermometers), the glass must be protected with a transparent layer of gallium(III) oxide.\nDue to their high surface tension and deformability, gallium-based liquid metals can be used to create actuators by controlling the surface tension. Researchers have demonstrated the potentials of using liquid metal actuators as artificial muscle in robotic actuation.\nThe plutonium used in nuclear weapon pits is stabilized in the \u03b4 phase and made machinable by alloying with gallium.\nBiomedical applications.\nAlthough gallium has no natural function in biology, gallium ions interact with processes in the body in a manner similar to iron(III). Because these processes include inflammation, a marker for many disease states, several gallium salts are used (or are in development) as pharmaceuticals and radiopharmaceuticals in medicine. Interest in the anticancer properties of gallium emerged when it was discovered that 67Ga(III) citrate injected in tumor-bearing animals localized to sites of tumor. Clinical trials have shown gallium nitrate to have antineoplastic activity against non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and urothelial cancers. A new generation of gallium-ligand complexes such as tris(8-quinolinolato)gallium(III) (KP46) and gallium maltolate has emerged. Gallium nitrate (brand name Ganite) has been used as an intravenous pharmaceutical to treat hypercalcemia associated with tumor metastasis to bones. Gallium is thought to interfere with osteoclast function, and the therapy may be effective when other treatments have failed. Gallium maltolate, an oral, highly absorbable form of gallium(III) ion, is an anti-proliferative to pathologically proliferating cells, particularly cancer cells and some bacteria that accept it in place of ferric iron (Fe3+). Researchers are conducting clinical and preclinical trials on this compound as a potential treatment for a number of cancers, infectious diseases, and inflammatory diseases.\nWhen gallium ions are mistakenly taken up in place of iron(III) by bacteria such as \"Pseudomonas\", the ions interfere with respiration, and the bacteria die. This happens because iron is redox-active, allowing the transfer of electrons during respiration, while gallium is redox-inactive.\nA complex amine-phenol Ga(III) compound MR045 is selectively toxic to parasites resistant to chloroquine, a common drug against malaria. Both the Ga(III) complex and chloroquine act by inhibiting crystallization of hemozoin, a disposal product formed from the digestion of blood by the parasites.\nRadiogallium salts.\nGallium-67 salts such as gallium citrate and gallium nitrate are used as radiopharmaceutical agents in the nuclear medicine imaging known as gallium scan. The radioactive isotope 67Ga is used, and the compound or salt of gallium is unimportant. The body handles Ga3+ in many ways as though it were Fe3+, and the ion is bound (and concentrates) in areas of inflammation, such as infection, and in areas of rapid cell division. This allows such sites to be imaged by nuclear scan techniques.\nGallium-68, a positron emitter with a half-life of 68 min, is now used as a diagnostic radionuclide in PET-CT when linked to pharmaceutical preparations such as DOTATOC, a somatostatin analogue used for neuroendocrine tumors investigation, and DOTA-TATE, a newer one, used for neuroendocrine metastasis and lung neuroendocrine cancer, such as certain types of \"microcytoma\". Gallium-68's preparation as a pharmaceutical is chemical, and the radionuclide is extracted by elution from germanium-68, a synthetic radioisotope of germanium, in gallium-68 generators.\nOther uses.\nNeutrino detection: Gallium is used for neutrino detection. Possibly the largest amount of pure gallium ever collected in a single location is the Gallium-Germanium Neutrino Telescope used by the SAGE experiment at the Baksan Neutrino Observatory in Russia. This detector contains 55\u201357 tonnes (~9 cubic metres) of liquid gallium. Another experiment was the GALLEX neutrino detector operated in the early 1990s in an Italian mountain tunnel. The detector contained 12.2 tons of watered gallium-71. Solar neutrinos caused a few atoms of 71Ga to become radioactive 71Ge, which were detected. This experiment showed that the solar neutrino flux is 40% less than theory predicted. This deficit (solar neutrino problem) was not explained until better solar neutrino detectors and theories were constructed (see SNO).\nIon source: Gallium is also used as a liquid metal ion source for a focused ion beam. For example, a focused gallium-ion beam was used to create the world's smallest book, \"Teeny Ted from Turnip Town\".\nLubricants: Gallium serves as an additive in glide wax for skis and other low-friction surface materials.\nFlexible electronics: Materials scientists speculate that the properties of gallium could make it suitable for the development of flexible and wearable devices.\nHydrogen generation: Gallium disrupts the protective oxide layer on aluminium, allowing water to react with the aluminium in AlGa to produce hydrogen gas.\nHumor: A well-known practical joke among chemists is to fashion gallium spoons and use them to serve tea to unsuspecting guests, since gallium has a similar appearance to its lighter homolog aluminium. The spoons then melt in the hot tea.\nGallium in the ocean.\nAdvances in trace element testing have allowed scientists to discover traces of dissolved gallium in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. In recent years, dissolved gallium concentrations have presented in the Beaufort Sea. These reports reflect the possible profiles of the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean waters. For the Pacific Oceans, typical dissolved gallium concentrations are between 4 and 6\u00a0pmol/kg at depths &lt;~150 m. In comparison, for Atlantic waters 25\u201328\u00a0pmol/kg at depths &gt;~350 m.\nGallium has entered oceans mainly through aeolian input, but having gallium in our oceans can be used to resolve aluminium distribution in the oceans. The reason for this is that gallium is geochemically similar to aluminium, just less reactive. Gallium also has a slightly larger surface water residence time than aluminium. Gallium has a similar dissolved profile similar to that of aluminium, due to this gallium can be used as a tracer for aluminium. Gallium can also be used as a tracer of aeolian inputs of iron. Gallium is used as a tracer for iron in the northwest Pacific, south and central Atlantic Oceans. For example, in the northwest Pacific, low gallium surface waters, in the subpolar region suggest that there is low dust input, which can subsequently explain the following high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll environmental behavior.\nPrecautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nMetallic gallium is not toxic. However, several gallium compounds are toxic.\nGallium halide complexes can be toxic. The Ga3+ ion of soluble gallium salts tends to form the insoluble hydroxide when injected in large doses; precipitation of this hydroxide resulted in nephrotoxicity in animals. In lower doses, soluble gallium is tolerated well and does not accumulate as a poison, instead being excreted mostly through urine. Excretion of gallium occurs in two phases: the first phase has a biological half-life of 1 hour, while the second has a biological half-life of 25 hours.\nInhaled Ga2O3 particles are probably toxic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12242", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12242", "title": "Germanium", "text": "Chemical element with atomic number 32\nelement with atomic number 32 (Ge)\nGermanium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ge and atomic number 32. It is lustrous, hard-brittle, grayish-white and similar in appearance to silicon. It is a metalloid or a nonmetal in the carbon group that is chemically similar to silicon. Like silicon, germanium naturally reacts and forms complexes with oxygen in nature.\nBecause it seldom appears in high concentration, germanium was found comparatively late in the discovery of the elements. Germanium ranks 50th in abundance of the elements in the Earth's crust. In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev predicted its existence and some of its properties from its position on his periodic table, and called the element ekasilicon. On February 6, 1886, Clemens Winkler at Freiberg University found the new element, along with silver and sulfur, in the mineral argyrodite. Winkler named the element after Germany, his country of birth. Germanium is mined primarily from sphalerite (the primary ore of zinc), though germanium is also recovered commercially from silver, lead, and copper ores.\nElemental germanium is used as a semiconductor in transistors and various other electronic devices. Historically, the first decade of semiconductor electronics was based entirely on germanium. Presently, the major end uses are fibre-optic systems, infrared optics, solar cell applications, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Germanium compounds are also used for polymerization catalysts and have most recently found use in the production of nanowires. This element forms a large number of organogermanium compounds, such as tetraethylgermanium, useful in organometallic chemistry.\nGermanium is not thought to be an essential element for any living organism. Similar to silicon and aluminium, naturally occurring germanium compounds tend to be insoluble in water and thus have little oral toxicity. However, synthetic soluble germanium salts are nephrotoxic, and synthetic chemically reactive germanium compounds with halogens and hydrogen are irritants and toxins.\nHistory.\nIn his report on \"The Periodic Law of the Chemical Elements\" in 1869, the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev predicted the existence of several unknown chemical elements, including one that would fill a gap in the carbon family, located between silicon and tin. Because of its position in his periodic table, Mendeleev called it \"ekasilicon (Es)\", and he estimated its atomic weight to be 70 (later 72).\nIn mid-1885, at a mine near Freiberg, Saxony, a new mineral was discovered and named \"argyrodite\" because of its high silver content. The chemist Clemens Winkler analyzed this new mineral, which proved to be a combination of silver, sulfur, and a new element. Winkler was able to isolate the new element in 1886 and found it similar to antimony. He initially considered the new element to be eka-antimony, but was soon convinced that it was instead eka-silicon. Before Winkler published his results on the new element, he decided that he would name his element \"neptunium\", since the recent discovery of planet Neptune in 1846 had similarly been preceded by mathematical predictions of its existence. However, the name \"neptunium\" had already been given to another proposed chemical element (though not the element that today bears the name neptunium, which was discovered in 1940). So instead, Winkler named the new element \"germanium\" (from the Latin word, \"Germania\", for Germany) in honor of his homeland. Argyrodite proved empirically to be Ag8GeS6.\nBecause this new element showed some similarities with the elements arsenic and antimony, its proper place in the periodic table was under consideration, but its similarities with Dmitri Mendeleev's predicted element \"ekasilicon\" confirmed that place on the periodic table. With further material from 500\u00a0kg of ore from the mines in Saxony, Winkler confirmed the chemical properties of the new element in 1887. He also determined an atomic weight of 72.32 by analyzing pure germanium tetrachloride (GeCl4), while Lecoq de Boisbaudran deduced 72.3 by a comparison of the lines in the spark spectrum of the element.\nWinkler was able to prepare several new compounds of germanium, including fluorides, chlorides, sulfides, dioxide, and tetraethylgermane (Ge(C2H5)4), the first organogermane. The physical data from those compounds\u2014which corresponded well with Mendeleev's predictions\u2014made the discovery an important confirmation of Mendeleev's idea of element periodicity. Here is a comparison between the prediction and Winkler's data:\nUntil the late 1930s, germanium was thought to be a poorly conducting metal. Germanium did not become economically significant until after 1945 when its properties as an electronic semiconductor were recognized. During World War II, small amounts of germanium were used in some special electronic devices, mostly diodes. The first major use was the point-contact Schottky diodes for radar pulse detection during the War. The first silicon\u2013germanium alloys were obtained in 1955. Before 1945, only a few hundred kilograms of germanium were produced in smelters each year, but by the end of the 1950s, the annual worldwide production had reached .\nThe development of the germanium transistor in 1948 opened the door to countless applications of solid state electronics. From 1950 through the early 1970s, this area provided an increasing market for germanium, but then high-purity silicon began replacing germanium in transistors, diodes, and rectifiers. For example, the company that became Fairchild Semiconductor was founded in 1957 with the express purpose of producing silicon transistors. Silicon has superior electrical properties, but it requires much greater purity that could not be commercially achieved in the early years of semiconductor electronics.\nMeanwhile, the demand for germanium for fiber optic communication networks, infrared night vision systems, and polymerization catalysts increased dramatically. These end uses represented 85% of worldwide germanium consumption in 2000. The US government even designated germanium as a strategic and critical material, calling for a 146\u00a0ton (132\u00a0tonne) supply in the national defense stockpile in 1987.\nGermanium differs from silicon in that the supply is limited by the availability of exploitable sources, while the supply of silicon is limited only by production capacity since silicon comes from ordinary sand and quartz. While silicon could be bought in 1998 for less than $10 per kg, the price of germanium was almost $800 per kg.\nCharacteristics.\nUnder standard conditions, germanium is a brittle, silvery-white, semiconductor. This form constitutes an allotrope known as \"\u03b1-germanium\", which has a metallic luster and a diamond cubic crystal structure, the same structure as silicon and diamond. In this form, germanium has a threshold displacement energy of formula_1. At pressures above 120\u00a0kbar, germanium becomes the metallic allotrope \"\u03b2-germanium\" with the same structure as \u03b2-tin. Like silicon, gallium, bismuth, antimony, and water, germanium is one of the few substances that expands as it solidifies (i.e. freezes) from the molten state.\nGermanium is a semiconductor having an indirect bandgap, as is crystalline silicon. Zone refining techniques have led to the production of crystalline germanium for semiconductors that has an impurity of only one part in 1010,\nmaking it one of the purest materials ever obtained.\nThe first semi-metallic material discovered (in 2005) to become a superconductor in the presence of an extremely strong electromagnetic field was an alloy of germanium, uranium, and rhodium.\nPure germanium is known to spontaneously extrude very long screw dislocations, referred to as \"germanium whiskers\". The growth of these whiskers is one of the primary reasons for the failure of older diodes and transistors made from germanium, as, depending on what they eventually touch, they may lead to an electrical short.\nChemistry.\nElemental germanium starts to oxidize slowly in air at around 250\u00a0\u00b0C, forming GeO2 . Germanium is insoluble in dilute acids and alkalis but dissolves slowly in hot concentrated sulfuric and nitric acids and reacts violently with molten alkalis to produce germanates ([GeO3]2\u2212). Germanium occurs mostly in the oxidation state +4 although many +2 compounds are known. Other oxidation states are rare: +3 is found in compounds such as Ge2Cl6, and +3 and +1 are found on the surface of oxides, or negative oxidation states in germanides, such as \u22124 in Mg2Ge. Germanium cluster anions (Zintl ions) such as Ge42\u2212, Ge94\u2212, Ge92\u2212, [(Ge9)2]6\u2212 have been prepared by the extraction from alloys containing alkali metals and germanium in liquid ammonia in the presence of ethylenediamine or a cryptand. The oxidation states of the element in these ions are not integers\u2014similar to the ozonides O3\u2212.\nTwo oxides of germanium are known: germanium dioxide (GeO2, germania) and germanium monoxide, (GeO). The dioxide, GeO2, can be obtained by roasting germanium disulfide (GeS2), and is a white powder that is only slightly soluble in water but reacts with alkalis to form germanates. The monoxide, germanous oxide, can be obtained by the high temperature reaction of GeO2 with elemental Ge. The dioxide (and the related oxides and germanates) exhibits the unusual property of having a high refractive index for visible light, but transparency to infrared light. Bismuth germanate, Bi4Ge3O12 (BGO), is used as a scintillator.\nBinary compounds with other chalcogens are also known, such as the disulfide (GeS2) and diselenide (GeSe2), and the monosulfide (GeS), monoselenide (GeSe), and monotelluride (GeTe). GeS2 forms as a white precipitate when hydrogen sulfide is passed through strongly acid solutions containing Ge(IV). The disulfide is appreciably soluble in water and in solutions of caustic alkalis or alkaline sulfides. Nevertheless, it is not soluble in acidic water, which allowed Winkler to discover the element. By heating the disulfide in a current of hydrogen, the monosulfide (GeS) is formed, which sublimes in thin plates of a dark color and metallic luster, and is soluble in solutions of the caustic alkalis. Upon melting with alkaline carbonates and sulfur, germanium compounds form salts known as thiogermanates.\nFour tetrahalides are known. Under normal conditions germanium tetraiodide (GeI4) is a solid, germanium tetrafluoride (GeF4) a gas and the others volatile liquids. For example, germanium tetrachloride, GeCl4, is obtained as a colorless fuming liquid boiling at 83.1\u00a0\u00b0C by heating the metal with chlorine. All the tetrahalides are readily hydrolyzed to hydrated germanium dioxide. GeCl4 is used in the production of organogermanium compounds. All four dihalides are known and in contrast to the tetrahalides are polymeric solids. Additionally Ge2Cl6 and some higher compounds of formula Ge\"n\"Cl2\"n\"+2 are known. The unusual compound Ge6Cl16 has been prepared that contains the Ge5Cl12 unit with a neopentane structure.\nGermane (GeH4) is a compound similar in structure to methane. Polygermanes\u2014compounds that are similar to alkanes\u2014with formula Ge\"n\"H2\"n\"+2 containing up to five germanium atoms are known. The germanes are less volatile and less reactive than their corresponding silicon analogues. GeH4 reacts with alkali metals in liquid ammonia to form white crystalline MGeH3 which contain the GeH3\u2212 anion. The germanium hydrohalides with one, two and three halogen atoms are colorless reactive liquids.\nThe first organogermanium compound was synthesized by Winkler in 1887; the reaction of germanium tetrachloride with diethylzinc yielded tetraethylgermane (Ge(C2H5)4). Organogermanes of the type R4Ge (where R is an alkyl) such as tetramethylgermane (Ge(CH3)4) and tetraethylgermane are accessed through the cheapest available germanium precursor germanium tetrachloride and alkyl nucleophiles. Organic germanium hydrides such as isobutylgermane ((CH3)2CHCH2GeH3) were found to be less hazardous and may be used as a liquid substitute for toxic germane gas in semiconductor applications. Many germanium reactive intermediates are known: germyl free radicals, germylenes (similar to carbenes), and germynes (similar to carbynes). The organogermanium compound 2-carboxyethylgermasesquioxane was first reported in the 1970s, and for a while was used as a dietary supplement and thought to possibly have anti-tumor qualities.\nUsing a ligand called Eind (1,1,3,3,5,5,7,7-octaethyl-s-hydrindacen-4-yl) germanium is able to form a double bond with oxygen (germanone). Germanium hydride and germanium tetrahydride are very flammable and even explosive when mixed with air.\nIsotopes.\nGermanium occurs in five natural isotopes: Ge, Ge, Ge, Ge, and Ge. Of these, Ge is very slightly radioactive, undergoing double beta decay with a half-life of . Ge is the most common isotope, having a natural abundance of 36.52% and Ge is the least common with a natural abundance of 7.75%.\nApart from Ge, at least 27 other radioisotopes have been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 58 to 89. The most stable of these is Ge, decaying by electron capture with a half-life of . This is followed by Ge, also decaying by electron capture with half-life , and the rest are all less than two days, most under two hours.\nOccurrence.\nGermanium is created by stellar nucleosynthesis, mostly by the s-process in asymptotic giant branch stars. The s-process is a slow neutron capture of lighter elements inside pulsating red giant stars. Germanium has been detected in some of the most distant stars and in the atmosphere of Jupiter.\nGermanium's abundance in the Earth's crust is approximately 1.6\u00a0ppm. Only a few minerals like argyrodite, briartite, germanite, renierite and sphalerite contain appreciable amounts of germanium. Only few of them (especially germanite) are, very rarely, found in mineable amounts. Some zinc\u2013copper\u2013lead ore bodies contain enough germanium to justify extraction from the final ore concentrate. An unusual natural enrichment process causes a high content of germanium in some coal seams, discovered by Victor Moritz Goldschmidt during a broad survey for germanium deposits. The highest concentration ever found was in Hartley coal ash with as much as 1.6% germanium. The coal deposits near Xilinhaote, Inner Mongolia, contain an estimated 1600\u00a0tonnes of germanium.\nProduction.\nAbout 118\u00a0tonnes of germanium were produced in 2011 worldwide, mostly in China (80 t), Russia (5 t) and United States (3 t). Germanium is recovered as a by-product from sphalerite zinc ores where it is concentrated in amounts as great as 0.3%, especially from low-temperature sediment-hosted, massive Zn\u2013Pb\u2013Cu(\u2013Ba) deposits and carbonate-hosted Zn\u2013Pb deposits. A recent study found that at least 10,000 t of extractable germanium is contained in known zinc reserves, particularly those hosted by Mississippi-Valley type deposits, while at least 112,000\u00a0t will be found in coal reserves. In 2007 35% of the demand was met by recycled germanium.\nWhile it is produced mainly from sphalerite, it is also found in silver, lead, and copper ores. Another source of germanium is fly ash of power plants fueled from coal deposits that contain germanium. Russia and China used this as a source for germanium. Russia's deposits are located in the far east of Sakhalin Island, and northeast of Vladivostok. The deposits in China are located mainly in the lignite mines near Lincang, Yunnan; coal is also mined near Xilinhaote, Inner Mongolia.\nThe ore concentrates are mostly sulfidic; they are converted to the oxides by heating under air in a process known as roasting:\n GeS2 + 3 O2 \u2192 GeO2 + 2 SO2\nSome of the germanium is left in the dust produced, while the rest is converted to germanates, which are then leached (together with zinc) from the cinder by sulfuric acid. After neutralization, only the zinc stays in solution while germanium and other metals precipitate. After removing some of the zinc in the precipitate by the Waelz process, the residing Waelz oxide is leached a second time. The dioxide is obtained as precipitate and converted with chlorine gas or hydrochloric acid to germanium tetrachloride, which has a low boiling point and can be isolated by distillation:\n GeO2 + 4 HCl \u2192 GeCl4 + 2 H2O\n GeO2 + 2 Cl2 \u2192 GeCl4 + O2\nGermanium tetrachloride is either hydrolyzed to the oxide (GeO2) or purified by fractional distillation and then hydrolyzed. The highly pure GeO2 is now suitable for the production of germanium glass. It is reduced to the element by reacting it with hydrogen, producing germanium suitable for infrared optics and semiconductor production:\n GeO2 + 2 H2 \u2192 Ge + 2 H2O\nThe germanium for steel production and other industrial processes is normally reduced using carbon:\n GeO2 + C \u2192 Ge + CO2\nProduction by country.\nWorld refinery production of germanium (germanium content).\nApplications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe major global end uses for germanium were electronics and solar applications, fiber-optic systems, infrared optics, and polymerization catalysts. Other uses included chemotherapy, metallurgy, and phosphors.\nOptics.\nThe notable properties of germania (GeO2) are its high index of refraction and its low optical dispersion. These make it especially useful for wide-angle camera lenses, microscopy, and the core part of optical fibers. It has replaced titania as the dopant for silica fiber, eliminating the subsequent heat treatment that made the fibers brittle. At the end of 2002, the fiber optics industry consumed 60% of the annual germanium use in the United States, but this is less than 10% of worldwide consumption. GeSbTe is a phase change material used for its optic properties, such as that used in rewritable DVDs.\nBecause germanium is transparent in the infrared wavelengths, it is an important infrared optical material that can be readily cut and polished into lenses and windows. It is especially used as the front optic in thermal imaging cameras working in the 8 to 14\u00a0micron range for passive thermal imaging and for hot-spot detection in military, mobile night vision, and fire fighting applications. It is used in infrared spectroscopes and other optical equipment that require extremely sensitive infrared detectors. It has a very high refractive index (4.0) and must be coated with anti-reflection agents. Particularly, a very hard special antireflection coating of diamond-like carbon (DLC), refractive index 2.0, is a good match and produces a diamond-hard surface that can withstand much environmental abuse.\nElectronics.\nGermanium can be alloyed with silicon, and silicon\u2013germanium alloys are rapidly becoming an important semiconductor material for high-speed integrated circuits. Circuits using the properties of Si-SiGe heterojunctions can be much faster than those using silicon alone. The SiGe chips, with high-speed properties, can be made with low-cost, well-established production techniques of the silicon chip industry.\nHigh efficiency solar panels are a major use of germanium. Because germanium and gallium arsenide have nearly identical lattice constant, germanium substrates can be used to make gallium-arsenide solar cells. Germanium is the substrate of the wafers for high-efficiency multijunction photovoltaic cells for space applications, such as the Mars Exploration Rovers, which use triple-junction gallium arsenide on germanium cells. High-brightness LEDs, used for automobile headlights and to backlight LCD screens, are also an important application.\nGermanium-on-insulator (GeOI) substrates are seen as a potential replacement for silicon on miniaturized chips. CMOS circuit based on GeOI substrates has been reported recently. Other uses in electronics include phosphors in fluorescent lamps and solid-state light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Germanium transistors are still used in some effects pedals by musicians who wish to reproduce the distinctive tonal character of the \"fuzz\"-tone from the early rock and roll era, most notably the Dallas Arbiter Fuzz Face.\nGermanium has been studied as a potential material for implantable bioelectronic sensors that are resorbed in the body without generating harmful hydrogen gas, replacing zinc oxide- and indium gallium zinc oxide-based implementations.\nGermanium was also used to create many of the circuits found in some of the very first pieces of electronic musical gear, initially 1950s, primarily in early transistor-based circuits. The first guitar effects pedals in the 1960s \u2013 Fuzz pedals like the Maestro FZ-1 (1962), Dallas-Arbiter Fuzz Face (1966), and Tone Bender (1965) - used germanium transistors. Silicon diodes are more frequently used in more modern equipment, but germanium diodes are still used in some applications as they have lower barrier potential and smoother transconductance curves, leading to less harsh clipping.\nOther uses.\nGermanium dioxide is also used in catalysts for polymerization in the production of polyethylene terephthalate (PET). The high brilliance of this polyester is especially favored for PET bottles marketed in Japan. In the United States, germanium is not used for polymerization catalysts.\nDue to the similarity between silica (SiO2) and germanium dioxide (GeO2), the silica stationary phase in some gas chromatography columns can be replaced by GeO2.\nIn recent years germanium has seen increasing use in precious metal alloys. In sterling silver alloys, for instance, it reduces firescale, increases tarnish resistance, and improves precipitation hardening. A tarnish-proof silver alloy trademarked Argentium contains 1.2% germanium.\nSemiconductor detectors made of single crystal high-purity germanium can precisely identify radiation sources\u2014for example in airport security. Germanium is useful for monochromators for beamlines used in single crystal neutron scattering and synchrotron X-ray diffraction. The reflectivity has advantages over silicon in neutron and high energy X-ray applications. Crystals of high purity germanium are used in detectors for gamma spectroscopy and the search for dark matter. Germanium crystals are also used in X-ray spectrometers for the determination of phosphorus, chlorine and sulfur.\nGermanium is emerging as an important material for spintronics and spin-based quantum computing applications. In 2010, researchers demonstrated room temperature spin transport and more recently donor electron spins in germanium has been shown to have very long coherence times.\nGermanium and health.\nGermanium is not considered essential to the health of plants or animals. Germanium in the environment has little or no health impact. This is primarily because it usually occurs only as a trace element in ores and carbonaceous materials, and the various industrial and electronic applications involve very small quantities that are not likely to be ingested. For similar reasons, end-use germanium has little impact on the environment as a biohazard. Some reactive intermediate compounds of germanium are poisonous (see precautions, below).\nGermanium supplements, made from both organic and inorganic germanium, have been marketed as an alternative medicine capable of treating leukemia and lung cancer. There is, however, no medical evidence of benefit; some evidence suggests that such supplements are actively harmful. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) research has concluded that inorganic germanium, when used as a nutritional supplement, \"presents potential human health hazard\".\nSome germanium compounds have been administered by alternative medical practitioners as non-FDA-allowed injectable solutions. Soluble inorganic forms of germanium used at first, notably the citrate-lactate salt, resulted in some cases of renal dysfunction, hepatic steatosis, and peripheral neuropathy in individuals using them over a long term. Plasma and urine germanium concentrations in these individuals, several of whom died, were several orders of magnitude greater than endogenous levels. A more recent organic form, beta-carboxyethylgermanium sesquioxide (propagermanium), has not exhibited the same spectrum of toxic effects.\nCertain compounds of germanium have low toxicity to mammals, but have toxic effects against certain bacteria.\nPrecautions for chemically reactive germanium compounds.\nWhile use of germanium itself does not require precautions, some of germanium's artificially produced compounds are quite reactive and present an immediate hazard to human health on exposure. For example, Germanium tetrachloride and germane (GeH4) are a liquid and gas, respectively, that can be very irritating to the eyes, skin, lungs, and throat.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12243", "revid": "1210941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12243", "title": "Gadolinium", "text": "element with atomic number 64 (Gd)\nGadolinium is a chemical element; it has symbol Gd and atomic number 64. It is a silvery-white metal when oxidation is removed. Gadolinium is a malleable and ductile rare-earth element. It reacts with atmospheric oxygen or moisture slowly to form a black oxide coating. Gadolinium below its Curie point of is ferromagnetic, with an attraction to a magnetic field higher than that of nickel. Above this temperature it is the most paramagnetic element. It is found in nature only in an oxidized form. When separated, it usually has impurities of the other rare earths because of their similar chemical properties.\nGadolinium was discovered in 1880 by Jean Charles de Marignac, who detected its oxide by using spectroscopy. It is named after the mineral gadolinite, one of the minerals in which gadolinium is found, itself named for the Finnish chemist Johan Gadolin. Pure gadolinium was first isolated by the chemist F\u00e9lix Trombe in 1935.\nGadolinium possesses unusual metallurgical properties, to the extent that as little as 1% of gadolinium can significantly improve the workability and resistance to oxidation at high temperatures of iron, chromium, and related metals. Gadolinium as a metal or a salt absorbs neutrons and is, therefore, used sometimes for shielding in neutron radiography and in nuclear reactors.\nLike most of the rare earths, gadolinium forms trivalent ions with fluorescent properties, and salts of gadolinium(III) are used as phosphors in various applications.\nGadolinium(III) ions in water-soluble salts are highly toxic to mammals. However, chelated gadolinium(III) compounds prevent the gadolinium(III) from being exposed to the organism, and the majority is excreted by healthy kidneys before it can deposit in tissues. Because of its paramagnetic properties, solutions of chelated organic gadolinium complexes are used as intravenously administered gadolinium-based MRI contrast agents in medical magnetic resonance imaging.\nThe main uses of gadolinium, in addition to use as a contrast agent for MRI scans, are in nuclear reactors, in alloys, as a phosphor in medical imaging, as a gamma ray emitter, in electronic devices, in optical devices, and in superconductors.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nGadolinium is the eighth member of the lanthanide series. In the periodic table, it appears between the elements europium to its left and terbium to its right, and above the actinide curium. It is a silvery-white, malleable, ductile rare-earth element. Its 64 electrons are arranged in the configuration of [Xe]4f75d16s2, of which the ten 4f, 5d, and 6s electrons are valence.\nLike most other metals in the lanthanide series, three electrons are usually available as valence electrons. The remaining 4f electrons are too strongly bound: this is because the 4f orbitals penetrate the most through the inert xenon core of electrons to the nucleus, followed by 5d and 6s, and this increases with higher ionic charge. Gadolinium crystallizes in the hexagonal close-packed \u03b1-form at room temperature. At temperatures above , it forms or transforms into its \u03b2-form, which has a body-centered cubic structure.\nThe isotope gadolinium-157 has the highest thermal-neutron capture cross-section among any stable nuclide: about 259,000 barns. Only xenon-135 has a higher capture cross-section, about 2.0\u00a0million barns, but this isotope is radioactive.\nGadolinium is believed to be ferromagnetic at temperatures below and is strongly paramagnetic above this temperature. In fact, at body temperature, gadolinium exhibits the greatest paramagnetic effect of any element. There is evidence that gadolinium is a helical antiferromagnetic, rather than a ferromagnetic, below . Gadolinium demonstrates a magnetocaloric effect whereby its temperature increases when it enters a magnetic field and decreases when it leaves the magnetic field. A significant magnetocaloric effect is observed at higher temperatures, up to about 300\u00a0kelvins, in the compounds Gd5(Si1\u2212\"x\"Ge\"x\")4.\nIndividual gadolinium atoms can be isolated by encapsulating them into fullerene molecules, where they can be visualized with a transmission electron microscope. Individual Gd atoms and small Gd clusters can be incorporated into carbon nanotubes.\nChemical properties.\nGadolinium combines with most elements to form Gd(III) derivatives. It also combines with nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, phosphorus, boron, selenium, silicon, and arsenic at elevated temperatures, forming binary compounds.\nUnlike the other rare-earth elements, metallic gadolinium is relatively stable in dry air. However, it tarnishes quickly in moist air, forming a loosely-adhering gadolinium(III) oxide ():\nwhich spalls off, exposing more surface to oxidation.\nGadolinium is a strong reducing agent, which reduces oxides of several metals into their elements. Gadolinium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water and quite quickly with hot water to form gadolinium(III) hydroxide ():\nGadolinium metal is attacked readily by dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the colorless Gd(III) ions, which exist as complexes:\nChemical compounds.\nIn the great majority of its compounds, like many rare-earth metals, gadolinium adopts the oxidation state +3. However, gadolinium can be found on rare occasions in the 0, +1 and +2 oxidation states. All four trihalides are known. All are white, except for the iodide, which is yellow. Most commonly encountered of the halides is gadolinium(III) chloride (). The oxide dissolves in acids to give the salts, such as gadolinium(III) nitrate.\nGadolinium(III), like most lanthanide ions, forms complexes with high coordination numbers. This tendency is illustrated by the use of the chelating agent DOTA, an octadentate ligand. Salts of [Gd(DOTA)]\u2212 are useful in magnetic resonance imaging. A variety of related chelate complexes have been developed, including gadodiamide.\nReduced gadolinium compounds are known, especially in the solid state. Gadolinium(II) halides are obtained by heating Gd(III) halides in presence of metallic Gd in tantalum containers. Gadolinium also forms the sesquichloride , which can be further reduced to GdCl by annealing at . This gadolinium(I) chloride forms platelets with layered graphite-like structure.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring gadolinium is composed of six stable isotopes, 154Gd, 155Gd, 156Gd, 157Gd, 158Gd and 160Gd, and one radioisotope, 152Gd, with the isotope 158Gd being the most abundant (24.8% natural abundance).\nThirty-three radioisotopes have been characterized, with the three most stable being alpha emitters: 152Gd (naturally occurring) with a half-life of 1.08\u00d71014 years, 150Gd with a half-life of 1.79\u00d7106 years, and 148Gd (theoretically not beta-stable) with a half-life of 86.9 years. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives less than a year, the majority of these having half-lives less than two minutes. There are also 10 metastable isomers, with the most stable being 143mGd (t1/2 = 110 seconds), 145mGd (t1/2 = 85 seconds) and 141mGd (t1/2 = 24.5 seconds). The predicted double beta decay of 160Gd has never been observed (an experimental lower limit on its half-life of more than 1.3\u00d71021 years has been measured).\nThe isotopes with atomic masses lower than the most abundant stable isotope, 158Gd, primarily decay by electron capture to isotopes of europium. At higher atomic masses, the primary decay mode is beta decay to isotopes of terbium.\nHistory.\nGadolinium is named after the mineral gadolinite. Gadolinite was first chemically analyzed by the Finnish chemist Johan Gadolin in 1794. In 1802 German chemist Martin Klaproth gave gadolinite its name. In 1880, the Swiss chemist Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac observed the spectroscopic lines from gadolinium in samples of gadolinite (which actually contains relatively little gadolinium, but enough to show a spectrum) and in the separate mineral cerite. The latter mineral proved to contain far more of the element with the new spectral line. De Marignac eventually separated a mineral oxide from cerite, which he realized was the oxide of this new element. He designated the element with the provisional symbol Y\u03b1. The French chemist Paul-\u00c9mile Lecoq de Boisbaudran named the element \"gadolinium\" in 1886. The pure element was isolated in 1935 by F\u00e9lix Trombe.\nOccurrence.\nGadolinium is a constituent in many minerals, such as monazite and bastn\u00e4site. The metal is too reactive to exist naturally. Paradoxically, as noted above, the mineral gadolinite actually contains only traces of this element. The abundance in the Earth's crust is about 6.2\u00a0mg/kg. The main mining areas are in China, the US, Brazil, Sri Lanka, India, and Australia with reserves expected to exceed one million tonnes. World production of pure gadolinium is about 400 tonnes per year. The only known mineral with essential gadolinium, lepersonnite-(Gd), is very rare.\nProduction.\nGadolinium is produced both from monazite and bastn\u00e4site.\nGadolinium metal is obtained from its oxide or salts by heating it with calcium at in an argon atmosphere. Sponge gadolinium can be produced by reducing molten GdCl3 with an appropriate metal at temperatures below (the melting point of Gd) at reduced pressure.\nApplications.\nGadolinium has no large-scale applications, but it has a variety of specialized uses.\nNeutron absorber.\nBecause gadolinium has a high neutron cross-section, it is effective for use with neutron radiography and in shielding of nuclear reactors. It is used as a secondary, emergency shut-down measure in some nuclear reactors, particularly of the CANDU reactor type. Gadolinium is used in nuclear marine propulsion systems as a burnable poison. The use of gadolinium in neutron capture therapy to target tumors has been investigated, and gadolinium-containing compounds have proven promising.\nAlloys.\nGadolinium possesses unusual metallurgic properties, with as little as 1% of gadolinium improving the workability of iron, chromium, and related alloys, and their resistance to high temperatures and oxidation.\nMagnetic contrast agent.\nGadolinium is paramagnetic at room temperature, with a ferromagnetic Curie point of . Paramagnetic ions, such as gadolinium, increase nuclear spin relaxation rates, making gadolinium useful as a contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Solutions of organic gadolinium complexes and gadolinium compounds are used as intravenous contrast agents to enhance images in medical and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) procedures. Magnevist is the most widespread example. Nanotubes packed with gadolinium, called \"gadonanotubes\", are 40 times more effective than the usual gadolinium contrast agent. Traditional gadolinium-based contrast agents are un-targeted, generally distributing throughout the body after injection, but will not readily cross the intact blood\u2013brain barrier. Brain tumors, and other disorders that degrade the blood-brain barrier, allow these agents to penetrate into the brain and facilitate their detection by contrast-enhanced MRI. Similarly, delayed gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of cartilage uses an ionic compound agent, originally Magnevist, that is excluded from healthy cartilage based on electrostatic repulsion but will enter proteoglycan-depleted cartilage in diseases such as osteoarthritis.\nPhosphors.\nGadolinium is used as a phosphor in medical imaging. It is contained in the phosphor layer of X-ray detectors, suspended in a polymer matrix. Terbium-doped gadolinium oxysulfide (Gd2O2S:Tb) at the phosphor layer converts the X-rays released from the source into light. This material emits green light at 540\u00a0nm because of the presence of Tb3+, which is very useful for enhancing the imaging quality. The energy conversion of Gd is up to 20%, which means that one fifth of the X-ray energy striking the phosphor layer can be converted into visible photons. Gadolinium oxyorthosilicate (Gd2SiO5, GSO; usually doped by 0.1\u20131.0% of Ce) is a single crystal that is used as a scintillator in medical imaging such as positron emission tomography, and for detecting neutrons.\nGadolinium compounds were also used for making green phosphors for color TV tubes.\nGamma ray emitter.\nGadolinium-153 is produced in a nuclear reactor from elemental europium or enriched gadolinium targets. It has a half-life of days and emits gamma radiation with strong peaks at 41\u00a0keV and 102\u00a0keV. It is used in many quality-assurance applications, such as line sources and calibration phantoms, to ensure that nuclear-medicine imaging systems operate correctly and produce useful images of radioisotope distribution inside the patient. It is also used as a gamma-ray source in X-ray absorption measurements and in bone density gauges for osteoporosis screening.\nElectronic and optical devices.\nGadolinium is used for making gadolinium yttrium garnet (Gd:Y3Al5O12), which has microwave applications and is used in fabrication of various optical components and as substrate material for magneto-optical films.\nElectrolyte in fuel cells.\nGadolinium can also serve as an electrolyte in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). Using gadolinium as a dopant for materials like cerium oxide (in the form of gadolinium-doped ceria) gives an electrolyte having both high ionic conductivity and low operating temperatures.\nMagnetic refrigeration via magnetocalorics.\nGadolinium is the standard reference material in the study of magnetic refrigeration near room temperature. Pure Gd itself exhibits a large magnetocaloric effect near its Curie temperature of , and this has sparked interest into producing Gd alloys having a larger effect and tunable Curie temperature. In Gd5(Si\"x\"Ge1\u2212\"x\")4, Si and Ge compositions can be varied to adjust the Curie temperature.\nGadolinium-based materials, such as Gd5(Si\"x\"Ge1\u2212\"x\")4, are currently the most promising materials, owing to their high Curie temperature and giant magneto-caloric effect. \nMagnetic refrigeration could provide significant efficiency and environmental advantages over conventional refrigeration methods.\nSuperconductors.\nGadolinium barium copper oxide (GdBCO) is a superconductor with applications in superconducting motors or generators such as in wind turbines. It can be manufactured in the same way as the most widely researched cuprate high temperature superconductor, yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) and uses an analogous chemical composition (GdBa2Cu3O7\u2212\"\u03b4\" ). It was used in 2014 to set a new world record for the highest trapped magnetic field in a bulk high temperature superconductor, with a field of 17.6T being trapped within two GdBCO bulks.\nAsthma treatment.\nGadolinium is being investigated as a possible treatment for preventing lung tissue scarring in asthma. A positive effect has been observed in mice.\nNiche and former applications.\nGadolinium is used for antineutrino detection in the Japanese Super-Kamiokande detector in order to sense supernova explosions. Low-energy neutrons that arise from antineutrino absorption by protons in the detector's ultrapure water are captured by gadolinium nuclei, which subsequently emit gamma rays that are detected as part of the antineutrino signature.\nGadolinium gallium garnet (GGG, Gd3Ga5O12) was used for imitation diamonds and for computer bubble memory.\nSafety.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nAs a free ion, gadolinium is reported often to be highly toxic, but MRI contrast agents are chelated compounds and are considered safe enough to be used in most persons. The toxicity of free gadolinium ions in animals is due to interference with a number of calcium-ion channel dependent processes. The 50% lethal dose is about 0.34\u00a0mmol/kg (IV, mouse) or 100\u2013200\u00a0mg/kg. Toxicity studies in rodents show that chelation of gadolinium (which also improves its solubility) decreases its toxicity with regard to the free ion by a factor of 31 (i.e., the lethal dose for the Gd-chelate increases by 31 times). It is believed therefore that clinical toxicity of gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) in humans will depend on the strength of the chelating agent; however this research is still not complete. About a dozen different Gd-chelated agents have been approved as MRI contrast agents around the world.\nUse of gadolinium-based contrast agents results in deposition of gadolinium in tissues of the brain, bone, skin, and other tissues in amounts that depend on kidney function, structure of the chelates (linear or macrocyclic) and the dose administered. In patients with kidney failure, there is a risk of a rare but serious illness called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) that is caused by the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents. The disease resembles scleromyxedema and to some extent scleroderma. It may occur months after a contrast agent has been injected. Its association with gadolinium and not the carrier molecule is confirmed by its occurrence with various contrast materials in which gadolinium is carried by very different carrier molecules. Because of the risk of NSF, use of these agents is not recommended for any individual with end-stage kidney failure as they may require emergent dialysis.\nIncluded in the current guidelines from the Canadian Association of Radiologists are that dialysis patients should receive gadolinium agents only where essential and that they should receive dialysis after the exam. If a contrast-enhanced MRI must be performed on a dialysis patient, it is recommended that certain high-risk contrast agents be avoided but not that a lower dose be considered. The American College of Radiology recommends that contrast-enhanced MRI examinations be performed as closely before dialysis as possible as a precautionary measure, although this has not been proven to reduce the likelihood of developing NSF. The FDA recommends that potential for gadolinium retention be considered when choosing the type of GBCA used in patients requiring multiple lifetime doses, pregnant women, children, and patients with inflammatory conditions.\nAnaphylactoid reactions are rare, occurring in approximately 0.03\u20130.1%.\nLong-term environmental impacts of gadolinium contamination due to human usage are a topic of ongoing research.\nBiological use.\nGadolinium has no known native biological role, but its compounds are used as research tools in biomedicine. Gd3+ compounds are components of MRI contrast agents. It is used in various ion channel electrophysiology experiments to block sodium leak channels and stretch activated ion channels. Gadolinium has recently been used to measure the distance between two points in a protein via electron paramagnetic resonance, something that gadolinium is especially amenable to thanks to EPR sensitivity at w-band (95\u00a0GHz) frequencies.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12244", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12244", "title": "German Unity Day", "text": "National Day of Germany\nGerman Unity Day (, ) is the National Day of Germany, celebrated on 3 October as a public holiday. It commemorates German reunification in 1990 when the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) ceased to exist and joined the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany), so that for the first time since 1945 there existed a single German state. German Unity Day on 3 October has been the German national holiday since 1990, when the reunification was formally completed.\nAn alternative choice to commemorate the reunification could have been the day the Berlin Wall came down: 9 November 1989, which coincided with the anniversary of the proclamation of the German Republic in 1918, and the defeat of Hitler's first coup in 1923. However, 9 November was also the anniversary of the first large-scale Nazi-led pogroms against Jews in 1938 (\"Reichspogromnacht\"), so the day was considered inappropriate as a national holiday (see 9 November in German history). Therefore, 3 October 1990, the day of the formal reunification, was chosen instead. It replaced the \"German Unity Day\" on 17 June, the national holiday of the Federal Republic of Germany from 1954.\nHistory.\nGermany has historically associated various dates with its nationhood and unity.\nImperial Germany.\nBefore 1871, in the area where the single state of Germany now exists, different kingdoms and principalities existed. After the unification of Germany, and the Founding of the Empire 1871, there was still no common national holiday. The Sedantag was, however, celebrated every year on 2 September, recalling the decisive victory in the Franco-Prussian War on 2 September 1870.\nBefore the Empire was founded in 1872, there were calls for a national holiday, and there were three suggestions. No decision was made. Until 1873, the Sedantag was moved to 18 January or the day of the Frankfurt Treaty (10 May 1871). The Sedantag would soon also be celebrated at the universities and in many German cities. It never occurred to them to think about \"Empire Parade\" or \"Emperor's Birthday\". Some Culture Ministers of the states, especially in Prussia, decided that the Sedantag would be an official festival in schools. Upon many suggestions, the date of the Emperor's proclamation on 18 January would be established as day of remembrance. Emperor Wilhelm I declined this: \"This was also the day of the first Prussian coronation of the king, which should not fall into the shadow of a united German holiday.\" \nDespite this, the Day of the founding of the German Empire was still celebrated locally and nationally to some degree. These celebrations continued in the Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany. Following World War II, East Germany completely abandoned the holiday, while West Germany still celebrated it on a smaller scale. West Germany did acknowledge the centennial of the German Empire as the founding of the German state in 1871. \nWeimar Republic.\nOn 31 July 1919, the Weimar Constitution would be accepted in its form by the Weimar National Congress. In memorial of this \"Hour of birth of democracy\", 11 August was created as Constitution Day, because the President of Germany Friedrich Ebert, signed the constitution on this day.\nNational Socialism.\nShortly after the Nazis took power in 1933 (the so-called ), May Day (1 May) was established as a national holiday in the \"German Reich\". It was already celebrated as a \"Day of the Labor Movement\" since 1890, and also was part of the tradition for the May dance commemorating the Walpurgis Night. Immediately after the establishment of the holiday in 1933, the Nazis banned trade unions on 2 May 1933 and occupied their buildings as offices for the Nazi Movement. On 1 March 1939, Hitler declared 9 November (the day of the failed Beer Hall Putsch in 1923) as the \"Memorial Day for the movement\" as the national holiday.\nFederal Republic of Germany.\nFrom 1954 to 1990, 17 June was an official holiday in the Federal Republic of Germany to commemorate the East German uprising of 1953, even with the name \"German Unity Day\". Since 1963, it was proclaimed by the President of the Federal Republic as \"National Day of Memorial of the German People\". However, by the mid-1960s as hope faded that the two Germanys would ever be re-united, this date became more of a holiday and day of recreation than a day to consider national unity.\nIn the year 1990, the \"German Unity Day\" was celebrated twice, on this date and on 3 October.\nGerman Democratic Republic.\nIn East Germany, the Founding Day in 1949 was celebrated on 7 October as Republic Day, until the 40th anniversary in 1989.\nDecision for GDR's unity with the Federal Republic.\nThe motive for setting the date of 3 October as the possible Day of Unity was decided by the Volkskammer, the East German parliament, on the impending economical and political collapse of the GDR. The Helsinki Conference was set for 2 October, at which the foreign ministers would be informed of the results of the Two-plus-Four talks.\nAt the beginning of July, the governments of both German states decided on the schedule: State elections in the GDR would be held on 14 October, and a Bundestag election for the entire country on 2 December.\nThe decision on the date was finally made on 22 August by the GDR's Minister-President, Lothar de Maizi\u00e8re, at a special session of the Volkskammer, which began at 9 p.m. After a heated debate, the President of the Volkskammer, Sabine Bergmann-Pohl, announced the results at 2:30\u00a0a.m. on 23 August:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Volkskammer decides on the accession of the GDR to the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Germany according to Article 23 of the Basic Laws effective as of 3 October 1990. In the matter Nr. 201 there have been 363 votes. There were no invalid votes. 294 deputies have voted 'yes.' (Strong applause from CDU/DA, DSU, FDP, partly SPD and the deputies standing up in their seats.) 62 deputies have voted 'no', and 7 people abstained. This is a historic event. Ladies and Gentlemen, I believe that we have not made an easy decision, but today we have acted within our responsibilities of the voting rights of the citizens of the GDR. I thank everybody that this result was made possible by a consensus across party lines.\nGregor Gysi, Chairman of the SED-PDS, was visibly moved and made a personal statement: \"Madame President! The Parliament has no more and no less decided on the downfall of the German Democratic Republic as of 3 October 1990\". This statement was met by jubilant cheers from the CDU/DA, DSU and SPD.\nAttempt to change the date of Unity Day.\nOn 3 November 2004, the Federal Chancellor, Gerhard Schr\u00f6der, suggested that the \"German Unity Day\" be celebrated on a Sunday, for economic reasons. Instead of 3 October, the National Reunification should be celebrated on the first Sunday of October. This suggestion received a lot of criticism from many sides, amongst them from Federal President Horst K\u00f6hler as well as the President of the Bundestag, Wolfgang Thierse. The demand worried a part of the population because of discontent for increased working hours would be seen as a provocation and devaluing the national holiday. In addition, fixing the Unity Day on the first Sunday of October would have meant that it would sometimes fall on 7 October, which happens to have been the national day of East Germany; this date would thus have been seen as commemorating the division of Germany rather than the reunification. The idea was dropped after a short but angry debate.\nCelebrations.\nThe Day of German Unity is celebrated each year with a ceremonial act and a citizen's festival (\"\").\nThe celebrations are hosted by a major city, usually the state capital, in the German state presiding over the Bundesrat in the respective year (a sequence determined by the K\u00f6nigstein Agreement). After Bonn in 2011, Frankfurt am Main was the second non-state capital to host the celebrations in 2015; however, both cities are significant in German political history (Bonn as former capital of West Germany and Frankfurt as the place of the Frankfurt Parliament of 1848\u201349).\nIn addition, various celebrations are held in the federal capital Berlin, mainly based on the Stra\u00dfe des 17. Juni and around the Brandenburg Gate. State capitals and also other cities often have additional festivities. Furthermore, the Oktoberfest beer festival in Munich, which traditionally runs until the first Sunday in October, now runs until 3 October, if the Sunday in question falls on the first or second day of October. The celebrations in the host city always includes a festival and fireworks show.\nZipfelbund: compass communities.\nAt the 1999 Day of German Unity celebration in Wiesbaden the Zipfelbund (Compass Confederation) was formalised. The Zipfelbund are the four communities at the cardinal compass points of Germany: North \u2013 List on the island of Sylt, West \u2013 Selfkant, South \u2013 Oberstdorf and East \u2013 G\u00f6rlitz. Together, they always participate in the respective annual celebration to represent the modern borders of Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12246", "revid": "35208815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12246", "title": "Alliance 90/The Greens", "text": "Green political party in Germany\nAlliance 90/The Greens ( ), often simply referred to as Greens ( ), is a green political party in Germany. It was formed in 1993 by the merger of the Greens (formed in West Germany in 1980) and Alliance 90 (formed in East Germany in 1990). The Greens had itself merged with the East German Green Party after German reunification in 1990.\nSince November 2024, Franziska Brantner and Felix Banaszak have been co-leaders of the party. It currently holds 85 of the 630 seats in the Bundestag, having won 11% of first votes and 11.6% of second votes cast in the 2025 federal election, putting it in fourth place of the seven political parties by number of seats. Its parliamentary co-leaders are Britta Ha\u00dfelmann and Katharina Dr\u00f6ge. The Greens have been part of the federal government twice: first as a junior partner to the Social Democrats (SPD) from 1998 to 2005, and then with the SPD and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) in the traffic light coalition from the 2021 election until that coalition's collapse in 2024. In the Scholz cabinet, the Greens had five ministers, including Vice-Chancellor Robert Habeck and Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock.\nThe party holds seats in most of Germany's state legislatures, except Saarland, Thuringia and Brandenburg, and is a member of coalition governments in seven states. Winfried Kretschmann, Minister-President of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, is the only Green head of government in Germany. The Landtag of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg is also the only state legislature in which Alliance 90/The Greens is the largest party; it is the second largest party in the legislatures of Berlin, Hamburg, North Rhine-Westphalia and Schleswig-Holstein.\nAlliance 90/The Greens is a founding member of the European Green Party and the Greens\u2013European Free Alliance group in the European Parliament. It is currently the largest party in the G/EFA group, with 21 MEPs. In the 2019 European election, Alliance 90/The Greens was the second largest party in Germany, winning 20.5% of votes cast. The party had 166,000 members in February 2025, making it the third largest party in Germany by membership.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe Green Party was initially founded in West Germany as \"Die Gr\u00fcnen\" (the Greens) in January 1980. It grew out of the anti-nuclear energy, environmental, peace, new left, and new social movements of the late 20th century.\n\"Gr\u00fcne Liste Umweltschutz\" (green list for environmental protection) was the name used for some branches in Lower Saxony and other states in the Federal Republic of Germany. These groups were founded in 1977 and took part in several elections. Most of them merged with The Greens in 1980.\nThe West Berlin state branch of The Greens was founded as \"Alternative Liste\", or precisely, \"Alternative Liste f\u00fcr Demokratie und Umweltschutz\" (AL; alternative list for democracy and environmental protection) in 1978 and became the official West Berlin branch of The Greens in 1980. In 1993, it renamed to Alliance 90/The Greens Berlin after the merger with East Berlin's Greens and Alliance 90.\nThe Hamburg state branch of the Green Party was called \"Gr\u00fcn-Alternative Liste Hamburg\" (GAL; green-alternative list) from its foundation in 1982 until 2012. In 1984, it became the official Hamburg branch of The Greens.\n12\u201313 January 1980: Foundation congress.\nThe political party The Greens () sprung out of the wave of New Social Movements that were active in the 1970s, including environmentalist, anti-war, and anti-nuclear movements which can trace their origin to the student protests of 1968. Officially founded as a German national party on 13 January 1980 in Karlsruhe, the party sought to give these movements political and parliamentary representation, as the pre-existing peoples parties were not organised in a way to address their stated issues. Its membership included organisers from former attempts to achieve institutional representation such as GLU and AUD. Opposition to pollution, use of nuclear power, NATO military action, and certain aspects of industrialised society were principal campaign issues. The party also championed sexual liberation and some of their members supported the abolition of age-of-consent laws.\nThe formation of a party was purportedly first discussed by movement leaders in 1978. Important figures in the first years were\u00a0\u2013 among others\u00a0\u2013 Petra Kelly, Joschka Fischer, Gert Bastian, Lukas Beckmann, Rudolf Bahro, Joseph Beuys, Antje Vollmer, Herbert Gruhl, August Hau\u00dfleiter, Luise Rinser, Dirk Schneider, Christian Str\u00f6bele, Jutta Ditfurth, Baldur Springmann and .\nIn the foundational https://, the ideological tenets of the party were consolidated, proclaiming the famous Four Pillars of the Green Party:\n1980s: Parliamentary representation on the federal level.\nIn 1982, the conservative factions of the Greens broke away to form the Ecological Democratic Party (\u00d6DP). Those who remained in the Green party were more strongly pacifist and against restrictions on immigration and reproductive rights, while supporting the legalisation of cannabis use, placing a higher priority on working for LGBT rights, and tending to advocate what they described as \"anti-authoritarian\" concepts of education and child-rearing. They also tended to identify more closely with a culture of protest and civil disobedience, frequently clashing with police at demonstrations against nuclear weapons, nuclear energy, and the construction of a new runway () at Frankfurt Airport. Those who left the party at the time might have felt similarly about some of these issues, but did not identify with the forms of protest that Green party members took part in.\nAfter some success at state-level elections, the party won 27 seats with of the vote in the Bundestag, the lower house of the German parliament, in the 1983 federal election. Among the important political issues at the time was the deployment of Pershing II IRBMs and nuclear-tipped cruise missiles by the U.S. and NATO on West German soil, generating strong opposition in the general population that found an outlet in mass demonstrations. The newly formed party was able to draw on this popular movement to recruit support. Partly due to the impact of the Chernobyl disaster in 1986, and to growing awareness of the threat of air pollution and acid rain to German forests (), the Greens increased their share of the vote to in the 1987 federal election. Around this time, Joschka Fischer emerged as the unofficial leader of the party, which he remained until resigning all leadership posts following the 2005 federal election.\nThe Greens were the target of attempts by the East German secret police to enlist the cooperation of members who were willing to align the party with the agenda of the German Democratic Republic. The party ranks included several politicians who were later discovered to have been Stasi agents, including Bundestag representative Dirk Schneider, European Parliament representative Brigitte Heinrich, and Red Army Faction defense lawyer Klaus Croissant. Greens politician and Bundestag representative Gert Bastian was also a founding member of Generals for Peace, a pacifist group created and funded by the Stasi, the revelation of which may have contributed to the murder-suicide in which he killed his partner and Greens founder Petra Kelly. A study commissioned by the Greens determined that 15 to 20 members intimately cooperated with the Stasi and another 450 to 500 had been informants.\nUntil 1987, the Greens included a faction involved in pedophile activism, the short for (approx. \"working group \"Gays, Pederasts and Transsexuals\"\"). This faction campaigned for repealing \u00a7 176 of the German penal code, dealing with child sexual abuse. This group was controversial within the party itself, and was seen as partly responsible for the poor election result of 1985. and chairwoman Claudia Roth stated she welcomed an independent scientific investigation on the extent of influence pedophile activists had on the party in the mid-1980s. In November 2014, the political scientist Franz Walter presented the final report about his research on a press conference.\n1990s: German reunification, electoral failure in the West, formation of Alliance 90/The Greens.\nIn the 1990 federal elections, taking place post-reunified Germany, the Greens in the West did not pass the 5% limit required to win seats in the Bundestag. It was only due to a temporary modification of German election law, applying the five-percent \"hurdle\" separately in East and West Germany, that the Greens acquired any parliamentary seats at all. This happened because in the new states of Germany, the Greens, in a joint effort with Alliance 90, a heterogeneous grouping of civil rights activists, were able to gain more than 5% of the vote. Some critics attribute this poor performance to the reluctance of the campaign to cater to the prevalent mood of nationalism, instead focusing on subjects such as global warming. A campaign poster at the time proudly stated, \"Everyone is talking about Germany; we're talking about the weather!\", paraphrasing a popular slogan of Deutsche Bundesbahn, the German national railway. The party also opposed imminent reunification that was in process, instead wanting to initiate debates on ecology and nuclear issues before reunification causing a drop in support in Western Germany. After the 1994 federal election; however, the merged party returned to the Bundestag, and the Greens received 7.3% of the vote nationwide and 49 seats.\n1998\u20132002: Greens as governing party, first term.\nIn the 1998 federal election, despite a slight fall in their percentage of the vote (6.7%), the Greens retained 47 seats and joined the federal government for the first time in 'Red-Green' coalition government with the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). Joschka Fischer became Vice-Chancellor of Germany and foreign minister in the new government, which had two other Green ministers (Andrea Fischer, later Renate K\u00fcnast, and J\u00fcrgen Trittin).\nAlmost immediately the party was plunged into a crisis by the question of German participation in the NATO actions in Kosovo. Numerous anti-war party members resigned their party membership when the first post-war deployment of German troops in a military conflict abroad occurred under a Red-Green government, and the party began to experience a long string of defeats in local and state-level elections. Disappointment with the Green participation in government increased when anti-nuclear power activists realised that shutting down the nation's nuclear power stations would not happen as quickly as they wished, and numerous pro-business SPD members of the federal cabinet opposed the environmentalist agenda of the Greens, calling for tacit compromises.\nIn 2001, the party experienced a further crisis as some Green Members of Parliament refused to back the government's plan of sending military personnel to help with the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan. Chancellor Gerhard Schr\u00f6der called a vote of confidence, tying it to his strategy on the war. Four Green MPs and one Social Democrat voted against the government, but Schr\u00f6der was still able to command a majority.\nOn the other hand, the Greens achieved a major success as a governing party through the 2000 decision to phase out the use of nuclear energy. Minister of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety J\u00fcrgen Trittin reached an agreement with energy companies on the gradual phasing out of the country's nineteen nuclear power plants and a cessation of civil usage of nuclear power by 2020. This was authorised through the Nuclear Exit Law. Based on an estimate of 32 years as the normal period of operation for a nuclear power plant, the agreement defines precisely how much energy a power plant is allowed to produce before being shut down. This law has since been overturned.\n2002\u20132005: Greens as governing party, second term.\nDespite the crises of the preceding electoral period, in the 2002 federal election, the Greens increased their total to 55 seats (in a smaller parliament) and 8.6%. This was partly due to the perception that the internal debate over the war in Afghanistan had been more honest and open than in other parties, and one of the MPs who had voted against the Afghanistan deployment, Hans-Christian Str\u00f6bele, was directly elected to the Bundestag as a district representative for the Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg \u2013 Prenzlauer Berg East constituency in Berlin, becoming the first Green to ever gain a first-past-the-post seat in Germany.\nThe Greens benefited from increased inroads among traditionally left-wing demographics which had benefited from Green-initiated legislation in the 1998\u20132002 term, such as environmentalists (Renewable Energies Act) and LGBT groups (Registered Partnership Law). Perhaps most important for determining the success of both the Greens and the SPD was the increasing threat of war in Iraq, which was highly unpopular with the German public, and helped gather votes for the parties which had taken a stand against participation in this war. Despite losses for the SPD, the Red-Green coalition government retained a very slight majority in the Bundestag (4 seats) and was renewed, with Joschka Fischer as foreign minister, Renate K\u00fcnast as minister for consumer protection, nutrition and agriculture, and J\u00fcrgen Trittin as minister for the environment.\nOne internal issue in 2002 was the failed attempt to settle a long-standing discussion about the question of whether members of parliament should be allowed to become members of the party executive. Two party conventions declined to change the party statute. The necessary majority of two-thirds was missed by a small margin. As a result, former party chairpersons Fritz Kuhn and Claudia Roth (who had been elected to parliament that year) were no longer able to continue in their executive function and were replaced by former party secretary general Reinhard B\u00fctikofer and former Bundestag member Angelika Beer. The party then held a member referendum on this question in the spring of 2003 which changed the party statute. Now members of parliament may be elected for two of the six seats of the party executive, as long as they are not ministers or caucus leaders. 57% of all party members voted in the member referendum, with 67% voting in favor of the change. The referendum was only the second in the history of Alliance 90/The Greens, the first having been held about the merger of the Greens and Alliance 90. In 2004, after Angelika Beer was elected to the European Parliament, Claudia Roth was elected to replace her as party chair.\nThe only party convention in 2003 was planned for November 2003, but about 20% of the local organisations forced the federal party to hold a special party convention in Cottbus early to discuss the party position regarding \"Agenda 2010\", a major reform of the German welfare programmes planned by Chancellor Schr\u00f6der.\nThe November 2003 party convention was held in Dresden and decided the election platform for the 2004 European Parliament elections. The German Green list for these elections was headed by Rebecca Harms (then leader of the Green party in Lower Saxony) and Daniel Cohn-Bendit, previously Member of the European Parliament for The Greens of France. The November 2003 convention is also noteworthy because it was the first convention of a German political party ever to use an electronic voting system.\nThe Greens gained a record 13 of Germany's 99 seats in these elections, mainly due to the perceived competence of Green ministers in the federal government and the unpopularity of the Social Democratic Party.\nIn early 2005, the Greens were the target of the German Visa Affair 2005, instigated in the media by the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). At the end of April 2005, they celebrated the decommissioning of the Obrigheim nuclear power station. They also continue to support a bill for an Anti-Discrimination Law (Allgemeines Gleichbehandlungsgesetz) in the Bundestag.\nIn May 2005, the only remaining state-level red-green coalition government lost the vote in the North Rhine-Westphalia state election, leaving only the federal government with participation of the Greens (apart from local governments). In the early 2005 federal election the party incurred very small losses and achieved 8.1% of the vote and 51 seats. However, due to larger losses of the SPD, the previous coalition no longer had a majority in the Bundestag.\n2005\u20132021: In opposition.\nFor almost two years after the federal election in 2005, the Greens were not part of any government at the state or federal level. In June 2007, the Greens in Bremen entered into a coalition with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) following the 2007 Bremen state election.\nIn April 2008, following the 2008 Hamburg state election, the Green-Alternative List (GAL) in Hamburg entered into a coalition with the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the first such state-level coalition in Germany. Although the GAL had to agree to the deepening of the Elbe River, the construction of a new coal-fired power station and two road projects they had opposed, they also received some significant concessions from the CDU. These included reforming state schools by increasing the number of primary school educational stages, the restoration of trams as public transportation in the city-state, and more pedestrian-friendly real estate development. On 29 November 2010, the coalition collapsed, resulting in an election that was won by SPD.\nFollowing the Saarland state election of August 2009, The Greens held the balance of power after a close election where no two-party coalitions could create a stable majority government. After negotiations, the Saarland Greens rejected the option of a left-wing 'red-red-green' coalition with the SPD and The Left () in order to form a centre-right state government with the CDU and Free Democratic Party (FDP), a historical first time that a Jamaica coalition has formed in German politics.\nIn June 2010, in the first state election following the victory of the CDU/CSU and FDP in the 2009 federal election, the \"black-yellow\" CDU-FDP coalition in North Rhine-Westphalia under J\u00fcrgen R\u00fcttgers lost its majority. The Greens and the SPD came one seat short of a governing majority, but after multiple negotiations about coalitions of SPD and Greens with either the FDP or The Left, the SPD and Greens decided to form a minority government, which was possible because under the constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia a plurality of seats is sufficient to elect a minister-president. So a red-green government in a state where it was defeated under Peer Steinbr\u00fcck in 2005 came into office again on 14 June 2010 with the election of Hannelore Kraft as minister-president (Cabinet Kraft I).\nThe Greens founded the first international chapter of a German political party in the U.S. on 13 April 2008 at the Goethe-Institut in Washington D.C. Its main goal is \"to provide a platform for politically active and green-oriented German citizens, in and beyond Washington D.C., to discuss and actively participate in German Green politics. [...] to foster professional and personal exchange, channeling the outcomes towards the political discourse in Germany.\"\nIn March 2011 (two weeks after the Fukushima nuclear disaster had begun), the Greens made large gains in Rhineland-Palatinate and in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. In Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg they became the senior partner in a governing coalition for the first time. Winfried Kretschmann is now the first Green to serve as Minister-President of a German State (Cabinet Kretschmann I and II). Polling data from August 2011 indicated that one in five Germans supported the Greens. From 4 October 2011 to 4 September 2016, the party was represented in all state parliaments.\nLike the Social Democrats, the Greens backed Chancellor Angela Merkel on most bailout votes in the German parliament during her second term, saying their pro-European stances overrode party politics. Shortly before the elections, the party plummeted to a four-year low in the polls, undermining efforts by Peer Steinbr\u00fcck's Social Democrats to unseat Merkel. While being in opposition on the federal level since 2005, the Greens have established themselves as a powerful force in Germany's political system. By 2016, the Greens had joined 11 out of 16 state governments in a variety of coalitions. Over the years, they have built up an informal structure called G-coordination to organize interests between the federal party office, the parliamentary group in the Bundestag, and the Greens governing on the state level.\nThe Greens remained the smallest of six parties in the Bundestag in the 2017 federal election, winning 8.9% of votes. After the election, they entered into talks for a Jamaica coalition with the CDU and FDP. Discussions collapsed after the FDP withdrew in November.\nAfter the federal election and unsuccessful Jamaica negotiations, the party held elections for two new co-leaders; incumbents \u00d6zdemir and Peter did not stand for re-election. Robert Habeck and Annalena Baerbock were elected with 81% and 64% of votes, respectively. Habeck had served as deputy premier and environment minister in Schleswig-Holstein since 2012, while Baerbock had been a leading figure in the party's Brandenburg branch since 2009. Their election was considered a break with tradition, as they were both members of the moderate wing.\nThe Greens saw a major surge in support during the Bavarian and Hessian state elections in October 2018, becoming the second largest party in both. They subsequently rose to second place behind the CDU/CSU in national polling, averaging between 17% and 20% over the next six months.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Greens achieved their best ever result in a national election, placing second with 20.5% of the vote and winning 21 seats. National polling released after the election showed a major boost for the party. The first poll after the election, conducted by Forsa, showed the Greens in first place on 27%. This was the first time the Greens had ever been in first place in a national opinion poll, and the first time in the history of the Federal Republic that any party other than the CDU/CSU or SPD had placed first in a national poll. This trend continued as polls from May to July showed the CDU/CSU and Greens trading first place, after which point the CDU/CSU pulled ahead once more. The Greens continued to poll in the low 20% range into early 2020.\nThe Greens recorded best-ever results in the Brandenburg (10.8%) and Saxony (8.6%) state elections in September 2019, and subsequently joined coalition governments in both states. They suffered an unexpected decline in the Thuringian election in October, only narrowing retaining their seats with 5.2%. In the February 2020 Hamburg state election, the Greens became the second largest party, winning 24.2% of votes cast.\nIn March 2021, the Greens improved their performance in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, where they remained the strongest party with 32.6% of votes, and Rhineland-Palatinate, where they moved into third place with 9.3%.\nDue to their sustained position as the second most popular party in national polling ahead of the September 2021 federal election, the Greens chose to forgo the traditional dual lead-candidacy in favour of selecting a single Chancellor candidate. Co-leader Annalena Baerbock was announced as Chancellor candidate on 19 April and formally confirmed on 12 June with 98.5% approval.\nThe Greens surged in opinion polls in late April and May, briefly surpassing the CDU as the most popular party in the country, but their numbers slipped back after Baerbock was caught up in several controversies. Her personal popularity also fell below that of both Armin Laschet and Olaf Scholz, the Chancellor candidates for the CDU and SPD, respectively. The party's fortunes did not reverse even after the July floods, which saw climate change return as the most important issue among voters. The situation worsened in August as the SPD surged into first place to the detriment of both the CDU and Greens.\n2021\u20132025: Return to government.\nThe Greens finished in third place in the 2021 federal election with 14.8% of votes. Though their best ever federal election result, it was considered a bitter disappointment in light of their polling numbers during the previous three years. They entered coalition talks with the FDP and SPD, eventually joining a traffic light coalition under Chancellor Olaf Scholz which took office on 8 December 2021. The Greens have five ministers in the Scholz cabinet, including Robert Habeck as Vice-Chancellor and Annalena Baerbock as foreign minister.\nSince party statute mandates that party leaders may not hold government office, Baerbock and Habeck stepped down after entering cabinet. At a party conference in January 2022, Ricarda Lang and Omid Nouripour were elected to succeed them. At the time of her election, Lang was 28 years old, speaker for women's issues, and a former leader of the Green Youth. 46-year-old Nouripour was foreign affairs spokesman and a member of the Bundestag since 2006. Of the new leaders, Lang is considered a representative of the party's left-wing, while Nouripour represents the right-wing.\nLang and Nouripour announced their resignations as party leaders in September 2024 after heavy defeats in the Saxony, Thuringia and Brandenburg state elections that month, as well as the earlier European Parliament election. In all three states, governing coalitions involving the Greens were not returned, and the party was wiped out in the latter two states while only narrowly retaining representation in Saxony. In the European elections, the Greens fell to fourth (behind the CDU/CSU, AfD and SPD) and lost 9 seats in the European parliament, falling to 12 seats. The party had fallen out of five state governments (additionally Berlin and Hesse) since entering the federal governing coalition in 2021. Analysts pointed to its participation in the federal government requiring it to take stances that are contrary to its traditional clean-energy and pacifist ideals, as well as a stark collapse in support with young voters.\nFelix Banaszak and Franziska Brantner elected as co-leaders in November 2024. During the 2024 government crisis, in which the FDP left the traffic light coalition, the Greens stayed in a Red-Green minority coalition. The party abstained in the succeeding vote of no confidence, ensuring the government's collapse and the calling of the 2025 federal election.\n2025\u2013present: Return to opposition.\nThe party chose incumbent Vice Chancellor Robert Habeck as their chancellor candidate for the 2025 federal election. The Greens would go on to lose 33 seats in that election, garnering 11.6% of the vote. The unpopularity of the Scholz cabinet has been credited with the result, although this was still the party's second best ever result. The morning after the election, co-chancellor candidate of The Greens Robert Habeck announced his withdrawal from the party's leadership. The other co-candidate for The Greens, Annalena Baerbock, as well as former party leader Ricarda Lang, were expected to become the next party leaders in the Bundestag.\nIdeology and platform.\nThe party's main ideological trends are green politics and social liberalism. The party has also been described as left-libertarian, and influenced by the postmaterialist left. The party's political position is generally described to be centre-left; some describe the party as centrist. The West German Greens played a crucial role in the development of green politics in Europe, with their original program outlining \"four principles: ecological, social, grassroots, and non-violent\". Initially ideologically heterogenous, the party took up a position on the radical left in its early years, which were dominated by conflicts between the more left-wing \"Fundi\" (fundamentalist) and more moderate \"Realo\" (realist) factions. These conflicts became less significant as the party moved toward the political mainstream in the 1990s.\nDuring the 2021 federal election, the WZB Berlin Social Science Center classified the party as the most centrist of Germany's left-wing parties. Annalena Baerbock campaigned from the left of the SPD, stating that the party's economic program is geared towards the \"common good\" while the SPD's no longer is. The party has a more pragmatic approach to workers' rights than the SPD. On the other hand, the party clearly holds positions to the left of the SPD on issues such as fiscal discipline, particularly on the debt brake, the climate transition, and property expropriation in Berlin. They are focusing on environmentalist and socially progressive policies. Emphasis is placed on mitigating climate change, reducing carbon emissions, and fostering sustainability and environmentally-friendly practices. They support equality, social justice, and humanitarian responses to events such as the European migrant crisis. Their fiscal platform is flexible and seeks to balance social, economic, and environmental interests. The party is strongly pro-European, advocating European federalism, and promotes wider international cooperation, including strengthening existing alliances.\nStarting from the leadership of Annalena Baerbock and Robert Habeck, commentators have observed the Greens taking a pragmatic, moderate approach to work with parties from across the political spectrum. Baerbock described their stances and style as a form of \"radical realism\" attempting to reconcile principles with practical politics. At the same time, the party has denounced populism and division, and placed rhetorical emphasis on optimism and cross-party cooperation. Accompanied by record high popularity and election results, this led some to suggest that the Greens were filling a gap in the political centre, which was left by the declining popularity of the CDU/CSU and SPD.\nEconomic policies.\nThe party has economically left-liberal views.\nForeign policy.\nThe Greens are regarded as taking a Atlanticist line on defense and pushing for a stronger common EU foreign policy, especially against Russia and China. Green Party co-leader Annalena Baerbock has proposed a post-pacifist foreign policy. She supports eastward expansion of NATO and has considered the number of UN resolutions critical of Israel as \"absurd compared to resolutions against other states.\" The party's program included references to NATO as an \"indispensable\" part of European security. The Greens have promised to abolish the contested Nord Stream 2 pipeline to ship Russian natural gas to Germany. The party criticized the EU's investment deal with China. It describes China as a \"systematic rival\", though the party also favors cooperation with China to fight climate change. In 2016, the Greens criticised Germany's defense plan with Saudi Arabia, which has been waging war in Yemen and has been accused of massive human rights violations.\nThe party remains divided over issues such as nuclear disarmament and U.S. nuclear weapons on German territory. Some Greens want Germany to sign the United Nations' Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. About the Gaza war, the Federal Minister of Food and Agriculture Cem \u00d6zdemir (former president of the party) criticized Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg for her presence and support of pro-Palestinian demonstrations in Berlin, calling on everyone to reconsider their opinions about her.\nEnergy and nuclear power.\nEver since the party's inception, The Greens have been concerned with the immediate halt of construction or operation of all nuclear power stations. As an alternative, they promote a shift to non-nuclear renewable energy and a comprehensive program of energy conservation.\nIn 1986, large parts of Germany were covered with radioactive contamination from the Chernobyl disaster and Germans went to great lengths to deal with the contamination. Germany's anti-nuclear stance was strengthened. From the mid-1990s onwards, anti-nuclear protests were primarily directed against transports of radioactive waste in \"CASTOR\" containers.\nAfter the Chernobyl disaster, the Greens became more radicalised and resisted compromise on the nuclear issue. During the 1990s, a re-orientation towards a moderate program occurred, with concern about global warming and ozone depletion taking a more prominent role. During the federal red-green government (1998\u20132005) many people became disappointed with what they saw as excessive compromise on key Greens policies.\nEnvironment and climate policy.\nThe central idea of green politics is sustainable development. The concept of environmental protection is the cornerstone of Alliance 90/The Greens policy. In particular, the economic, energy and transport policy claims are in close interaction with environmental considerations. The Greens acknowledge the natural environment as a high priority and animal protection should be enshrined as a national objective in constitutional law. An effective environmental policy would be based on a common environmental code, with the urgent integration of a climate change bill. During the red-green coalition (1998\u20132005) a policy of agricultural change was launched labeled as a paradigm shift in agricultural policy towards a more ecological friendly agriculture, which needs to continue.\nThe Greens have praised the European Green Deal, which aims to make the EU climate neutral by 2050. Climate change is at the center of all policy considerations. This includes environmental policy and safety and social aspects. The plans of the Alliance 90/The Greens provide a climate change bill laying down binding reductions to greenhouse gas emissions in Germany by 2020 restricting emissions to minus 40 percent compared to 1990.\nEuropean Union.\nAlliance 90/The Greens supports the eventual federalization of the European Union into a Federal European Republic (German: \"F\u00f6derale Europ\u00e4ische Republik\"), i.e. a single federal European sovereign state.\nTransport.\nA similarly high priority is given to transport policy. The switch from a traveling allowance to a mobility allowance, which is paid regardless of income to all employees, replacing company car privileges. The truck toll will act as a climate protection instrument internalizing the external costs of transport. Railway should be promoted in order to achieve the desired environmental objectives and the comprehensive care of customers. The railway infrastructure is to remain permanently in the public sector, allowing a reduction in expenditure on road construction infrastructure. The Greens want to control privileges on kerosene and for international flights, introduce an air ticket levy.\nFossil fuels such as heavy oil or diesel shall be replaced by emission-neutral fuels and green propulsion systems in order to make shipping climate-neutral in the long term.\nSocial policy.\nFor many years, the Green Party has advocated against the \"Ehegattensplitting\" policy, under which the incomes of married couples are split for taxation purposes. Furthermore, the Party advocates for a massive increase in federal spending for places in preschools, and for increased investment in education: an additional 1 billion Euros for vocational schools and 200 million Euros more BAf\u00f6G (Bundesausbildungsf\u00f6rderungsgesetz in German, approximately translated to \"the Federal Law for the Advancement of Education\") for adults.\nIn its 2013 platform, the Green Party successfully advocated for a minimum wage of 8.50 Euro per hour, which was implemented on 1 January 2015. It continues to press for higher minimum wages.\nThe Greens want the starting retirement age to remain 67, but with some qualifications\u00a0\u2013 for example, a provision for partial retirement.\nThe party supports and has supported various forms of rent regulation. During the 2021 election, the party called for rent hikes to be capped at 2.5% per year.\nThe Greens support progressive taxation and is critical of FDP efforts to cut taxes for top earners.\nWomen and LGBTQIA+ rights.\nThe Green Party supports the implementation of quotas in executive boards, the policy of equal pay for equal work, and continuing the fight against domestic violence. According to its website, the Green Party \"fights for the acceptance and against the exclusion of homosexuals, bisexuals, intersex- and transgender people and others\".\nIn order to recognize the political persecution that LGBT+ people face abroad, the Green Party wants to extend asylum to LGBTQIA+ people abroad. The policy change was sponsored primarily by Volker Beck, one of the Party's most prominent gay members. Because of the extensive support the Green Party has given the LGBTQIA+ community since its conception, many LGBTQIA+ people vote for the Green Party even if their political ideology does not quite align otherwise.\nDrug policy.\nThe party supports the legalization and regulation of cannabis and was the sponsor of the 2015 proposed iteration of the German cannabis control bill. Furthermore, the Greens support research on the drug and the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes.\nElectorate.\nA 2000 study by the Infratest Dimap political research company has suggested the Green voter demographic includes those on higher incomes (e.g. above \u20ac2,000/month) and the party's support is less among households with lower incomes. The same polling research also concluded that the Greens received fewer votes from the unemployed and general working population, with business people favouring the party as well as the centre-right liberal Free Democratic Party. According to the Infratest Dimap political research company for the ARD, the Greens received more voters from the age group 34\u201342 than any other age group and that the young were generally more supportive of the party than the old.\nThe Greens have a higher voter demographic in urban areas than rural areas, except for a small number of rural areas with pressing local environmental concerns, such as strip mining or radioactive waste deposits. The cities of Bonn, Cologne, Stuttgart, Berlin, Hamburg, Frankfurt and Munich have among the highest percentages of Green voters in the country. The towns of: Bonn, Hanover, and Wuppertal have Green mayors. The party has a lower level of support in the states of the former German Democratic Republic (East Germany); nonetheless, the party is currently represented in every state Landtag except Brandenburg, Saarland, and Thuringia.\nElection results.\nFederal Parliament (\"Bundestag\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12248", "revid": "94931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12248", "title": "Gheorghe Zamfir", "text": "Romanian pan flute musician\nGheorghe Zamfir (; born April 6, 1941) is a Romanian nai (pan flute) musician.\nZamfir is known for playing an expanded version of normally 20-pipe nai, with 22, 25, 28 or even 30 pipes, to increase its range, and obtaining as many as eight overtones (additional to the fundamental tone) from each pipe by changing his embouchure. He is known as \"The Master of the Pan Flute\".\nCareer.\nZamfir came to the public eye when he was approached by Swiss ethnomusicologist Marcel Cellier, who extensively researched Romanian folk music in the 1960s. The composer Vladimir Cosma brought Zamfir with his pan flute to Western European countries for the first time in 1972 as the soloist in Cosma's original music for the movie \"Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire\". The movie received several awards, including the \"Top Foreign Film\" from the National Board of Review in 1973. Zamfir continued to perform as a soloist in movie soundtracks by composers Francis Lai, Ennio Morricone and many others. Largely through television commercials where he was billed as \"Zamfir, Master of the Pan Flute\", he introduced the folk instrument to a modern audience and revived it from obscurity.\nIn 1966, Zamfir was appointed conductor of the \"Cioc\u00eerlia Orchestra\", one of the most prestigious state ensembles of Romania, destined for concert tours abroad. This created the opportunity for composition and arranging. In 1969 he left Cioc\u00eerlia and started his own \"taraf\" (small band) and in 1970 he had his first longer-term contract in Paris. Zamfir discovered the much greater freedom for artistic adventure. His taraf consisted of: Ion Dr\u0103goi (violin), Ion L\u0103ceanu (flutes), Dumitru F\u0103rca\u0219 (tarogato), Petre Vidrean (double bass) and Tony Iordache (cymbalom) all number one soloists in their country. This taraf made some excellent recordings (CD Zamfir a Paris). He changed the composition of the band soon after: Efta Botoca (violin), Marin Chisar (flutes), Dorin Ciobaru and Pavel Cebzan (clarinet and tarogato), Vasile Pandelescu (accordion), Petre Vidrean (bass) and Pantelimon St\u00eenga (cymbalom). It is said that this change was made to increase the command of Zamfir and have more artistic freedom. A turning point was the recording of Zamfir's composition \"Messe pour la Paix\" (Philips). His taraf joined a choir and a symphonic orchestra. This was evidence of the growing ambition. While the Philips recordings of that time were rather conservative, Zamfir preached revolution in the concert halls with daring performances. In 1977, he recorded \"The Lonely Shepherd\" with James Last. Zamfir put himself on the world map and since then his career became highly varied, hovering over classical repertoire, easy listening and pop music.\nBetween 1976 and 1983, Zamfir had six albums peak within the Australian top 100 albums charts, with \"The Flutes of Pan\", his best, peaking at number 26 in 1980.\nZamfir's big break in the English-speaking world came when the BBC religious television program, \"The Light of Experience\", adopted his recording of \"Doina De Jale\", a traditional Romanian funeral song, as its theme. Epic Records released the tune as a single in 1976, and it climbed to number four on the UK Singles chart. It would prove to be his only UK hit single, but it helped pave the way for a consistent stream of album sales in Britain. His song \"Summer Love\" reached number 9 in South Africa in November 1976. In 1983, he scored a No. 3 hit on the Canadian Adult Contemporary chart with \"Blue Navajo,\" \"Senatorial Samba\" in honor of his lifelong friend and confidant The Senator, and several of his albums (including 1982's \"Romance\" and 1983's \"Childhood Dreams\") have charted in Canada as well. His 1985 album, \"Atlantis\", contained tracks composed by Jacques Brel and Eric Satie, plus music from films and Zamfir's version of \"Stranger on the Shore\".\nAfter nearly a decade-long absence, Zamfir returned to Canada in January 2006 for a seven-city tour with the Traffic Strings quintet. The program included a world premiere of Vivaldi's Four Seasons for pan flute and string quintet arranged by Lucian Moraru, jazz standards, and well-known favorites.\nIn 2009, Zamfir was sampled by Animal Collective in the song \"Graze\" on their EP \"Fall Be Kind\". In 2012, he performed at the opening ceremony of the 11th Conference of Parties to the Ramsar Convention at the Palace of the Parliament in Bucharest, Romania.\nZamfir played \"Silent Night\" at the opening of Concerto di Natale (The Christmas Concert) on 15 December 2018 at the Vatican Aula Jean Paul the II. Concerto di Natale is an international event where artists from all over the world meet for a special concert to raise as much money as possible for charity projects in Africa and poor regions of the world. He performed with Anastacia, the Italian singer Alessandra Amoroso, and the Italian flautist Andrea Griminelli. Zamfir and Andrea Griminelli appeared again to perform \u201cThe Lonely Shepherd\u201d.\nSoundtracks.\nHis first appearance as soloist interpreter in a movie soundtrack was in Vladimir Cosma's 1972 \"Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire\", whose soundtrack became a worldwide hit.\nAnother of his notable contributions was to the soundtrack of the classic 1975 Australian film \"Picnic at Hanging Rock\". His other film scores include \"La guerre du p\u00e9trole n'aura pas lieu\" (1975) and the Moroccan film \"Bodas de Sangre\" (1977).\nHe was asked by Ennio Morricone to perform the pieces \"Childhood Memories\" and \"Cockeye's Song\" for the soundtrack of Sergio Leone's 1984 gangster film \"Once Upon a Time in America\". His performance can also be heard throughout the 1984 film \"The Karate Kid\" plus the sequels.\nOne of Zamfir's most famous pieces is \"The Lonely Shepherd\", which was written by James Last and recorded with the James Last Orchestra, and first included on Last's 1977 album \"Russland Erinnerungen\" (Memories of Russia); it was also released as a single. \"The Lonely Shepherd\" was used as the theme for the 1979 Australian miniseries \"Golden Soak\". It was also featured in Ishu Patel's 1984 Oscar-nominated short film Paradise, Quentin Tarantino's 2003 film \"\" and in Nikolas Grasso's 2010 short film \"Doina\".\nHis song \"Frunzuli\u021b\u0103 Lemn Adus C\u00e2ntec De Nunt\u0103\" (\"Fluttering Green Leaves Wedding Song\") appears in the 1991 Studio Ghibli film \"Only Yesterday\".\nPersonal life.\nZamfir was born in G\u0103e\u015fti, Romania, on April 6, 1941. Although initially interested in becoming an accordionist, at the age of 14 he began his pan flute studies with F\u0103nic\u0103 Luca at the Special Musical School no. 1 in Bucharest. Later he attended the Ciprian Porumbescu Conservatory. He currently resides and teaches pan flute in Bucharest. His son, Emmanuel Teodor (who resides in Montreal, Canada), is also a drummer/musician.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12250", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12250", "title": "Georg Henrik von Wright", "text": "Finnish philosopher (1916\u20132003)\n \nGeorg Henrik von Wright (; 14 June 1916 \u2013 16 June 2003) was a Finnish philosopher.\nBiography.\nG. H. von Wright was born in Helsinki on 14 June 1916 to Tor von Wright and his wife Ragni Elisabeth Alfthan.\nOn the retirement of Ludwig Wittgenstein as professor at the University of Cambridge in 1948, von Wright succeeded him. He published in English, Finnish, German, and Swedish, belonging to the Swedish-speaking minority of Finland. Von Wright was of both Finnish and 17th-century Scottish ancestry, and the family was raised to nobility in 1772.\nIn later years von Wright began to take an interest in political questions, having opposed the heavy bombing ordered by Lyndon B. Johnson during the Vietnam War. He attended the Praxis School-organised Kor\u010dula Summer School.\nWork.\nVon Wright's writings come under two broad categories. The first is analytic philosophy and philosophical logic in the Anglo-American vein. His 1951 texts \"An Essay in Modal Logic\" and \"Deontic Logic\" were landmarks in the postwar rise of formal modal logic and its deontic version. He was an authority on Wittgenstein, editing his later works. He was the leading figure in the Finnish philosophy of his time, specialising in philosophical logic, philosophical analysis, philosophy of action, philosophy of language, epistemology, and the close study of Charles Sanders Peirce.\nThe other vein in von Wright's writings is moralist and pessimist. During the last twenty years of his life, under the influence of Oswald Spengler, J\u00fcrgen Habermas and the Frankfurt School's reflections about modern rationality, he wrote prolifically. His best known article from this period is entitled \"The Myth of Progress\" (1993), and it questions whether our apparent material and technological progress can really be considered \"progress\" (see Myth of Progress).\nAwards.\nIn the last year of his life, he was awarded several honorary degrees, including one by the University of Bergen. He also was awarded the Swedish Academy Finland Prize in 1968.\nPublications.\nVon Wright edited posthumous publications by Wittgenstein, which were published by Blackwell (unless otherwise stated):\nVon Wright also edited extracts from the diary of David Pinsent, also published by Wiley-Blackwell:\nFor more complete publication details see \"\" (in Schilpp, 1989) and \"The Georg Henrik von Wright-Bibliography\" (2005).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12251", "revid": "49817562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12251", "title": "Goteborg", "text": ""}
{"id": "12253", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12253", "title": "Gaudy Night", "text": "1935 mystery novel by Dorothy L. Sayers\nGaudy Night (1935) is a mystery novel by Dorothy L. Sayers, the tenth featuring Lord Peter Wimsey, and the third including Harriet Vane.\nThe dons of Harriet Vane's \"alma mater\", the all-female Shrewsbury College, Oxford (based on Sayers' own Somerville College), have invited her back to attend the annual Gaudy celebrations. However, the mood turns sour when someone begins a series of malicious acts including poison-pen messages, obscene graffiti, and wanton vandalism. Despite the dons' reluctance to share the secret with an outsider, Harriet convinces them to let her bring in Lord Peter Wimsey to assist the investigation \u2013 but his involvement is not without complications, both personal and professional.\nPlot.\nHarriet Vane returns with trepidation to her \"alma mater\", Shrewsbury College, Oxford to attend the Gaudy dinner. Expecting hostility because of her notoriety (she had stood trial for murder in an earlier novel, \"Strong Poison\"), she is surprised to be welcomed warmly by most of the dons, and rediscovers her old love of academic life. Harriet's short stay is, however, marred by her discovery of a sheet of paper with an offensive drawing, and a poison pen message referring to her as a \"dirty murderess\".\nSome time later the Dean of Shrewsbury writes to ask for her help. There has been an outbreak of vandalism and anonymous letters, and fearing for the college's reputation if this becomes public knowledge, the Dean wants someone to investigate confidentially. Harriet, herself a victim of poison-pen letters since her trial, reluctantly agrees, and returns to spend some months in residence, ostensibly to do research on Sheridan Le Fanu and to assist a don with her book. The timing of the first poison pen message during the gaudy, and the use of a Latin quotation from the \"Aeneid\" during one disturbance, focuses suspicion on the Senior Common Room dons, causing escalating tensions.\nAs Harriet wrestles with the case, trying to narrow down the list of suspects who might be responsible for poison-pen messages, obscene graffiti, wanton vandalism including the destruction of a set of scholarly proofs, and the crafting of vile effigies, she is forced to examine her ambivalent feelings about Wimsey, love and marriage, and her attraction to academia as an intellectual and emotional refuge. Wimsey eventually arrives in Oxford to help, and she gains a new perspective from those who know him, including his nephew, an undergraduate at the university.\nThe attacks build to a crisis. There is an attempt to drive a vulnerable student to suicide and a physical assault on Harriet that almost kills her. The perpetrator is finally unmasked as Annie Wilson, one of the college scouts, revealed to be the widow of a disgraced University of York academic. Her husband's academic fraud had been exposed by an examiner, destroying his career and driving him to suicide; his suicide note used the Latin quote eventually used by Wilson. The examiner later moved to Shrewsbury College, and the widow's campaign has been her revenge against the examiner in particular and more generally against intellectual women who move outside what she sees as their proper domestic sphere.\nAt the end of the book, Wimsey admits his own faults in his attempts at courtship, and Harriet comes to terms with her own feelings, finally accepting Wimsey's proposal of marriage.\nTitle.\nA \"gaudy\", at the University of Oxford, is a college feast, typically a reunion for its alumni. The term \"gaudy night\" appears in Shakespeare's \"Antony and Cleopatra\": \"Let's have one other gaudy night: call to me / All my sad captains; fill our bowls once more / Let's mock the midnight bell\".\nReception.\nWriting in 1936, George Orwell disagreed with the opinion of an \"Observer\" critic who felt that \"Gaudy Night\" had put Miss Sayers \"definitely among the great writers\". Orwell concluded, to the contrary, that \"her slickness in writing has blinded many readers to the fact that her stories, considered as detective stories, are very bad ones. They lack the minimum of probability that even a detective story ought to have, and the crime is always committed in a way that is incredibly tortuous and quite uninteresting\".\nIn a letter to his son Christopher from May 1944, J. R. R. Tolkien wrote: \"I could not stand Gaudy Night. I followed P. Wimsey from his attractive beginnings so far, by which time I conceived a loathing for him (and his creatrix) not surpassed by any other character in literature known to me, unless by his Harriet. The honeymoon one (Busman's H[oneymoon].?) was worse. I was sick.\"\nJacques Barzun stated that \"\"Gaudy Night\" is a remarkable achievement. Harriet Vane and Saint-George, the undergraduate nephew of Lord Peter, help give variety, and the college setting justifies good intellectual debate. The motive is magnificently orated on by the culprit in a scene that is a striking set-piece. And though the Shrewsbury dons are sometimes hard to distinguish one from another, the College architecture is very good\".\nThemes.\nAlthough no murder occurs in \"Gaudy Night\", it includes a great deal of suspense and psychological thrills. The narrative is interwoven with a love story and an examination of women's struggles to enlarge their roles and achieve some independence within the social climate of 1930s England, and the novel has been described as \"the first feminist mystery novel\".\nThe novel deals with a number of philosophical themes, including the right relation between love and independence, and between principles and personal loyalties. Susan Haack has an essay on \"Gaudy Night\" as a philosophical novel.\nThe issue of women's right to academic education is central to the book's plot. Sayers had herself been one of the first women to obtain an Oxford University degree, having been awarded first-class honours in the mediaeval literature examinations of 1915. She attended Somerville College, the basis for the fictional Shrewsbury College of the plot.\nAdaptations.\nThe book was adapted as a three-part series for BBC television in 1987, starring Edward Petherbridge as Wimsey and Harriet Walter as Harriet.\nIn 2005 a dramatisation of the novel was released on CD by the BBC Radio Collection, with Joanna David as Harriet and Ian Carmichael as Wimsey. In 2010 the dramatisation was broadcast on BBC Radio 7.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12255", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12255", "title": "G", "text": "Seventh letter of the Latin alphabet\nG, or g, is the seventh letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages, and others worldwide. Its name in English is \"gee\" (pronounced ), plural \"gees\".\nThe lowercase version can be written in two forms: the single-storey (sometimes \"opentail\") and the double-storey (sometimes \"looptail\") . The former is commonly used in handwriting and typefaces based on it, especially in texts intended to be read by children; it is the style used by most sans-serif typefaces, such as Helvetica. The latter form is used by most serif typefaces, such as Times.\nHistory.\nThe evolution of the Latin alphabet's G can be traced back to the Latin alphabet's predecessor, the Greek alphabet. The voiced velar stop was represented by the third letter of the Greek alphabet, gamma (\u0393), which was later adopted by the Etruscan language. Latin then borrowed this \"rounded form\" of gamma, C, to represent the same sound in words such as \"recei\", which was likely an early dative form of \"rex\", meaning \"king\", as found in an \"early Latin inscription.\" Over time, however, the letter C shifted to represent the voiceless velar stop, leading to the displacement of the letter K. Scholars believe that this change can be attributed to the influence of the Etruscan language on Latin. \nAfterwards, the letter 'G' was introduced in the Old Latin period as a variant of 'C' to distinguish voiced from voiceless , and G was used to represent a voiced velar stop from this point on and C \"stood for the unvoiced velar only\".\nThe recorded originator of 'G' is freedman Spurius Carvilius Ruga, who added letter G to the teaching of the Roman alphabet during the 3rd century BCE: he was the first Roman to open a fee-paying school, around 230 BCE. At this time, 'K' had fallen out of favor, and 'C', which had formerly represented both and before open vowels, had come to express in all environments.\nRuga's positioning of 'G' shows that alphabetic order related to the letters' values as Greek numerals was a concern even in the 3rd century BCE. According to some records, the original seventh letter, 'Z', had been purged from the Latin alphabet somewhat earlier in the 3rd century BCE by the Roman censor Appius Claudius, who found it distasteful and foreign. Sampson (1985) suggests that: \"Evidently the order of the alphabet was felt to be such a concrete thing that a new letter could be added in the middle only if a 'space' was created by the dropping of an old letter.\" \nGeorge Hempl proposed in 1899 that there never was such a \"space\" in the alphabet and that in fact 'G' was a direct descendant of zeta. Zeta took shapes like \u228f in some of the Old Italic scripts; the development of the monumental form 'G' from this shape would be exactly parallel to the development of 'C' from gamma. He suggests that the pronunciation &gt; was due to contamination from the also similar-looking 'K'.\nEventually, both velar consonants and developed palatalized allophones before front vowels; consequently in today's Romance languages, \u27e8c\u27e9 and \u27e8g\u27e9 have different sound values depending on context (known as hard and soft C and hard and soft G). Because of French influence, English language orthography shares this feature.\nTypographic variants.\nThe modern lowercase g has two typographic variants: the single-storey (sometimes \"opentail\") and the double-storey (sometimes \"looptail\") . The single-storey form derives from the majuscule (uppercase) form by raising the serif that distinguishes it from 'c' to the top of the loop (thus closing the loop), and extending the vertical stroke downward and to the left. The double-storey form had developed similarly, except that some ornate forms then extended the tail back to the right, and to the left again, forming a closed bowl or loop. In the double-storey version, a small top stroke in the upper-right, often terminating in an orb shape, is called an \"ear\". The loop-tail form is the original one, as seen in 9th century Carolingian script; evolving over centuries of monastic copying, the open-tail variant came to predominate and it was this that Gutenberg adopted when creating the first Blackletter typefaces\u00a0\u2013 until that in turn was replaced by Humanist minuscule, which reasserted the closed-tail form.\nGenerally, the two forms are complementary and interchangeable; the form displayed is a typeface selection choice. In Unicode, the two appearances are generally treated as glyph variants with no semantic difference. Most serif typefaces use the looptail form (for example, g) and most sans-serif typefaces use the opentail form (for example, g) but the code point in both cases is U+0067. For applications where the single-storey variant must be distinguished (such as strict IPA in a typeface where the usual g character is double-storey), the character is available, as well as an upper case version, . \nOccasionally the difference has been exploited to provide contrast. In the International Phonetic Alphabet, opentail \u27e8\u27e9 has always represented a voiced velar plosive, while looptail \u27e8\u27e9 represented a voiced velar fricative from 1895 to 1900. In 1948, the Council of the International Phonetic Association recognized \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 as typographic equivalents, and this decision was reaffirmed in 1993. While the 1949 \"Principles of the International Phonetic Association\" recommended the use of \u27e8\u27e9 for a velar plosive and \u27e8\u27e9 for an advanced one for languages where it is preferable to distinguish the two, such as Russian, this practice never caught on. The 1999 \"Handbook of the International Phonetic Association\", the successor to the \"Principles\", abandoned the recommendation and acknowledged both shapes as acceptable variants.\nIn 2018, a study found that native English speakers have little conscious awareness of the looptail form The authors write: \"Despite being questioned repeatedly, and despite being informed directly that G has two lowercase print forms, nearly half of the participants failed to reveal any knowledge of the looptail 'g', and only 1 of the 38 participants was able to write looptail 'g' correctly\".\nUse in writing systems.\nEnglish.\nIn English, the letter appears either alone or in some digraphs. Alone, it represents\n\u27e8g\u27e9 is predominantly soft before \u27e8e\u27e9 (including the digraphs \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9), \u27e8i\u27e9, or \u27e8y\u27e9, and hard otherwise. It is hard in those derivations from \"\u03b3\u03c5\u03bd\u03ae (gyn\u1e17)\" meaning woman where initial-worded as such. Soft \u27e8g\u27e9 is also used in many words that came into English from medieval church/academic use, French, Spanish, Italian or Portuguese \u2013 these tend to, in other ways in English, closely align to their Ancient Latin and Greek roots (such as \"fragile\", \"logic\" or \"magic\").\nThere remain widely used a few English words of non-Romance origin where \u27e8g\u27e9 is hard followed by \u27e8e\u27e9 or \u27e8i\u27e9 (\"get\", \"give\", \"gift\", \"gig\", \"girl\", \"giggle\"), and very few in which \u27e8g\u27e9 is soft though followed by \u27e8a\u27e9 such as \"gaol\", which since the 20th century is almost always written as \"jail\". The word \"fungi\", although from Romance origin, is pronounced with a hard \u27e8g\u27e9.\nThe double consonant \u27e8gg\u27e9 has the value (hard \u27e8g\u27e9) as in \"nugget\", with very few exceptions: in \"exaggerate\" and \"veggies\" and dialectally in \"suggest\".\nThe digraph \u27e8dg\u27e9 has the value (soft \u27e8g\u27e9), as in \"badger\". Non-digraph \u27e8dg\u27e9 can also occur, in compounds like \"floodgate\" and \"headgear\".\nThe digraph \u27e8ng\u27e9 may represent:\nNon-digraph \u27e8ng\u27e9 also occurs, with possible values\nThe digraph \u27e8gh\u27e9 (in many cases a replacement for the obsolete letter yogh, which took various values including , , and ) may represent:\nNon-digraph \u27e8gh\u27e9 also occurs, in compounds like \"foghorn\", \"pigheaded\".\nThe digraph \u27e8gn\u27e9 may represent:\nNon-digraph \u27e8gn\u27e9 also occurs, as in \"signature\", \"agnostic\".\nThe trigraph \u27e8ngh\u27e9 has the value as in \"gingham\" or \"dinghy\". Non-trigraph \u27e8ngh\u27e9 also occurs, in compounds like \"stronghold\" and \"dunghill\".\nG is the tenth least frequently used letter in the English language (after Y, P, B, V, K, J, X, Q, and Z), with a frequency of about 2.02% in words.\nOther languages.\nMost Romance languages and some Scandinavian languages also have two main pronunciations for \u27e8g\u27e9, hard and soft. While the soft value of \u27e8g\u27e9 varies in different Romance languages ( in French and Portuguese, in Catalan, in Italian and Romanian, and in most dialects of Spanish), in all except Romanian and Italian, soft \u27e8g\u27e9 has the same pronunciation as the \u27e8j\u27e9.\nIn Italian and Romanian, \u27e8gh\u27e9 is used to represent before front vowels where \u27e8g\u27e9 would otherwise represent a soft value. In Italian and French, \u27e8gn\u27e9 is used to represent the palatal nasal , a sound somewhat similar to the \u27e8ny\u27e9 in English \"canyon\". In Italian, the trigraph \u27e8gli\u27e9, when appearing before a vowel or as the article and pronoun \"gli\", represents the palatal lateral approximant . Other languages typically use \u27e8g\u27e9 to represent , regardless of position.\nAmongst European languages, Czech, Dutch, Estonian and Finnish are exceptions, as they do not have in their native words. In Dutch, \u27e8g\u27e9 represents a voiced velar fricative instead, a sound that does not occur in modern English, but there is a dialectal variation: many Netherlandic dialects use a voiceless fricative ( or ) instead, and in southern dialects it may be palatal . Nevertheless, word-finally, it is always voiceless in all dialects, including the standard Dutch of Belgium and the Netherlands. On the other hand, some dialects (like Amelands) may have a phonemic .\nFaroese uses \u27e8g\u27e9 to represent , in addition to , and also uses it to indicate a glide.\nIn M\u0101ori, \u27e8g\u27e9 is used in the digraph \u27e8ng\u27e9 which represents the velar nasal and is pronounced like the \u27e8ng\u27e9 in \"singer\".\nThe Samoan and Fijian languages use the letter \u27e8g\u27e9 by itself for .\nIn older Czech and Slovak orthographies, \u27e8g\u27e9 was used to represent , while was written as \u27e8\u01e7\u27e9 (\u27e8g\u27e9 with caron).\nThe Azerbaijani Latin alphabet uses \u27e8g\u27e9 exclusively for the \"soft\" sound, namely . The sound is written as \u27e8q\u27e9. This leads to unusual spellings of loanwords: \"qram\" 'gram', \"qrup\" 'group', \"qaraj\" 'garage', \"qallium\" 'gallium'.\nOther systems.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet, \u27e8\u0261\u27e9 represents the voiced velar plosive. The small caps \u27e8\u0262\u27e9 represents the voiced uvular plosive.\nOther representations.\nComputing.\nThe principal forms of the letter have codepoints in Unicode as listed below. The ASCII codes for G and g are the same as the Unicode codepoints:\nIn addition, there are many forms of 'G with a diacritic', encoded either as a precomposed character or using a combining diacritic.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12256", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12256", "title": "Greek Alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "12257", "revid": "22703566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12257", "title": "Gamma", "text": "Third letter of the Greek alphabet\nGamma (; uppercase \u0393, lowercase \u03b3; ) is the third letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 3. In Ancient Greek, the letter gamma represented a voiced velar stop . In Modern Greek, this letter normally represents a voiced velar fricative , except before either of the two front vowels (/e/, /i/), where it represents a voiced palatal fricative ; while /g/ in foreign words is instead commonly transcribed as \u03b3\u03ba).\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet and other modern Latin-alphabet based phonetic notations, it represents the voiced velar fricative.\nHistory.\nThe Greek letter Gamma \u0393 is a grapheme derived from the Phoenician letter \ud802\udd02\u200e (\"g\u012bml\") which was rotated from the right-to-left script of Canaanite to accommodate the Greek language's writing system of left-to-right. The Canaanite grapheme represented the /g/ phoneme in the Canaanite language, and as such is cognate with \"gimel\" \u05d2 of the Hebrew alphabet.\nBased on its name, the letter has been interpreted as an abstract representation of a camel's neck, but this has been criticized as contrived, and it is more likely that the letter is derived from an Egyptian hieroglyph representing a club or throwing stick.\nIn Archaic Greece, the shape of gamma was closer to a classical lambda (\u039b), while lambda retained the Phoenician L-shape (\ud800\udf0b\u200e).\nLetters that arose from the Greek gamma include Etruscan (Old Italic) \ud800\udf02, Roman C and G, Runic \"kaunan\" \u16b2, Gothic \"geuua\" \ud800\udf32, the Coptic \u2c84, and the Cyrillic letters \u0413 and \u0490.\nGreek phoneme.\nThe Ancient Greek /g/ phoneme was the voiced velar stop, continuing the reconstructed proto-Indo-European \"*g\", \"*\u01f5\".\nThe modern Greek phoneme represented by gamma is realized either as a voiced palatal fricative () before a front vowel (/e/, /i/), or as a voiced velar fricative in all other environments. Both in Ancient and in Modern Greek, before other velar consonants (\u03ba, \u03c7, \u03be \u2013 that is, \"k, kh, ks\"), gamma represents a velar nasal . A double gamma \u03b3\u03b3 (e.g., \u03ac\u03b3\u03b3\u03b5\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2, \"angel\") represents the sequence (phonetically varying ) or .\nPhonetic transcription.\nLowercase Greek gamma is used in the Americanist phonetic notation and Uralic Phonetic Alphabet to indicate voiced consonants.\nThe gamma was also added to the Latin alphabet, as Latin gamma, in the following forms: majuscule \u0194, minuscule \u0263, and superscript modifier letter \u02e0.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet the minuscule letter is used to represent a voiced velar fricative and the superscript modifier letter is used to represent velarization. It is not to be confused with the character , which looks like a lowercase Latin gamma that lies above the baseline rather than crossing, and which represents the close-mid back unrounded vowel. In certain nonstandard variations of the IPA, the uppercase form is used.\nIt is as a full-fledged majuscule and minuscule letter in the alphabets of some of languages of Africa such as Dagbani, Dinka, Kabye, and Ewe, and Berber languages using the Berber Latin alphabet.\nIt is sometimes also used in the romanization of Pashto.\nMathematics and science.\nLowercase.\nThe lowercase letter formula_1 is used as a symbol for:\nThe lowercase Latin gamma \u0263 can also be used in contexts (such as chemical or molecule nomenclature) where gamma must not be confused with the letter y, which can occur in some computer typefaces.\nUppercase.\nThe uppercase letter formula_3 is used as a symbol for:\nMusic.\nIn Medieval music theory, Gamma was the starting note of the musical scale using the Guidonian hand. Paired with the Solf\u00e8ge syllable \"ut\", it became the origin for the word \"gamut\" (\"Gamma \"ut\"\").\nUnicode.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12262", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12262", "title": "Glaciation", "text": "Interval of time within an ice age that is marked by colder temperatures and glacier advances"}
{"id": "12265", "revid": "43539968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12265", "title": "Goitre", "text": "Neck swelling due to enlarged thyroid gland\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nA goitre (British English), or goiter (American English), is a swelling in the neck resulting from an enlarged thyroid gland. A goitre can be associated with a thyroid that is not functioning properly.\nWorldwide, over 90% of goitre cases are caused by iodine deficiency. The term is from the Latin \"gutturia\", meaning throat. Most goitres are not cancerous (i.e., benign), though they may be potentially harmful.\nSigns and symptoms.\nA goitre can present as a palpable or visible enlargement of the thyroid gland at the base of the neck. A goitre, if associated with hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, may be present with symptoms of the underlying disorder. For hyperthyroidism, the most common symptoms are associated with adrenergic stimulation: tachycardia (increased heart rate), palpitations, nervousness, tremor, increased blood pressure and heat intolerance. Clinical manifestations are often related to hypermetabolism (increased metabolism), excessive thyroid hormone, an increase in oxygen consumption, metabolic changes in protein metabolism, immunologic stimulation of diffuse goitre, and ocular changes (exophthalmos). Hypothyroid people commonly have poor appetite, cold intolerance, constipation, lethargy and may undergo weight gain. However, these symptoms are often non-specific and make diagnosis difficult.\nAccording to the WHO classification of goitre by palpation, the severity of goitre is currently graded as grade 0, grade 1, grade 2.\nCauses.\nWorldwide, the most common cause for goitre is iodine deficiency, commonly seen in countries that scarcely use iodised salt. Selenium deficiency is also considered a contributing factor. In countries that use iodised salt, Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the most common cause. Goitre can also result from cyanide poisoning, which is particularly common in tropical countries where people eat the cyanide-rich cassava root as the staple food.\nDiagnosis.\nGoitre may be diagnosed via a thyroid function test.\nTypes.\nA goitre may be classified either as nodular or diffuse. Nodular goitres are either of one nodule (uninodular) or of multiple nodules (multinodular). Multinodular goitre is the most common disorder of the thyroid gland.\nTreatment.\nGoitre is treated according to the cause. If the thyroid gland is producing an excess of thyroid hormones (T3 and T4), radioactive iodine is given to the patient to shrink the gland. If goitre is caused by iodine deficiency, small doses of iodide in the form of Lugol's iodine or KI solution are given. If the goitre is associated with an underactive thyroid, thyroid supplements are used as treatment. Sometimes a partial or complete thyroidectomy is required.\nMedical and scientific developments.\nThe discovery of iodine's importance in thyroid function and its role in preventing goitre marked a significant medical breakthrough. The introduction of iodised salt in the early 20th century became a key public health initiative, effectively reducing the prevalence of goitre in previously affected regions. This measure was one of the earliest and most successful examples of mass preventive health campaigns.\nEpidemiology.\nGoitre is more common among women, but this includes the many types of goitre caused by autoimmune problems, and not only those caused by simple lack of iodine.\nIodine mainly accumulates in the sea and in the topsoil. Before iodine enrichment programs, goiters were common in areas with repeated flooding or glacial activities, which erodes the topsoil. It is endemic in populations where the intake of iodine is less than 10 \u03bcg per day.\nExamples of such regions include the alpine regions of Southern Europe (such as Switzerland), the Himalayans, the Great Lakes basin, etc. As reported in 1923, all the domestic animals have goiter in some of the glacial valleys of Southern Alaska. It was so severe in Pemberton Meadows that it was difficult to raise young animals there.\nHistory.\nChinese physicians of the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) were the first to successfully treat patients with goitre by using the iodine-rich thyroid gland of animals such as sheep and pigs\u2014in raw, pill, or powdered form. This was outlined in Zhen Quan's (d. 643\u00a0AD) book, as well as several others. One Chinese book, \"The Pharmacopoeia of the Heavenly Husbandman\", asserted that iodine-rich sargassum was used to treat goitre patients by the 1st century BC, but this book was written much later.\nIn the 12th century, Zayn al-Din al-Jurjani, a Persian physician, provided the first description of Graves' disease after noting the association of goitre and a displacement of the eye known as exophthalmos in his \"Thesaurus of the Shah of Khwarazm\", the major medical dictionary of its time. The disease was later named after Irish doctor Robert James Graves, who described a case of goitre with exophthalmos in 1835. The German Karl Adolph von Basedow also independently reported the same constellation of symptoms in 1840, while earlier reports of the disease were also published by the Italians Giuseppe Flajani and Antonio Giuseppe Testa, in 1802 and 1810 respectively, and by the English physician Caleb Hillier Parry (a friend of Edward Jenner) in the late 18th century.\nParacelsus (1493\u20131541) was the first person to propose a relationship between goitre and minerals (particularly lead) in drinking water. Iodine was later discovered by Bernard Courtois in 1811 from seaweed ash.\nGoitre was previously common in many areas that were deficient in iodine in the soil. For example, in the English Midlands, the condition was known as Derbyshire Neck. In the United States, goitre was found in the Appalachian, Great Lakes, Midwest, and Intermountain regions. The condition is now practically absent in affluent nations, where table salt is supplemented with iodine. However, it is still prevalent in India, China, Central Asia, and Central Africa.\nGoitre had been prevalent in the alpine countries for a long time. Switzerland reduced the condition by introducing iodised salt in 1922. The Bavarian tracht in the Miesbach and Salzburg regions, which appeared in the 19th century, includes a choker, dubbed \"Kropfband\" (struma band) which was used to hide either the goitre or the remnants of goitre surgery.\nIn various regions around the world, particularly in mountainous areas, the prevalence of goitre was linked to iodine deficiency in the diet. For example, the Alps, the Himalayas, and the Andes had high rates of goitre due to the iodine-poor soil. In these regions, iodine deficiency led to widespread hormonal imbalances, particularly affecting thyroid function.\nSociety and culture.\nIn the 1920s wearing bottles of iodine around the neck was believed to prevent goitre.\nHeraldry.\nThe coat of arms and crest of Die Kr\u00f6pfner, of Tyrol, showed a man \"afflicted with a large goitre\", an apparent pun on the German for the word (\"Kropf\").\nSocial Impacts.\nIn some historical contexts, goitres were so prevalent that they became normalized within the culture. For instance, in certain Alpine regions, large goitres were sometimes considered a sign of beauty. Conversely, in other areas, individuals with goitres faced social stigma, which could lead to marginalisation and discrimination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12266", "revid": "28146993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12266", "title": "Genetics", "text": "Science of genes, heredity, and variation in living organisms\nGenetics is the study of genes, genetic variation, and heredity in organisms. It is an important branch in biology because heredity is vital to organisms' evolution. Gregor Mendel, a Moravian Augustinian friar working in the 19th century in Brno, was the first to study genetics scientifically. Mendel studied \"trait inheritance\", patterns in the way traits are handed down from parents to offspring over time. He observed that organisms (pea plants) inherit traits by way of discrete \"units of inheritance\". This term, still used today, is a somewhat ambiguous definition of what is referred to as a gene.\nTrait inheritance and molecular inheritance mechanisms of genes are still primary principles of genetics in the 21st century, but modern genetics has expanded to study the function and behavior of genes. Gene structure and function, variation, and distribution are studied within the context of the cell, the organism (e.g. dominance), and within the context of a population. Genetics has given rise to a number of subfields, including molecular genetics, epigenetics, population genetics, and paleogenetics. Organisms studied within the broad field span the domains of life (archaea, bacteria, and eukarya).\nGenetic processes work in combination with an organism's environment and experiences to influence development and behavior, often referred to as nature versus nurture. The intracellular or extracellular environment of a living cell or organism may increase or decrease gene transcription. A classic example is two seeds of genetically identical corn, one placed in a temperate climate and one in an arid climate (lacking sufficient waterfall or rain). While the average height the two corn stalks could grow to is genetically determined, the one in the arid climate only grows to half the height of the one in the temperate climate due to lack of water and nutrients in its environment.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"genetics\" stems from the ancient Greek ' meaning \"genitive\"/\"generative\", which in turn derives from ' meaning \"origin\".\nHistory.\nThe observation that living things inherit traits from their parents has been used since prehistoric times to improve crop plants and animals through selective breeding. The modern science of genetics, seeking to understand this process, began with the work of the Augustinian friar Gregor Mendel in the mid-19th century.\nPrior to Mendel, Imre Festetics, a Hungarian noble, who lived in K\u0151szeg before Mendel, was the first who used the word \"genetic\" in hereditarian context, and is considered the first geneticist. He described several rules of biological inheritance in his work \"The genetic laws of nature\" (Die genetischen Gesetze der Natur, 1819). His second law is the same as that which Mendel published. In his third law, he developed the basic principles of mutation (he can be considered a forerunner of Hugo de Vries). Festetics argued that changes observed in the generation of farm animals, plants, and humans are the result of scientific laws. Festetics empirically deduced that organisms inherit their characteristics, not acquire them. He recognized recessive traits and inherent variation by postulating that traits of past generations could reappear later, and organisms could produce progeny with different attributes. These observations represent an important prelude to Mendel's theory of particulate inheritance insofar as it features a transition of heredity from its status as myth to that of a scientific discipline, by providing a fundamental theoretical basis for genetics in the twentieth century.\nOther theories of inheritance preceded Mendel's work. A popular theory during the 19th century, and implied by Charles Darwin's 1859 \"On the Origin of Species\", was blending inheritance: the idea that individuals inherit a smooth blend of traits from their parents. Mendel's work provided examples where traits were definitely not blended after hybridization, showing that traits are produced by combinations of distinct genes rather than a continuous blend. Blending of traits in the progeny is now explained by the action of multiple genes with quantitative effects. Another theory that had some support at that time was the inheritance of acquired characteristics: the belief that individuals inherit traits strengthened by their parents. This theory (commonly associated with Jean-Baptiste Lamarck) is now known to be wrong\u2014the experiences of individuals do not affect the genes they pass to their children. Other theories included Darwin's pangenesis (which had both acquired and inherited aspects) and Francis Galton's reformulation of pangenesis as both particulate and inherited.\nMendelian genetics.\nModern genetics started with Mendel's studies of the nature of inheritance in plants. In his paper \"Versuche \u00fcber Pflanzenhybriden\" (\"Experiments on Plant Hybridization\"), presented in 1865 to the \"Naturforschender Verein\" (Society for Research in Nature) in Brno, Mendel traced the inheritance patterns of certain traits in pea plants and described them mathematically. Although this pattern of inheritance could only be observed for a few traits, Mendel's work suggested that heredity was particulate, not acquired, and that the inheritance patterns of many traits could be explained through simple rules and ratios.\nThe importance of Mendel's work did not gain wide understanding until 1900, after his death, when Hugo de Vries and other scientists rediscovered his research. William Bateson, a proponent of Mendel's work, coined the word \"genetics\" in 1905. The adjective \"genetic\", derived from the Greek word \"genesis\"\u2014\u03b3\u03ad\u03bd\u03b5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2, \"origin\", predates the noun and was first used in a biological sense in 1860. Bateson both acted as a mentor and was aided significantly by the work of other scientists from Newnham College at Cambridge, specifically the work of Becky Saunders, Nora Darwin Barlow, and Muriel Wheldale Onslow. Bateson popularized the usage of the word \"genetics\" to describe the study of inheritance in his inaugural address to the Third International Conference on Plant Hybridization in London in 1906.\nAfter the rediscovery of Mendel's work, scientists tried to determine which molecules in the cell were responsible for inheritance. In 1900, Nettie Stevens began studying the mealworm. Over the next 11 years, she discovered that females only had the X chromosome and males had both X and Y chromosomes. She was able to conclude that sex is a chromosomal factor and is determined by the male. In 1911, Thomas Hunt Morgan argued that genes are on chromosomes, based on observations of a sex-linked white eye mutation in fruit flies. In 1913, his student Alfred Sturtevant used the phenomenon of genetic linkage to show that genes are arranged linearly on the chromosome.\nMolecular genetics.\nAlthough genes were known to exist on chromosomes, chromosomes are composed of both protein and DNA, and scientists did not know which of the two is responsible for inheritance. In 1928, Frederick Griffith discovered the phenomenon of transformation: dead bacteria could transfer genetic material to \"transform\" other still-living bacteria. Sixteen years later, in 1944, the Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment identified DNA as the molecule responsible for transformation. The role of the nucleus as the repository of genetic information in eukaryotes had been established by H\u00e4mmerling in 1943 in his work on the single celled alga \"Acetabularia\". The Hershey\u2013Chase experiment in 1952 confirmed that DNA (rather than protein) is the genetic material of the viruses that infect bacteria, providing further evidence that DNA is the molecule responsible for inheritance.\nJames Watson and Francis Crick determined the structure of DNA in 1953, using the X-ray crystallography work of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins that indicated DNA has a helical structure (i.e., shaped like a corkscrew). Their double-helix model had two strands of DNA with the nucleotides pointing inward, each matching a complementary nucleotide on the other strand to form what look like rungs on a twisted ladder. This structure showed that genetic information exists in the sequence of nucleotides on each strand of DNA. The structure also suggested a simple method for replication: if the strands are separated, new partner strands can be reconstructed for each based on the sequence of the old strand. This property is what gives DNA its semi-conservative nature where one strand of new DNA is from an original parent strand.\nAlthough the structure of DNA showed how inheritance works, it was still not known how DNA influences the behavior of cells. In the following years, scientists tried to understand how DNA controls the process of protein production. It was discovered that the cell uses DNA as a template to create matching messenger RNA, molecules with nucleotides very similar to DNA. The nucleotide sequence of a messenger RNA is used to create an amino acid sequence in protein; this translation between nucleotide sequences and amino acid sequences is known as the genetic code.\nWith the newfound molecular understanding of inheritance came an explosion of research. A notable theory arose from Tomoko Ohta in 1973 with her amendment to the neutral theory of molecular evolution through publishing the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution. In this theory, Ohta stressed the importance of natural selection and the environment to the rate at which genetic evolution occurs. One important development was chain-termination DNA sequencing in 1977 by Frederick Sanger. This technology allows scientists to read the nucleotide sequence of a DNA molecule. In 1983, Kary Banks Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction, providing a quick way to isolate and amplify a specific section of DNA from a mixture. The efforts of the Human Genome Project, Department of Energy, NIH, and parallel private efforts by Celera Genomics led to the sequencing of the human genome in 2003.\nFeatures of inheritance.\nDiscrete inheritance and Mendel's laws.\nAt its most fundamental level, inheritance in organisms occurs by passing discrete heritable units, called genes, from parents to offspring. This property was first observed by Gregor Mendel, who studied the segregation of heritable traits in pea plants, showing for example that flowers on a single plant were either purple or white\u2014but never an intermediate between the two colors. The discrete versions of the same gene controlling the inherited appearance (phenotypes) are called alleles.\nIn the case of the pea, which is a diploid species, each individual plant has two copies of each gene, one copy inherited from each parent. Many species, including humans, have this pattern of inheritance. Diploid organisms with two copies of the same allele of a given gene are called homozygous at that gene locus, while organisms with two different alleles of a given gene are called heterozygous. The set of alleles for a given organism is called its genotype, while the observable traits of the organism are called its phenotype. When organisms are heterozygous at a gene, often one allele is called dominant as its qualities dominate the phenotype of the organism, while the other allele is called recessive as its qualities recede and are not observed. Some alleles do not have complete dominance and instead have incomplete dominance by expressing an intermediate phenotype, or codominance by expressing both alleles at once.\nWhen a pair of organisms reproduce sexually, their offspring randomly inherit one of the two alleles from each parent. These observations of discrete inheritance and the segregation of alleles are collectively known as Mendel's first law or the Law of Segregation. However, the probability of getting one gene over the other can change due to dominant, recessive, homozygous, or heterozygous genes. For example, Mendel found that if you cross heterozygous organisms your odds of getting the dominant trait is 3:1. Real geneticist study and calculate probabilities by using theoretical probabilities, empirical probabilities, the product rule, the sum rule, and more.\nNotation and diagrams.\nGeneticists use diagrams and symbols to describe inheritance. A gene is represented by one or a few letters. Often a \"+\" symbol is used to mark the usual, non-mutant allele for a gene.\nIn fertilization and breeding experiments (and especially when discussing Mendel's laws) the parents are referred to as the \"P\" generation and the offspring as the \"F1\" (first filial) generation. When the F1 offspring mate with each other, the offspring are called the \"F2\" (second filial) generation. One of the common diagrams used to predict the result of cross-breeding is the Punnett square.\nWhen studying human genetic diseases, geneticists often use pedigree charts to represent the inheritance of traits. These charts map the inheritance of a trait in a family tree.\nMultiple gene interactions.\nOrganisms have thousands of genes, and in sexually reproducing organisms these genes generally assort independently of each other. This means that the inheritance of an allele for yellow or green pea color is unrelated to the inheritance of alleles for white or purple flowers. This phenomenon, known as \"Mendel's law of independent assortment, means that the alleles of different genes get shuffled between parents to form offspring with many different combinations. Different genes often interact to influence the same trait. In the Blue-eyed Mary (\"Omphalodes verna\"), for example, there exists a gene with alleles that determine the color of flowers: blue or magenta. Another gene, however, controls whether the flowers have color at all or are white. When a plant has two copies of this white allele, its flowers are white\u2014regardless of whether the first gene has blue or magenta alleles. This interaction between genes is called epistasis, with the second gene epistatic to the first.\nMany traits are not discrete features (e.g. purple or white flowers) but are instead continuous features (e.g. human height and skin color). These complex traits are products of many genes. The influence of these genes is mediated, to varying degrees, by the environment an organism has experienced. The degree to which an organism's genes contribute to a complex trait is called heritability. Measurement of the heritability of a trait is relative\u2014in a more variable environment, the environment has a bigger influence on the total variation of the trait. For example, human height is a trait with complex causes. It has a heritability of 89% in the United States. In Nigeria, however, where people experience a more variable access to good nutrition and health care, height has a heritability of only 62%.\nMolecular basis for inheritance.\nDNA and chromosomes.\nThe molecular basis for genes is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA is composed of deoxyribose (sugar molecule), a phosphate group, and a base (amine group). There are four types of bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). The phosphates make phosphodiester bonds with the sugars to make long phosphate-sugar backbones. Bases specifically pair together (T&amp;A, C&amp;G) between two backbones and make like rungs on a ladder. The bases, phosphates, and sugars together make a nucleotide that connects to make long chains of DNA. Genetic information exists in the sequence of these nucleotides, and genes exist as stretches of sequence along the DNA chain. These chains coil into a double a-helix structure and wrap around proteins called Histones which provide the structural support. DNA wrapped around these histones are called chromosomes. Viruses sometimes use the similar molecule RNA instead of DNA as their genetic material.\nDNA normally exists as a double-stranded molecule, coiled into the shape of a double helix. Each nucleotide in DNA preferentially pairs with its partner nucleotide on the opposite strand: A pairs with T, and C pairs with G. Thus, in its two-stranded form, each strand effectively contains all necessary information, redundant with its partner strand. This structure of DNA is the physical basis for inheritance: DNA replication duplicates the genetic information by splitting the strands and using each strand as a template for synthesis of a new partner strand.\nGenes are arranged linearly along long chains of DNA base-pair sequences. In bacteria, each cell usually contains a single circular genophore, while eukaryotic organisms (such as plants and animals) have their DNA arranged in multiple linear chromosomes. These DNA strands are often extremely long; the largest human chromosome, for example, is about 247 million base pairs in length. The DNA of a chromosome is associated with structural proteins that organize, compact, and control access to the DNA, forming a material called chromatin; in eukaryotes, chromatin is usually composed of nucleosomes, segments of DNA wound around cores of histone proteins. The full set of hereditary material in an organism (usually the combined DNA sequences of all chromosomes) is called the genome.\nDNA is most often found in the nucleus of cells, but Ruth Sager helped in the discovery of nonchromosomal genes found outside of the nucleus. In plants, these are often found in the chloroplasts and in other organisms, in the mitochondria. These nonchromosomal genes can still be passed on by either partner in sexual reproduction and they control a variety of hereditary characteristics that replicate and remain active throughout generations.\nWhile haploid organisms have only one copy of each chromosome, most animals and many plants are diploid, containing two of each chromosome and thus two copies of every gene. The two alleles for a gene are located on identical loci of the two homologous chromosomes, each allele inherited from a different parent.\nMany species have so-called sex chromosomes that determine the sex of each organism. In humans and many other animals, the Y chromosome contains the gene that triggers the development of the specifically male characteristics. In evolution, this chromosome has lost most of its content and also most of its genes, while the X chromosome is similar to the other chromosomes and contains many genes. This being said, Mary Frances Lyon discovered that there is X-chromosome inactivation during reproduction to avoid passing on twice as many genes to the offspring. Lyon's discovery led to the discovery of X-linked diseases.\nReproduction.\nWhen cells divide, their full genome is copied and each daughter cell inherits one copy. This process, called mitosis, is the simplest form of reproduction and is the basis for asexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction can also occur in multicellular organisms, producing offspring that inherit their genome from a single parent. Offspring that are genetically identical to their parents are called clones.\nEukaryotic organisms often use sexual reproduction to generate offspring that contain a mixture of genetic material inherited from two different parents. The process of sexual reproduction alternates between forms that contain single copies of the genome (haploid) and double copies (diploid). Haploid cells fuse and combine genetic material to create a diploid cell with paired chromosomes. Diploid organisms form haploids by dividing, without replicating their DNA, to create daughter cells that randomly inherit one of each pair of chromosomes. Most animals and many plants are diploid for most of their lifespan, with the haploid form reduced to single cell gametes such as sperm or eggs.\nAlthough they do not use the haploid/diploid method of sexual reproduction, bacteria have many methods of acquiring new genetic information. Some bacteria can undergo conjugation, transferring a small circular piece of DNA to another bacterium. Bacteria can also take up raw DNA fragments found in the environment and integrate them into their genomes, a phenomenon known as transformation. These processes result in horizontal gene transfer, transmitting fragments of genetic information between organisms that would be otherwise unrelated. Natural bacterial transformation occurs in many bacterial species, and can be regarded as a sexual process for transferring DNA from one cell to another cell (usually of the same species). Transformation requires the action of numerous bacterial gene products, and its primary adaptive function appears to be repair of DNA damages in the recipient cell.\nRecombination and genetic linkage.\nThe diploid nature of chromosomes allows for genes on different chromosomes to assort independently or be separated from their homologous pair during sexual reproduction wherein haploid gametes are formed. In this way new combinations of genes can occur in the offspring of a mating pair. Genes on the same chromosome would theoretically never recombine. However, they do, via the cellular process of chromosomal crossover. During crossover, chromosomes exchange stretches of DNA, effectively shuffling the gene alleles between the chromosomes. This process of chromosomal crossover generally occurs during meiosis, a series of cell divisions that creates haploid cells. Meiotic recombination, particularly in microbial eukaryotes, appears to serve the adaptive function of repair of DNA damages.\nThe first cytological demonstration of crossing over was performed by Harriet Creighton and Barbara McClintock in 1931. Their research and experiments on corn provided cytological evidence for the genetic theory that linked genes on paired chromosomes do in fact exchange places from one homolog to the other.\nThe probability of chromosomal crossover occurring between two given points on the chromosome is related to the distance between the points. For an arbitrarily long distance, the probability of crossover is high enough that the inheritance of the genes is effectively uncorrelated. For genes that are closer together, however, the lower probability of crossover means that the genes demonstrate genetic linkage; alleles for the two genes tend to be inherited together. The amounts of linkage between a series of genes can be combined to form a linear linkage map that roughly describes the arrangement of the genes along the chromosome.\nGene expression.\nGenetic code.\nGenes express their functional effect through the production of proteins, which are molecules responsible for most functions in the cell. Proteins are made up of one or more polypeptide chains, each composed of a sequence of amino acids. The DNA sequence of a gene is used to produce a specific amino acid sequence. This process begins with the production of an RNA molecule with a sequence matching the gene's DNA sequence, a process called transcription.\nThis messenger RNA molecule then serves to produce a corresponding amino acid sequence through a process called translation. Each group of three nucleotides in the sequence, called a codon, corresponds either to one of the twenty possible amino acids in a protein or an instruction to end the amino acid sequence; this correspondence is called the genetic code. The flow of information is unidirectional: information is transferred from nucleotide sequences into the amino acid sequence of proteins, but it never transfers from protein back into the sequence of DNA\u2014a phenomenon Francis Crick called the central dogma of molecular biology.\nThe specific sequence of amino acids results in a unique three-dimensional structure for that protein, and the three-dimensional structures of proteins are related to their functions. Some are simple structural molecules, like the fibers formed by the protein collagen. Proteins can bind to other proteins and simple molecules, sometimes acting as enzymes by facilitating chemical reactions within the bound molecules (without changing the structure of the protein itself). Protein structure is dynamic; the protein hemoglobin bends into slightly different forms as it facilitates the capture, transport, and release of oxygen molecules within mammalian blood.\nA single nucleotide difference within DNA can cause a change in the amino acid sequence of a protein. Because protein structures are the result of their amino acid sequences, some changes can dramatically change the properties of a protein by destabilizing the structure or changing the surface of the protein in a way that changes its interaction with other proteins and molecules. For example, sickle-cell anemia is a human genetic disease that results from a single base difference within the coding region for the \u03b2-globin section of hemoglobin, causing a single amino acid change that changes hemoglobin's physical properties.\nSickle-cell versions of hemoglobin stick to themselves, stacking to form fibers that distort the shape of red blood cells carrying the protein. These sickle-shaped cells no longer flow smoothly through blood vessels, having a tendency to clog or degrade, causing the medical problems associated with this disease.\nSome DNA sequences are transcribed into RNA but are not translated into protein products\u2014such RNA molecules are called non-coding RNA. In some cases, these products fold into structures which are involved in critical cell functions (e.g. ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA). RNA can also have regulatory effects through hybridization interactions with other RNA molecules (such as microRNA).\nNature and nurture.\nAlthough genes contain all the information an organism uses to function, the environment plays an important role in determining the ultimate phenotypes an organism displays. The phrase \"nature and nurture\" refers to this complementary relationship. The phenotype of an organism depends on the interaction of genes and the environment. An interesting example is the coat coloration of the Siamese cat. In this case, the body temperature of the cat plays the role of the environment. The cat's genes code for dark hair, thus the hair-producing cells in the cat make cellular proteins resulting in dark hair. But these dark hair-producing proteins are sensitive to temperature (i.e. have a mutation causing temperature-sensitivity) and denature in higher-temperature environments, failing to produce dark-hair pigment in areas where the cat has a higher body temperature. In a low-temperature environment, however, the protein's structure is stable and produces dark-hair pigment normally. The protein remains functional in areas of skin that are colder\u2014such as its legs, ears, tail, and face\u2014so the cat has dark hair at its extremities.\nEnvironment plays a major role in effects of the human genetic disease phenylketonuria. The mutation that causes phenylketonuria disrupts the ability of the body to break down the amino acid phenylalanine, causing a toxic build-up of an intermediate molecule that, in turn, causes severe symptoms of progressive intellectual disability and seizures. However, if someone with the phenylketonuria mutation follows a strict diet that avoids this amino acid, they remain normal and healthy.\nA common method for determining how genes and environment (\"nature and nurture\") contribute to a phenotype involves studying identical and fraternal twins, or other siblings of multiple births. Identical siblings are genetically the same since they come from the same zygote. Meanwhile, fraternal twins are as genetically different from one another as normal siblings. By comparing how often a certain disorder occurs in a pair of identical twins to how often it occurs in a pair of fraternal twins, scientists can determine whether that disorder is caused by genetic or postnatal environmental factors. One famous example involved the study of the Genain quadruplets, who were identical quadruplets all diagnosed with schizophrenia.\nGene regulation.\nThe genome of a given organism contains thousands of genes, but not all these genes need to be active at any given moment. A gene is expressed when it is being transcribed into mRNA and there exist many cellular methods of controlling the expression of genes such that proteins are produced only when needed by the cell. Transcription factors are regulatory proteins that bind to DNA, either promoting or inhibiting the transcription of a gene. Within the genome of \"Escherichia coli\" bacteria, for example, there exists a series of genes necessary for the synthesis of the amino acid tryptophan. However, when tryptophan is already available to the cell, these genes for tryptophan synthesis are no longer needed. The presence of tryptophan directly affects the activity of the genes\u2014tryptophan molecules bind to the tryptophan repressor (a transcription factor), changing the repressor's structure such that the repressor binds to the genes. The tryptophan repressor blocks the transcription and expression of the genes, thereby creating negative feedback regulation of the tryptophan synthesis process.\nDifferences in gene expression are especially clear within multicellular organisms, where cells all contain the same genome but have very different structures and behaviors due to the expression of different sets of genes. All the cells in a multicellular organism derive from a single cell, differentiating into variant cell types in response to external and intercellular signals and gradually establishing different patterns of gene expression to create different behaviors.\nWithin eukaryotes, there exist structural features of chromatin that influence the transcription of genes, often in the form of modifications to DNA and chromatin that are stably inherited by daughter cells. These features are called \"epigenetic\" because they exist \"on top\" of the DNA sequence and retain inheritance from one cell generation to the next. Because of epigenetic features, different cell types grown within the same medium can retain very different properties. Although epigenetic features are generally dynamic over the course of development, some, like the phenomenon of paramutation, have multigenerational inheritance and exist as rare exceptions to the general rule of DNA as the basis for inheritance.\nGenetic change.\nMutations.\nDuring the process of DNA replication, errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand. These errors, called mutations, can affect the phenotype of an organism, especially if they occur within the protein coding sequence of a gene. Error rates are usually very low\u20141 error in every 10\u2013100\u00a0million bases\u2014due to the \"proofreading\" ability of DNA polymerases. Processes that increase the rate of changes in DNA are called mutagenic: mutagenic chemicals promote errors in DNA replication, often by interfering with the structure of base-pairing, while UV radiation induces mutations by causing damage to the DNA structure. Chemical damage to DNA occurs naturally as well and cells use DNA repair mechanisms to repair mismatches and breaks. The repair does not, however, always restore the original sequence. A particularly important source of DNA damages appears to be reactive oxygen species produced by cellular aerobic respiration, and these can lead to mutations.\nIn organisms that use chromosomal crossover to exchange DNA and recombine genes, errors in alignment during meiosis can also cause mutations. Errors in crossover are especially likely when similar sequences cause partner chromosomes to adopt a mistaken alignment; this makes some regions in genomes more prone to mutating in this way. These errors create large structural changes in DNA sequence\u2014duplications, inversions, deletions of entire regions\u2014or the accidental exchange of whole parts of sequences between different chromosomes, chromosomal translocation.\nNatural selection and evolution.\nMutations alter an organism's genotype and occasionally this causes different phenotypes to appear. Most mutations have little effect on an organism's phenotype, health, or reproductive fitness. Mutations that do have an effect are usually detrimental, but occasionally some can be beneficial. Studies in the fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\" suggest that if a mutation changes a protein produced by a gene, about 70 percent of these mutations are harmful with the remainder being either neutral or weakly beneficial.\nPopulation genetics studies the distribution of genetic differences within populations and how these distributions change over time. Changes in the frequency of an allele in a population are mainly influenced by natural selection, where a given allele provides a selective or reproductive advantage to the organism, as well as other factors such as mutation, genetic drift, genetic hitchhiking, artificial selection and migration.\nOver many generations, the genomes of organisms can change significantly, resulting in evolution. In the process called adaptation, selection for beneficial mutations can cause a species to evolve into forms better able to survive in their environment. New species are formed through the process of speciation, often caused by geographical separations that prevent populations from exchanging genes with each other.\nBy comparing the homology between different species' genomes, it is possible to calculate the evolutionary distance between them and when they may have diverged. Genetic comparisons are generally considered a more accurate method of characterizing the relatedness between species than the comparison of phenotypic characteristics. The evolutionary distances between species can be used to form evolutionary trees; these trees represent the common descent and divergence of species over time, although they do not show the transfer of genetic material between unrelated species (known as horizontal gene transfer and most common in bacteria).\nResearch and technology.\nModel organisms.\nAlthough geneticists originally studied inheritance in a wide variety of organisms, the range of species studied has narrowed. One reason is that when significant research already exists for a given organism, new researchers are more likely to choose it for further study, and so eventually a few model organisms became the basis for most genetics research. Common research topics in model organism genetics include the study of gene regulation and the involvement of genes in development and cancer. Organisms were chosen, in part, for convenience\u2014short generation times and easy genetic manipulation made some organisms popular genetics research tools. Widely used model organisms include the gut bacterium \"Escherichia coli\", the plant \"Arabidopsis thaliana\", baker's yeast (\"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\"), the nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\", the common fruit fly (\"Drosophila melanogaster\"), the zebrafish (\"Danio rerio\"), and the common house mouse (\"Mus musculus\").\nMedicine.\nMedical genetics seeks to understand how genetic variation relates to human health and disease. When searching for an unknown gene that may be involved in a disease, researchers commonly use genetic linkage and genetic pedigree charts to find the location on the genome associated with the disease. At the population level, researchers take advantage of genome wide association studies (GWAS) to look for locations in the genome that are associated with diseases, a method especially useful for multigenic traits not clearly defined by a single gene. Once a candidate gene is found, further research is often done on the corresponding (or homologous) genes of model https://. In addition to studying genetic diseases, the increased availability of genotyping methods has led to the field of pharmacogenetics: the study of how genotype can affect drug responses.\nIndividuals differ in their inherited tendency to develop cancer, and cancer is a genetic disease. The process of cancer development in the body is a combination of events. Mutations occasionally occur within cells in the body as they divide. Although these mutations will not be inherited by any offspring, they can affect the behavior of cells, sometimes causing them to grow and divide more frequently. There are biological mechanisms that attempt to stop this process; signals are given to inappropriately dividing cells that should trigger cell death, but sometimes additional mutations occur that cause cells to ignore these messages. An internal process of natural selection occurs within the body and eventually mutations accumulate within cells to promote their own growth, creating a cancerous tumor that grows and invades various tissues of the body. Normally, a cell divides only in response to signals called growth factors and stops growing once in contact with surrounding cells and in response to growth-inhibitory signals. It usually then divides a limited number of times and dies, staying within the epithelium where it is unable to migrate to other organs. To become a cancer cell, a cell has to accumulate mutations in a number of genes (three to seven). A cancer cell can divide without growth factor and ignores inhibitory signals. Also, it is immortal and can grow indefinitely, even after it makes contact with neighboring cells. It may escape from the epithelium and ultimately from the primary tumor. Then, the escaped cell can cross the endothelium of a blood vessel and get transported by the bloodstream to colonize a new organ, forming deadly metastasis. Although there are some genetic predispositions in a small fraction of cancers, the major fraction is due to a set of new genetic mutations that originally appear and accumulate in one or a small number of cells that will divide to form the tumor and are not transmitted to the progeny (somatic mutations). The most frequent mutations are a loss of function of p53 protein, a tumor suppressor, or in the p53 pathway, and gain of function mutations in the Ras proteins, or in other oncogenes.\nResearch methods.\nDNA can be manipulated in the laboratory. Restriction enzymes are commonly used enzymes that cut DNA at specific sequences, producing predictable fragments of DNA. DNA fragments can be visualized through use of gel electrophoresis, which separates fragments according to their length.\nThe use of ligation enzymes allows DNA fragments to be connected. By binding (\"ligating\") fragments of DNA together from different sources, researchers can create recombinant DNA, the DNA often associated with genetically modified organisms. Recombinant DNA is commonly used in the context of plasmids: short circular DNA molecules with a few genes on them. In the process known as molecular cloning, researchers can amplify the DNA fragments by inserting plasmids into bacteria and then culturing them on plates of agar (to isolate clones of bacteria cells). \"Cloning\" can also refer to the various means of creating cloned (\"clonal\") organisms.\nDNA can also be amplified using a procedure called the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). By using specific short sequences of DNA, PCR can isolate and exponentially amplify a targeted region of DNA. Because it can amplify from extremely small amounts of DNA, PCR is also often used to detect the presence of specific DNA sequences.\nDNA sequencing and genomics.\nDNA sequencing, one of the most fundamental technologies developed to study genetics, allows researchers to determine the sequence of nucleotides in DNA fragments. The technique of chain-termination sequencing, developed in 1977 by a team led by Frederick Sanger, is still routinely used to sequence DNA fragments. Using this technology, researchers have been able to study the molecular sequences associated with many human diseases.\nAs sequencing has become less expensive, researchers have sequenced the genomes of many organisms using a process called genome assembly, which uses computational tools to stitch together sequences from many different fragments. These technologies were used to sequence the human genome in the Human Genome Project completed in 2003. New high-throughput sequencing technologies are dramatically lowering the cost of DNA sequencing, with many researchers hoping to bring the cost of resequencing a human genome down to a thousand dollars.\nNext-generation sequencing (or high-throughput sequencing) came about due to the ever-increasing demand for low-cost sequencing. These sequencing technologies allow the production of potentially millions of sequences concurrently. The large amount of sequence data available has created the subfield of genomics, research that uses computational tools to search for and analyze patterns in the full genomes of organisms. Genomics can also be considered a subfield of bioinformatics, which uses computational approaches to analyze large sets of biological data.\nSociety and culture.\nOn 19 March 2015, a group of leading biologists urged a worldwide ban on clinical use of methods, particularly the use of CRISPR and zinc finger, to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited. In April 2015, Chinese researchers reported results of basic research to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos using CRISPR.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12269", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12269", "title": "Guitar/Classical", "text": ""}
{"id": "12270", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12270", "title": "Guitar/Bass", "text": ""}
{"id": "12272", "revid": "1310714653", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12272", "title": "George Pappas", "text": "American philosopher\nGeorge Sotiros Pappas (4 May 1942-3 September 2025) is a professor of philosophy at Ohio State University. Pappas specializes in epistemology, the history of early modern philosophy, philosophy of religion and metaphysics. He is of Greek and English origin.\nHe is the author of the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" entry on \"Internalist versus Externalist\" conceptions of epistemic justification.\nHe was co-editor (with Marshall Swain) of \"Essays on Knowledge and Justification\" (1978), an anthology of essays relating to the Gettier problem used as a core text in undergraduate epistemology courses.\nPappas is an editorial consultant of Berkeley Studies.\nStudies in Berkeley's philosophy.\nPappas is known to be a leading Berkeley scholar; his essay \"Berkeley and Scepticism\" was in 1993 awarded the International Berkeley Prize. Pappas is a regular participant of International Berkeley Conferences. At one such conference, celebrating the 300th anniversary of George Berkeley's birth, Pappas propounded a new approach to the relationship between Berkeley's anti-abstractionism and \"esse est percipi\" principle. On Pappas' reading, Berkeley's two theses \u2014 that there are no abstract ideas and that sensible objects must be perceived in order to exist \u2014 entail one another.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pappas' formulation of the relationship between these two propositions is ingenious and merits his verdict that it is a 'very exciting result' ... So far as I know, his thesis is original. Some writers, to be sure, have some close to suggesting that the first proposition is a necessary condition for the truth of the second, but I cannot think of a commentator who holds that it is both a necessary and sufficient condition.\u2014\u200a\nPappas' interpretation of Berkeley's esse\" is \"percipi thesis has sparked much discussion. In 1989, the Garland Publishing Company brought out a 15-volume collection of major works on Berkeley; Pappas' paper \"Abstract ideas and the 'esse is percipi' thesis\" was included in the third volume, as it was considered to be a significant contribution to Berkeley scholarship.\nPappas developed his treatment of Berkeley's \"esse est percipi\" principle to repudiate the \"inherence interpretation of Berkeley\", upon which Edwin E. Allaire, among others, elaborated.\nThat account is put forward to answer an extremely perplexing question in the history of philosophy: Why did Berkeley embrace idealism, i. e., why did he hold that esse est percipi, that to be is to be perceived? \nAfter emerging in the early 1960s, the \"inherence account\" attracted numerous proponents and became an influential element of contemporary Berkeley scholarship. In his paper \"Ideas, minds, and Berkeley\" Pappas revealed some discrepancies between fountain-head evidences and Allaire's approach to a reconstruction of Berkeley's idealism. Pappas' critical examination of the \"inherence account\" is greatly appreciated by Berkeley scholars. Pappas' penetrating remarks compelled Edwin B. Allaire to revise and improve his conception. Even those who share Allaire's account of Berkeley's idealism acknowledge Pappas' article to be \"an excellent review and critique of the IA [inherence account].\"\nIn 2000, Pappas published his monograph \"Berkeley's thought\" in which some parts were based on earlier papers of his. While writings by A. A. Luce or Geoffrey Warnock are long outdated, \"Berkeley's thought\" is often included in lists of recommended literature on Berkeley's philosophy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12273", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12273", "title": "Guy de Maupasant", "text": ""}
{"id": "12274", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12274", "title": "Guy de Maupassant", "text": "French writer (1850\u20131893)\nHenri Ren\u00e9 Albert Guy de Maupassant (, ; ; 5 August 1850 \u2013 6 July 1893) was a 19th-century French author, celebrated as a master of the short story, as well as a representative of the naturalist school, depicting human lives, destinies and social forces in disillusioned and often pessimistic terms.\nMaupassant was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Gustave Flaubert and his stories are characterized by economy of style and efficient, seemingly effortless \"d\u00e9nouements\". Many are set during the Franco-Prussian War of the 1870s, describing the futility of war and the innocent civilians who, caught up in events beyond their control, are permanently changed by their experiences. He wrote 300 short stories, six novels, three travel books, and one volume of verse. His first published story, \"Boule de Suif\" (\"The Dumpling\", 1880), is often considered his most famous work.\nBiography.\nHenri-Ren\u00e9-Albert-Guy de Maupassant was born on 5 August 1850 at the late 16th-century Ch\u00e2teau de Miromesnil (near Dieppe in the Seine-Inf\u00e9rieure (now Seine-Maritime) Department, France), the elder son of Gustave de Maupassant (1821\u201399) and Laure Le Poittevin, whose family hailed from the prosperous bourgeoisie. His mother urged her husband when they married in 1846 to obtain the right to use the particule or form \"de Maupassant\" instead of \"Maupassant\" as his family name, in order to indicate noble birth. Gustave's great-great-grandfather, Jean-Baptiste de Maupassant (1699\u20131774), \"conseiller-secr\u00e9taire\" to King Louis XV, had been ennobled by Emperor Francis I in 1752, and although his family were considered petite noblesse they had not yet received official recognition by the Kingdom of France. He then obtained from the Tribunal Civil of Rouen by royal decree dated 9 July 1846 the right to style himself \"de Maupassant\" instead of \"Maupassant\", being formally assumed as the family name before the birth of his children.\nWhen Maupassant was 11 and his brother Herv\u00e9 was five, his mother, an independent-minded woman, risked social disgrace to obtain a legal separation from her husband, who was violent towards her.\nAfter the separation, Laure Le Poittevin kept custody of her two sons. In the absence of Maupassant's father, his mother became the most influential figure in the young boy's life. She was an exceptionally well-read woman and was very fond of classical literature, particularly Shakespeare. Until the age of thirteen, Guy lived happily with his mother, at \u00c9tretat in Normandy. At the Villa des Verguies, between the sea and the luxuriant countryside, he grew very fond of fishing and of outdoor activities. When Guy reached the age of thirteen, his mother placed her two sons as day boarders in a private school, the Institution Leroy-Petit, in Rouen\u2014the \"Institution Robineau\" of Maupassant's story \"La Question du Latin\"\u2014for classical studies. From his early education, he retained a marked hostility to religion, and to judge from verses composed around this time, he deplored the ecclesiastical atmosphere, its ritual and discipline. Finding the place unbearable, he finally got himself expelled in his penultimate year.\nIn 1867, while he was in junior high school, Maupassant met Gustave Flaubert at Croisset on the insistence of his mother. Next year, in autumn, he was sent to the \"Lyc\u00e9e Pierre-Corneille\" in Rouen where he proved a good scholar, indulging in poetry and taking a prominent part in theatricals. In October 1868, at the age of 18, he saved the famous poet Algernon Swinburne from drowning off the coast of \u00c9tretat.\nThe Franco-Prussian War broke out soon after his graduation from college in 1870 and Maupassant volunteered to serve in the French Army without attending military academy as aspirant. In 1871, he left Normandy and moved to Paris, where he spent ten years as a clerk in the Navy Department. During this time his only recreation and relaxation was boating on the Seine on Sundays and holidays.\nGustave Flaubert took him under his protection and acted as a kind of literary guardian to him, guiding his debut in journalism and literature. At Flaubert's home he met \u00c9mile Zola (1840\u20131902) and the Russian novelist Ivan Turgenev (1818\u20131883), as well as many of the proponents of the realist and naturalist schools. He wrote and himself played (1875) in a comedy - \"\" - with Flaubert's blessing.\nIn 1878, he was transferred to the Ministry of Public Instruction and became a contributing editor to several leading newspapers such as \"Le Figaro\", \"Gil Blas\", \"Le Gaulois\" and \"l'\u00c9cho de Paris\". He devoted his spare time to writing novels and short stories.\nIn 1880 he published what is considered his first masterpiece, \"Boule de Suif\", which met with instant and tremendous success. Flaubert characterized it as \"a masterpiece that will endure\". This, Maupassant's first piece of short fiction set during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, was followed by short stories such as \"Deux Amis\", \"Mother Savage\", and \"Mademoiselle Fifi\".\n\"The fear that haunted his restless brain day and night was already visible in his eyes, I for one considered him then as a doomed man. I knew that the subtle poison of his own Boule de Suif had already begun its work of destruction in this magnificent brain. Did he know it himself? I often thought he did. The MS. of his Sur L'Eau was lying on the table between us, he had just read me a few chapters, the best thing he had ever written I thought. He was still producing with feverish haste one masterpiece after another, slashing his excited brain with champagne, ether and drugs of all sorts. Women after women in endless succession hastened the destruction, women recruited from all quarters... actresses, ballet-dancers, midinettes, grisettes, common prostitutes-- 'le taureau triste' his friends used to call him.\"\nThe decade from 1880 to 1891 was the most fertile period of Maupassant's life. Made famous by his first short story, he worked methodically and produced two or sometimes four volumes annually. His talent and practical business sense made him wealthy.\nIn 1881 he published his first volume of short stories under the title of \"La Maison Tellier\"; it reached its twelfth edition within two years. In 1883 he finished his first novel, \"Une Vie\" (translated into English as \"A Woman's Life\"), 25,000 copies of which were sold in less than a year.\n\"\", published in 1884, is a social and political satirical collection of some of his best short stories, including the titular story which is shocking and scandalous, even by modern standards.\nHis editor, Victor Havard, commissioned him to write more stories, and Maupassant continued to produce them efficiently and frequently. His second novel, \"Bel-Ami\", which came out in 1885, had thirty-seven printings in four months. Then, he wrote what many consider his greatest novel, \"Pierre et Jean\" (1888).\nWith a natural aversion to society, he loved retirement, solitude, and meditation. He traveled extensively in Algeria, Italy, England, Brittany, Sicily, and the Auvergne, and from each voyage brought back a new volume. He cruised on his private yacht \"Bel-Ami\", named after his novel. This life did not prevent him from making friends among the literary celebrities of his day: Alexandre Dumas, \"fils\" had a paternal affection for him; at Aix-les-Bains he met Hippolyte Taine (1828\u20131893) and became devoted to the philosopher-historian.\nFlaubert continued to act as his literary godfather. His friendship with the Goncourts was of short duration; his frank and practical nature reacted against the ambiance of gossip, scandal, duplicity, and invidious criticism that the two brothers had created around them in the guise of an 18th-century style salon.\nMaupassant was one of a fair number of 19th-century Parisians (including Charles Gounod, Alexandre Dumas, \"fils\", and Charles Garnier) who did not care for the Eiffel Tower (erected 1887/89). He often ate lunch in the restaurant at its base, not out of preference for the food but because only there could he avoid seeing its otherwise unavoidable profile. He and forty-six other Parisian literary and artistic notables attached their names to an elaborately irate letter of protest against the tower's construction, written to the Minister of Public Works, and published on 14 February 1887.\nDeclining appointment to the L\u00e9gion d'honneur and election to the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, Maupassant also wrote under several pseudonyms, including \"Joseph Prunier\", \"Guy de Valmont\", and \"Maufrigneuse\" (which he used from 1881 to 1885).\nIn his later years he developed a constant desire for solitude, an obsession for self-preservation, and a fear of death and paranoia of persecution caused by the syphilis he had contracted in his youth. It has been suggested that his brother, Herv\u00e9, also suffered from syphilis and that the disease may have been congenital. On 2 January 1892, Maupassant tried to take his own life by cutting his throat; he was committed to the private asylum of Esprit Blanche at Passy, in Paris, where he died on 6 July 1893 from syphilis.\nMaupassant penned his own epitaph: \"I have coveted everything and taken pleasure in nothing.\" He is buried in Section 26 of the Montparnasse Cemetery, Paris.\nSignificance.\nMaupassant is considered a father of the modern short story. Literary theorist Kornelije Kvas wrote that along \"with Chekhov, Maupassant is the greatest master of the short story in world literature. He is not a naturalist like Zola; to him, physiological processes do not constitute the basis of human actions, although the influence of the environment is manifested in his prose. In many respects, Maupassant's naturalism is Schopenhauerian anthropological pessimism, as he is often harsh and merciless when it comes to depicting human nature. He owes most to Flaubert, from whom he learned to use a concise and measured style and to establish a distance towards the object of narration.\" He delighted in clever plotting, and served as a model for Somerset Maugham and O. Henry in this respect. One of his famous short stories, \"The Necklace\", was imitated with a twist by Maugham (\"Mr Know-All\", \"A String of Beads\"). Henry James's \"Paste\" adapts another story of his with a similar title, \"The Jewels\".\nTaking his cue from Balzac, Maupassant wrote comfortably in both the high-realist and fantastic modes; stories and novels such as \"L'H\u00e9ritage\" and \"Bel-Ami\" aim to recreate Third Republic France in a realistic way, whereas many of the short stories (notably \"Le Horla\" and \"Qui sait?\") describe apparently supernatural phenomena.\nThe supernatural in Maupassant, however, is often implicitly a symptom of the protagonists' troubled minds; Maupassant was fascinated by the burgeoning discipline of psychiatry, and attended the public lectures of Jean-Martin Charcot between 1885 and 1886.\nLegacy.\nLeo Tolstoy used Maupassant as the subject for one of his essays on art: '. His stories are second only to Shakespeare in their inspiration of movie adaptations with films ranging from \"Stagecoach\", ' and \"Masculine Feminine\".\nFriedrich Nietzsche's autobiography mentions him in the following text:\n\"I cannot at all conceive in which century of history one could haul together such inquisitive and at the same time delicate psychologists as one can in contemporary Paris: I can name as a sample \u2013 for their number is by no means small, ... or to pick out one of the stronger race, a genuine Latin to whom I am particularly attached, Guy de Maupassant.\"\nWilliam Saroyan wrote a short story about Maupassant in his 1971 book, \"Letters from 74 rue Taitbout or Don't Go But If You Must Say Hello To Everybody\".\nIsaac Babel wrote a short story about him, \"Guy de Maupassant.\" It appears in \"The Collected Stories of Isaac Babel\" and in the story anthology \"You\u2019ve Got To Read This: Contemporary American Writers Introduce Stories that Held Them in Awe.\"\nGene Roddenberry, in an early draft for \"The Questor Tapes\", wrote a scene in which the android Questor employs Maupassant's theory that, \"the human female will open her mind to a man to whom she has opened other channels of communications.\" In the script Questor copulates with a woman to obtain information that she is reluctant to impart. Due to complaints from NBC executives, this scene was never filmed.\nMichel Drach directed and co-wrote a 1982 French biographical film: \"Guy de Maupassant\". Claude Brasseur stars as the titular character.\nSeveral of Maupassant's short stories, including \"La Peur\" and \"The Necklace\", were adapted as episodes of the 1986 Indian anthology television series \"Katha Sagar\". The French anthology television series \"Chez Maupassant\" ran for three seasons in 2007, 2008 and 2011, adapting 24 of Maupassant's stories to critical acclaim and high viewership.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12276", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12276", "title": "Gheorghe Hagi", "text": "Romanian footballer and manager (born 1965)\nGheorghe Hagi (; born 5 February 1965) is a Romanian professional football manager and former player, who is currently the owner of Liga I club Farul Constan\u021ba. Deployed as an attacking midfielder, Hagi was considered one of the best players in the world during the 1980s and '90s, and is regarded by many as the greatest Romanian footballer of all time. Fans of Turkish club Galatasaray, with whom Hagi ended his career, called him (\"[The] Commander\"), while he was known as (\"The King\") to Romanian supporters. Nicknamed \"The Maradona of the Carpathians\", he was a creative advanced playmaker renowned for his dribbling, technique, vision, passing and shooting.\nAfter starting his playing career in Romania, with FC Constan\u021ba, and subsequently featuring for Sportul Studen\u021besc and Steaua Bucure\u0219ti, he later also had spells in Spain with Real Madrid and Barcelona, Italy with Brescia, and Turkey, with Galatasaray. Hagi is one of the few footballers to have played for both Spanish rival clubs Real Madrid and Barcelona. Throughout his club career, he won numerous titles while playing in four different countries: he won three Romanian League titles, two Cupa Rom\u00e2niei titles, and the European Super Cup with Steaua Bucure\u0219ti \u2013 also reaching the final of the 1988\u201389 European Cup \u2013, a Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a title with Real Madrid, the Anglo-Italian Cup with Brescia, another Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a title with Barcelona, and four S\u00fcper Lig titles, two Turkish Cups, two Turkish Super Cups, the UEFA Cup, and the UEFA Super Cup with Galatasaray.\nAt international level, Hagi played for the Romania national team in three FIFA World Cups, in 1990, 1994 (where he was named in the World Cup All-Star Team after helping his nation to the quarter-finals of the tournament) and 1998; as well as in three UEFA European Championships, in 1984, 1996 and 2000. He won a total of 124 caps for Romania between 1983 and 2000, making him the second-most capped Romanian player of all time, behind only Dorinel Munteanu; he is also the joint all-time leading goalscorer of the Romania national side (alongside Adrian Mutu) with 35 goals.\nHagi is considered a hero both in his homeland and in Turkey. He was named Romanian Footballer of the Year a record seven times, and is regarded as one of the best football players of his generation. Hagi was nominated six times for the Ballon d'Or, his best performance being a 4th place in 1994. In November 2003, to celebrate UEFA's Jubilee, Hagi was selected as the Golden Player of Romania by the Romanian Football Federation as their most outstanding player of the past 50 years. In 2004, he was named by Pel\u00e9 as one of the 125 Greatest Living Footballers at a FIFA Awards Ceremony. In 1999, he was ranked at number 25 in \"World Soccer Magazine\"'s list of the 100 greatest players of the 20th century.\nFollowing his retirement in 2001, Hagi pursued a managerial career, coaching the Romania national team, as well as clubs in both Romania and Turkey, namely Bursaspor, Galatasaray, Politehnica Timi\u0219oara, Steaua Bucure\u0219ti, Viitorul Constan\u021ba and Farul Constan\u021ba. In 2009, he founded Romanian club Viitorul Constan\u021ba, which he has coached between 2014 and 2020. Hagi also established his namesake football academy, one of the largest in Southeastern Europe.\nEarly life.\nHagi was born to Iancu and Chirata Hagi on 5 February 1965. Hagi's grandfather was one of 40,000 ethnic Aromanians who fled Greece to Romania. His mother was born in Mesolakkia, Greece, and her original surname was Mega. He set up home in the village of S\u0103cele, near Constan\u021ba on the Black Sea coast. Hagi has fond memories of his grandfather who, like many Aromanians, was a shepherd. He stated: \"I was proud when he, who was called Gheorghe like me, asked me to go and spend the whole day with him minding the sheep\". He added: \"I loved to eat cheese and tomatoes with him, and that is still my favorite food today.\" He also said \"ambition is the main quality of the Aromanians\".\nClub career.\nFC Constan\u021ba.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I knew he would soon be one of the best players in the world. He could do everything with the ball. To watch him was like watching a fairytale.\"\n\u2013Iosif B\u00fck\u00f6ssy, Hagi's first coach\nHagi began his career in 1978, playing for FC Constan\u021ba's youth teams under the guidance of coach Iosif B\u00fck\u00f6ssy. The Romanian Football Federation selected him to join the Luceaf\u0103rul Bucure\u0219ti squad in 1980, where he remained for two years. In 1982, he returned to FC Constan\u021ba, making his Divizia A debut on 11 September at age 17, being a starter under coach Emanoil Ha\u0219oti in a 3\u20130 away loss to SC Bac\u0103u. On 6 November he scored his first goal when he defeated goalkeeper Vasile Iordache with a 35-meter shot, closing the score in the 2\u20132 draw against Steaua Bucure\u0219ti. In the \"Sportul\" newspaper, the chronicle of the match was signed by Stelian Trandafirescu, under the title \"A junior (Hagi) stops the Bucharest team!\" in which the journalist described the goal as follows:\"Hagi scored sensationally (what an effective shot!), from distance\". Until the end of the season he would score six more goals, including two doubles against CS T\u00e2rgovi\u0219te and Politehnica Timi\u0219oara, but the team finished in last place, being relegated to Divizia B.\nSportul Studen\u021besc.\nHagi was originally directed to Universitatea Craiova, but chose Sportul Studen\u021besc of Bucharest instead where he would form a successful offensive partnership with Marcel Cora\u0219. The highlights of his years with Sportul were becoming the top-scorer of the league for two consecutive seasons, in the first one with 20 goals scored, then in the second with 31, including six in a 7\u20135 win over Olt Scornice\u0219ti in the last round. In both instances he had a hard competition with Steaua's Victor Pi\u021burc\u0103, and those 31 goals netted in the 1985\u201386 season, helped the team finish runner-up in the league. During his time with \"The Students\", Hagi started playing in European competitions, making 10 appearances with four goals scored in the UEFA Cup over the course of four seasons. Most notably he played in a historical 1\u20130 victory against Inter Milan in the first round of the 1984\u201385 season, then in the same round in the following edition he scored a hat-trick in a 4\u20134 draw against Neuch\u00e2tel Xamax, but on both occasions the team did not qualify further, losing on the aggregate result.\nSteaua Bucure\u0219ti.\nIn late 1986, Hagi transferred to Steaua Bucure\u0219ti as the team prepared for the European Super Cup final against Dynamo Kyiv. The original contract was for a one-game loan only, the final. However, after winning the final, in which Hagi scored the only goal of the match from a free kick, Steaua did not want to release him back to Sportul Studen\u021besc and retained him. By the end of his first season he helped \"The Military Men\" win The Double, coach Anghel Iord\u0103nescu giving him 14 league appearances in which he scored 10 goals, and also appeared the full 90 minutes in the 1\u20130 victory in the Cupa Rom\u00e2niei final over rivals Dinamo Bucure\u0219ti. \nIn the next season, Hagi was used by Iord\u0103nescu in 31 league games in which he scored 25 goals that helped the club win another title. They also made another continental performance, reaching the semi-finals of the European Cup where they lost to Benfica, Hagi contributing with two doubles scored against MTK Budapest and Omonia Nicosia in the eight matches played, being the competition's top-scorer alongside six other players.&lt;ref name=\"Champions Cup/Champions League Topscorers\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \nIn the 1988\u201389 season, the team won another Double, Hagi managing to score 31 goals in the 30 league matches he was played by Iord\u0103nescu, and also scored the only goal in another 1\u20130 victory in the Cupa Rom\u00e2niei final over Dinamo. He delivered another European performance by playing nine games in the European Cup campaign, including the entire match in the 4\u20130 loss to AC Milan in the final, scoring three goals against Spartak Prague, two against Spartak Moscow and one in the semi-finals against Galatasaray. In December 1988 he netted five goals against Corvinul Hunedoara in a 11\u20130 win which is the biggest goal difference victory for Steaua in its first division history. In addition to his goal scored in the Cupa Rom\u00e2niei final, he also scored four league goals in the derby against Dinamo that helped his side earn one victory and two draws. On 6 May 1990, Hagi made his last appearance for Steaua, a Divizia A match in which he scored once in the 4\u20130 success over Corvinul Hunedoara, having a total of 222 matches with 141 goals in the competition.\nHis strong performances had him linked with Arrigo Sacchi's AC Milan, fellow Serie A club Juventus, and German side Bayern Munich, but Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's communist government rejected any offer.\nReal Madrid.\nAfter impressing in the 1990 World Cup, Hagi was signed on 27 June that same year by Spanish club Real Madrid who paid a sum estimated by the press in between $3.5 \u2013 4.3 million to Steaua to acquire him. He made his La Liga debut on 1 September, being used the entire match by coach John Toshack in a 1\u20130 home win over Castell\u00f3n which was the club's 1000th victory in the competition. On 21 September he netted his first goal by closing the score in a 3\u20131 away victory against Real Zaragoza. During his first season, Toshack got replaced with Alfredo Di St\u00e9fano and under his command he managed to win the Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a, playing in the final minutes of the 1\u20130 win in the first leg against rivals Barcelona, but didn't play in the second leg because of an injury.\nIn the following season under the guidance of Radomir Anti\u0107, Hagi scored more often. Most notably he managed a hat-trick in a 5\u20130 home win over Athletic Bilbao and a double in another victory against Osasuna, one of the goals being scored with a folha seca from the center of the field. In 2013, the \"Marca\" newspaper organized a poll for the most beautiful long-distance goal in Real Madrid's history and Hagi's folha seca against Osasuna came in first place. He also helped \"Los Blancos\" reach the 1991\u201392 UEFA Cup semi-finals, making 10 appearances in the campaign, scoring against FC Utrecht, Neuch\u00e2tel Xamax and in the lost semi-final to Torino. With one round before the end of the season, Real was in first place, needing a victory against Tenerife to win the title, but after leading 2\u20130 at halftime with one goal netted by Hagi, they ended up losing 3\u20132 and Barcelona won the championship. The team also lost the Copa del Rey final with 2\u20130 in a derby against Atl\u00e9tico Madrid in which coach Leo Beenhakker used Hagi as a starter.\nBrescia.\nIn 1992 he was transferred for 8 billion lira ($2.4 million) by Mircea Lucescu's \"Brescia Romena\", as around that period, his fellow Romanians Florin R\u0103ducioiu, Ioan Sab\u0103u, Dorin Mateu\u021b and D\u0103nu\u021b Lupu also played for the club. He made his Serie A debut on 5 September 1992 in a 0\u20130 draw against Napoli in which he received a red card, one month later scoring his first goal in a 4\u20131 home win over Foggia. At the end of his first season, the team was relegated to Serie B. After the relegation, Hagi was wanted by Napoli who needed a replacement for Diego Maradona but Brescia denied his transfer.\nIn his second season with Brescia, he helped them win the Anglo-Italian Cup, defeating Notts County 1\u20130 in the final at Wembley and also contributed to their third-place finish in Serie B and subsequent promotion back to Serie A.\nBarcelona.\nAfter performing memorably during the 1994 World Cup, Hagi returned to Spain, signed by Barcelona from Brescia for $3.2 million, and was coached by his childhood idol Johan Cruyff. His first performance was winning the Supercopa de Espa\u00f1a against Real Zaragoza, where in the first leg, Hristo Stoichkov opened the score after a free kick executed by Hagi, which the goalkeeper defended. In the second leg, Hagi played the first 10 minutes, but was replaced after suffering an injury. He made his league debut for \"Bar\u00e7a\" on 16 September 1994 in a goalless draw in the derby against Espanyol, then in the following round he netted a double in a 4\u20130 win over Compostela. In December 1994 he scored a goal from the center of the field in an away victory against Celta Vigo which in 2007 was nominated by the \"Mundo Deportivo\" newspaper for the most beautiful goal in Barcelona's history.\nIn the following season he was teammates with compatriot Gheorghe Popescu. Hagi scored three goals in five matches in the 1995\u201396 UEFA Cup campaign against Hapoel Be'er Sheva, Sevilla and in the lost semi-final to Bayern Munich. Barcelona reached the 1996 Copa del Rey final where they lost 1\u20130 after extra time against Atl\u00e9tico Madrid in which Cruyff used Hagi the entire match.\nGalatasaray.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Hagi is like wine, the older it gets, the better it is.\"\n\u2013Luis Fern\u00e1ndez, former French international\nIn 1996, 31-year-old Hagi signed for Turkish club Galatasaray who paid $3.5 million to Barcelona for his transfer, during this spell reuniting with Popescu, and with Romanians Adrian Ilie and Iulian Filipescu also at the club. He had been the subject of a competing transfer offer from S\u00e3o Paulo. He made his Turkish league debut on 9 August under coach Fatih Terim, scoring a brace in a 4\u20130 win over Vanspor. Although in the twilight of his career, at Galatasaray, he was extremely successful and became highly popular among the Turkish supporters. In his first four seasons, he domestically won four league titles, two Turkish Cups and two Turkish Super Cups. His highest success was when at age 35 he captained the club to win the 1999\u20132000 UEFA Cup, scoring two goals in the campaign against Borussia Dortmund and in the semi-finals against Leeds United. In the final, they defeated Arsenal on penalties following a 0\u20130 draw, but during the match, Hagi was sent off in extra time for punching Arsenal captain Tony Adams. Consequently, Galatasaray became the first Turkish club to win a UEFA club competition title. \nIn June 2000, Romanian Mircea Lucescu replaced Fatih Terim at the \"Cim Bom Bom\" side, together winning the 2000 UEFA Super Cup, after a 2\u20131 victory against Real Madrid. They also reached the quarter-finals of the Champions League during the 2000\u201301 season where in the first group stage, Hagi netted a goal with a spectacular long-distance shot in a win over AS Monaco. Subsequently, in the second group stage he scored his last goal in a European competition following a deep launch from Capone, then succeeding a lob over goalkeeper Dida in a 2\u20130 victory against AC Milan. In the quarter-finals they earned a 3\u20132 victory in the first leg against Real Madrid, but lost with 3\u20130 in the second one. In 2014, UEFA placed his goal against Monaco in a top 60 all-time best goals scored in European club and national teams competitions, while in 2020, the journalists of \"France Football\" ranked it in 19th place of most beautiful goals scored in the Champions League.\nOn 26 May 2001, Hagi played his last game as a professional footballer, managing to score a brace and provide an assist in Galatasaray's 4\u20130 win over Trabzonspor in the Turkish league. Hagi drew praise from the Galatasaray supporters for his performances during his time with the club, who adopted the chant \"I Love You Hagi\" in his honour.\nInternational career.\nEarly years and Euro 1984.\nHagi made his debut for Romania on 10 August 1983 at the age of 18, under coach Mircea Lucescu who used him the entire match in a 0\u20130 friendly draw against Norway, played at the Ullevaal stadium in Oslo. After the game, the \"Sportul\" newspaper wrote:\"Hagi is the main win of the match with Norway\".\nHe was selected by Lucescu to be part of the squad that went to Euro 1984, as the team needed a replacement for injured Ilie Balaci. In the first game which was a 1\u20131 draw against Spain, he came in the 76th minute to replace Romulus Gabor, then in the 2\u20131 loss to West Germany he was a starter, but replaced at half-time with Ion Zare. In the 1\u20130 loss against Portugal he did not play, as Romania did not get past the group stage. The 19-year-old Hagi's performance in the final tournament was criticized by Lucescu:\"\u021aicleanu and Hagi failed to make a real contribution after entering. Hagi, especially, isolated himself on the wing, being unable to make up for the great absence of Balaci\".\nHe scored his first international goal against Northern Ireland in a 3\u20132 loss during the 1986 World Cup qualifiers. In the second leg against the Northern Irish he was made captain for the first time, but the game ended with another loss.\n1990 World Cup.\nHe played six matches and scored once from a penalty in a 3\u20130 victory against Greece in the 1990 World Cup qualifiers. In the final tournament, coach Emeric Jenei could not use him in the first game, a victory against Soviet Union, as he was suspended due to a red card in the last qualifier match against Denmark. He played in the following two which were a loss to Cameroon and a draw against Argentina as Romania got past the group stage, reaching the round of 16. There, the journey ended in favor of Republic of Ireland at the penalty shoot-out following a 0\u20130 draw, with Hagi netting Romania's first spot kick.\n1994 World Cup.\nHagi scored five goals in the 1994 World Cup qualifiers, including a brace in a 5\u20131 home win over Wales. In the last group game of the qualifiers, which was also against Wales, he opened the score, the first half ending 1\u20130. Then Hagi, feeling that his teammates were too relaxed, asked coach Anghel Iord\u0103nescu to leave the dressing room and let him talk to them, and afterwards he started punching the closet and held a motivational speech. The match finished with a 2\u20131 victory which earned Romania the mathematical qualification to the final tournament, and also this game is considered by Romanian journalists as the birth of Romania's \"Golden Generation\".\nHagi captained \"The Tricolours\" in the final tournament. In the first match against Colombia, he provided the assists for both of Florin R\u0103ducioiu's goals in the 3\u20131 win and defeated goalkeeper \u00d3scar C\u00f3rdoba with a spectacular 35-meter lob from the side of the field, with the ball not spinning in the air. After getting past the group stage, they eliminated Argentina with a 3\u20132 score in which Hagi gave an assist to one of Ilie Dumitrescu's goals, then scored himself after Dumitrescu returned the favor. In the quarter-finals, Romania faced Sweden, the score was 2\u20132 after extra time, reaching the penalty shoot-out where Hagi netted his shot, but two of his teammates missed, while all the Swedes scored, thus the campaign ended.\nHagi was named in the Team of the Tournament for his performances. His goal against Columbia was listed in 2010 as one of the ten most beautiful goals scored in the World Cup by the \"Agence France-Presse\" news agency, and in 2014 \"Diario AS\" placed it in third place and \"L'\u00c9quipe\" in 16th.\nEuro 1996.\nDuring the successful Euro 1996 qualifiers he played six matches and scored two goals in two victories against Slovakia. In the final tournament, Iord\u0103nescu used him for the entirety of all three games in the group stage, but Romania lost all of them to France, Bulgaria and Spain.\n1998 World Cup.\nIn the 1998 World Cup qualifiers he made six appearances, scoring three goals against Iceland, one against Liechtenstein, and a spectacular one in Dublin with a 35-meter free kick shot in a 1\u20131 draw against the Republic of Ireland. Hagi was used as captain by Iord\u0103nescu in all four games during the final tournament, as in the group stage they earned victories in the first two rounds over Colombia and England, thus mathematically being qualified before the last group match against Tunisia. In order to celebrate, the players dyed their hair blonde and presented themselves like that at the game. They were defeated with 1\u20130 by Croatia in the round of 16 after a goal scored from a penalty by Davor \u0160uker.\nEuro 2000.\nAfter the World Cup 1998, Hagi retired from the national team. Before a game against rivals Hungary in the Euro 2000 qualifiers, Hagi was invited by Adrian P\u0103unescu to his \"Meciul Meciurilor\" (The Match of Matches) TV show. During the show, P\u0103unescu and all his guests who were figures from Romanian football but also from politics tried over the course of about five hours to convince Hagi to come back to the national team, and also over 100 fans spontaneously came in front of the TV station's headquarters to cheer him even though it was past midnight. Seeing all of this happening, Hagi recalls saying to himself in those moments:\"Who are you, for an entire country to beg for you?!\" He played in the 2\u20130 victory against the Hungarians, having a praised evolution by the press even though coach Victor Pi\u021burc\u0103 used him only in the first half because he injured his shoulder. At the end of the game he was carried on the arms of his colleagues to tour the stadium, although his shoulder was immobilized in a splint. In these qualifiers he would go on to score his last two goals for the national team in a win over Slovakia and a draw against Portugal.\nDuring the final tournament, coach Emerich Jenei used him as a starter in the first two group stage matches, receiving a yellow card in each of them leading to his suspension for the decisive game against England. Eventually, his teammates managed to win it without him and qualify to the quarter-finals. There, they lost with 2\u20130 to eventual runners-up Italy in which Hagi received a red card in the 59th minute.\nRetirement.\nHagi retired from professional football in 2001 at the age of 36. That year, he was given a send-off in a testimonial game on 24 April, called \"Gala Hagi,\" featuring a team of Romanian All-Stars against a team of international All-Stars. At the time of his retirement, his 124 caps for his country were a national record, which has since been surpassed by Dorinel Munteanu. He currently still holds the record of most goals scored for Romania, alongside Adrian Mutu, with 35.\nFor representing his country at six final tournaments, Hagi was decorated by President of Romania Traian B\u0103sescu on 25 March 2008 with the Ordinul \"Meritul Sportiv\" \u2013 (The Medal \"The Sportive Merit\") class II. In 2013 he was Decorated at the Romanian Royal House with the \"Nihil Sine Deo\" medal by Margareta of Romania, Hagi saying at the event:\"It's an important moment for me, I'm happy, I'm glad because all the sacrifices I've made in life were worth it, and right now I feel even more honored and responsible and I have more ambition to keep going, to keep working and giving my best for football, for children\". In 2022, the International Federation of Football History &amp; Statistics (IFFHS) included Hagi in its \"Romania's all-time dream team\" first XI. On 12 March 2025, Hagi was decorated by President Ilie Bolojan with the Order of the Star of Romania in the rank of Knight, the highest distinction of the Romanian state.\nManagerial career.\nRomania.\nIn 2001, Hagi was named the head coach of Romania, replacing Ladislau B\u00f6l\u00f6ni, who left the squad to coach Sporting Lisbon. He led the team in the final matches of the 2002 World Cup qualifiers, the first match being a 2\u20130 away win over Hungary, followed by a 1\u20131 draw against Georgia. Afterwards the team reached a play-off where they faced Slovenia, losing 2\u20131 in the first leg and drew 1\u20131 in the second where Hagi, by the end of the game, was using five forwards.\nBursaspor.\nIn July 2003, Hagi took over as coach of Turkish S\u00fcper Lig side Bursaspor, transferring Romanian players Ionel Ganea, Bogdan Vintil\u0103, Iulian Miu and Cornel Fr\u0103sineanu to the club. However, his spell was unsuccessful, earning just two victories out of 12 games, leaving in November.\nGalatasaray.\nHagi then became manager of Galatasaray in March 2004, replacing Fatih Terim, having fellow Romanian players Florin Bratu and Ovidiu Petre in the squad, finishing the season in sixth place. In the following season, the team finished third in the league and won the Turkish Cup after a 5\u20131 victory in the final against fierce rivals Fenerbah\u00e7e, and he also promoted young Arda Turan to the first team. Afterwards he was replaced with Eric Gerets.\nPolitehnica Timi\u0219oara.\nHagi was hired by Politehnica Timi\u0219oara in November 2005, managing to win his first two matches, defeating O\u021belul Gala\u021bi 2\u20130 and Pandurii T\u00e2rgu Jiu 1\u20130. During this spell, he gave the first league debut to Gabriel Torje. However, after a string of poor results and disagreements with the management, he left the club in May 2006 after a 2\u20130 loss to O\u021belul. His decision to coach Politehnica Timi\u0219oara did not go well with Farul's fans, who asked for the name to be changed, as Constan\u021ba's main stadium used to bear his name since 2000.\nSteaua Bucure\u0219ti.\nFrom June to September 2007, Hagi coached Steaua Bucure\u0219ti, managing to get past Zag\u0142\u0119bie Lubin and BATE Borisov in the Champions League qualifying rounds, reaching the group stage where they were defeated 2\u20131 by Slavia Prague in the first match. After the defeat against Slavia he resigned due to a long series of conflicts with club owner Gigi Becali, who also happens to be his godson. The main reason for resigning was the owner's policy of imposing players, dictating the team's strategy and threatening him that he would be fired if he didn't comply.\nReturn to Galatasaray.\nAfter Frank Rijkaard was sacked as coach, Hagi signed a one-and-a-half-year contract with Galatasaray on 21 October 2010. He brought to the team Bogdan Stancu, Emmanuel Culio and R\u00f3binson Zapata from the Romanian league. Under his guidance, the team's results did not improve, so by the end of March 2011 his contract was terminated after a series of poor results.\nViitorul Constan\u021ba.\nIn 2009, Hagi established a football academy in Constan\u021ba, which he named after himself, and also founded a senior football club, Viitorul Constan\u021ba, registering it in the third league and serving as its president. In a few years the team managed to promote to the first league, then in 2014 he installed himself as head coach. On 5 December 2014, he gave the senior debut to his son, Ianis. He had a good season in the 2015\u201316 edition, finishing in fifth place and qualifying to the Europa League, and also was named Romania Coach of the Year in 2015. In their first European match, Viitorul were defeated 5\u20130 by Gent at the Ghelamco Arena, and were eliminated from the Europa League third qualifying round round after a 0\u20130 draw in the second leg.\nViitorul won their first league title in the 2016\u201317 season after a 1\u20130 home victory over CFR Cluj in the last round, finishing on equal points with FCSB but on a better head-to-head record. As a result, Hagi won his second Romania Coach of the Year award. Hagi would go on to win two more trophies with Viitorul, first the 2018\u201319 Cupa Rom\u00e2niei after a 2\u20131 victory against Astra Giurgiu in the final and shortly afterwards the 2019 Supercupa Rom\u00e2niei when they defeated CFR Cluj with 1\u20130.\nFarul Constan\u021ba.\nAt a press conference from 21 June 2021, Hagi, together with club president Gheorghe Popescu and Farul Constan\u021ba's owner Ciprian Marica announced that Viitorul and Farul had merged into one team which would have the name of the latter and Hagi would be head coach.\nLed by Hagi, Farul won their first league title in the 2022\u201323 season, earning the points that mathematically made them champions with one round before the end of the season, after a 3\u20132 win against FCSB, coming back from 0\u20132.\nStyle of play.\nA talented left-footed attacking midfielder, Hagi's playing style was frequently compared with Diego Maradona's throughout his career, due to his technical ability as well as his temperamental character and leadership; as a youth, he was mainly inspired by compatriots Anghel Iord\u0103nescu and Ion Dumitru. A quick, agile, creative, and mobile advanced playmaker, Hagi was also tactically versatile, and capable of playing in several midfield and offensive positions on either wing or through the middle, due to his ability with both feet, despite being naturally left-footed, although he had a preference for using his stronger foot; his preferred position was in a free role as a classic number 10, but he was also used as a second striker on occasion. Hagi was renowned in particular for his first touch and speed on the ball, as well as his timing, interpretation of space, bursts of acceleration and dribbling skills, which enabled him to get past defenders; he was also highly regarded for his vision and precise passing, although he was capable of both scoring and assisting goals, and was also an accurate finisher and set-piece taker, who had a penchant for scoring goals from powerful, bending long range strikes. Despite his small stature and slender build, Hagi possessed significant upper body strength, which, along with his control, aided him in protecting the ball from opponents, and allowed him to create space for himself or his teammates. Despite his skill and his reputation as one of the greatest number 10s of his generation, his career was marked by inconsistency at times, and he was also considered to be a controversial player, due to his rebellious and arrogant attitude, as well as his low work-rate, aggression, unsportsmanlike behaviour, and lack of discipline, which led him to have several disagreements and confrontations with his managers, opponents, and officials.\nPublications.\nOn 5 February 2025, on the occasion of his 60th birthday, Hagi published his autobiography:\nSeveral books about Hagi were written by various authors:\nPersonal life.\nHagi is married to Marilena Hagi and has two children with her. His son, Ianis Hagi, is also a footballer. His daughter, Kira Hagi, is an actress. He is the brother-in-law of fellow Romanian international Gheorghe Popescu, who married Hagi's wife's sister.\nHagi was chosen to dub in Romanian the character Dagda in the animated movie \"Epic\".\n\"Scores and results list Romania's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Hagi goal\".\n \"As of 16 May 2025\"\nHonours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12277", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12277", "title": "Gordon Banks", "text": "English footballer (1937\u20132019)\nGordon Banks (30 December 1937 \u2013 12 February 2019) was an English professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper. Widely regarded as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, he made 679 appearances during a 20-year professional career, and won 73 caps for England, highlighted by starting every game of the nation's 1966 World Cup victory.\nBanks joined Chesterfield in March 1953 and played for their youth team in the 1956 FA Youth Cup final. He made his first-team debut in November 1958 and was sold to Leicester City for \u00a37,000 in July 1959. He played in four cup finals for the club, as they were beaten in the 1961 and 1963 FA Cup finals before winning the League Cup in 1964 and finishing as finalists in 1965. Despite this success and his World Cup win in 1966, Banks was dropped by Leicester and sold on to Stoke City for \u00a350,000 in April 1967. In the 1970 World Cup, he made one of the game's greatest saves to prevent a Pel\u00e9 goal, but was absent due to illness as England were beaten by West Germany in the quarter-finals.\nBanks was Stoke City's goalkeeper in the 1972 League Cup win, the club's only major honour. He was still Stoke's and England's number one when a car crash in October 1972 cost him both the sight in his right eye and, eventually, his professional career. He played two last seasons in the United States for the Fort Lauderdale Strikers in 1977 and 1978, and despite only having the vision in one eye, was NASL Goalkeeper of the Year in 1977 after posting the best defensive record in the league. He briefly entered management with Telford United but left the game in December 1980.\nBanks was named FWA Footballer of the Year in 1972 and was named FIFA Goalkeeper of the Year on six occasions. The IFFHS named Banks the second-best goalkeeper of the 20th century, after Lev Yashin.\nEarly life.\nBanks was born in Abbeydale, Sheffield, on 30 December 1937, and brought up in the working-class area of Tinsley. The family later moved to the village of Catcliffe after his father set up a (then-illegal) betting shop. This brought greater prosperity but also misery; one day, Banks's disabled brother was mugged for the shop's daily takings and died of his injuries some weeks later. Banks left school in December 1952, aged 15, and took up employment as a bagger with a local coal merchant, which helped to build up his upper body strength. He spent a season playing for amateur side Millspaugh after their regular goalkeeper failed to turn up for a match; the club's trainer spotted Banks amongst the spectators and invited him to play in goal as he was aware that Banks had previously played for Sheffield Schoolboys. His performances there earned him a game in the Yorkshire League for Rawmarsh Welfare. However, a 12\u20132 defeat to Stocksbridge Works on his debut was followed by a 3\u20131 home defeat, and he was dropped by Rawmarsh and returned to Millspaugh. Still aged 15, he then switched jobs to become a hod carrier.\nClub career.\nChesterfield.\nBanks was scouted by Chesterfield whilst playing for Millspaugh and offered a six-game trial in the youth team in March 1953. He impressed enough in these games to be offered a part-time \u00a33-a-week contract by manager Teddy Davison in July 1953. The reserve team were placed in the Central League on account of a powerful club director rather than on merit, and Banks conceded 122 goals in the 1954\u201355 season as the \"Spireites\" finished in last place with only three victories. Banks was posted to Germany with the Royal Signals on national service, and won the Rhine Cup with his regimental team. He recovered from a fractured elbow to help the Chesterfield youth team to the 1956 final of the FA Youth Cup. There they were beaten 4\u20133 on aggregate by Manchester United's famous \"Busby Babes\"\u2014a team that included both Wilf McGuinness and Bobby Charlton.\nBanks was given his first-team debut by manager Doug Livingstone, at the expense of long-serving Ron Powell, in a Third Division game against Colchester United at Saltergate in November 1958. The game ended 2\u20132, and Banks kept his place against Norwich City in the following match; by the end of the 1958\u201359 season, he had missed only three games, those owing to injury. With no goalkeeping coach to guide him, Banks had to learn from his mistakes on the pitch, and he soon developed into a modern vocal goalkeeper who ordered the players in front of him into a more effective defence. Having just 23 league and three cup appearances to his name, it came as a surprise to Banks when Matt Gillies, manager of First Division club Leicester City, bought him from Chesterfield for \u00a37,000 in July 1959; this also meant a wage increase to \u00a315 a week.\nLeicester City.\nBanks faced competition from five other goalkeepers, including 30-year-old Scotland international Johnny Anderson and 25-year-old Dave MacLaren. He started the 1959\u201360 season as the reserve team's goalkeeper. This, in effect, made him the club's second-choice, ahead of four of his rivals but behind first-team choice MacLaren. He had played four reserve team games when MacLaren picked up an injury, and manager Matt Gillies selected Banks for his Leicester debut against Blackpool at Filbert Street on 9 September. The match finished 1\u20131, with Jackie Mudie's strike cancelling out Ken Leek's opener. Banks retained his place for the 2\u20130 loss to Newcastle United at St James' Park three days later. With McLaren fit again, Banks was sent back to the reserves, but after the first team conceded 14 goals in the next five games, he was recalled and became the first-choice goalkeeper for the remainder of the season. The defensive record did not improve at first, with Banks conceding six in a heavy defeat by Everton at Goodison Park. Still, he improved in each match, and the Foxes settled for a comfortable 12th-place finish. In training, he worked extensively on improving his weaknesses, such as coming for crosses. He put in extra hours during training and came up with practice sessions to improve his skills \u2013 this was largely unique in an era where there were no specialized goalkeeping coaches. In the summer, both Anderson and MacLaren departed, leaving Banks as the club's undisputed number one ahead of a group of understudies.\nLeicester finished sixth in 1960\u201361, and managed to beat champions Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane. Yet their greatest accomplishment was in reaching the final of the FA Cup, with Banks conceding only five goals in their nine games \"en route\" to the final, and keeping three clean sheets in the semi-final and two replays against Sheffield United. Their opponents in the final at Wembley were Tottenham, who had already won the First Division title by an eight-point margin. Right-back Len Chalmers picked up a severe injury early in the match, and with Ken Leek dropped for disciplinary reasons in favour of rookie Hughie McIlmoyle, City were effectively playing with ten men and offered little threat going forward. Bobby Smith and Terry Dyson gave Spurs a 2\u20130 win and the first \"double\" of the 20th century, with Banks unable to prevent either goal.\nThe 1961\u201362 season proved to be highly disappointing, as Leicester finished 14th in the league and exited the FA Cup at the hands of Stoke City. The only highlight was the club's participation in the European Cup Winners' Cup, which put Banks in the difficult position of choosing to play for his club against Spanish club Atl\u00e9tico Madrid or choosing to attend the England versus Portugal match as a non-playing squad member. He elected to attend both games, leaving London at full-time to reach Leicester 30 minutes before the kick-off against Madrid. A last-minute goal earned the Spaniards a 1\u20131 draw at Filbert Street. In the return leg, Banks saved an Enrique Collar penalty, but Atl\u00e9tico were awarded a second penalty which Collar converted, and Leicester lost the game 2\u20130 (losing the tie 3\u20131 on aggregate).\nBanks broke his nose at Craven Cottage on the opening day of the 1962\u201363 season, in a 2\u20131 defeat by Fulham. Leicester went to chase a possible double, reaching the FA Cup semi-finals whilst sitting on top of the table in April. City beat Liverpool 1\u20130 at Hillsborough to reach the final, with Banks keeping a clean sheet despite his goal being under a near-constant siege from the Merseyside club. The \"News of the World\" reported that Liverpool had had 34 attempts on goal to Leicester's one, and Banks later stated that it was his finest performance at club level. Unluckily, Banks then broke a finger in a 2\u20131 defeat by West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns, and was out injured as Leicester lost their final three league games, ending the season in a disappointing fourth place. In the 1963 FA Cup final Banks and the rest of the team underperformed, and lost the game 3\u20131 to Manchester United.\nCity ended the 1963\u201364 season in 11th place, having been inconsistent all season. Success instead came through the League Cup, as they beat West Ham United 6\u20133 over two legs in the semi-finals to reach the final against Stoke City. The opening tie at the Victoria Ground finished 1\u20131 in extremely muddy conditions as Banks spilled a shot from Bill Asprey, with Keith Bebbington pouncing on the rebound. Back at Filbert Street, goals from Mike Stringfellow, Dave Gibson and Howard Riley won the game for Leicester 3\u20132 and settled the tie at 4\u20133.\nBanks started the 1964\u201365 season on wages of \u00a340 a week, and the club only agreed to pay \u00a360 a week in December. These miserly wages made it difficult for the club to spend the \u00a380,000 it received from the sale of Frank McLintock \u2013 he had put in a transfer request over dissatisfaction with his pay and quality replacements were reluctant to join a club that paid full internationals like Banks and McLintock no more than the base rate that rival clubs paid to average players. Leicester finished 18th in the league and were knocked out of the FA Cup by Liverpool at Anfield in the sixth round. In the League Cup, City struggled to get past Peterborough United (in a replay), Grimsby Town and Crystal Palace (in a replay), before they recorded an 8\u20131 victory over Coventry City at Highfield Road. After easing past Plymouth Argyle in the semi-finals, Banks found himself playing in another League Cup final. However, Chelsea won the final after successfully defending their 3\u20132 win at Stamford Bridge with a goalless draw at Filbert Street.\nBanks missed the first nine games of the 1965\u201366 season after breaking his wrist when diving at the feet of Northampton Town's Joe Kiernan in a pre-season friendly. Leicester finished the season in seventh spot and exited both cup competitions at the hands of Manchester City.\nDespite being a World Cup winner in the summer of 1966, Banks was dropped towards the end of the 1966\u201367 season in favour of highly promising teenage reserve Peter Shilton. Manager Matt Gillies was blunt, telling Banks \"we [Gillies and the club's directors] think your best days are behind you, and you should move on\". Teammate Richie Norman told Banks that Gillies was pressured into the decision, Shilton having told the board he would leave the club unless he was given first-team football. Banks was transfer listed at \u00a350,000, the same price the club received for Derek Dougan in March 1967. However, many of the big clubs were unwilling to spend such a sum on a goalkeeper. Liverpool manager Bill Shankly showed strong interest, but could not convince the club's board of directors to agree to such a large fee for a goalkeeper. West Ham United manager Ron Greenwood was prepared to match the fee, but instead signed Kilmarnock's Bobby Ferguson for \u00a365,000 because he had already agreed terms with Kilmarnock and did not want to go back on his word. Terms were instead agreed with Stoke City, a mid-table First Division side.\nStoke City.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I've not come here to retire you know. I've come to here to win something.\"\n\u2014 Banks speaking upon signing with the club after critics questioned Waddington's policy of signing veteran players.\nOn leaving Filbert Street, Banks requested a loyalty bonus from Leicester and was told by Matt Gillies, \"We've decided not to pay you a penny. There's to be no compensation payment and that's final.\" Banks then refused the move until Stoke boss Tony Waddington seemingly negotiated a \u00a32,000 payment out of Leicester. It was only some years later that Banks was informed that Stoke had made the payment, not Leicester. Waddington valued good goalkeepers highly, and the two built up a close relationship. During this time, Banks moved to Madeley, Staffordshire. He replaced John Farmer as the club's number one, and kept goal in the last four games of the 1966\u201367 season, making his home debut at the Victoria Ground in a 3\u20131 win over his former club Leicester.\nBanks fitted in well at Stoke, as Waddington built a team of veteran players who were judged by some to be past their best. The Potters struggled near the foot of the First Division table in the 1967\u201368 and 1968\u201369 campaigns, before rising to ninth place in the 1969\u201370 season. Banks remained a reliable stopper for the club. However, on 1 March 1969, he was knocked unconscious at Roker Park by Sunderland's Malcolm Moore, and his replacement David Herd conceded four goals in a 4\u20131 defeat. Banks also played a season for the Cleveland Stokers of the American United Soccer Association in the summer of 1968: he played seven of the short-lived club's 12 games in Cleveland, Ohio.\nBanks made what he believed to be three of the best saves of his career in a Stoke shirt. In the first instance, he saved and caught a powerful and well-placed header from Manchester City's Wyn Davies from out; in the second case he saved a Francis Lee header at Maine Road; and he made his third great save for the club by catching a volley from Tottenham Hotspur's Alan Gilzean that had been hit from out at White Hart Lane.\nStoke began to compete for honours in the 1970\u201371 season, though despite impressive victories against the top two clubs\u2014Arsenal and Leeds United\u2014City ended the season in mid-table obscurity. The club's great achievement was in reaching the semi-finals of the FA Cup, beating Millwall, Huddersfield Town, Ipswich Town and Hull City \"en route\". Facing Arsenal at Hillsborough in the semi-finals, they lost a two-goal lead to draw 2\u20132, and were then beaten 2\u20130 in the replay at Villa Park.\nDespite another mid-table finish in 1971\u201372, Stoke beat Chesterfield, Tranmere Rovers, Hull City and Manchester United to reach another FA Cup semi-final. They again faced Arsenal, and once more, a draw at Villa Park meant a replay at Goodison Park. The Gunners' goals in a 2\u20131 victory came from a disputed Frank McLintock penalty and a John Radford goal that television replays showed was clearly offside. In a May 2011 interview, Banks said that he still felt \"cheated\" out of a chance to play for the club in an FA Cup final. Stoke and Banks found solace in the League Cup, though it took them 11 matches to reach the final after overcoming Southport, then Oxford United in a replay, Manchester United in a second replay, Bristol Rovers, and then West Ham United in a second replay following an aggregate draw after two legs. In extra time of the second leg with West Ham, Banks fouled Harry Redknapp, conceding a penalty, and then saved Geoff Hurst's powerful spot-kick to keep City in the competition. They then faced Chelsea in the final at Wembley. Peter Osgood beat Banks with a hooked shot just before half-time, but goals from Terry Conroy and George Eastham won Stoke the game 2\u20131. At the end of the season, Banks was named the FWA Footballer of the Year, becoming the first goalkeeper to receive the honour since Bert Trautmann in 1956.\nOn 22 October 1972, while driving home from a session of work on his injured shoulder with the Stoke physiotherapist, Banks lost control of his new Ford Consul (a re-badged Ford Granada Mk I) car, which ended up in a ditch. He had attempted to overtake a car on a sharp bend and collided with an oncoming Austin A60 van. He was taken to the North Staffordshire Hospital and, during an operation, received 200 stitches in his face and over 100 micro-stitches inside the socket of his right eye, and was told the chances of saving the sight in his eye were 50\u201350. His sight never returned, and as the loss of binocular vision severely limited his abilities as a goalkeeper, he retired from professional football the following summer.\nFort Lauderdale Strikers.\nIn April 1977, he went on to play as a named superstar in the North American Soccer League (NASL) for Fort Lauderdale Strikers. The Strikers won their division in 1977, and Banks was named NASL Goalkeeper of the Year after he conceded only 29 goals in 26 games\u2014the best defensive record in the NASL. He also played one League of Ireland game for St Patrick's Athletic, keeping a clean sheet in a 1\u20130 win over Shamrock Rovers at Richmond Park on 2 October 1977. He returned to Fort Lauderdale and played 11 games in the 1978 season.\nInternational career.\nBanks was capped twice for the England under-23 side, in matches against Wales and Scotland in 1961.\nRon Springett was the goalkeeper for England as Banks rose to prominence. Still, after the 1962 World Cup in Chile, a new coach was appointed in former England right-back Alf Ramsey. Ramsey demanded sole control of the team and began looking towards the next World Cup. Banks won his first cap on 6 April 1963 against Scotland at Wembley, after Springett was dropped following a poor performance. England lost 2\u20131, though Banks was blameless as Scotland's goals came firstly from an error by Jimmy Armfield and then secondly from the penalty spot. He was picked for the next match against Brazil, which ended in a creditable 1\u20131 draw after Bryan Douglas cancelled out Pepe's opener. Banks continued to play consistently to become established as England's first-choice goalkeeper. In 1963, he was picked to play against the Rest of the World, in a celebration match to mark 100 years of The Football Association.\nBanks also played in two of England's three games at the \"Little World Cup\" in Brazil in the summer of 1964, a 1\u20131 draw with Portugal and a 1\u20130 defeat to Argentina. Blackpool's Tony Waiters won five caps in the England goal in 1964 but found that his challenge to Banks's first-team place came to an end after he conceded five goals to Brazil. During England's summer of 1965 tour he built up a solid understanding with his defenders\u2014George Cohen, Jack Charlton, Bobby Moore, and Ray Wilson\u2014as he only conceded two goals in four matches against Hungary, Yugoslavia, West Germany, and Sweden. They then played seven friendlies in 1966 in the build-up to the World Cup, though the team passed their biggest test of character in the British Home Championship, beating Scotland 4\u20133 in front of a crowd of over 130,000 at Hampden Park. Going into the competition, the only defeat in 21 matches since the \"Little World Cup\" came against Austria, in a game that Banks missed due to injury.\n1966 World Cup.\nBanks entered the 1966 FIFA World Cup as England's first-choice goalkeeper, and his understudies Ron Springett and Peter Bonetti never took to the field during the tournament. England opened the tournament with a goalless draw against Uruguay, with Banks a virtual spectator as the highly defensive Uruguayans rarely ventured out of their half. They then defeated Mexico 2\u20130, with Banks again rarely troubled throughout. A 2\u20130 win over France then took England through the group stage without Banks conceding a goal.\nEngland beat Argentina 1\u20130 in the last eight, with Geoff Hurst scoring with a header; the match was sullied by the first-half sending off of Argentinian midfielder Antonio Ratt\u00edn, who refused to leave the pitch after being dismissed for dissent. In contrast to the previous games, the semi-final against Portugal proved to be a fair contest between two sides of talented players eager to attack from the start of the match. Yet there was panic in the buildup to the game as trainer Harold Shepherdson forgot to buy chewing gum, which Banks used to make his hands stickier and better able to handle the ball, and so Shepherdson had to run to a nearby newsagents to purchase gum as the teams were in the tunnel. Bobby Charlton scored two goals, but Portugal made a strong finish and won a penalty on 82 minutes after Jack Charlton handled the ball in the penalty area. Eus\u00e9bio converted the penalty after sending Banks the wrong way, and the game finished 2\u20131 in England's favour. This was the first goal Banks had conceded for England in 721 minutes of regular play since giving up Scotland's last goal after 81 minutes of the Home International clash in April. This remained a record for an England goalkeeper until 2021 when it was broken by Jordan Pickford.\nEngland's opponents in the final were West Germany. It was England who dominated the final, but it was Banks who was beaten first. A weak header from Ray Wilson handed a chance to Helmut Haller, who sent an accurate but relatively weak shot into the corner of the net; Banks had been unsighted by Jack Charlton, and he failed to adjust his position in time to reach the ball. England equalised through a Geoff Hurst header within six minutes and went ahead late in the second half through Martin Peters. With seconds left in the game, Lothar Emmerich sent a free kick into the England penalty area, and the ball fell to Wolfgang Weber, who guided the ball over a lunging Ray Wilson and an outstretched Banks into the net to take the game into extra-time. In extra time, the Germans sent shots in at the England goal, which Banks managed to catch and control without any great danger. Hurst scored two goals to complete his hat-trick, and though many claimed his second goal never crossed the line Banks always maintained his belief that the officials called the decision correctly. Between these goals, Banks had to deal with a fiery shot from Sigfried Held and was later exposed only for Uwe Seeler to come just centimetres away from connecting with the ball.\nEuro 1968.\nScotland were the first team to beat the world champions, as goals from Denis Law, Bobby Lennox and Jim McCalliog secured a 3\u20132 victory at Wembley on 15 April 1967. Despite this set-back, England qualified for UEFA Euro 1968, which consisted of just four teams: England, Italy (hosts), the Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia. England played just two games at the tournament, losing 1\u20130 to Yugoslavia, and then beating the Soviets 2\u20130 in the third-place play-off.\n1970 World Cup.\nBanks went into the 1970 World Cup as England's number one with 59 caps to his name, and had Peter Bonetti (six caps) and Alex Stepney (one cap) as his understudies. He found the heat and altitude at Guadalajara, Mexico difficult to cope with. The team's efforts at acclimatisation were not helped when Bobby Moore was falsely accused of stealing the infamous \"Bogot\u00e1 Bracelet\". Despite this, a Geoff Hurst goal was enough to beat their first opponents, Romania. A far tougher test awaited on 7 June, when England faced Brazil. The day before the match, Banks was informed that he had been awarded an OBE.\nPlaying at pace, Brazil were putting England under enormous pressure and an attack was begun by captain Carlos Alberto who sent a low ball down the right flank for the speedy Jairzinho to latch on to. The Brazilian winger sped past left-back Terry Cooper and crossed the ball into the six-yard box, where Pel\u00e9 connected with a powerful header to send the ball low towards the right-hand corner of the goal. In the knowledge that his header was placed to perfection, Pel\u00e9 immediately shouted \"Gol!\" (Brazilian Portuguese for goal).\nThe split-second incident only allowed Banks time for one conscious thought \u2013 that the shot was impossible to catch, and the only way to prevent Pel\u00e9 from following up on the rebound would be to parry the ball over the bar. The ball bounced in front of the goal-line, and Banks managed to make contact with the ball with the fingers of his right hand and rolled his hand slightly to angle the ball over the crossbar. He landed in the inner netting of the goal and knew he had saved the ball after seeing Pel\u00e9's reaction. Banks then rose to his feet to defend the corner and broke into laughter after the following exchange:\n\"I thought that was a goal.\" (Pel\u00e9)\n\"You and me both.\" (Banks)\n\"You're getting old, Banksy, you used to hold on to them.\" (Bobby Moore)\nPel\u00e9 and numerous journalists and pundits would later describe the save as the greatest in the game's history. Banks later said \"They won't remember me for winning the World Cup, it'll be for that save. That's how big a thing it is. People just want to talk about that save.\" In 2002 the UK public voted the save No. 41 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments.\nBrazil won 1\u20130 after Jairzinho beat Banks in the second half. England ultimately joined Brazil in the last eight after a win in the final group game against Czechoslovakia. The reward was a rematch of the 1966 final against West Germany.\nThe day before the West Germany game, England's hopes of making further inroads into the World Cup were dented when Banks complained of an upset stomach. He became affected by violent stomach cramps and aching limbs and spent his time in the bathroom sweating, shivering and vomiting. He passed an extremely undemanding fitness test but suffered a relapse shortly before the game, and Ramsey was forced to rest him and play Peter Bonetti in his place. Ramsey remarked that \"of all the players to lose, we had to lose him.\" Banks watched the game on television at the hotel as England lost a two-goal lead to be eliminated 3\u20132 after extra time. Due to a delay in the broadcast, he switched the television off, with England 2\u20130 in the lead, as Bobby Moore returned to the hotel to break the news of the defeat. Suspicions later surfaced that Banks had been poisoned to take him out of the game, but with no evidence to support them, Banks never believed in them.\nFinal years.\nOnly four teams competed in UEFA Euro 1972: Belgium (hosts), Hungary, the Soviet Union, and West Germany. England came close to qualifying but lost 3\u20131 to West Germany in the final round of qualifying.\nOn 15 May 1971, Banks was involved in a notorious incident with George Best who, while playing against England for Northern Ireland, flicked the ball out of Banks's hands and headed it into the net. The move was audacious, but was disallowed by the referee, who judged it to be dangerous play. Banks played his 73rd and final game for England on 27 May 1972, in a 1\u20130 win over Scotland at Hampden Park. During his 73 international games, he kept 35 clean sheets and lost just nine games.\nCoaching career.\nIn December 1977, he was appointed as a coach at Port Vale by manager Dennis Butler, being demoted to reserve coach in October 1978 by new boss Alan Bloor. Banks enjoyed coaching but soon resigned his position, feeling that players such as Bernie Wright refused to take his advice on board. He applied for the vacant management positions at Lincoln City and Rotherham United, but was rejected. He instead accepted the role as manager of Alliance Premier League part-time club Telford United. He signed a goalkeeper, centre-half and centre-forward from Bangor City for \u00a31,500, as well as former Stoke striker John Ruggiero. The \"Bucks\" finished in 13th place in 1979\u201380.\nIn November 1980, he left Jackie Mudie in temporary charge of team affairs whilst he underwent surgery and led the club to defeat in the FA Trophy at the hands of a lower league club. On his return to the club Banks was sacked. He was offered the position of raffle ticket seller and accepted the post in the belief that it would entitle him to the money owed to him in the terms of his management contract; he eventually had to settle for 50% of his contract. He later stated that \"It broke my heart\u00a0... I did not want to stay in the game.\"\nStyle of play.\nAn excellent, consistent, and instinctive goalkeeper who possessed significant physical strength, athleticism, and excellent shot-stopping abilities, Banks is regarded as one of the greatest players of all time in his position. He possessed an excellent positional sense, which he felt to be one of his best assets, and was also known for his handling, awareness, composure, and mental strength, as well as his agility, speed, and quick reflexes, which enabled him to produce acrobatic saves, such as his famous stop from Pel\u00e9's header against Brazil at the 1970 World Cup in Mexico.\nPersonal life and health.\nBanks first met his wife, Ursula, during his national service in Germany in 1955. They married in 1957 and had three children: Robert, Julia and Wendy. He separated from Ursula during his time in America. Still, the couple reunited when Banks returned to England.\nIn October 1972, Banks was involved in a car crash in his Ford Consul while driving on the wrong side of the road, close to his home in Madeley Heath. Fragments of glass had perforated his right eye and damaged the retina, requiring 100 micro stitches to the eye and a further 200 to his face.\nBanks's nephew is Nick Banks, drummer of the band Pulp.\nShortly after his retirement, Banks was surprised by Eamonn Andrews for an episode of \"This Is Your Life\". He later fronted a Leicester-based hospitality company. He lost a significant sum of money when the business failed but was helped out by Leicester City, who offered him a belated testimonial match. He was appointed as Stoke City's president following the death of Stanley Matthews. From the 1980s he was a member of the three-man pools panel.\nIn 2001, he sold his World Cup winners medal at Christie's for \u00a3124,750, and his international cap from the final was also sold for \u00a327,025.\nBanks was an Inaugural Inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002. In March 2004, he was named by Pel\u00e9 as one of the world's 125 greatest living footballers. He was awarded an honorary doctorate from Keele University in February 2006. In May 2006, Banks was the first 'legend' to be inducted into a new Walk of Fame, by having a plaque installed in the pavement in front of Sheffield Town Hall. In July 2008, Pel\u00e9 unveiled a statue of Banks making his famous 1970 World Cup save outside the Britannia Stadium. In March 2011, he was also inducted into the City of Stoke-on-Trent Hall of Fame, along with Roy Sproson. Pel\u00e9 became a good friend of Banks and following his death the Brazilian described Banks as a \"goalkeeper with magic\".\nIn 1980, Banks published his first autobiography, \"Banks of England\". He published a more comprehensive autobiography in 2002: \"Banksy: My Autobiography\". Irish investigative author, Don Mullan, published a boyhood memoir in 2006 called \"Gordon Banks \u2013 A Hero Who Could Fly\" in which he wrote about the influence of the England goalkeeper on his life.\nIn December 2015, it was announced Banks was receiving treatment for kidney cancer. He died from cancer in his sleep at his home in Madeley, Staffordshire, 12 February 2019 at the age of 81. Banks's funeral took place on 4 March 2019 at Stoke Minster. His pallbearers were goalkeepers representing his former teams; Joe Anyon (Chesterfield), Jack Butland (Stoke City), Joe Hart (England) and Kasper Schmeichel (Leicester City).\nCareer statistics.\nClub.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHonours.\nLeicester City\nStoke City\nEngland\nIndividual\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12278", "revid": "1316056270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12278", "title": "Ganglion", "text": "Clusters of neurons in the peripheral nervous system\nA ganglion (pl.: ganglia) is a group of neuron cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system. In the somatic nervous system, this includes dorsal root ganglia and trigeminal ganglia among a few others. In the autonomic nervous system, there are both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia which contain the cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons respectively.\nA pseudoganglion looks like a ganglion, but only has nerve fibers and has few nerve cell bodies.\nStructure.\nGanglia are primarily made up of somata and dendritic structures, which are bundled or connected. Ganglia often interconnect with other ganglia to form a complex system of ganglia known as a plexus. Ganglia provide relay points and intermediary connections between different neurological structures in the body, such as the peripheral and central nervous systems.\nAmong vertebrates there are three major groups of ganglia:\nIn the autonomic nervous system, fibers from the central nervous system to the ganglia are known as preganglionic fibers, while those from the ganglia to the effector organ are called postganglionic fibers.\nBasal ganglia.\nThe term \"ganglion\" refers to the peripheral nervous system.\nHowever, in the brain (part of the central nervous system), the basal ganglia are a group of nuclei interconnected with the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and brainstem, associated with a variety of functions: motor control, cognition, emotions, and learning.\nPartly due to this ambiguity, the \"Terminologia Anatomica\" recommends using the term 'basal nuclei' instead of 'basal ganglia'; however, this usage has not been generally adopted.\nPseudoganglion.\nA pseudoganglion is a localized thickening of the main part or trunk of a nerve that has the appearance of a ganglion but has only nerve fibers and no nerve cell bodies.\nPseudoganglia are found in the teres minor muscle and radial nerve.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12279", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12279", "title": "Guessing game", "text": "Redirect page"}
{"id": "12281", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12281", "title": "Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz", "text": "German polymath (1646\u20131716)\nGottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (or Leibnitz; 1 July 1646 [O.S. 21 June]\u00a0\u2013 14 November 1716) was a German polymath active as a mathematician, philosopher, scientist and diplomat who is credited, alongside Isaac Newton, with the creation of calculus in addition to many other branches of mathematics, such as binary arithmetic and statistics. Leibniz has been called the \"last universal genius\" due to his vast expertise across fields, which became a rarity after his lifetime with the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the spread of specialized labour. He is a prominent figure in both the history of philosophy and the history of mathematics. He wrote works on philosophy, theology, ethics, politics, law, history, philology, games, music, and other studies. Leibniz also made major contributions to physics and technology, and anticipated notions that surfaced much later in probability theory, biology, medicine, geology, psychology, linguistics and computer science.\nLeibniz contributed to the field of library science, developing a cataloguing system (at the Herzog August Library in Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Germany) that came to serve as a model for many of Europe's largest libraries. His contributions to a wide range of subjects were scattered in various learned journals, in tens of thousands of letters and in unpublished manuscripts. He wrote in several languages, primarily in Latin, French and German.\nAs a philosopher, he was a leading representative of 17th-century rationalism and idealism. As a mathematician, his major achievement was the development of differential and integral calculus, independently of Newton's contemporaneous developments. Leibniz's notation has been favoured as the conventional and more exact expression of calculus. In addition to his work on calculus, he is credited with devising the modern binary number system which is the basis of modern communications and digital computing (though the English astronomer Thomas Harriot had devised the same system decades before). He envisioned the field of combinatorial topology as early as 1679, and helped initiate the field of fractional calculus.\nIn the 20th century, Leibniz's notions of the law of continuity and the transcendental law of homogeneity found a consistent mathematical formulation by means of non-standard analysis. He was also a pioneer in the field of mechanical calculators. While working on adding automatic multiplication and division to Pascal's calculator, he was the first to describe a pinwheel calculator in 1685 and invented the Leibniz wheel, later used in the arithmometer, the first mass-produced mechanical calculator.\nIn philosophy and theology, Leibniz is most noted for his optimism, i.e. his conclusion that our world is, in a qualified sense, the best possible world that God could have created, a view sometimes lampooned by other thinkers, such as Voltaire in his satirical novella \"Candide\". Leibniz, along with Ren\u00e9 Descartes and Baruch Spinoza, was one of the three influential early modern rationalists. His philosophy also assimilates elements of the scholastic tradition, notably the assumption that some substantive knowledge of reality can be achieved by reasoning from first principles or prior definitions. The work of Leibniz anticipated modern logic and still influences contemporary analytic philosophy, such as its adopted use of the term \"possible world\" to define modal notions.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGottfried Leibniz was born on 1 July [OS: 21 June] 1646, in Leipzig, in the Electorate of Saxony of the Holy Roman Empire (now in the German state of Saxony) to Friedrich Leibniz (1597\u20131652) and Catharina Schmuck (1621\u20131664). He was baptized two days later at St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig; his godfather was the Lutheran theologian Martin Geier. His father died when he was six years old, and Leibniz was raised by his mother.\nLeibniz's father had been a Professor of Moral Philosophy at the University of Leipzig, where he also served as dean of philosophy. The boy inherited his father's personal library. He was given free access to it from the age of seven, shortly after his father's death. While Leibniz's schoolwork was largely confined to the study of a small canon of authorities, his father's library enabled him to study a wide variety of advanced philosophical and theological works\u00a0\u2013 ones that he would not have otherwise been able to read until his college years. Access to his father's library, largely written in Latin, also led to his proficiency in the Latin language, which he achieved by the age of 12. At the age of 13 he composed 300 hexameters of Latin verse in a single morning for a special event at school.\nIn April 1661 he enrolled in his father's former university at age 14. There he was guided, among others, by Jakob Thomasius, previously a student of Friedrich. Leibniz completed his bachelor's degree in Philosophy in December 1662. He defended his \"\" ('Metaphysical Disputation on the Principle of Individuation'), which addressed the principle of individuation, on 9 June 1663 [O.S. 30 May], presenting an early version of monadic substance theory. Leibniz earned his master's degree in Philosophy on 7 February 1664. In December 1664 he published and defended a dissertation (transl.\u2009An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right), arguing for both a theoretical and a pedagogical relationship between philosophy and law. After one year of legal studies, he was awarded his bachelor's degree in Law on 28 September 1665. His dissertation was titled (transl.\u2009On Conditions).\nIn early 1666, at age 19, Leibniz wrote his first book, ' (transl.\u2009On the Combinatorial Art), the first part of which was also his habilitation thesis in Philosophy, which he defended in March 1666. ' was inspired by Ramon Llull's \"Ars Magna\" and contained a proof of the existence of God, cast in geometrical form, and based on the argument from motion.\nHis next goal was to earn his license and Doctorate in Law, which normally required three years of study. In 1666, the University of Leipzig turned down Leibniz's doctoral application and refused to grant him a Doctorate in Law, most likely due to his relative youth. Leibniz subsequently left Leipzig.\nLeibniz then enrolled in the University of Altdorf and quickly submitted a thesis, which he had probably been working on earlier in Leipzig. The title of his thesis was (transl.\u2009Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases). Leibniz earned his license to practice law and his Doctorate in Law in November 1666. He next declined the offer of an academic appointment at Altdorf, saying that \"my thoughts were turned in an entirely different direction\".\nAs an adult, Leibniz often introduced himself as \"Gottfried von Leibniz\". Many posthumously published editions of his writings presented his name on the title page as \"Freiherr G. W. von Leibniz.\" However, no document has ever been found from any contemporary government that stated his appointment to any form of nobility.\n1666\u20131676.\nLeibniz's first position was as a salaried secretary to an alchemical society in Nuremberg. He knew fairly little about the subject at that time but presented himself as deeply learned. He soon met Johann Christian von Boyneburg (1622\u20131672), the dismissed chief minister of the Elector of Mainz, Johann Philipp von Sch\u00f6nborn. Von Boyneburg hired Leibniz as an assistant, and shortly thereafter reconciled with the Elector and introduced Leibniz to him. Leibniz then dedicated an essay on law to the Elector in the hope of obtaining employment. The stratagem worked; the Elector asked Leibniz to assist with the redrafting of the legal code for the Electorate. In 1669, Leibniz was appointed assessor in the Court of Appeal. Although von Boyneburg died late in 1672, Leibniz remained under the employment of his widow until she dismissed him in 1674.\nVon Boyneburg did much to promote Leibniz's reputation, and the latter's memoranda and letters began to attract favourable notice. After Leibniz's service to the Elector there soon followed a diplomatic role. He published an essay, under the pseudonym of a fictitious Polish nobleman, arguing (unsuccessfully) for the German candidate for the Polish crown. The main force in European geopolitics during Leibniz's adult life was the ambition of Louis XIV, backed by French military and economic might. Meanwhile, the Thirty Years' War had left German-speaking Europe exhausted, fragmented, and economically backward. Leibniz proposed to protect German-speaking Europe by distracting Louis as follows: France would be invited to take Egypt as a stepping stone towards an eventual conquest of the Dutch East Indies. In return, France would agree to leave Germany and the Netherlands undisturbed. This plan obtained the Elector's cautious support. In 1672, the French government invited Leibniz to Paris for discussion, but the plan was soon overtaken by the outbreak of the Franco-Dutch War and became irrelevant. Napoleon's failed invasion of Egypt in 1798 can be seen as an unwitting, late implementation of Leibniz's plan, after the Eastern hemisphere colonial supremacy in Europe had already passed from the Dutch to the British.\nThus Leibniz went to Paris in 1672. Soon after arriving, he met Dutch physicist and mathematician Christiaan Huygens and realised that his own knowledge of mathematics and physics was lacking. With Huygens as his mentor, he began a program of self-study that soon pushed him to making major contributions to both subjects, including discovering his version of the differential and integral calculus. He met Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld, the leading French philosophers of the day, and studied the writings of Descartes and Pascal, unpublished as well as published. He befriended a German mathematician, Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus; they corresponded for the rest of their lives.\nWhen it became clear that France would not implement its part of Leibniz's Egyptian plan, the Elector sent his nephew, escorted by Leibniz, on a related mission to the English government in London, early in 1673. There Leibniz met Henry Oldenburg and John Collins. He met with the Royal Society where he demonstrated a calculating machine that he had designed and had been building since 1670. The machine was able to execute all four basic operations (adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing), and the society quickly made him an external member.\nThe mission ended quickly when news of the Elector's death (12 February 1673) reached them. Leibniz promptly returned to Paris and not, as had been planned, to Mainz. The sudden deaths of his two patrons in the same winter meant that Leibniz had to find a new basis for his career.\nIn this regard, a 1669 invitation from Duke John Frederick of Brunswick to visit Hanover proved to have been fateful. Leibniz had declined the invitation, but had begun corresponding with the duke in 1671. In 1673, the duke offered Leibniz the post of counsellor. Leibniz very reluctantly accepted the position two years later, only after it became clear that no employment was forthcoming in Paris, whose intellectual stimulation he relished, or with the Habsburg imperial court.\nIn 1675 he tried to get admitted to the French Academy of Sciences as a foreign honorary member, but it was considered that there were already enough foreigners there and so no invitation came. He left Paris in October 1676.\nHouse of Hanover, 1676\u20131716.\nLeibniz managed to delay his arrival in Hanover until the end of 1676 after making one more short journey to London, where Newton accused him of having seen his unpublished work on calculus in advance. This was alleged to be evidence supporting the accusation, made decades later, that he had stolen calculus from Newton. On the journey from London to Hanover, Leibniz stopped in The Hague where he met van Leeuwenhoek, the discoverer of microorganisms. He also spent several days in intense discussion with Spinoza, who had just completed, but had not published, his masterwork, the \"Ethics\". Spinoza died very shortly after Leibniz's visit.\nIn 1677, he was promoted, at his request, to Privy Counselor of Justice, a post he held for the rest of his life. Leibniz served three consecutive rulers of the House of Brunswick as historian, political adviser, and most consequentially, as librarian of the ducal library. He thenceforth employed his pen on all the various political, historical, and theological matters involving the House of Brunswick; the resulting documents form a valuable part of the historical record for the period.\nLeibniz began promoting a project to use windmills to improve the mining operations in the Harz mountains. This project did little to improve mining operations and was shut down by Duke Ernst August in 1685.\nAmong the few people in north Germany to accept Leibniz were the Electress Sophia of Hanover (1630\u20131714), her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668\u20131705), the Queen of Prussia and his avowed disciple, and Caroline of Ansbach, the consort of her grandson, the future George II. To each of these women he was correspondent, adviser, and friend. In turn, they all approved of Leibniz more than did their spouses and the future king George I of Great Britain.\nThe population of Hanover was only about 10,000, and its provinciality eventually grated on Leibniz. Nevertheless, to be a major courtier to the House of Brunswick was quite an honour, especially in light of the meteoric rise in the prestige of that House during Leibniz's association with it. In 1692, the Duke of Brunswick became a hereditary Elector of the Holy Roman Empire. The British Act of Settlement 1701 designated the Electress Sophia and her descent as the royal family of England, once both King William III and his sister-in-law and successor, Queen Anne, were dead. Leibniz played a role in the initiatives and negotiations leading up to that Act, but not always an effective one. For example, something he published anonymously in England, thinking to promote the Brunswick cause, was formally censured by the British Parliament.\nThe Brunswicks tolerated the enormous effort Leibniz devoted to intellectual pursuits unrelated to his duties as a courtier, pursuits such as perfecting calculus, writing about other mathematics, logic, physics, and philosophy, and keeping up a vast correspondence. He began working on calculus in 1674; the earliest evidence of its use in his surviving notebooks is 1675. By 1677 he had a coherent system in hand, but did not publish it until 1684. Leibniz's most important mathematical papers were published between 1682 and 1692, usually in a journal which he and Otto Mencke founded in 1682, the \"Acta Eruditorum\". That journal played a key role in advancing his mathematical and scientific reputation, which in turn enhanced his eminence in diplomacy, history, theology, and philosophy.\nThe Elector Ernest Augustus commissioned Leibniz to write a history of the House of Brunswick, going back to the time of Charlemagne or earlier, hoping that the resulting book would advance his dynastic ambitions. From 1687 to 1690, Leibniz traveled extensively in Germany, Austria, and Italy, seeking and finding archival materials bearing on this project. Decades went by but no history appeared; the next Elector became quite annoyed at Leibniz's apparent dilatoriness. Leibniz never finished the project, in part because of his huge output on many other fronts, but also because he insisted on writing a meticulously researched and erudite book based on archival sources, when his patrons would have been quite happy with a short popular book, one perhaps little more than a genealogy with commentary, to be completed in three years or less. Leibniz was appointed Librarian of the Herzog August Library in Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Lower Saxony, in 1691. Three volumes of the \" were published from 1707 to 1711. \nIn 1708, John Keill, writing in the journal of the Royal Society and with Newton's presumed blessing, accused Leibniz of having plagiarised Newton's calculus. Thus began the calculus priority dispute which darkened the remainder of Leibniz's life. A formal investigation by the Royal Society (in which Newton was an unacknowledged participant), undertaken in response to Leibniz's demand for a retraction, upheld Keill's charge. Historians of mathematics writing since 1900 or so have tended to acquit Leibniz, pointing to important differences between Leibniz's and Newton's versions of calculus.\nIn 1712, Leibniz began a two-year residence in Vienna, where he was appointed Imperial Court Councillor to the Habsburgs. On the death of Queen Anne in 1714, Elector George Louis became King George I of Great Britain, under the terms of the 1701 Act of Settlement. Even though Leibniz had done much to bring about this happy event, it was not to be his hour of glory. Despite the intercession of the Princess of Wales, Caroline of Ansbach, George I forbade Leibniz to join him in London until he completed at least one volume of the history of the Brunswick family his father had commissioned nearly 30 years earlier. Moreover, for George I to include Leibniz in his London court would have been deemed insulting to Newton, who was seen as having won the calculus priority dispute and whose standing in British official circles could not have been higher. Finally, his dear friend and defender, the Dowager Electress Sophia, died in 1714. In 1716, while traveling in northern Europe, the Russian Tsar Peter the Great stopped in Bad Pyrmont and met Leibniz, who took interest in Russian matters since 1708 and was appointed advisor in 1711.\nDeath.\nLeibniz died in Hanover in 1716, and was\ninterred in the New Town Church (). At the time, he was so out of favour that neither George I (who happened to be near Hanover at that time) nor any fellow courtier other than his personal secretary attended the funeral. Even though Leibniz was a life member of the Royal Society and the Berlin Academy of Sciences, neither organization saw fit to honour his death. His grave went unmarked for more than 50 years. He was, however, eulogized by Fontenelle, before the French Academy of Sciences in Paris, which had admitted him as a foreign member in 1700. The eulogy was composed at the behest of the Duchess of Orleans, a niece of the Electress Sophia.\nPersonal life.\nLeibniz never married. He proposed to an unknown woman at age 50, but changed his mind when she took too long to decide. He complained on occasion about money, but the fair sum he left to his sole heir, his sister's stepson, proved that the Brunswicks had paid him fairly well. In his diplomatic endeavors, he at times verged on the unscrupulous, as was often the case with professional diplomats of his day. On several occasions, Leibniz backdated and altered personal manuscripts, actions which put him in a bad light during the calculus controversy.\nHe was charming, well-mannered, and not without humor and imagination. He had many friends and admirers all over Europe. He was identified as a Protestant and a philosophical theist. Leibniz remained committed to Trinitarian Christianity throughout his life.\nPhilosophy.\nLeibniz's philosophical thinking appears fragmented because his philosophical writings consist mainly of a multitude of short pieces: journal articles, manuscripts published long after his death, and letters to correspondents. He wrote two book-length philosophical treatises, of which only the \" ('theodicy') of 1710 was published in his lifetime.\nLeibniz dated his beginning as a philosopher to his \"Discourse on Metaphysics\", which he composed in 1686 as a commentary on a running dispute between Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld. This led to an extensive correspondence with Arnauld; it and the \"Discourse\" were not published until the 19th century. In 1695, Leibniz made his public entr\u00e9e into European philosophy with a journal article titled \"New System of the Nature and Communication of Substances\". Between 1695 and 1705, he composed his \"New Essays on Human Understanding\", a lengthy commentary on John Locke's 1690 \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", but upon learning of Locke's 1704 death, lost the desire to publish it, so that the \"New Essays\" were not published until 1765. The \"Monadologie\", composed in 1714 and published posthumously, consists of 90 aphorisms.\nLeibniz also wrote a short paper, \"\" ('first truths'), first published by Louis Couturat in 1903 summarizing his views on metaphysics. The paper is undated; that he wrote it while in Vienna in 1689 was determined only in 1999, when the ongoing historical-critical scholarly editing of the collected papers of Leibniz by the editorial project ('Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Complete Writings and Letters'), the ('Leibniz edition') colloqually, finally published Leibniz's philosophical writings for the period 1677\u20131690. Couturat's reading of this paper influenced much 20th-century thinking about Leibniz, especially among analytic philosophers. After a meticulous study (informed by the 1999 additions to the ) of all of Leibniz's philosophical writings up to 1688, disagreed with Couturat's reading.\nLeibniz met Baruch Spinoza in 1676, read some of his unpublished writings, and was influenced by some of Spinoza's ideas. While Leibniz befriended Spinoza and admired his powerful intellect, he was also dismayed by Spinoza's conclusions, especially when these were inconsistent with Christian orthodoxy.\nUnlike Descartes and Spinoza, Leibniz had a university education in philosophy. He was influenced by his Leipzig professor Jakob Thomasius, who also supervised his Bachelor of Arts thesis in philosophy. Leibniz also read Francisco Su\u00e1rez, a Spanish Jesuit respected even in Lutheran universities. Leibniz was deeply interested in the new methods and conclusions of Descartes, Huygens, Newton, and Boyle, but the established philosophical ideas in which he was educated influenced his view of their work.\nPrinciples.\nLeibniz variously invoked one or another of seven fundamental philosophical Principles:\nLeibniz would on occasion give a rational defense of a specific principle, but more often took them for granted.\nMonads.\nLeibniz's best known contribution to metaphysics is his theory of monads, as exposited in \"Monadologie\". He proposes his theory that the universe is made of an infinite number of simple substances known as monads. Monads can also be compared to the corpuscles of the mechanical philosophy of Ren\u00e9 Descartes and others. These simple substances or monads are the \"ultimate units of existence in nature\". Monads have no parts but still exist by the qualities that they have. These qualities are continuously changing over time, and each monad is unique. They are also not affected by time and are subject to only creation and annihilation. Monads are centers of force; substance is force, while space, matter, and motion are merely phenomenal. He argued, against Newton, that space, time, and motion are completely relative: \"As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions.\" Einstein, who called himself a \"Leibnizian\", wrote in the introduction to Max Jammer's book \"Concepts of Space\" that Leibnizianism was superior to Newtonianism, and his ideas would have dominated over Newton's had it not been for the poor technological tools of the time; Joseph Agassi argues that Leibniz paved the way for Einstein's theory of relativity.\nLeibniz's proof of God can be summarized in the \". Reason is governed by the principle of contradiction and the principle of sufficient reason. Using the principle of reasoning, Leibniz concluded that the first reason of all things is God. All that we see and experience is subject to change, and the fact that this world is contingent can be explained by the possibility of the world being arranged differently in space and time. The contingent world must have some necessary reason for its existence. Leibniz uses a geometry book as an example to explain his reasoning. If this book was copied from an infinite chain of copies, there must be some reason for the content of the book. Leibniz concluded that there must be the \"monas monadum\"\" or God.\nThe ontological essence of a monad is its irreducible simplicity. Unlike atoms, monads possess no material or spatial character. They also differ from atoms by their complete mutual independence, so that interactions among monads are only apparent. Instead, by virtue of the principle of pre-established harmony, each monad follows a pre-programmed set of \"instructions\" peculiar to itself, so that a monad \"knows\" what to do at each moment. By virtue of these intrinsic instructions, each monad is like a little mirror of the universe. Monads need not be \"small\"; e.g., each human being constitutes a monad, in which case free will is problematic.\nMonads are purported to have gotten rid of the problematic:\nTheodicy and optimism.\nThe \"\" tries to justify the apparent imperfections of the world by claiming that it is optimal among all possible worlds. It must be the best possible and most balanced world, because it was created by an all-powerful and all-knowing God, who would not choose to create an imperfect world if a better world could be known to him or possible to exist. In effect, apparent flaws that can be identified in this world must exist in every possible world, because otherwise God would have chosen to create the world that excluded those flaws.\nLeibniz asserted that the truths of theology (religion) and philosophy cannot contradict each other, since reason and faith are both \"gifts of God\" so that their conflict would imply God contending against himself. The \"\" is Leibniz's attempt to reconcile his personal philosophical system with his interpretation of the tenets of Christianity. This project was motivated in part by Leibniz's belief, shared by many philosophers and theologians during the Enlightenment, in the rational and enlightened nature of the Christian religion. It was also shaped by Leibniz's belief in the perfectibility of human nature (if humanity relied on correct philosophy and religion as a guide), and by his belief that metaphysical necessity must have a rational or logical foundation, even if this metaphysical causality seemed inexplicable in terms of physical necessity (the natural laws identified by science).\nIn the view of Leibniz, because reason and faith must be entirely reconciled, any tenet of faith which could not be defended by reason must be rejected. Leibniz then approached one of the central criticisms of Christian theism: if God is all good, all wise, and all powerful, then how did evil come into the world? The answer (according to Leibniz) is that, while God is indeed unlimited in wisdom and power, his human creations, as creations, are limited both in their wisdom and in their will (power to act). This predisposes humans to false beliefs, wrong decisions, and ineffective actions in the exercise of their free will. God does not arbitrarily inflict pain and suffering on humans; rather he permits both \"moral evil\" (sin) and \"physical evil\" (pain and suffering) as the necessary consequences of \"metaphysical evil\" (imperfection), as a means by which humans can identify and correct their erroneous decisions, and as a contrast to true good.\nFurther, although human actions flow from prior causes that ultimately arise in God and therefore are known to God as metaphysical certainties, an individual's free will is exercised within natural laws, where choices are merely contingently necessary and to be decided in the event by a \"wonderful spontaneity\" that provides individuals with an escape from rigorous predestination.\n\"Discourse on Metaphysics\".\nFor Leibniz, \"God is an absolutely perfect being\". He describes this perfection later in section VI as the simplest form of something with the most substantial outcome (VI). Along these lines, he declares that every type of perfection \"pertains to him (God) in the highest degree\" (I). Even though his types of perfections are not specifically drawn out, Leibniz highlights the one thing that, to him, does certify imperfections and proves that God is perfect: \"that one acts imperfectly if he acts with less perfection than he is capable of\", and since God is a perfect being, he cannot act imperfectly (III). Because God cannot act imperfectly, the decisions he makes pertaining to the world must be perfect. Leibniz also comforts readers, stating that because he has done everything to the most perfect degree; those who love him cannot be injured. However, to love God is a subject of difficulty as Leibniz believes that we are \"not disposed to wish for that which God desires\" because we have the ability to alter our disposition (IV). In accordance with this, many act as rebels, but Leibniz says that the only way we can truly love God is by being content \"with all that comes to us according to his will\" (IV).\nBecause God is \"an absolutely perfect being\" (I), Leibniz argues that God would be acting imperfectly if he acted with any less perfection than what he is able of (III). His syllogism then ends with the statement that God has made the world perfectly in all ways. This also affects how we should view God and his will. Leibniz states that, in lieu of God's will, we have to understand that God \"is the best of all masters\" and he will know when his good succeeds, so we, therefore, must act in conformity to his good will\u00a0\u2013 or as much of it as we understand (IV). In our view of God, Leibniz declares that we cannot admire the work solely because of the maker, lest we mar the glory and love God in doing so. Instead, we must admire the maker for the work he has done (II). Effectively, Leibniz states that if we say the earth is good because of the will of God, and not good according to some standards of goodness, then how can we praise God for what he has done if contrary actions are also praiseworthy by this definition (II). Leibniz then asserts that different principles and geometry cannot simply be from the will of God, but must follow from his understanding.\nLeibniz wrote: \"Why is there something rather than nothing? The sufficient reason ... is found in a substance which ... is a necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself.\" Martin Heidegger called this question \"the fundamental question of metaphysics\".\nSymbolic thought and rational resolution of disputes.\nLeibniz believed that much of human reasoning could be reduced to calculations of a sort, and that such calculations could resolve many differences of opinion\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The only way to rectify our reasonings is to make them as tangible as those of the Mathematicians, so that we can find our error at a glance, and when there are disputes among persons, we can simply say: Let us calculate, without further ado, to see who is right.\nLeibniz's calculus ratiocinator, which resembles symbolic logic, can be viewed as a way of making such calculations feasible. Leibniz wrote memoranda that can now be read as groping attempts to get symbolic logic\u00a0\u2013 and thus his \"calculus\"\u00a0\u2013 off the ground. These writings remained unpublished until the appearance of a selection edited by Carl Immanuel Gerhardt (1859). Louis Couturat published a selection in 1901; by this time the main developments of modern logic had been created by Charles Sanders Peirce and by Gottlob Frege.\nLeibniz thought symbols were important for human understanding. He attached so much importance to the development of good notations that he attributed all his discoveries in mathematics to this. His notation for calculus is an example of his skill in this regard. Leibniz's passion for symbols and notation, as well as his belief that these are essential to a well-running logic and mathematics, made him a precursor of semiotics.\nBut Leibniz took his speculations much further. Defining a character as any written sign, he then defined a \"real\" character as one that represents an idea directly and not simply as the word embodying the idea. Some real characters, such as the notation of logic, serve only to facilitate reasoning. Many characters well known in his day, including Egyptian hieroglyphics, Chinese characters, and the symbols of astronomy and chemistry, he deemed not real. Instead, he proposed the creation of a \"characteristica universalis\" or \"universal characteristic\", built on an alphabet of human thought in which each fundamental concept would be represented by a unique \"real\" character:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is obvious that if we could find characters or signs suited for expressing all our thoughts as clearly and as exactly as arithmetic expresses numbers or geometry expresses lines, we could do in all matters \"insofar as they are subject to reasoning\" all that we can do in arithmetic and geometry. For all investigations which depend on reasoning would be carried out by transposing these characters and by a species of calculus.\nComplex thoughts would be represented by combining characters for simpler thoughts. Leibniz saw that the uniqueness of prime factorization suggests a central role for prime numbers in the universal characteristic, a striking anticipation of G\u00f6del numbering. Granted, there is no intuitive or mnemonic way to number any set of elementary concepts using the prime numbers.\nBecause Leibniz was a mathematical novice when he first wrote about the \"characteristic\", at first he did not conceive it as an algebra but rather as a universal language or script. Only in 1676 did he conceive of a kind of \"algebra of thought\", modeled on and including conventional algebra and its notation. The resulting \"characteristic\" included a logical calculus, some combinatorics, algebra, his \"analysis situs\" (geometry of situation), a universal concept language, and more. What Leibniz actually intended by his \"characteristica universalis\" and calculus ratiocinator, and the extent to which modern formal logic does justice to calculus, may never be established. Leibniz's idea of reasoning through a universal language of symbols and calculations remarkably foreshadows great 20th-century developments in formal systems, such as Turing completeness, where computation was used to define equivalent universal languages (see Turing degree).\nFormal logic.\nLeibniz has been noted as one of the most important logicians between the times of Aristotle and Gottlob Frege. Leibniz enunciated the principal properties of what we now call conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, set inclusion, and the empty set. The principles of Leibniz's logic and, arguably, of his whole philosophy, reduce to two:\nThe formal logic that emerged early in the 20th century also requires, at minimum, unary negation and quantified variables ranging over some universe of discourse.\nLeibniz published nothing on formal logic in his lifetime; most of what he wrote on the subject consists of working drafts. In his \"History of Western Philosophy\", Bertrand Russell went so far as to claim that Leibniz had developed logic in his unpublished writings to a level which was reached only 200 years later.\nRussell's principal work on Leibniz found that many of Leibniz's most startling philosophical ideas and claims (e.g., that each of the fundamental monads mirrors the whole universe) follow logically from Leibniz's conscious choice to reject \"relations\" between things as unreal. He regarded such relations as (real) \"qualities\" of things (Leibniz admitted unary predicates only): For him, \"Mary is the mother of John\" describes separate qualities of Mary and of John. This view contrasts with the relational logic of De Morgan, Peirce, Schr\u00f6der and Russell himself, now standard in predicate logic. Notably, Leibniz also declared space and time to be inherently relational.\nLeibniz's 1690 discovery of his algebra of concepts (deductively equivalent to the Boolean algebra) and the associated metaphysics, are of interest in present-day computational metaphysics.\nMathematics.\nAlthough the mathematical notion of function was implicit in trigonometric and logarithmic tables, which existed in his day, Leibniz was the first, in 1692 and 1694, to employ it explicitly, to denote any of several geometric concepts derived from a curve, such as abscissa, ordinate, tangent, chord, and the perpendicular (see History of the function concept). In the 18th century, \"function\" lost these geometrical associations. Leibniz was also one of the pioneers in actuarial science, calculating the purchase price of life annuities and the liquidation of a state's debt.\nLeibniz's research into formal logic, also relevant to mathematics, is discussed in the preceding section. The best overview of Leibniz's writings on calculus may be found in Bos (1974).\nLeibniz, who invented one of the earliest mechanical calculators, said of calculation: \"For it is unworthy of excellent men to lose hours like slaves in the labour of calculation which could safely be relegated to anyone else if machines were used.\"\nLinear systems.\nLeibniz arranged the coefficients of a system of linear equations into an array, now called a matrix, in order to find a solution to the system if it existed. This method was later called Gaussian elimination. Leibniz laid down the foundations and theory of determinants, although the Japanese mathematician Seki Takakazu also discovered determinants independently of Leibniz. His works show calculating the determinants using cofactors. Calculating the determinant using cofactors is named the Leibniz formula. Finding the determinant of a matrix using this method proves impractical with large \"n\", requiring to calculate \"n!\" products and the number of n-permutations. He also solved systems of linear equations using determinants, which is now called Cramer's rule. This method for solving systems of linear equations based on determinants was found in 1684 by Leibniz (Gabriel Cramer published his findings in 1750). Although Gaussian elimination requires formula_1 arithmetic operations, linear algebra textbooks still teach cofactor expansion before LU factorization.\nGeometry.\nThe Leibniz formula for \u03c0 states that\nformula_2\nLeibniz wrote that circles \"can most simply be expressed by this series, that is, the aggregate of fractions alternately added and subtracted\". However this formula is only accurate with a large number of terms, using 10,000,000 terms to obtain the correct value of to 8 decimal places. Leibniz attempted to create a definition for a straight line while attempting to prove the parallel postulate. While most mathematicians defined a straight line as the shortest line between two points, Leibniz believed that this was merely a property of a straight line rather than the definition.\nCalculus.\nLeibniz is credited, along with Isaac Newton, with the invention of calculus (differential and integral calculus). According to Leibniz's notebooks, a critical breakthrough occurred on 11 November 1675, when he employed integral calculus for the first time to find the area under the graph of a function y = f(x). He introduced several notations used to this day, for instance the integral sign \u222b (formula_3), representing an elongated S, from the Latin word \"summa\", and the d used for differentials (formula_4), from the Latin word \"differentia\". Leibniz did not publish anything about his calculus until 1684. Leibniz expressed the inverse relation of integration and differentiation, later called the fundamental theorem of calculus, by means of a figure in his 1693 paper \"Supplementum geometriae dimensoriae...\". However, James Gregory is credited for the theorem's discovery in geometric form, Isaac Barrow proved a more generalized geometric version, and Newton developed supporting theory. The concept became more transparent as developed through Leibniz's formalism and new notation. The product rule of differential calculus is still called \"Leibniz's law\". In addition, the theorem that tells how and when to differentiate under the integral sign is called the Leibniz integral rule.\nLeibniz exploited infinitesimals in developing calculus, manipulating them in ways suggesting that they had paradoxical algebraic properties. George Berkeley, in a tract called \"The Analyst\" and also in \"De Motu\", criticized these. A recent study argues that Leibnizian calculus was free of contradictions, and was better grounded than Berkeley's empiricist criticisms.\nLeibniz introduced fractional calculus in a letter written to Guillaume de l'H\u00f4pital in 1695. At the same time, Leibniz wrote to Johann Bernoulli about derivatives of \"general order\". In the correspondence between Leibniz and John Wallis in 1697, Wallis's infinite product for formula_5\u03c0 is discussed. Leibniz suggested using differential calculus to achieve this result. Leibniz further used the notation formula_6 to denote the derivative of order formula_5.\nFrom 1711 until his death, Leibniz was engaged in a dispute with John Keill, Newton and others, over whether Leibniz had invented calculus independently of Newton.\nThe use of infinitesimals in mathematics was frowned upon by followers of Karl Weierstrass, but survived in science and engineering, and even in rigorous mathematics, via the fundamental computational device known as the differential. Beginning in 1960, Abraham Robinson worked out a rigorous foundation for Leibniz's infinitesimals, using model theory, in the context of a field of hyperreal numbers. The resulting non-standard analysis can be seen as a belated vindication of Leibniz's mathematical reasoning. Robinson's transfer principle is a mathematical implementation of Leibniz's heuristic law of continuity, while the standard part function implements the Leibnizian transcendental law of homogeneity.\nTopology.\nLeibniz was the first to use the term \"analysis situs\", later used in the 19th century to refer to what is now known as topology. There are two takes on this situation. On the one hand, Mates, citing a 1954 paper in German by Jacob Freudenthal, argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although for Leibniz the situs of a sequence of points is completely determined by the distance between them and is altered if those distances are altered, his admirer Euler, in the famous 1736 paper solving the K\u00f6nigsberg Bridge Problem and its generalizations, used the term \"geometria situs\" in such a sense that the situs remains unchanged under topological deformations. He mistakenly credits Leibniz with originating this concept. ... [It] is sometimes not realized that Leibniz used the term in an entirely different sense and hence can hardly be considered the founder of that part of mathematics.\nBut Hideaki Hirano argues differently, quoting Mandelbrot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To sample Leibniz' scientific works is a sobering experience. Next to calculus, and to other thoughts that have been carried out to completion, the number and variety of premonitory thrusts is overwhelming. We saw examples in 'packing'... My Leibniz mania is further reinforced by finding that for one moment its hero attached importance to geometric scaling. In ..., which is an attempt to tighten Euclid's axioms, he states...: 'I have diverse definitions for the straight line. The straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole, and it alone has this property, not only among curves but among sets.' This claim can be proved today.\nThus the fractal geometry promoted by Mandelbrot drew on Leibniz's notions of self-similarity and the principle of continuity: \"Natura non facit saltus\". We also see that when Leibniz wrote, in a metaphysical vein, that \"the straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole\", he was anticipating topology by more than two centuries. As for \"packing\", Leibniz told his friend and correspondent Des Bosses to imagine a circle, then to inscribe within it three congruent circles with maximum radius; the latter smaller circles could be filled with three even smaller circles by the same procedure. This process can be continued infinitely, from which arises a good idea of self-similarity. Leibniz's improvement of Euclid's axiom contains the same concept.\nHe envisioned the field of combinatorial topology as early as 1679, in his work titled \"Characteristica Geometrica,\" as he \"tried to formulate basic geometric properties of figures, to use special symbols to represent them, and to combine these properties under operations so as to produce new ones.\"\nScience and engineering.\nLeibniz's writings are currently discussed, not only for their anticipations and possible discoveries not yet recognized, but as ways of advancing present knowledge. Much of his writing on physics is included in Gerhardt's \"Mathematical Writings\".\nPhysics.\nLeibniz contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton. He devised a new theory of motion (dynamics) based on kinetic energy and potential energy, which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute. An important example of Leibniz's mature physical thinking is his \"Specimen Dynamicum\" of 1695.\nUntil the discovery of subatomic particles and the quantum mechanics governing them, many of Leibniz's speculative ideas about aspects of nature not reducible to statics and dynamics made little sense. For instance, he anticipated Albert Einstein by arguing, against Newton, that space, time and motion are relative, not absolute: \"As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions.\"\nLeibniz held a relational notion of space and time, against Newton's substantivalist views. According to Newton's substantivalism, space and time are entities in their own right, existing independently of things. Leibniz's relationalism, in contrast, describes space and time as systems of relations that exist between objects. The rise of general relativity and subsequent work in the history of physics has put Leibniz's stance in a more favourable light.\nOne of Leibniz's projects was to recast Newton's theory as a vortex theory. However, his project went beyond vortex theory, since at its heart there was an attempt to explain one of the most difficult problems in physics, that of the origin of the cohesion of matter.\nThe principle of sufficient reason has been invoked in recent cosmology, and his identity of indiscernibles in quantum mechanics, a field some even credit him with having anticipated in some sense. In addition to his theories about the nature of reality, Leibniz's contributions to the development of calculus have also had a major impact on physics.\nThe.\nLeibniz's ('living force') is , twice the modern kinetic energy. He realized that the total energy would be conserved in certain mechanical systems, so he considered it an innate motive characteristic of matter. Here too his thinking gave rise to another regrettable nationalistic dispute. His \"vis viva\" was seen as rivaling the conservation of momentum championed by Newton in England and by Descartes and Voltaire in France; hence academics in those countries tended to neglect Leibniz's idea. Leibniz knew of the validity of conservation of momentum. In reality, both energy and momentum are conserved (in closed systems), so both approaches are valid. In Einstein's General Relativity, energy and momentum are not separately conserved. This was thought to be fatal until Emmy Noether showed that taken together, as the four-dimensional energy-momentum tensor, they are conserved.\nOther natural science.\nBy proposing that the Earth has a molten core, he anticipated modern geology. In embryology, he was a preformationist, but also proposed that organisms are the outcome of a combination of an infinite number of possible microstructures and of their powers. In the life sciences and paleontology, he revealed an amazing transformist intuition, fueled by his study of comparative anatomy and fossils. One of his principal works on this subject, \"Protogaea\", unpublished in his lifetime, has recently been published in English for the first time. He worked out a primal organismic theory. In medicine, he exhorted the physicians of his time\u00a0\u2013 with some results\u00a0\u2013 to ground their theories in detailed comparative observations and verified experiments, and to distinguish firmly scientific and metaphysical points of view.\nPsychology.\nPsychology had been a central interest of Leibniz. He appears to be an \"underappreciated pioneer of psychology\" He wrote on topics which are now regarded as fields of psychology: attention and consciousness, memory, learning (association), motivation (the act of \"striving\"), emergent individuality, the general dynamics of development (evolutionary psychology). His discussions in the \"New Essays\" and \"Monadology\" often rely on everyday observations such as the behaviour of a dog or the noise of the sea, and he develops intuitive analogies (the synchronous running of clocks or the balance spring of a clock). He also devised postulates and principles that apply to psychology: the continuum of the unnoticed \"petites perceptions\" to the distinct, self-aware apperception, and psychophysical parallelism from the point of view of causality and of purpose: \"Souls act according to the laws of final causes, through aspirations, ends and means. Bodies act according to the laws of efficient causes, i.e. the laws of motion. And these two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final causes, harmonize with one another.\" This idea refers to the mind-body problem, stating that the mind and brain do not act upon each other, but act alongside each other separately but in harmony. Leibniz, however, did not use the term \"psychologia\".\nLeibniz's epistemological position\u00a0\u2013 against John Locke and English empiricism (sensualism)\u00a0\u2013 was made clear: \"Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuerit in sensu, nisi intellectu ipse.\" \u2013 \"Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the senses, except the intellect itself.\" Principles that are not present in sensory impressions can be recognised in human perception and consciousness: logical inferences, categories of thought, the principle of causality and the principle of purpose (teleology).\nLeibniz found his most important interpreter in Wilhelm Wundt, founder of psychology as a discipline. Wundt used the \"\u2026 nisi intellectu ipse\" quotation 1862 on the title page of his \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung\" (Contributions on the Theory of Sensory Perception) and published a detailed and aspiring monograph on Leibniz. Wundt shaped the term apperception, introduced by Leibniz, into an experimental psychologically based apperception psychology that included neuropsychological modelling \u2013 an excellent example of how a concept created by a great philosopher could stimulate a psychological research program. One principle in the thinking of Leibniz played a fundamental role: \"the principle of equality of separate but corresponding viewpoints.\" Wundt characterized this style of thought (perspectivism) in a way that also applied for him\u00a0\u2013 viewpoints that \"supplement one another, while also being able to appear as opposites that only resolve themselves when considered more deeply.\"\nMuch of Leibniz's work went on to have a great impact on the field of psychology. Leibniz thought that there are many petites perceptions, or small perceptions of which we perceive but of which we are unaware. He believed that by the principle that phenomena found in nature were continuous by default, it was likely that the transition between conscious and unconscious states had intermediary steps. For this to be true, there must also be a portion of the mind of which we are unaware at any given time. His theory regarding consciousness in relation to the principle of continuity can be seen as an early theory regarding the stages of sleep. In this way, Leibniz's theory of perception can be viewed as one of many theories leading up to the idea of the unconscious. Leibniz was a direct influence on Ernst Platner, who is credited with originally coining the term Unbewu\u00dftseyn (unconscious). Additionally, the idea of subliminal stimuli can be traced back to his theory of small perceptions. Leibniz's ideas regarding music and tonal perception went on to influence the laboratory studies of Wilhelm Wundt.\nSocial science.\nIn public health, he advocated establishing a medical administrative authority, with powers over epidemiology and veterinary medicine. He worked to set up a coherent medical training program, oriented towards public health and preventive measures. In economic policy, he proposed tax reforms and a national insurance program, and discussed the balance of trade. He even proposed something akin to what much later emerged as game theory. In sociology he laid the ground for communication theory.\nTechnology.\nIn 1906, Garland published a volume of Leibniz's writings bearing on his many practical inventions and engineering work. To date, few of these writings have been translated into English. Nevertheless, it is well understood that Leibniz was a serious inventor, engineer, and applied scientist, with great respect for practical life. Following the motto \"theoria cum praxi\", he urged that theory be combined with practical application, and thus has been claimed as the father of applied science. He designed wind-driven propellers and water pumps, mining machines to extract ore, hydraulic presses, lamps, submarines, clocks, etc. With Denis Papin, he created a steam engine. He even proposed a method for desalinating water. From 1680 to 1685, he struggled to overcome the chronic flooding that afflicted the ducal silver mines in the Harz mountains, but did not succeed.\nComputation.\nLeibniz may have been the first computer scientist and information theorist. Early in life, he documented the binary numeral system (base 2), then revisited that system throughout his career. While Leibniz was examining other cultures to compare his metaphysical views, he encountered an ancient Chinese book \"I Ching\". Leibniz interpreted a diagram which showed yin and yang and corresponded it to a zero and one. More information can be found in the Sinophilia section. Leibniz had similarities with Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz and Thomas Harriot, who independently developed the binary system, as he was familiar with their works on the binary system. Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz worked extensively on logarithms including logarithms with base 2. Thomas Harriot's manuscripts contained a table of binary numbers and their notation, which demonstrated that any number could be written on a base 2 system. Regardless, Leibniz simplified the binary system and articulated logical properties such as conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, inclusion, and the empty set. He anticipated Lagrangian interpolation and algorithmic information theory. His calculus ratiocinator anticipated aspects of the universal Turing machine. In 1961, Norbert Wiener suggested that Leibniz should be considered the patron saint of cybernetics. Wiener is quoted with \"Indeed, the general idea of a computing machine is nothing but a mechanization of Leibniz's Calculus Ratiocinator.\"\nIn 1671, Leibniz began to invent a machine that could execute all four arithmetic operations, gradually improving it over a number of years. This \"stepped reckoner\" attracted fair attention and was the basis of his election to the Royal Society in 1673. A number of such machines were made during his years in Hanover by a craftsman working under his supervision. They were not an unambiguous success because they did not fully mechanize the carry operation. Couturat reported finding an unpublished note by Leibniz, dated 1674, describing a machine capable of performing some algebraic operations. Leibniz also devised a (now reproduced) cipher machine, recovered by Nicholas Rescher in 2010. In 1693, Leibniz described a design of a machine which could, in theory, integrate differential equations, which he called \"integraph\".\nLeibniz was groping towards hardware and software concepts worked out much later by Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace. In 1679, while mulling over his binary arithmetic, Leibniz imagined a machine in which binary numbers were represented by marbles, governed by a rudimentary sort of punched cards. Modern electronic digital computers replace Leibniz's marbles moving by gravity with shift registers, voltage gradients, and pulses of electrons, but otherwise they run roughly as Leibniz envisioned in 1679.\nLibrarian.\nLater in Leibniz's career (after the death of von Boyneburg), Leibniz moved to Paris and accepted a position as a librarian in the Hanoverian court of Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg. Leibniz's predecessor, Tobias Fleischer, had already created a cataloging system for the Duke's library but it was a clumsy attempt. At this library, Leibniz focused more on advancing the library than on the cataloging. For instance, within a month of taking the new position, he developed a comprehensive plan to expand the library. He was one of the first to consider developing a core collection for a library and felt \"that a library for display and ostentation is a luxury and indeed superfluous, but a well-stocked and organized library is important and useful for all areas of human endeavor and is to be regarded on the same level as schools and churches\". Leibniz lacked the funds to develop the library in this manner. After working at this library, by the end of 1690 Leibniz was appointed as privy-councilor and librarian of the Bibliotheca Augusta at Wolfenb\u00fcttel. It was an extensive library with at least 25,946 printed volumes. At this library, Leibniz sought to improve the catalog. He was not allowed to make complete changes to the existing closed catalog, but was allowed to improve upon it so he started on that task immediately. He created an alphabetical author catalog and had also created other cataloging methods that were not implemented. While serving as librarian of the ducal libraries in Hanover and Wolfenb\u00fcttel, Leibniz effectively became one of the founders of library science. Seemingly, Leibniz paid a good deal of attention to the classification of subject matter, favouring a well-balanced library covering a host of numerous subjects and interests. Leibniz, for example, proposed the following classification system in the \"Otivm Hanoveranvm Sive Miscellanea\" (1737):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHe also designed a book indexing system in ignorance of the only other such system then extant, that of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University. He also called on publishers to distribute abstracts of all new titles they produced each year, in a standard form that would facilitate indexing. He hoped that this abstracting project would eventually include everything printed from his day back to Gutenberg. Neither proposal met with success at the time, but something like them became standard practice among English language publishers during the 20th century, under the aegis of the Library of Congress and the British Library.\nHe called for the creation of an empirical database as a way to further all sciences. His \"characteristica universalis\", calculus ratiocinator, and a \"community of minds\"\u00a0\u2013 intended, among other things, to bring political and religious unity to Europe\u00a0\u2013 can be seen as distant unwitting anticipations of artificial languages (e.g., Esperanto and its rivals), symbolic logic, even the World Wide Web.\nAdvocate of scientific societies.\nLeibniz emphasized that research was a collaborative endeavour. Hence he warmly advocated the formation of national scientific societies along the lines of the British Royal Society and the French . More specifically, in his correspondence and travels he urged the creation of such societies in Dresden, Saint Petersburg, Vienna, and Berlin. Only one such project came to fruition; in 1700, the Berlin Academy of Sciences was created. Leibniz drew up its first statutes, and served as its first president for the remainder of his life. That academy evolved into the German Academy of Sciences, the publisher of the ongoing of his works.\nLaw and morality.\nLeibniz's writings on law, ethics, and politics were long overlooked by English-speaking scholars, but this has changed.\nWhile Leibniz was no apologist for absolute monarchy like Hobbes, or for tyranny in any form, neither did he echo the political and constitutional views of his contemporary John Locke, views invoked in support of liberalism, in 18th-century America and later elsewhere. The following excerpt from a 1695 letter to Baron J. C. Boyneburg's son Philipp is very revealing of Leibniz's political sentiments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for... the great question of the power of sovereigns and the obedience their peoples owe them, I usually say that it would be good for princes to be persuaded that their people have the right to resist them, and for the people, on the other hand, to be persuaded to obey them passively. I am, however, quite of the opinion of Grotius, that one ought to obey as a rule, the evil of revolution being greater beyond comparison than the evils causing it. Yet I recognize that a prince can go to such excess, and place the well-being of the state in such danger, that the obligation to endure ceases. This is most rare, however, and the theologian who authorizes violence under this pretext should take care against excess; excess being infinitely more dangerous than deficiency.\nIn 1677, Leibniz called for a European confederation, governed by a council or senate, whose members would represent entire nations and would be free to vote their consciences; this is sometimes considered an anticipation of the European Union. He believed that Europe would adopt a uniform religion. He reiterated these proposals in 1715.\nBut at the same time, he arrived to propose an interreligious and multicultural project to create a universal system of justice, which required from him a broad interdisciplinary perspective. In order to propose it, he combined linguistics (especially sinology), moral and legal philosophy, management, economics, and politics.\nLaw.\nLeibniz trained as a legal academic, but under the tutelage of Cartesian-sympathiser Erhard Weigel we already see an attempt to solve legal problems by rationalist mathematical methods; Weigel's influence being most explicit in the ('An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right'). For example, the ('Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases') uses early combinatorics to solve some legal disputes, while the 1666 \"\" ('On the Art of Combination') includes simple legal problems by way of illustration.\nThe use of combinatorial methods to solve legal and moral problems seems, via Athanasius Kircher and Daniel Schwenter to be of Llullist inspiration: Ram\u00f3n Llull attempted to solve ecumenical disputes through recourse to a combinatorial mode of reasoning he regarded as universal (a ).\nIn the late 1660s the enlightened Prince-Bishop of Mainz Johann Philipp von Sch\u00f6nborn announced a review of the legal system and made available a position to support his current law commissioner. Leibniz left Franconia and made for Mainz before even winning the role. On reaching Frankfurt am Main Leibniz penned \"The New Method of Teaching and Learning the Law\", by way of application. The text proposed a reform of legal education and is characteristically syncretic, integrating aspects of Thomism, Hobbesianism, Cartesianism and traditional jurisprudence. Leibniz's argument that the function of legal teaching was not to impress rules as one might train a dog, but to aid the student in discovering their own public reason, evidently impressed von Sch\u00f6nborn as he secured the job.\nLeibniz's next major attempt to find a universal rational core to law and so found a legal \"science of right\", came when Leibniz worked in Mainz from 1667\u201372. Starting initially from Hobbes' mechanistic doctrine of power, Leibniz reverted to logico-combinatorial methods in an attempt to define justice. As Leibniz's so-called advanced, he built in modal notions of right (possibility) and obligation (necessity) in which we see perhaps the earliest elaboration of his possible worlds doctrine within a deontic frame. While ultimately the remained unpublished, Leibniz continued to work on his drafts and promote their ideas to correspondents up until his death.\nEcumenism.\nLeibniz devoted considerable intellectual and diplomatic effort to what would now be called an ecumenical endeavor, seeking to reconcile the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches. In this respect, he followed the example of his early patrons, Baron von Boyneburg and the Duke John Frederick\u00a0\u2013 both cradle Lutherans who converted to Catholicism as adults\u00a0\u2013 who did what they could to encourage the reunion of the two faiths, and who warmly welcomed such endeavors by others. (The House of Brunswick remained Lutheran, because the Duke's children did not follow their father.) These efforts included corresponding with French bishop Jacques-B\u00e9nigne Bossuet, and involved Leibniz in some theological controversy. He evidently thought that the thoroughgoing application of reason would suffice to heal the breach caused by the Reformation.\nPhilology.\nLeibniz the philologist was an avid student of languages, eagerly latching on to any information about vocabulary and grammar that came his way. In 1710, he applied ideas of gradualism and uniformitarianism to linguistics in a short essay. He refuted the belief, widely held by Christian scholars of the time, that Hebrew was the primeval language of the human race. At the same time, he rejected the idea of unrelated language groups and considered them all to have a common source. He also refuted the argument, advanced by Swedish scholars in his day, that a form of proto-Swedish was the ancestor of the Germanic languages. He puzzled over the origins of the Slavic languages and was fascinated by classical Chinese. Leibniz was also an expert in the Sanskrit language.\nHe published the ('first modern edition') of the late medieval \"\", a Latin chronicle of the County of Holstein.\nSinophilia.\nLeibniz was perhaps the first major European intellectual to take a close interest in Chinese civilization, which he knew by corresponding with, and reading other works by, European Christian missionaries posted in China. He apparently read \"Confucius Sinarum Philosophus\" in the first year of its publication. He came to the conclusion that Europeans could learn much from the Confucian ethical tradition. He mulled over the possibility that the Chinese characters were an unwitting form of his universal characteristic. He noted how the \"I Ching\" hexagrams correspond to the binary numbers from 000000 to 111111, and concluded that this mapping was evidence of major Chinese accomplishments in the sort of philosophical mathematics he admired. Leibniz communicated his ideas of the binary system representing Christianity to the Emperor of China, hoping it would convert him. Leibniz was one of the western philosophers of the time who attempted to accommodate Confucian ideas to prevailing European beliefs.\nLeibniz's attraction to Chinese philosophy originates from his perception that Chinese philosophy was similar to his own. The historian E.R. Hughes suggests that Leibniz's ideas of \"simple substance\" and \"pre-established harmony\" were directly influenced by Confucianism, pointing to the fact that they were conceived during the period when he was reading \"Confucius Sinarum Philosophus\".\nPolymath.\nWhile making his grand tour of European archives to research the Brunswick family history that he never completed, Leibniz stopped in Vienna between May 1688 and February 1689, where he did much legal and diplomatic work for the Brunswicks. He visited mines, talked with mine engineers, and tried to negotiate export contracts for lead from the ducal mines in the Harz mountains. His proposal that the streets of Vienna be lit with lamps burning rapeseed oil was implemented. During a formal audience with the Austrian Emperor and in subsequent memoranda, he advocated reorganizing the Austrian economy, reforming the coinage of much of central Europe, negotiating a Concordat between the Habsburgs and the Vatican, and creating an imperial research library, official archive, and public insurance fund. He wrote and published an important paper on mechanics.\nPosthumous reputation.\nWhen Leibniz died, his reputation was in decline. He was remembered for only one book, ', whose supposed central argument Voltaire lampooned in his popular book \"Candide\", which concludes with the character Candide saying, \"\" ('it is not clear'), a term that was applied during the Roman Republic to a legal verdict of 'not proven'. Voltaire's depiction of Leibniz's ideas was so influential that many believed it to be an accurate description. Thus Voltaire and his \"Candide\" bear some of the blame for the lingering failure to appreciate and understand Leibniz's ideas. Leibniz had an ardent disciple, Christian Wolff, whose dogmatic and facile outlook did Leibniz's reputation much harm. Leibniz also influenced David Hume, who read his ' and used some of his ideas. In any event, philosophical fashion was moving away from the rationalism and system building of the 17th century, of which Leibniz had been such an ardent proponent. His work on law, diplomacy, and history was seen as of ephemeral interest. The vastness and richness of his correspondence went unrecognized.\nLeibniz's reputation began to recover with the 1765 publication of the \"Nouveaux Essais\". In 1768, Louis Dutens edited the first multi-volume edition of Leibniz's writings, followed in the 19th century by a number of editions, including those edited by Erdmann, Foucher de Careil, Gerhardt, Gerland, Klopp, and Mollat. Publication of Leibniz's correspondence with notables such as Antoine Arnauld, Samuel Clarke, Sophia of Hanover, and her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover, began.\nIn 1900, Bertrand Russell published a critical study of Leibniz's metaphysics. Shortly thereafter, Louis Couturat published an important study of Leibniz, and edited a volume of Leibniz's heretofore unpublished writings, mainly on logic. They made Leibniz somewhat respectable among 20th-century analytical and linguistic philosophers in the English-speaking world (Leibniz had already been of great influence to many Germans such as Bernhard Riemann). For example, Leibniz's phrase , meaning 'interchangeability without loss of or compromising the truth', recurs in Willard Quine's writings. Nevertheless, the secondary literature on Leibniz did not really blossom until after World War II. This is especially true of English speaking countries; in Gregory Brown's bibliography fewer than 30 of the English language entries were published before 1946. American Leibniz studies owe much to Leroy Loemker (1900\u20131985) through his translations and his interpretive essays in LeClerc (1973). Leibniz's philosophy was also highly regarded by Gilles Deleuze, who in 1988 published \"\".\nNicholas Jolley has surmised that Leibniz's reputation as a philosopher is now perhaps higher than at any time since he was alive. Analytic and contemporary philosophy continue to invoke his notions of identity, individuation, and possible worlds. Work in the history of 17th- and 18th-century ideas has revealed more clearly the 17th-century \"Intellectual Revolution\" that preceded the better-known Industrial and commercial revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries.\nIn Germany, various important institutions were named after Leibniz. In Hanover in particular, he is the namesake for some of the most important institutions in the town:\nOutside of Hanover:\nAwards:\nIn 1985, the German government created the Leibniz Prize, offering an annual award of, as of 2025[ [update]], \u20ac each for up to 10 recipients. It was the world's largest prize for scientific achievement prior to the Fundamental Physics Prize.\nThe collection of manuscript papers of Leibniz at the was inscribed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register in 2007.\nCultural references.\nLeibniz still receives popular attention. The Google Doodle for 1 July 2018 celebrated Leibniz's 372nd birthday. Using a quill, his hand is shown writing \"Google\" in binary ASCII code.\nOne of the earliest popular but indirect expositions of Leibniz was Voltaire's satire \"Candide\", published in 1759. Leibniz was lampooned as Professor Pangloss, described as \"the greatest philosopher of the Holy Roman Empire\".\nLeibniz also appears as one of the main historical figures in Neal Stephenson's series of novels \"The Baroque Cycle\". Stephenson credits readings and discussions concerning Leibniz for inspiring him to write the series.\nLeibniz also stars in Adam Ehrlich Sachs's novel \"The Organs of Sense\".\nThe German biscuit Choco Leibniz is named after Leibniz. Its manufacturer Bahlsen is based in Hanover, where Leibniz lived for four decades until his death.\nWritings and publication.\nLeibniz wrote mainly in three languages: scholastic Latin, French and German. During his lifetime, he published many pamphlets and scholarly articles, but only two philosophical books: ' and '. (He published numerous pamphlets, often anonymous, on behalf of the House of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, most notably ', 'On the right of Supremacy', a major consideration of the nature of sovereignty.) One substantial book appeared posthumously, his ' ('New Essays on Human Understanding'), which Leibniz had withheld from publication after the death of John Locke. Only in 1895, when Bodemann completed his catalogue of Leibniz's manuscripts and correspondence, did the enormous extent of Leibniz's ('literary estate') become clear: about 15,000 letters to more than 1000 recipients, and more than 40,000 other items. Moreover, quite a few of these letters are of essay length. Much of his vast correspondence, especially the letters dated after 1700, remains unpublished, and much of what is published has appeared only in recent decades. The more than 67,000 records of the working catalogue of the cover almost all of his known writings and the letters from him and to him. The amount, variety, and disorder of Leibniz's writings are a predictable result of a situation he described in a letter as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I cannot tell you how extraordinarily distracted and spread out I am. I am trying to find various things in the archives; I look at old papers and hunt up unpublished documents. From these I hope to shed some light on the history of the [House of] Brunswick. I receive and answer a huge number of letters. At the same time, I have so many mathematical results, philosophical thoughts, and other literary innovations that should not be allowed to vanish that I often do not know where to begin.\nThe extant parts of the of Leibniz's writings are organized as follows:\nThe systematic cataloguing of all of Leibniz's began in 1901. This effort was hampered by World War I and World War II and then by decades of German division into East Germany and West Germany, separating scholars and scattering portions of his literary estates. The ambitious project has had to deal with writings in seven languages, contained in some 200,000 written and printed pages. In 1985 it was reorganized and included in a joint program of German federal and state () academies. Since then the branches in Potsdam, M\u00fcnster, Hanover and Berlin have jointly published 57 volumes of the , with an average of 870 pages, and prepared index and concordance works.\nSelected works.\nThe year given is usually that in which the work was completed, not of its eventual publication.\nCollections.\nSix important collections of English translations are , , , , , and .\nThe historical-critical scholarly editing of the collected papers of Leibniz, begun in 1901 and conducted by various editorial projects during that time, remains ongoing as of 2025[ [update]], and is conducted by the editorial project ('Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Complete Writings and Letters'), the ('Leibniz edition') colloqually.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBibliographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary literature up to 1950.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary literature post-1950.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12283", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12283", "title": "Gamma World", "text": "1978 post-apocalyptic role-playing game\nGamma World is a post-apocalyptic science fantasy role-playing game in which player characters explore Earth centuries after the collapse of civilization, searching for artifacts from the time before \"The Great Upheaval\". The game was originally designed by James M. Ward and Gary Jaquet, and first published by TSR in 1978. It borrows heavily from Ward's earlier role-playing game, \"Metamorphosis Alpha\".\nSetting.\n\"Gamma World\" takes place in the mid-25th century, more than a century after a second nuclear war had destroyed human civilization. This war is only vaguely described in most editions of the game, and what details are provided change from version to version:\nThe first two editions explained that ever-increasing material prosperity and leisure had led to ever-more radical and violent social movements, culminating in a final war in the years AD 2309\u20132322, and ascribe the final annihilation to a terrorist group called \"The Apocalypse\" and the ensuing retaliation by surviving factions.\nLater versions would alter the reason for the collapse. The 2000 \"Alternity\" edition explained this as caused by the arrival of aliens and nuclear response. The 2003 \"d20 Modern\" iteration explained collapse as due to uncontrolled nanotechnology and AI. The 2010 edition attributes the destruction of civilization to the activation of the Large Hadron Collider, which caused multiple realities to exchange features in an event known as the Big Mistake. \nAll backstories agree that the cataclysm destroyed all government and society beyond a village scale, plunging the world into a Dark Age. In many editions of the game, technology is at best quasi-medieval (in the first edition, the crossbow is described as \"the ultimate weapon\" for most Gamma World societies). Some, such as the 2003 and, to a lesser degree the 2010 edition, feature advanced technology that is well known and often easily available. In contrast, super-science artifacts in earlier editions were risky to use due to the average Gamma World character not knowing how to properly operate such devices, or possibly even what the device is at all. The post-apocalyptic inhabitants of Earth now refer to their planet as \"Gamma World\", or, in later edition, \"Gamma Terra\".\nThe setting is chaotic and dangerous and little resembles pre-apocalyptic Earth. The weapons unleashed during the final war were strong enough to alter coastlines, level cities, and leave large areas of land lethally radioactive. These future weapons bathed the surviving life of Earth in unspecified forms of radiation and biochemical agents, producing widespread, permanent mutations among humans, animals, and plants. This has caused mutations such as additional limbs, super-strength, and psychic powers. (Random tables of such improbable mutations are a hallmark of every edition of \"Gamma World\".) Many animals and plants are sentient, semi-civilized species competing with surviving humans. Both humans and non-humans have lost most knowledge of the pre-war humans, whom Gamma World's inhabitants call \"the Ancients\". The only group with significant knowledge of the Ancients are isolated robots and other AIs that survived the war. These machines tend to be damaged, in ill repair, and/or hostile to organic beings.\nPlayer characters include unmutated humans (referred to as \"Pure Strain Humans\" in most editions), mutated humans, sentient animals or plants, and androids. Characters explore ruins and strange post-apocalyptic societies to gain knowledge of the Ancients and social status for themselves. Common adventure themes involve protecting fragile post-apocalypse societies, retrieving such Ancient \"artifacts\" fiction as power armor, laser pistols, and anti-grav sleds), or mere survival against the multifarious dangers of the future such as gun-toting mutant rabbits, death machines, and other, more hostile, Gamma Worlders.\nA recurrent source of conflict on Gamma World is the rivalry among the Cryptic Alliances, semi-secret societies whose ideological agendas, sometimes monomaniacal ones, often bring them into conflict with the rest of the Gamma World. The Pure Strain Humans' Knights of Genetic Purity, for example, wish for genocide on mutants, Iron Society seeks the same for baseline humans.. Other rivalries involve attitudes towards Ancient technology. The Restorationists seek to rebuild Ancient society while others the Seekers, wish to destroy it.\nSystem.\nThroughout the game's many editions, \"Gamma World\" has almost always remained strongly compatible with the then-current edition of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"D&amp;D\"). Attribute generation is much the same for instance with a range of 3 to 18, randomly generated by rolling three six-sided dice. The attributes themselves are the same, but with occasional name changes such as Physical Strength instead of Strength and Mental Strength instead of Wisdom. This allows Gamma World and D&amp;D characters to potentially cross over genres.\nCharacter generation is mostly random, and features one of the game's most distinctive mechanics, the mutation tables. Players who choose to play mutants roll dice to randomly determine their characters' mutations. All versions of \"Gamma World\" eschew a realistic portrayal of genetic mutation to one degree or another, instead giving characters fantastic abilities like psychic powers, laser beams, force fields, life draining and others. Other mutations are extensions or extremes of naturally existing features transposed from different species, such as electrical generation, infravision, quills, extra limbs, dual brains, carapaces, gills, etc. These were offset with defects that also ranged from the fantastical\u2014such as skin that dissolves in water, or a scent that attracts monsters\u2014to the mundane, such as seizures, madness and phobias.\nCharacters in most versions of \"Gamma World\" earn experience points during their adventures, which cause the character's Rank (in some editions, Level) to increase. Unlike \"D&amp;D\", however, the first two editions of \"Gamma World\" do not use a concept of true level or character class, and increases in Rank do not affect the character's skills or combat abilities. In fact, in the first three editions of the game, character rank is primarily a measure of the character's social prestige.\nThe game mechanics used for resolving character actions, on the other hand, greatly varied between \"Gamma World\" editions. The first two editions, like the early editions of \"D&amp;D\", depend heavily on matrix-based mechanics, where two factors (one representing the actor or attacker, and one representing the opponent) are cross-referenced on a chart. For some actions, such as attacks, the number located on the matrix represents a number the acting player must roll. For other actions (such as determining the result of radiation exposure), the matrix result indicates a non-negotiable result. \"Gamma\" World's first two editions had a variety of specialized matrices for different situations (again, closely resembling \"D&amp;D\").\nThe third edition rules replace specialized matrices with the Action Control Table (ACT), a single, color-coded chart that allowed players to determine whether a character action succeeded, and the degree of success, with a single roll. (The ACT concept is drawn from the \"Marvel Super Heroes\" game published by TSR shortly before development of \"Gamma World\"'s third edition.) The ACT requires the referee to cross-reference the difficulty of a character action with the ability score used to complete that action, determining which column of the ACT is used for that action. The character's player then rolls percentile dice; the result is compared to appropriate column, determining a degree of success or failure and eliminating the need for second result roll (e.g. the damage roll that many games require after a successful combat action).\nThe fourth edition was directly compatible with 2nd Edition AD&amp;D with some minor differences in mechanics. The fifth and sixth editions though would relegate Gamma World to that of a Campaign Setting and require the core books to play. 5th uses the Alternity system which is mostly represented in the book but required the core rules in order to resolve some factors. 6th Edition though was fully incomplete on its own and required the d20 Modern rulebook in order to play the game.\nThe seventh version uses a streamlined version of \"D&amp;D 4th edition\" mechanics. Character generation choice though was nearly fully removed. Instead of choosing a character class, a player had to roll a twenty-sided die two times and consult an accompanying character origin table. For example, a player might obtain the result \"Radioactive Yeti\" and gain the powers associated with the \"Radioactive\" and \"Yeti\" origins. Attributes, mutations, and skills were also randomly assigned. Two decks of cards comprising the core of a \"Collectible Card Game\" are included with the game. One deck represented random Alpha Mutations, which could be drawn to gain temporary powers, and the other contained various Omega Tech, powerful technological devices that could possibly backfire on those that used them. Some 4th edition rules enhancements for the setting include new damage types such as \"Radiation\", Gamma World-specific skills, and increased lethality. Despite these differences, it is possible to use characters and monsters from a \"D&amp;D\" game in \"Gamma World\" and vice versa.\nHistory.\nFirst Edition (1978).\nThe original \"Gamma World\" boxed set (containing a 56-page rulebook, a map of a devastated North America, and dice) was released in 1978. TSR went on to publish three accessories for the 1st edition of the game:\nGrenadier Miniatures also supported the game, with a line of licensed miniatures.\nAt least one other TSR product was announced -- \"Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega\", an adaptation of \"Metamorphosis Alpha's\" campaign setting to \"Gamma World's\" rules (Anon 1981). Work on the adaptation was halted when a 2nd edition of \"Gamma World\" was announced. This was later released as \"Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega\" using the \"Amazing Engine\" Rules.\nSecond Edition (1983).\nThe second edition \"Gamma World\" boxed set (with rules designed by Ward, Jaquet, and David James Ritchie) was released in 1983. Two modules and two accessories were released for this version:\nTSR also produced four packs of \"Gamma World\" miniatures. TSR started production on a third adventure module, which was to be assigned the identification code GW5 and had the working title \"Rapture of the Deep\". This module was not published. However, a 'ghost' Second Edition GW5 \"Rapture of the Deep\" module was produced in 2007.\nThird Edition (1986).\nThe 3rd edition of \"Gamma World\" was another boxed set, credited to James M. Ward. It introduced the Action Control Table, a color-coded table used to resolve nearly all actions in the game. (Color-coded tables were something of a trend at TSR in the mid-1980s. After 1984's \"Marvel Super Heroes\" proved the viability of the concept, TSR revised \"Gamma World\", \"Star Frontiers\", and \"Top Secret\" to use similar tables.) Unfortunately for TSR, this version of the rules became notorious for the number of editorial mistakes, including cross-references to rules that didn't appear in the boxed set. The errors were serious enough that TSR published a \"Gamma World Rules Supplement\" containing the \"missing\" rules. The \"Rules Supplement\" was sent to gamers who requested it by mail, and included in reprintings of the boxed set.\nThe five modules TSR published for \"Gamma World's\" 3rd edition introduced the setting's first multi-module metaplot, which involved rebuilding an ancient 'sky chariot':\nTSR dropped the 3rd edition of \"Gamma World\" from its product line before the multi-module storyline could be completed. In 2003 an unofficial conclusion to the series was published under the title GW11 \"Omega Project\".\nDespite its editorial issues, the 3rd edition rules were well-received enough to win the 1986/1987 Gamer's Choice Award for \"Best Science-Fiction Roleplaying Game\".\nScott Taylor of \"Black Gate\" in 2015 rated the GW6-GW10 series as #7 in \"The Top 10 Campaign Adventure Module Series of All Time, saying \"if you are ever in the mood to crack out \"Gamma World\", or just have a great campaign setting for any post-apocalyptic campaign, this super series could be for you.\"\nFourth Edition (1992).\nThe 4th edition of \"Gamma World\" was a 192-page softcover book, written by Bruce Nesmith and James M. Ward, published in May 1992 by TSR. This version of the game abandoned the 3rd edition's Action Control Table for mechanics resembling \"2nd Edition Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". TSR published five accessories for the 4th edition:\nTSR's \"Gamma World\" development team announced at Gen Con 1993 that no further products would be released for the 4th edition. They also announced that TSR had restarted development of \"Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega\", but that the manuscript would be completed using the \"Amazing Engine\" rules.\nFifth Edition (2000).\nThe 5th version of \"Gamma World\" was a supplement for the science-fiction game \"Alternity\". (In a nod to \"Gamma World\"'s reputation for being repeatedly revised, the book's back cover states \"That's right, it's the return of the \"Gamma World\"\".) The \"Gamma World Campaign Setting\" () was a 192-page softcover book written by Andy Collins and Jeff Grubb, published in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast (WOTC), only a month after WOTC announced its cancellation of the \"Alternity\" line. This version of \"Gamma World\" is unique as the only one not to have accessories or supplements.\n\"Omega World\" (2002).\nIn September 2002, \"Omega World\", a \"d20 System\" mini-game based on \"Gamma World\" and written by Jonathan Tweet, was published in \"Dungeon\" 94/\"Polyhedron\" 153. Tweet does not plan any expansions for the game, although it received a warm reception from \"Gamma World\" fans and players new to the concept alike.\nSixth Edition (2003).\nIn November 2002, Sword &amp; Sorcery Studios (SSS) announced that it had licensed the \"Gamma World\" setting from WOTC in order to produce a sixth version of the game. SSS's version of the game, which reached the market in 2003, used the \"d20 Modern\" system, and mimicked \"D&amp;D\"'s \"three core book\" model with three hardcover manuals:\nSword &amp; Sorcery Studios also published three paperback supplements for the d20 version of \"Gamma World\":\nThis new version of the game presented a more sober and serious approach to the concept of a post-nuclear world, at odds with the more light-hearted and adventurous approach taken by previous editions; it was also the first edition of the game to include fantastical nanotechnology on a large scale. In August 2005, White Wolf announced that it was reverting the rights to publish \"Gamma World\" products back to Wizards of the Coast, putting the game out of print again. Several critics and fans considered Tweet's \"Omega World\" to be a superior d20 System treatment of the \"Gamma World\" concept.\n\"Mutant Future\" (2008 and 2010).\nAn unofficial open gaming version published in 2008 and in revised form in 2010.\nSeventh Edition (2010).\nAt the Dungeons &amp; Dragons Experience fan convention in early 2010, Wizards of the Coast announced a new version titled \"D&amp;D Gamma World\", eventually released in October of that year. The game is compatible with the D&amp;D 4th Edition rules and the System Reference Document, but is not considered a separate D&amp;D setting.\nThe basic box included 80 non-random cards. In addition, random \"boosters\" of \"Alpha Mutation\" and \"Omega Tech\" cards for players are sold separately in packs of eight.\nThis edition of \"Gamma World\" includes the following three boxed sets (one core set and two expansion kits):\nAdditional content was released for the 7th Edition of \"Gamma World\" at Game Day 2010 and at the 2010 Penny Arcade Expo, Trouble in Freesboro and Pax Extraterrestria respectively. In addition, a Christmas themed adventure and vehicular combat rules were released online.\nAdditionally, two novels were published in the setting. \"Sooner Dead\" by Mel Odom was published February 1, 2011, and \"Red Sails in the Fallout\" by Pauli Kidd, published July 5, 2011.\n\"Mutant Crawl Classics\" (2018).\nA open gaming unofficial release from Goodman Games.\nReception.\nIn Issue 41 of \"Moves\", Steve List reviewed the first edition and commented, \"\"Gamma World\" is not a game for those who take their science fiction, science, or technology seriously, but it is a good set of rules for role-playing, provided an energetic referee can be found to run the show.\"\nDon Turnbull reviewed the first edition of \"Gamma World\" for \"White Dwarf\" #10, giving it an overall rating of 9 out of 10, and stated that \"\"Gamma World\" is good quality - let there be no mistake. This has not been thrown together in haste by earnest amateurs over glasses of cheap booze. It is a thoroughly professional job which deserves a place on the shelf (and the playing table) of anyone remotely interested in the science fiction game-setting.\"\nIn the 1979 book \"The Playboy Winner's Guide to Board Games\", John Jackson reviewed the first edition, and noted that \"\"Gama World\" could draw on a hundred science-fiction novels for material. It seems to be better organized than its cousin [\"Metamorphosis Alpha\"], and the campaign map of an altered America is almost worth the cost of the game itself.\"\nRonald Pehr reviewed the first edition of \"Gamma World\" in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 32 and commented \"If you liked its progenitors, \"Gamma World\" is an interesting variant. Beginning players should find it easy to learn, and referees are challenged to create a playable, balanced world. It's somewhat expensive and the sudden-death power of futuristic weaponry and the lack of character 'levels' may put you off, but if the basic premise is appealing you'll probably enjoy \"Gamma World\".\"\nIn the July 1980 issue of \"Fantastic Science Fiction\", Greg Costikyan called the rules of the first edition \"reasonably well written, if poorly organized; they are sufficient to base a campaign upon.\" However, Costikyan was appalled by the lack of hard science, calling the game \"idiotic pseudo-science\". Costikyan concluded, \"I'm surprised that even TSR would attempt to foist junk like \"Gamma World\" off on an unsuspecting public.\"\nIn the 1980 book \"The Complete Book of Wargames\", game designer Jon Freeman reviewed the first edition and commented, \"This is in every sense an improved version of \"Metamorphosis Alpha\". Rules have been tightened and elaborated, and the organization is clearly superior.\" Freeman concluded, \"While it's not quite as open-ended in scope as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", it has plenty of potential. It's hardly flawless, but \"Gamma World\" is one of the best things TSR has produced.\"\nIn Issue 11 of the French games magazine \"Jeu et Strat\u00e9gie\", Michel Brassinne found the game mechanics only ordinary, but noted \"the mutation table is a gem worth its weight in gold, it is indeed sometimes hilarious.\" Brassinne pointed out that because of similarities in rules, this game could theoretically be combined with other TSR games such as \"AD&amp;D\", but he warned, \"be careful, because this is not a walk of pleasure \u2014 I experienced it with characters from \"D&amp;D\" and I can assure you that I will not do it again soon.\" Brassinne concluded, \"Given dice, cards, modules, pencils and time, the result will be long, exciting sleepless nights.\"\nChris Baylis reviewed the second edition for \"Imagine\" magazine, and stated that \"For a post nuclear holocaust role-playing game, \"Gamma World\" game has just about all the right ingredients, in the correct proportions. It is a very good introduction into the fantasy world of role-playing, and should seriously rival all other RPGs.\"\nIn the August 1984 issue of \"Asimov's Science Fiction\", Dana Lombardy called the redesign of the 2nd edition \"so extensive it should be considered a new game ... \"Gamma World\" offers one of the more bizarre and hostile environments to role-play in.\" Lombardy did note that \"the technology is disjointed. You can have a dog-man with a spear fighting alongside a robot with a laser, allied against humanoids with pistols and swords.\" Lombardy concluded, \"If you prefer more straightforward science fiction with known and approximately equal abilities and weapons, then \"Gamma World\" may not be for you. It's a topsy-turvy world, where the average pure-strain human is hard-pressed to exist among plants and animals mutated by humanity's wars. But if you like a challenge, and want to role-play something really different \u2014 \"Gamma World\" could be it.\"\nIn Issue 37 of the French games magazine \"Casus Belli\", Denis Beck found many improvements in the third edition, writing, \"Even if \"Gamma World\" sometimes reminds us of a transposition of \"AD&amp;D\" into the future, this new version \u2014 where we do not find the many problems that handicapped the previous editions \u2014 really looks good alongside other post-apocalypse games.\" Beck concluded, \"It may not be the game of the year, but fans of The Great Upheaval will find plenty to enjoy here.\"\nIn his 1990 book \"The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games\", game critic Rick Swan reviewed the 3rd edition and commented \"Though \"Gamma World\" may sound like a loony-bin version of \"\", it makes for some exciting adventures as the PCs explore a high-tech wonderland of mysterious landmarks and artifacts\". Swan concluded by giving the game a rating of 3 out of 4, saying, \"It's a bang-up job [...] that is, if you don't take your nuclear holocausts too seriously.\"\nGene Alloway reviewed the Complete 4th Edition Game of \"Gamma World\" in \"White Wolf\" #36 (1993), rating it a 3 out of 5 and stated that \"\"Gamma World\" has not undergone a massive overhaul from the third edition. But it does seem better to me and to those around me familiar with both versions. It is an enjoyable, entertaining trip through an America that isn't quite what it used to be. If you like science fiction that takes some latitude with the laws of nature, you should visit \"Gamma World, Fourth Edition\": it'll be a fun 'wahoo experience.'\"\nScott Taylor for \"Black Gate\" in 2013 rated \"Gamma World\" as #8 in the top ten role-playing games of all time, saying \"There seems to be an innate fascination with the end of the world, be it from a global thermal nuclear war, zombie outbreak, alien invasion, or super-bug and \"Gamma World\" finds a way to bring the fantastic to this type of setting. It has survived seven editions and three companies, but still, \"Gamma World\" remains a fun and functional game in the current RPG marketplace.\"\nCancelled video game.\nIn 2011, a video game adaptation was announced at E3 called \"Gamma World: Alpha Mutation\" for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and PC. It was to be developed by Bedlam Games and published by Atari. The video game was later cancelled.\nLegacy.\nThe Swedish role playing game \"Mutant\", released in 1984 by \u00c4ventyrsspel, was first pitched to its future writer as \"Gamma World, set in Sweden\".\nThe post-apocalyptic premise of the 1997 computer game \"Fallout\" was inspired by \"Gamma World.\" Game creator Tim Cain said it was not the most balanced RPG but it had a good spirit to it.\n\"Gamma World\" was cited as a source of inspiration for the procedurally generated world-building in Caves of Qud.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12284", "revid": "2308716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12284", "title": "Grimoire", "text": "Book of magic spells, invocations, and talismans\nA grimoire () (also known as a book of spells, magic book, or a spellbook) is a textbook of magic, typically including instructions on how to create magical objects like talismans and amulets; how to perform magical spells, charms, and divination; and how to summon or invoke supernatural entities such as angels, spirits, deities, and demons. In many cases, the books themselves are believed to be imbued with magical powers. The only contents found in a grimoire are information on spells, rituals, the preparation of magical tools, and lists of ingredients and their magical correspondences. In this manner, while all \"books on magic\" could be thought of as grimoires, not all \"magical books\" should be thought of as grimoires.\nWhile the term \"grimoire\" is originally European\u2014and many Europeans throughout history, particularly ceremonial magicians and cunning folk, have used grimoires\u2014the historian Owen Davies has noted that similar books can be found all around the world, ranging from Jamaica to Sumatra. He also noted that in this sense, the world's first grimoires were created in Europe and the ancient Near East.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"grimoire\" is unclear. It is most commonly believed that the term \"grimoire\" originated from the Old French word \"grammaire\" 'grammar', which had initially been used to refer to all books written in Latin. By the 18th century, the term had gained its now common usage in France and had begun to be used to refer purely to books of magic. Owen Davies presumed this was because \"many of them continued to circulate in Latin manuscripts\".\nHowever, the term \"grimoire\" later developed into a figure of speech among the French indicating something that was hard to understand. In the 19th century, with the increasing interest in occultism among the British following the publication of Francis Barrett's \"The Magus\" (1801), the term entered English in reference to books of magic.\nHistory.\nAncient period.\nThe earliest known written magical incantations come from ancient Mesopotamia (modern Iraq), where they have been found inscribed on cuneiform clay tablets that archaeologists excavated from the city of Uruk and dated to between the 5th and 4th centuries BC. The ancient Egyptians also employed magical incantations, which have been found inscribed on amulets and other items. The Egyptian magical system, known as heka, was greatly altered and expanded after the Macedonians, led by Alexander the Great, invaded Egypt in 332 BC.\nUnder the next three centuries of Hellenistic Egypt, the Coptic writing system evolved, and the Library of Alexandria was opened. This likely had an influence upon books of magic, with the trend on known incantations switching from simple health and protection charms to more specific things, such as financial success and sexual fulfillment. Around this time the legendary figure of Hermes Trismegistus developed as a conflation of the Egyptian god Thoth and the Greek Hermes; this figure was associated with writing and magic and, therefore, of books on magic.\nThe ancient Greeks and Romans believed that books on magic were invented by the Persians. The 1st-century AD writer Pliny the Elder stated that magic had been first discovered by the ancient philosopher Zoroaster around the year 647 BC but that it was only written down in the 5th century BC by the magician Osthanes. His claims are not, however, supported by modern historians.\nThe ancient Jewish people were often viewed as being knowledgeable in magic, which, according to legend, they had learned from Moses, who had learned it in Egypt. Among many ancient writers, Moses was seen as an Egyptian rather than a Jew. Two manuscripts likely dating to the 4th century, both of which purport to be the legendary eighth Book of Moses (the first five being the initial books in the Biblical Old Testament), present him as a polytheist who explained how to conjure gods and subdue demons.\nMeanwhile, there is definite evidence of grimoires being used by certain\u2014particularly Gnostic\u2014sects of early Christianity. In the \"Book of Enoch\" found within the Dead Sea Scrolls, for instance, there is information on astrology and the angels. In possible connection with the \"Book of Enoch\", the idea of Enoch and his great-grandson Noah having some involvement with books of magic given to them by angels continued through to the medieval period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Many of those [in Ephesus] who believed [in Christianity] now came and openly confessed their evil deeds. A number who had practised sorcery brought their scrolls together and burned them publicly. When they calculated the value of the scrolls, the total came to fifty thousand drachmas. In this way the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power.\"\nActs 19, c.\u20091st century\nIsraelite King Solomon was a Biblical figure associated with magic and sorcery in the ancient world. The 1st-century Romano-Jewish historian Josephus mentioned a book circulating under the name of Solomon that contained incantations for summoning demons and described how a Jew called Eleazar used it to cure cases of possession. The book may have been the \"Testament of Solomon\" but was more probably a different work. The pseudepigraphic \"Testament of Solomon\" is one of the oldest magical texts. It is a Greek manuscript attributed to Solomon and was likely written in either Babylonia or Egypt sometime in the first five centuries AD; over 1,000 years after Solomon's death.\nThe work tells of the building of The Temple and relates that construction was hampered by demons until the archangel Michael gave the King a magical ring. The ring, engraved with the Seal of Solomon, had the power to bind demons from doing harm. Solomon used it to lock demons in jars and commanded others to do his bidding, although eventually, according to the \"Testament\", he was tempted into worshiping \"false gods\", such as Moloch, Baal, and Rapha. Subsequently, after losing favour with God, King Solomon wrote the work as a warning and a guide to the reader.\nWhen Christianity became the dominant faith of the Roman Empire, the early Church frowned upon the propagation of books on magic, connecting it with paganism, and burned books of magic. The New Testament records that after the unsuccessful exorcism by the seven sons of Sceva became known, many converts decided to burn their own magic and pagan books in the city of Ephesus; this advice was adopted on a large scale after the Christian ascent to power.\nMedieval period.\nIn the medieval period, the production of grimoires continued in Christendom, as well as amongst Jews and the followers of the newly founded Islamic faith. As the historian Owen Davies noted, \"while the [Christian] Church was ultimately successful in defeating pagan worship it never managed to demarcate clearly and maintain a line of practice between religious devotion and magic.\" The use of such books on magic continued. In Christianised Europe, the Church divided books of magic into two kinds: those that dealt with \"natural magic\" and those that dealt in \"demonic magic\".\nThe former was acceptable because it was viewed as merely taking note of the powers in nature that were created by God; for instance, the Anglo-Saxon leechbooks, which contained simple spells for medicinal purposes, were tolerated. Demonic magic was not acceptable, because it was believed that such magic did not come from God, but from the Devil and his demons. These grimoires dealt in such topics as necromancy, divination and demonology. Despite this, \"there is ample evidence that the mediaeval clergy were the main practitioners of magic and therefore the owners, transcribers, and circulators of grimoires\", while several grimoires were attributed to popes.\nOne such Arabic grimoire devoted to astral magic, the 10th-century \"Gh\u00e2yat al-Hak\u00eem\", was later translated into Latin and circulated in Europe during the 13th century under the name of the \"Picatrix\". However, not all such grimoires of this era were based upon Arabic sources. The 13th-century \"Sworn Book of Honorius\", for instance, was (like the ancient \"Testament of Solomon\" before it) largely based on the supposed teachings of the Biblical king Solomon and included ideas such as prayers and a ritual circle, with the mystical purpose of having visions of God, Hell, and Purgatory and gaining much wisdom and knowledge as a result. Another was the Hebrew \"Sefer Raziel Ha-Malakh\", translated in Europe as the \"Liber Razielis Archangeli\".\nA later book also claiming to have been written by Solomon was originally written in Greek during the 15th century, where it was known as the \"Magical Treatise of Solomon\" or the \"Little Key of the Whole Art of Hygromancy, Found by Several Craftsmen and by the Holy Prophet Solomon\". In the 16th century, this work had been translated into Latin and Italian, being renamed the \"Clavicula Salomonis\", or the \"Key of Solomon\".\nIn Christendom during the medieval age, grimoires were written that were attributed to other ancient figures, thereby supposedly giving them a sense of authenticity because of their antiquity. The German abbot and occultist Trithemius (1462\u20131516) supposedly had a \"Book of Simon the Magician\", based upon the New Testament figure of Simon Magus.\nSimilarly, it was commonly believed by medieval people that other ancient figures, such as the poet Virgil, astronomer Ptolemy, and philosopher Aristotle, had been involved in magic, and grimoires claiming to have been written by them were circulated. However, there were those who did not believe this; for instance, the Franciscan friar Roger Bacon (c.\u00a01214\u20131294) stated that books falsely claiming to be by ancient authors \"ought to be prohibited by law\".\nEarly modern period.\nAs the early modern period commenced in the late 15th century, many changes began to shock Europe that would have an effect on the production of grimoires. Historian Owen Davies classed the most important of these as the Protestant Reformation, and subsequent Catholic Counter-Reformation; The Witch-hunts, and the advent of printing. The Renaissance saw the continuation of interest in magic that had been found in the medieval period, and in this period, there was an increased interest in Hermeticism among occultists and ceremonial magicians in Europe, largely fueled by the 1471 translation of the ancient \"Corpus hermeticum\" into Latin by Marsilio Ficino (1433\u201399).\nAlongside this, there was a rise in interest in the Jewish mysticism known as the Kabbalah, which was spread across the continent by Pico della Mirandola and Johannes Reuchlin. The most important magician of the Renaissance was Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa (1486\u20131535), who widely studied occult topics and earlier grimoires and eventually published his own, the \"Three Books of Occult Philosophy\", in 1533. A similar figure was the Swiss magician known as Paracelsus (1493\u20131541), who published \"Of the Supreme Mysteries of Nature\", in which he emphasised the distinction between good and bad magic. A third such individual was Johann Georg Faust, upon whom several pieces of later literature were written, such as Christopher Marlowe's \"Doctor Faustus\", that portrayed him as consulting with demons.\nThe idea of demonology had remained strong in the Renaissance, and several demonological grimoires were published, including \"The Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy\", which falsely claimed to having been authored by Cornelius Agrippa, and the \"Pseudomonarchia Daemonum\", which listed 69 demons. To counter this, the Roman Catholic Church authorised the production of many works of exorcism, the rituals of which were often very similar to those of demonic conjuration. Alongside these demonological works, grimoires on natural magic continued to be produced, including \"Magia Naturalis\", written by Giambattista Della Porta (1535\u20131615).\nIceland held magical traditions in regional work as well, most remarkably the Galdrab\u00f3k, where numerous symbols of mystic origin are dedicated to the practitioner. These pieces give a perfect fusion of Germanic pagan and Christian influence, seeking splendid help from the Norse gods and referring to the titles of demons.\nThe advent of printing in Europe meant that books could be mass-produced for the first time and could reach an ever-growing literate audience. Among the earliest books to be printed were magical texts. The \"n\u00f3minas\" were one example, consisting of prayers to the saints used as talismans. It was particularly in Protestant countries, such as Switzerland and the German states, which were not under the domination of the Roman Catholic Church, where such grimoires were published.\nDespite the advent of print, however, handwritten grimoires remained highly valued, as they were believed to contain inherent magical powers, and they continued to be produced. With increasing availability, people lower down the social scale and women began to have access to books on magic; this was often incorporated into the popular folk magic of the average people and, in particular, that of the cunning folk, who were professionally involved in folk magic. These works left Europe and were imported to the parts of Latin America controlled by the Spanish and Portuguese empires and the parts of North America controlled by the British and French empires.\nThroughout this period, the Inquisition, a Roman Catholic organisation, had organised the mass suppression of peoples and beliefs that they considered heretical. In many cases, grimoires were found in the heretics' possessions and destroyed. In 1599, the church published the \"Indexes of Prohibited Books\", in which many grimoires were listed as forbidden, including several mediaeval ones, such as the \"Key of Solomon\", which were still popular.\nIn Christendom, there also began to develop a widespread fear of witchcraft, which was believed to be Satanic in nature. The subsequent hysteria, mostly a Protestant phenomenon and partly known as The Witch-hunts, caused the death of around 40,000 people, most of whom were women. Sometimes, those found with grimoires\u2014particularly demonological ones\u2014were prosecuted and dealt with as witches but, in most cases, those accused had no access to such books. Iceland\u2014which had a relatively high literacy rate\u2014proved an exception to this, with a third of the 134 witch trials held involving people who had owned grimoires. By the end of the Early Modern period, and the beginning of the Enlightenment, many European governments brought in laws prohibiting many superstitious beliefs in an attempt to bring an end to the Witch Hunts; this would invariably affect the release of grimoires.\nMeanwhile, Hermeticism and the Kabbalah would influence the creation of a mystical philosophy known as Rosicrucianism, which first appeared in the early 17th century, when two pamphlets detailing the existence of the mysterious Rosicrucian group were published in Germany. These claimed that Rosicrucianism had originated with a medieval figure known as Christian Rosenkreuz, who had founded the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross; however, there was no evidence for the existence of Rosenkreuz or the Brotherhood.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe 18th century saw the rise of the Enlightenment, a movement devoted to science and rationalism, predominantly amongst the ruling classes. However, amongst much of Europe, belief in magic and witchcraft persisted, as did the witch trials in certain areas. Governments tried to crack down on magicians and fortune tellers, particularly in France, where the police viewed them as social pests who took money from the gullible, often in a search for treasure. In doing so, they confiscated many grimoires.\nBeginning in the 17th century, a new, ephemeral form of printed literature developed in France; the \"Biblioth\u00e8que bleue\". Many grimoires published through this circulated among a growing percentage of the populace; in particular, the \"Grand Albert\", the \"Petit Albert\" (1782), the \"Grimoire du Pape Honorius\", and the \"Enchiridion Leonis Papae\". The \"Petit Albert\" contained a wide variety of magic; for instance, dealing in simple charms for ailments, along with more complex things, such as the instructions for making a Hand of Glory.\nIn the late 18th and early 19th centuries, following the French Revolution of 1789, a hugely influential grimoire was published under the title of the \"Grand Grimoire\", which was considered particularly powerful, because it involved conjuring and making a pact with the devil's chief minister, Lucifug\u00e9 Rofocale, to gain wealth from him. A new version of this grimoire was later published under the title of the \"Dragon rouge\" and was available for sale in many Parisian bookstores. Similar books published in France at this time included the \"Black Pullet\" and the \"Grimoirium Verum\". The \"Black Pullet\", probably authored in late-18th-century Rome or France, differs from the typical grimoires in that it does not claim to be a manuscript from antiquity, but told by a man who was a member of Napoleon's armed expeditionary forces in Egypt.\nThe widespread availability of printed grimoires in France\u2014despite the opposition of both the rationalists and the church\u2014soon spread to neighbouring countries, such as Spain and Germany. In Switzerland, Geneva was commonly associated with the occult at the time, particularly by Catholics, because it had been a stronghold of Protestantism. Many of those interested in the esoteric traveled from Roman Catholic nations to Switzerland to purchase grimoires or to study with occultists. Soon, grimoires appeared that involved Catholic saints; one example that appeared during the 19th century, and became relatively popular\u2014particularly in Spain\u2014was the \"Libro de San Cipriano\", or \"The Book of St. Ciprian\", which falsely claimed to date from c.\u00a01000. As with most grimoires of this period, it dealt with (among other things) how to discover treasure.\nIn Germany, with the increased interest in folklore during the 19th century, many historians took an interest in magic and in grimoires. Several published extracts of such grimoires in their own books on the history of magic, thereby helping to further propagate them. Perhaps the most notable of these was the Protestant pastor Georg Conrad Horst (1767 \u20131832) who, from 1821 to 1826, published a six-volume collection of magical texts in which he studied grimoires as a peculiarity of the medieval mindset.\nAnother scholar of the time interested in grimoires, the antiquarian bookseller Johann Scheible first published the \"Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses\"; two influential magical texts that claimed to have been written by the ancient Jewish figure Moses. \"The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses\" were among the works which later spread to the countries of Scandinavia, where\u2014in Danish and Swedish\u2014grimoires were known as black books and were commonly found among members of the army.\nIn Britain, new grimoires continued to be produced throughout the 18th century, such as Ebenezer Sibly's \"A New and Complete Illustration of the Celestial Science of Astrology\". In the last decades of that century, London experienced a revival of interest in the occult which was further propagated by Francis Barrett's publication of \"The Magus\" in 1801. \"The Magus\" contained many things taken from older grimoires\u2014particularly those of Cornelius Agrippa\u2014and, while not achieving initial popularity upon release, it gradually became an influential text.\nOne of Barrett's pupils, John Parkin, created his own handwritten grimoire \"The Grand Oracle of Heaven, or, The Art of Divine Magic\", although it was never published, largely because Britain was at war with France, and grimoires were commonly associated with the French. The only writer to publish British grimoires widely in the early 19th century was Robert Cross Smith, who released \"The Philosophical Merlin\" (1822) and \"The Astrologer of the Nineteenth Century\" (1825), but neither sold well.\nIn the late 19th century, several of these texts (including \"The Book of Abramelin\" and the \"Key of Solomon\") were reclaimed by para-Masonic magical organisations, such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and Ordo Templi Orientis.\n20th and 21st centuries.\n\"The Secret Grimoire of Turiel\" claims to have been written in the 16th century, but no copy older than 1927 has been produced.\nA modern grimoire, the \"Simon Necronomicon\", takes its name from a fictional book of magic in the stories of H. P. Lovecraft which was inspired by Babylonian mythology and the \"Ars Goetia\"\u2014one of the five books that make up \"The\" \"Lesser Key of Solomon\"\u2014concerning the summoning of demons. \"The Azo\u00ebtia\" of Andrew D. Chumbley has been described by Gavin Semple as a modern grimoire.\nThe neopagan religion of Wicca publicly appeared in the 1940s, and Gerald Gardner introduced the \"Book of Shadows\" as a Wiccan grimoire.\nThe term grimoire commonly serves as an alternative name for a spell book or tome of magical knowledge in fantasy fiction and role-playing games. The most famous fictional grimoire is the \"Necronomicon\", a creation of H.\u00a0P. Lovecraft.\nList of grimoires and related works.\nOriginal works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDissertations of grimoires.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12285", "revid": "1992196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12285", "title": "Grand Guignol", "text": "1897\u20131962 theatre in Paris, France\nThe Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Grand-Guignol () was a theater in the Pigalle district of Paris (7, cit\u00e9 Chaptal). From its opening in 1897 until its closing in 1962, it specialized in horror shows. Its name is often used as a general term for graphic, amoral horror entertainment, a genre popular from Elizabethan and Jacobean theater (for instance Shakespeare's \"Titus Andronicus\", and Webster's \"The Duchess of Malfi\" and \"The White Devil\"), to today's splatter films.\nTheater.\nThe Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Grand-Guignol was founded in 1897 by Oscar M\u00e9t\u00e9nier, who planned it as a space for naturalist performance. With 293 seats, the venue was the smallest in Paris.\nA former chapel, the theatre's previous life was evident in the which looked like and in the angels over the orchestra. Although the architecture created frustrating obstacles, the design that was initially a predicament ultimately became beneficial to the marketing of the theatre. The opaque furniture and gothic structures placed sporadically on the walls of the building exude a feeling of eeriness from the moment of entrance. People came to this theatre for an experience, not only to see a show. The audience at Grand Guignol endured the terror of the shows because they wanted to be filled with strong \"feelings\" of something. Many attended the shows to get a feeling of sexual arousal. \nUnderneath the balcony were boxes (originally built for nuns to watch church services) that were available for theatre-goers to rent during performances because they would get so aroused by the action happening on stage. It has been said that audience members would get so boisterous in the boxes, that actors would sometimes break character and yell something such as \"Keep it down in there!\" Conversely, there were audience members who could not physically handle the brutality of the actions taking place on stage. Frequently, the \"special effects\" would be too realistic and often an audience member would faint or vomit during performances. Theater director Max Maurey used the goriness to his advantage by hiring doctors to be at performances as a marketing ploy.\nThe theatre owed its name to Guignol, a traditional Lyonnaise puppet character, joining political commentary with the style of Punch and Judy.\nThe theatre's peak was between World War I and World War II, when it was frequented by royalty and celebrities in evening dress.\nImportant people.\nOscar M\u00e9t\u00e9nier was the Grand Guignol's founder and original director. Under his direction, the theater produced plays about a class of people who were not considered appropriate subjects in other venues: prostitutes, criminals, street urchins and others at the lower end of Paris's social echelon.\nAndr\u00e9 Antoine was the founder of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Libre and a collaborator of M\u00e9t\u00e9nier. His theater gave M\u00e9t\u00e9nier a basic model to use for The Grand Guignol theater.\nMax Maurey served as director from 1898 to 1914. Maurey shifted the theater's emphasis to the horror plays it would become famous for and judged the success of a performance by the number of patrons who passed out from shock; the average was two faintings each evening. Maurey discovered Andr\u00e9 de Lorde, who would become the most important playwright for the theater.\nDe Lorde was the theater's principal playwright from 1901 to 1926. He wrote at least 100 plays for the Grand Guignol, such as \"The Old Woman\", \"The Ultimate Torture\", \"A Crime in the Mad House\" and more. He collaborated with experimental psychologist Alfred Binet to create plays about insanity, one of the theater's favorite and frequently recurring themes.\nCamille Choisy served as director from 1914 to 1930. He contributed his expertise in special effects and scenery to the theater's distinctive style.\nPaula Maxa was one of the Grand Guignol's best-known performers. From 1917 to the 1930s, she performed most frequently as a victim and was known as \"the most assassinated woman in the world.\" During her career at the Grand Guignol, Maxa's characters were murdered more than 10,000 times in at least 60 different ways and raped at least 3,000 times.\nJack Jouvin served as director from 1930 to 1937. He shifted the theater's subject matter, focusing performances not on gory horror but psychological drama. Under his leadership, the theater's popularity waned and, after World War II, it was not well-attended.\nCharles Nonon was the theater's last director.\nPlays.\nIn a typical Grand Guignol performance patrons would see five or six short plays, all in a style that attempted to be brutally true to the theater's naturalistic ideals. The most popular and best-known were the horror plays, which featured a distinctly bleak worldview and gory special effects, particularly in their climaxes. The horrors depicted at Grand Guignol were generally not supernatural; rather these plays often explored altered states like insanity, hypnosis, or panic. To heighten the effect, the horror plays were often alternated with comedies, a lineup referred to as \"hot and cold showers.\"\nExamples of Grand Guignol horror shows included:\nClosure.\nAudiences waned in the years following World War II, and the Grand Guignol closed its doors in 1962. Management attributed the closure in part to the fact that the theater's faux horrors had been eclipsed by the actual events of the Holocaust two decades earlier. \"We could never equal Buchenwald,\" said its final director, Charles Nonon. \"Before the war, everyone felt that what was happening onstage was impossible. Now we know that these things, and worse, are possible in reality.\"\nThe Grand Guignol building still exists. It is occupied by the International Visual Theatre, a company devoted to presenting plays in sign language.\nThematic and structural analysis.\nWhile the original Grand Guignol attempted to present naturalistic horror, the performances would seem melodramatic and heightened to today's audiences. For this reason, the term is often applied to films and plays of a stylized nature with heightened acting, melodrama and theatrical effects such as \"\", \"Sleepy Hollow\", \"Quills\", and the Hammer Horror films that came before them. \"What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?\"; \"Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte\"; \"What Ever Happened to Aunt Alice?\"; \"What's the Matter with Helen?\"; \"Night Watch\" and \"Whoever Slew Auntie Roo?\" form a sub-branch of the genre called Grande Dame Guignol for its use of aging A-list actresses in sensational horror films.\nAudiences had strong reactions to the new disturbing themes the horror plays presented. One of the most prevalent themes staged at the Grand-Guignol was the demoralization and corruption of science. The \"evil doctor\" was a recurring trope in the horror shows performed. The popular show \"The System of Doctor Goudron and Professor Plume\" by Andr\u00e9 de Lorde displays a depiction of a doctor typical of the theater. Dr. Goudron is portrayed as manic, insane, unreliable. He is seen \"pac[ing] nervously\" and \"jumping on [a] desk and gesticulating\". Later Lorde depicts the scientist as violent, with Goudron attempting to carve out an eye and then bite the hands of guards. During the time, curiosity and skepticism ravaged science and medicine. The depiction of scientists at the Grand-Guignol reflected the public attitude of fear and disdain. Medical science held a reputation of \"terror and peculiar infamy\". Middle-class Parisian society believed science existed in a world of frivolity and falsehood, whereas art existed in a world of honesty. Poet Matthew Arnold is an exemplary lens to use in order to understand these sympathies.\nThe themes the Grand-Guignol introduced into the horror genre affected how the genre exists today. The Grand-Guignol's introduction of naturalism into horror \"unmasked brutality of contemporary culture\". Previously, horror served as escapism, dealing with the supernatural and unrelatable.305 After the theater introduced relatable topics into the genre, the audience could visualize the plots taking place and thus experienced greater fear - the Grand-Guignol transformed the horror plot into something the audience could feel personally. Horror became a vehicle for ideas and philosophy where deep \"insights gave way to spectacle, and spectacle to violence and gore, until in the end little was left but the gore\". Today the horror genre begins with \"optimism and hope\", which \"wither before random, chaotic, and inevitable violence\".\nLegacy and revivals.\nGrand Guignol flourished briefly in London in the early 1920s under the direction of Jose Levy, where it attracted the talents of Sybil Thorndike, No\u00ebl Coward, and Richard Hughes (whose one-act play \"The Sisters' Tragedy\" was said to outshine even Coward's), and a series of short English \"Grand Guignol\" films (using original screenplays, not play adaptations) was made at the same time, directed by Fred Paul. Several of the films exist at the BFI National Archive.\nThe Grand Guignol was revived once again in London in 1945, under the direction of Frederick Witney, where it ran for two seasons at the Granville Theater. These included premiers of Witney's own work as well as adaptations of French originals.\nIn 2010, English director-writer, Richard Mazda, re-introduced New York audiences to the Grand Guignol. His acting troupe, The Queens Players, did six mainstage productions of Grand Guignol plays, and Mazda wrote new plays in the classic Guignol style. The sixth production, \"Theater of Fear\", included De Lorde's adaptation of Poe's \"The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether\" (\"Le Syst\u00e9me du Dr Goudron et Pr Plume\") as well as two original plays, \"Double Crossed\" and \"The Good Death\" alongside \"The Tell Tale Heart\".\nThe 1963 mondo film \"Ecco\" (Original title: \"Il mondo di notte numero 3\", directed by\nGianni Proia) includes a scene which may have been filmed at the Grand Guignol theater during its final years.\nThe Swiss theater company Compagnie Pied de Biche has revisited the Grand Guignol genre in contemporary contexts since 2008. The company staged in 2010 a diptych \"Impact &amp; Dr. Incubis\", based on original texts by Nicolas Yazgi and directed by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Ozier. More than literal adaptations, the plays address violence, death, crime and fear in contemporary contexts, while revisiting many trope of the original Grand Guignol corpus, often with humor.\nThe recently formed London-based Grand Guignol company Theatre of the Damned, brought their first production to the Camden Fringe in 2010 and produced the award nominated \"Grand Guignol\" in November of that year. In 2011, they staged \"Revenge of the Grand Guignol\" at the Courtyard theater, London, as part of the London Horror Festival.\nBetween 2011 and 2016, the Baltimore-based Yellow Sign Theater performed Grand Guignol productions (including a heavily updated version of \"Le Syst\u00e9me du Dr Goudron et Pr Plume\") as well as integrating Guignol elements into other performance forms.\nIn November 2014, 86 years after the last show of Alfredo Sainati's \"La Compagnia del Grand-Guignol\", founded in 1908 and which had been the only example of Grand Guignol in Italy, the Convivio d'Arte Company presented in Milan \"Grand Guignol de Milan: Le Cabaret des Vampires\". The show was an original tribute to Grand Guignol, a horror vaudeville with various horror and grotesque performances such as monologues, live music and burlesque, with a satirical black humor conduction.\nSince 2022 Yorkshire-based theater company Contortium have been touring \"Tales of the Bizarre\", a modern revival of the Grand Guignol, presenting a mixture of new pieces by various writers, and adapted originals.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "12286", "revid": "1130897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12286", "title": "Great Plague of London", "text": "Epidemic of bubonic plague, 1665\u201366\nThe Great Plague of London, lasting from 1665 to 1666, was the most recent major epidemic of the bubonic plague to occur in England. It happened within the centuries-long Second Pandemic, a period of intermittent bubonic plague epidemics that originated in Central Asia in 1331 (the first year of the Black Death), and included related diseases such as pneumonic plague and septicemic plague, which lasted until 1750.\nThe Great Plague killed an estimated 100,000 people\u2014almost a quarter of London's population\u2014in 18 months. The plague was caused by the \"Yersinia pestis\" bacterium, which is usually transmitted to a human by the bite of a flea or louse.\nThe 1665\u201366 epidemic was on a much smaller scale than the earlier Black Death pandemic. It became known afterwards as the \"great\" plague mainly because it was the last widespread outbreak of bubonic plague in England during the 400-year Second Pandemic.\nLondon in 1665.\nThe plague was endemic in 17th-century London, as it was in other European cities at the time. The disease periodically erupted into massive epidemics. There were 30,000 deaths due to the plague in 1603, 35,000 in 1625, 10,000 in 1636, and smaller numbers in other years.\nIn late 1664, a bright comet was seen in the sky, and the people of London became fearful, wondering what evil event it portended. London at that time was a city of about 448 acres surrounded by a city wall that had originally been built to keep out raiding bands, and, in the south, by the River Thames. There were gates in the wall at Ludgate, Newgate, Aldersgate, Cripplegate, Moorgate, Bishopsgate and Aldgate, and the Thames was crossable at London Bridge. In the poorer parts of the city, filled with overcrowded tenements and garrets, hygiene was impossible to maintain. There was no sanitation, and open drains flowed along the centre of winding streets. The cobbles were slippery with animal droppings, rubbish and the slops thrown out of the houses; they were muddy and buzzing with flies in summer, and awash with sewage in winter. The City Corporation employed \"rakers\" to remove the worst of the filth, and it was transported to mounds outside the walls, where it accumulated and continued to decompose. The stench was overwhelming, and people walked around with handkerchiefs or nosegays pressed against their nostrils.\nSome of the city's necessities, such as coal, arrived by barge, but most came by road. Carts, carriages, horses and pedestrians were crowded together, and the gateways in the wall formed bottlenecks through which it was difficult to progress. The nineteen-arch London Bridge was even more congested. Those who were better-off used hackney carriages and sedan chairs to get to their destinations without getting filthy. The poor walked, and might be drenched by water tossed up by wheeled vehicles, slops thrown into the street, or water pouring off overhanging roofs. Another hazard was the choking black smoke belching forth from soap factories, breweries, iron smelters and about 15,000 households that were burning coal to heat their homes.\nOutside the city walls, shanty towns with wooden shacks and no sanitation had sprung up, providing homes for the craftsmen and tradespeople who had flocked to the already overcrowded city. The government had tried to limit the development of these \"suburbs\", but had failed: Over a quarter of a million people lived in them. When Royalists had fled the country during the Commonwealth, they had left many fine town houses vacant, and some immigrants to London had crowded into them, converting them into tenements that housed different families in every room. These properties were soon vandalised and became rat-infested.\nThe City of London proper was administered by the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen and the common councillors, but some parts of the greater metropolitan area were not legally part of the city. Some of these areas, both inside the City walls and outside its boundaries, had long been organised into districts of various sizes, called \"liberties\", that had historically been granted rights to self-government. (Many had originally been associated with the religious institutions that were abolished in the Dissolution of the Monasteries, whereupon their historic rights and property had been transferred to secular owners.)\nBy 1665, the walled City was surrounded by a ring of liberties which had come under its authority, and these had come to be referred to collectively as 'the City and Liberties'. However, this area was surrounded by additional suburbs with other independent administrations. For example, Westminster was an independent town with its own liberties, joined to London by urban development, and the Tower of London was an independent liberty. Areas that were not part of any of these various independent administrations came under the authority of the county of Middlesex if they were north of the river, and under the authority of Surrey if they were south of the river.\nAt that time, bubonic plague was a much feared disease, but its cause was not understood. Many mistakenly blamed emanations from the earth, \"pestilential effluvia\", unusual weather, sickness in livestock, abnormal behaviour of animals or an increase in the numbers of moles, frogs, mice or flies. It was not until 1894 that its causal agent, the bacterium \"Yersinia pestis\", was identified by Alexandre Yersin, and its transmission by rat fleas became known. Although the Great Plague in London was long assumed to be bubonic plague, caused by \"Yersinia pestis\", this was only confirmed (by DNA analysis) in 2016. It is now believed that human body lice also played a key role in causing infections, perhaps more so than rats.\nThe recording of deaths.\nIn order to judge the severity of an epidemic, it is first necessary to know how big the population was in which it occurred. There was no official census of the population to provide this figure, and the best contemporary count comes from the work of John Graunt (1620\u20131674), who was one of the earliest Fellows of the Royal Society and one of the first demographers, bringing a scientific approach to the collection of statistics. In 1662, he estimated that 384,000 people lived in the City of London, the Liberties, Westminster and the out-parishes, based on figures in the Bills of Mortality published each week in the capital. These different districts with different administrations constituted the officially recognized extent of London as a whole. In 1665, he revised his estimate to \"not above 460,000\". Other contemporaries put the figure higher (the French Ambassador, for example, suggested 600,000), but with no mathematical basis to support their estimates. The next largest city in the kingdom was Norwich, with a population of 30,000.\nThere was no duty to report a death to anyone in authority. Instead, each parish appointed two or more \"searchers of the dead\", whose duty was to inspect a corpse and determine the cause of death. A searcher was entitled to charge a small fee from relatives for each death they reported, and so habitually the parish would appoint someone to the post who would otherwise be destitute and would be receiving support from the parish poor rate. Typically, this meant searchers would be old women who were illiterate, might know little about identifying diseases and who would be open to dishonesty. Searchers would typically learn about a death either from the local sexton who had been asked to dig a grave or from the tolling of a church bell. Anyone who did not report a death to their local church, such as Quakers, Anabaptists, other non-Anglican Christians or Jews, frequently did not get included in the official records. Searchers during times of plague were required to live apart from the community, avoid other people and carry a white stick to warn of their occupation when outdoors, and stay indoors except when performing their duties, to avoid spreading the diseases. Searchers reported to the Parish Clerk, who made a return each week to the Company of Parish Clerks in Brode Lane. Figures were then passed to the Lord Mayor and then to the Minister of State once plague became a matter of national concern. The reported figures were used to compile the Bills of Mortality, which listed total deaths in each parish and whether by the plague. The system of Searchers to report the cause of death continued until 1836.\nGraunt recorded the incompetence of the Searchers at identifying true causes of death, remarking on the frequent recording of 'consumption' rather than other diseases which were recognized then by physicians. He suggested a cup of ale and a doubling of their fee to two groats rather than one was sufficient for Searchers to change the cause of death to one more convenient for the householders. No one wished to be known as having had a death by plague in their household, and Parish Clerks, too, connived in covering up cases of plague in their official returns. Analysis of the Bills of Mortality during the months plague took hold shows a rise in deaths other than by plague well above the average death rate, a tell-tale sign of misrepresentation of the true cause of death. As plague spread, a system of quarantine was introduced, whereby any house where someone had died from plague would be locked up and no one allowed to enter or leave for 40 days. This frequently led to the deaths of the other inhabitants, by neglect if not from the plague, and provided ample incentive not to report the disease. The official returns record 68,596 cases of plague, but a reasonable estimate suggests this figure is 30,000 short of the true total. A plague house was marked with a red cross on the door with the words \"Lord have mercy upon us\", and a watchman stood guard outside.\nPreventive measures.\nReports of plague around Europe began to reach England in the 1660s, causing the Privy Council to consider what steps might be taken to prevent it crossing to England. Quarantining (isolation) of ships had been used during previous outbreaks and was again introduced for ships coming to London in November 1663, following outbreaks in Amsterdam and Hamburg. Two naval ships were assigned to intercept any vessels entering the Thames estuary. Ships from infected ports were required to moor at Hole Haven on Canvey Island for a \"trentine\" \u2013 period of 30 days \u2013 before being allowed to travel up-river. Ships from ports free of plague or completing their isolation period were given a certificate of health and allowed to travel on. A second inspection line was established between the forts on opposite banks of the Thames at Tilbury and Gravesend with instructions to pass only ships with a certificate.\nThe isolation period was increased to forty days \u2013 a \"quarantine\" \u2013 in May 1664 as the continental plague worsened, and the areas subject to quarantine changed with the news of the spread of plague to include all of Holland, Zeeland and Friesland (all regions of the Dutch Republic); restrictions on Hamburg were removed in November. Quarantine measures against ships coming from the Dutch Republic were put in place in 29 other ports from May, starting with Great Yarmouth. The Dutch ambassador objected at the constraint of trade with his country, but England responded that it had been one of the last countries introducing such restrictions. Regulations were enforced quite strictly, so that people or houses where voyagers had come ashore without serving their quarantine were also subjected to 40 days of quarantine.\nOutbreak.\nPlague was one of the hazards of life in Britain from its dramatic appearance in 1348 with the Black Death. The Bills of Mortality began to be published regularly in 1603, in which year 33,347 deaths were recorded from plague. Between then and 1665, only four years had no recorded cases. In 1563, a thousand people were reportedly dying in London each week. In 1593, there were 15,003 deaths, 1625 saw 41,313 dead, between 1640 and 1646 came 11,000 deaths, culminating in 3,597 for 1647. The 1625 outbreak was recorded at the time as the 'Great Plague', until deaths from the plague of 1665 surpassed it. These official figures are likely to under-report actual numbers.\nEarly days.\nPlague was sufficiently uncommon that medical practitioners might have had no personal experience of seeing the disease; medical training varied from those who had attended the college of physicians, to apothecaries who also acted as doctors, to charlatans. Other diseases abounded, such as an outbreak of smallpox the year before, and these uncertainties all added to difficulties identifying the true start of the epidemic. Contemporary accounts suggest cases of plague occurred through the winter of 1664\u201365, some of which were fatal but a number of which did not display the virulence of the later epidemic. The winter was cold, the ground frozen from December to March, river traffic on the Thames twice blocked by ice, and it may be that the cold weather held back its spread.\nThis outbreak of bubonic plague in England is thought to have spread from the Netherlands, where the disease had been occurring intermittently since 1599. It is unclear exactly where the disease first struck but the initial contagion may have arrived with Dutch trading ships carrying bales of cotton from Amsterdam, which was ravaged by the disease in 1663\u201364, with a mortality given of 50,000. The first areas to be struck are believed to be the dock areas just outside London, and the parish of St Giles. In both of these localities, poor workers were crowded into ill-kept structures. Two suspicious deaths were recorded in St Giles parish in 1664 and another in February 1665. These did not appear as plague deaths on the Bills of Mortality, so no control measures were taken by the authorities, but the total number of people dying in London during the first four months of 1665 showed a marked increase. By the end of April, only four plague deaths had been recorded, two in the parish of St. Giles, but total deaths per week had risen from around 290 to 398.\nThere had been three official cases in April, a level of plague which in earlier years had not induced any official response, but the Privy Council now acted to introduce household quarantine. Justices of the Peace in Middlesex were instructed to investigate any suspected cases and to shut up the house if it was confirmed. Shortly after, a similar order was issued by the King's Bench to the City and Liberties. A riot broke out in St. Giles when the first house was sealed up; the crowd broke down the door and released the inhabitants. Rioters caught were punished severely. Instructions were given to build pest-houses, which were essentially isolation hospitals built away from other people where the sick could be cared for (or stay until they died). This official activity suggests that despite the few recorded cases, the government was already aware that this was a serious outbreak of plague.\nWith the arrival of warmer weather, the disease began to take a firmer hold. In the week 2\u20139 May, there were three recorded deaths in the parish of St Giles, four in neighbouring St Clement Danes and one each in St Andrew Holborn and St Mary Woolchurch Haw. Only the last was actually inside the city walls. A Privy Council committee was formed to investigate methods to best prevent the spread of plague, and measures were introduced to close some of the ale houses in affected areas and limit the number of lodgers allowed in a household. In the city, the Lord Mayor issued a proclamation that all householders must diligently clean the streets outside their property, which was a householder's responsibility, not a state one (the city employed scavengers and rakers to remove the worst of the mess). Matters just became worse, and Aldermen were instructed to find and punish those failing their duty. As cases in St. Giles began to rise, an attempt was made to quarantine the area and constables were instructed to inspect everyone wishing to travel and contain inside vagrants or suspect persons.\nPeople began to be alarmed. Samuel Pepys, who had an important position at the Admiralty, stayed in London and provided a contemporary account of the plague through his diary. On 30 April he wrote: \"Great fears of the sickness here in the City it being said that two or three houses are already shut up. God preserve us all!\" Another source of information on the time is \"A Journal of the Plague Year\", which was written by Daniel Defoe and published in 1722. He had been only five when the plague struck but made use of his family's recollections (his uncle was a saddler in East London and his father a butcher in Cripplegate), interviews with survivors and sight of such official records as were available.\nThe onset of the disease was recalled two years later by Puritan minister Thomas Vincent:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExodus from the city.\nBy July 1665, plague was rampant in the City of London. The rich ran away, including King Charles II of England, his family and his court, who left the city for Salisbury, moving on to Oxford in September when some cases of plague occurred in Salisbury. The aldermen and most of the other city authorities opted to stay at their posts. The Lord Mayor of London, Sir John Lawrence, also decided to stay in the city. Businesses were closed when merchants and professionals fled. Defoe wrote \"Nothing was to be seen but wagons and carts, with goods, women, servants, children, coaches filled with people of the better sort, and horsemen attending them, and all hurrying away\". As the plague raged throughout the summer, only a small number of clergymen, physicians and apothecaries remained to cope with an increasingly large number of victims. Ellen Cotes, author of \"London's Dreadful Visitation\", expressed the hope that \"Neither the Physicians of our Souls or Bodies may hereafter in such great numbers forsake us\".\nThe poorer people were also alarmed by the contagion and some left the city, but it was not easy for them to abandon their accommodation and livelihoods for an uncertain future elsewhere. Before exiting through the city gates, they were required to possess a certificate of good health signed by the Lord Mayor and these became increasingly difficult to obtain. As time went by and the numbers of plague victims rose, people living in the villages outside London began to resent this exodus and were no longer prepared to accept townsfolk from London, with or without a certificate. The refugees were turned back, were not allowed to pass through towns and had to travel across country, and were forced to live rough on what they could steal or scavenge from the fields. Many died in wretched circumstances of starvation and dehydration in the hot summer that was to follow.\nHeight of the epidemic.\nIn the last week of July, the London Bill of Mortality showed 3,014 deaths, of which 2,020 had died from the plague. The number of deaths as a result of plague may have been underestimated, as deaths in other years in the same period were much lower, at around 300. As the number of victims affected mounted up, burial grounds became overfull, and pits were dug to accommodate the dead. Drivers of dead-carts travelled the streets calling \"Bring out your dead\" and carted away piles of bodies. The authorities became concerned that the number of deaths might cause public alarm and ordered that body removal and interment should take place only at night. As time went on, there were too many victims, and too few drivers, to remove the bodies which began to be stacked up against the walls of houses. Daytime collection was resumed and the plague pits became mounds of decomposing corpses. In the parish of Aldgate, a great hole was dug near the churchyard, fifty feet long and twenty feet wide. Digging was continued by labourers at one end while the dead-carts tipped in corpses at the other. When there was no room for further extension it was dug deeper until ground water was reached at twenty feet. When finally covered with earth it housed 1,114 corpses.\nPlague doctors traversed the streets diagnosing victims, many of them without formal medical training. Several public health efforts were attempted. Physicians were hired by city officials and burial details were carefully organized, but panic spread through the city and, out of the fear of contagion, bodies were hastily buried in overcrowded pits. The means of transmission of the disease were not known but thinking they might be linked to the animals, the City Corporation ordered a cull of dogs and cats. This decision may have extended the length of the epidemic since those animals could have helped keep in check the rat population carrying the fleas which transmitted the disease. Thinking bad air was involved in transmission, the authorities ordered giant bonfires to be burned in the streets and house fires to be kept burning night and day, in the hope that the air would be cleansed. Tobacco was thought to be a prophylactic and it was later said that no London tobacconist had died from the plague during the epidemic.\nTrade and business had dried up, and the streets were empty of people except for the dead-carts and the dying victims, as witnessed and recorded by Samuel Pepys in his diary: \"Lord! How empty the streets are and how melancholy, so many poor sick people in the streets full of sores\u2026 in Westminster, there is never a physician and but one apothecary left, all being dead.\" That people did not starve was down to the foresight of Sir John Lawrence and the Corporation of London who arranged for a commission of one farthing to be paid above the normal price for every quarter of corn landed in the Port of London. Another food source was the villages around London which, denied of their usual sales in the capital, left vegetables in specified market areas, negotiated their sale by shouting, and collected their payment after the money had been left submerged in a bucket of vinegar to \"disinfect\" the coins.\nRecords state that plague deaths in London and the suburbs crept up over the summer from 2,000 people per week to over 7,000 per week in September. These figures are likely to be a considerable underestimate. Many of the sextons and parish clerks who kept the records themselves died. Quakers refused to co-operate and many of the poor were just dumped into mass graves unrecorded. It is not clear how many people caught the disease and made a recovery because only deaths were recorded and many records were destroyed in the Great Fire of London the following year. In the few districts where intact records remain, plague deaths varied between 30% and over 50% of the total population.\nVincent wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe outbreak was concentrated in London, but it affected other areas as well. Perhaps the best known example occurred in the village of Eyam in Derbyshire. The plague allegedly arrived with a merchant carrying a parcel of cloth sent from London. The villagers imposed a quarantine on themselves to stop the further spread of the disease. This prevented the disease from moving into surrounding areas, but around 33% of the village's inhabitants died over a period of fourteen months. Other places hit hard included Derby and Norwich. In Bristol strenuous efforts by the City Council seems to have limited the death rate to c.0.6 per cent during an outbreak lasting from April to September 1666.\nAftermath.\nBy late autumn, the death toll in London and the suburbs began to slow until, in February 1666, it was considered safe enough for the King and his entourage to come back to the city. With the return of the monarch, others began to return: The gentry returned in their carriages accompanied by carts piled high with their belongings. The judges moved back from Windsor to sit in Westminster Hall; Parliament, which had been prorogued in April 1665, did not reconvene until September 1666. Trade recommenced and businesses and workshops opened up. London was the goal of a new wave of people who flocked to the city in expectation of making their fortunes. Writing at the end of March 1666, Lord Clarendon, the Lord Chancellor, stated \"...\u00a0the streets were as full, the Exchange as much crowded, the people in all places as numerous as they had ever been seen\u00a0...\".\nPlague cases continued to occur sporadically at a modest rate until mid-1666. That September, the Great Fire of London destroyed much of the City of London, and some people believed that the fire put an end to the epidemic. It is now thought that the plague had largely subsided before the fire took place. Most of the later cases of plague were found in the suburbs, and it was the City of London that was destroyed by the fire.\nAccording to the Bills of Mortality, there were in total 68,596 deaths in London from the plague in 1665. Lord Clarendon estimated that the true number of mortalities was probably twice that figure. 1666 saw further deaths in other cities but on a lesser scale. Dr Thomas Gumble, chaplain to the Duke of Albemarle, both of whom had stayed in London for the whole of the epidemic, estimated that the total death count for the country from plague during 1665 and 1666 was about 200,000. Among the more notable death victims were Samuel Fisher, John Godwin, John Lewger and George Starkey.\nThe Great Plague of 1665/1666 was the most recent major outbreak of bubonic plague in Great Britain. The last recorded death from plague came in 1679, and it was removed as a specific category in the Bills of Mortality after 1703. It spread to other towns in East Anglia and the southeast of England but fewer than ten per cent of parishes outside London had a higher than average death rate during those years. Urban areas were more affected than rural ones; Norwich, Ipswich, Colchester, Southampton and Winchester were badly affected, while the west of England and areas of the English Midlands escaped altogether.\nThe population of England in 1650 was approximately 5.25 million, which declined to about 4.9 million by 1680, recovering to just over 5 million by 1700. Other diseases, such as smallpox, took a high toll on the population without the contribution by plague. The higher death rate in cities, both generally and specifically from the plague, was made up by continuous immigration, from small towns to larger ones and from the countryside to the towns.\nThere were no contemporary censuses of London's population, but available records suggest that the population returned to its previous level within a couple of years. Burials in 1667 had returned to 1663 levels, Hearth Tax returns had recovered, and John Graunt contemporarily analysed baptism records and concluded they represented a recovered population. Part of this could be accounted for by the return of wealthy households, merchants and manufacturing industries, all of which needed to replace losses among their staff and took steps to bring in necessary people. Colchester had suffered more severe depopulation, but manufacturing records for cloth suggested that production had recovered or even increased by 1669, and the total population had nearly returned to pre-plague levels by 1674. Other towns did less well: Ipswich was affected less than Colchester, but in 1674, its population had dropped by 18%, more than could be accounted for by the plague deaths alone.\nAs a proportion of the population who died, the London death toll was less severe than in some other towns. The total of deaths in London was greater than in any previous outbreak for 100 years, though as a proportion of the population, the epidemics in 1563, 1603 and 1625 were comparable or greater. Perhaps around 2.5% of the English population died.\nImpact.\nThe plague in London largely affected the poor, as the rich were able to leave the city by either retiring to their country estates or residing with kin in other parts of the country. The subsequent Great Fire of London ruined many city merchants and property owners. As a result of these events, London was largely rebuilt and Parliament enacted the Rebuilding of London Act 1666. The street plan of the capital remained relatively unchanged, but some improvements were made: streets were widened, pavements were created, open sewers abolished, wooden buildings and overhanging gables forbidden, and the design and construction of buildings controlled. The use of brick or stone was mandatory and many gracious buildings were constructed. Not only was the capital rejuvenated, but it became a healthier environment in which to live. Londoners had a greater sense of community after they had overcome the great adversities of 1665 and 1666.\nRebuilding took over ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke as Surveyor of London. The architect Sir Christopher Wren was involved in the rebuilding of St Paul's Cathedral and more than fifty London churches. King Charles II did much to foster the rebuilding work. He was a patron of the arts and sciences and founded the Royal Observatory and supported the Royal Society, a scientific group whose early members included Robert Hooke, Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton. In fact, out of the fire and pestilence flowed a renaissance in the arts and sciences in England.\nPlague pits have been archaeologically excavated during underground construction work. Between 2011 and 2015, 3,500 burials from the 'New Churchyard' or 'Bethlam burial ground' were discovered during the construction of the Crossrail railway at Liverpool Street. \"Yersinia pestis\" DNA was found in the teeth of individuals found buried in pits at the site, confirming they had died of bubonic plague.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "12288", "revid": "29238288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12288", "title": "Ga", "text": ""}
{"id": "12293", "revid": "14835592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12293", "title": "Graphical user interface", "text": "A graphical user interface, or GUI, is a form of user interface that allows users to interact with electronic devices through graphical icons and visual indicators such as secondary notation. In many applications, GUIs are used instead of text-based UIs, which are based on typed command labels or text navigation. GUIs were introduced in reaction to the perceived steep learning curve of command-line interfaces (CLIs), which require commands to be typed on a computer keyboard.\nThe actions in a GUI are usually performed through direct manipulation of the graphical elements. Beyond computers, GUIs are used in many handheld mobile devices such as MP3 players, portable media players, gaming devices, smartphones and smaller household, office and industrial controls. The term \"GUI\" tends not to be applied to other lower-display resolution types of interfaces, such as video games (where head-up displays (\"HUDs\") are preferred), or not including flat screens like volumetric displays because the term is restricted to the scope of 2D display screens able to describe generic information, in the tradition of the computer science research at the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center.\nGUI and interaction design.\nDesigning the visual composition and temporal behavior of a GUI is an important part of software application programming in the area of human\u2013computer interaction. Its goal is to enhance the efficiency and ease of use for the underlying logical design of a stored program, a design discipline named \"usability\". Methods of user-centered design are used to ensure that the visual language introduced in the design is well-tailored to the tasks.\nThe visible graphical interface features of an application are sometimes referred to as \"chrome\" or \"GUI\". Typically, users interact with information by manipulating visual widgets that allow for interactions appropriate to the kind of data they hold. The widgets of a well-designed interface are selected to support the actions necessary to achieve the goals of users. A model\u2013view\u2013controller allows flexible structures in which the interface is independent of and indirectly linked to application functions, so the GUI can be customized easily. This allows users to select or design a different \"skin\" or \"theme\" at will, and eases the designer's work to change the interface as user needs evolve. Good GUI design relates to users more, and to system architecture less.\nLarge widgets, such as windows, usually provide a frame or container for the main presentation content such as a web page, email message, or drawing. Smaller ones usually act as a user-input tool.\nA GUI may be designed for the requirements of a vertical market as application-specific GUIs. Examples include automated teller machines (ATM), point of sale (POS) touchscreens at restaurants, self-service checkouts used in a retail store, airline self-ticket and check-in, information kiosks in a public space, like a train station or a museum, and monitors or control screens in an embedded industrial application which employ a real-time operating system (RTOS).\nCell phones and handheld game systems also employ application specific touchscreen GUIs. Newer automobiles use GUIs in their navigation systems and multimedia centers, or navigation multimedia center combinations.\nComponents.\nA GUI uses a combination of technologies and devices to provide a platform that users can interact with, for the tasks of gathering and producing information.\nA series of elements conforming a visual language have evolved to represent information stored in computers. This makes it easier for people with few computer skills to work with and use computer software. The most common combination of such elements in GUIs is the \"windows, icons, text fields, canvases, menus, pointer\" (WIMP) paradigm, especially in personal computers.\nThe WIMP style of interaction uses a virtual input device to represent the position of a pointing device's interface, most often a mouse, and presents information organized in windows and represented with icons. Available commands are compiled together in menus, and actions are performed making gestures with the pointing device. A window manager facilitates the interactions between windows, applications, and the windowing system. The windowing system handles hardware devices such as pointing devices, graphics hardware, and positioning of the pointer.\nIn personal computers, all these elements are modeled through a desktop metaphor to produce a simulation called a desktop environment in which the display represents a desktop, on which documents and folders of documents can be placed. Window managers and other software combine to simulate the desktop environment with varying degrees of realism.\nEntries may appear in a list to make space for text and details, or in a grid for compactness and larger icons with little space underneath for text. Variations in between exist, such as a list with multiple columns of items and a grid of items with rows of text extending sideways from the icon.\nMulti-row and multi-column layouts commonly found on the web are \"shelf\" and \"waterfall\". The former is found on image search engines, where images appear with a fixed height but variable length, and is typically implemented with the CSS property and parameter codice_1. A waterfall layout found on Imgur and TweetDeck with fixed width but variable height per item is usually implemented by specifying codice_2.\nPost-WIMP interface.\nSmaller app mobile devices such as personal digital assistants (PDAs) and smartphones typically use the WIMP elements with different unifying metaphors, due to constraints in space and available input devices. Applications for which WIMP is not well suited may use newer interaction techniques, collectively termed \"post-WIMP\" UIs.\nAs of 2011, some touchscreen-based operating systems such as Apple's iOS (iPhone) and Android use the class of GUIs named post-WIMP. These support styles of interaction using more than one finger in contact with a display, which allows actions such as pinching and rotating, which are unsupported by one pointer and mouse.\nInteraction.\nHuman interface devices, for the efficient interaction with a GUI include a computer keyboard, especially used together with keyboard shortcuts, pointing devices for the cursor (or rather pointer) control: mouse, pointing stick, touchpad, trackball, joystick, virtual keyboards, and head-up displays (translucent information devices at the eye level).\nThere are also actions performed by programs that affect the GUI. For example, there are components like inotify or D-Bus to facilitate communication between computer programs.\nHistory.\nEarly efforts.\nIvan Sutherland developed Sketchpad in 1963, widely held as the first graphical computer-aided design program. It used a light pen to create and manipulate objects in engineering drawings in realtime with coordinated graphics. In the late 1960s, researchers at the Stanford Research Institute, led by Douglas Engelbart, developed the On-Line System (NLS), which used text-based hyperlinks manipulated with a then-new device: the mouse. (A 1968 demonstration of NLS became known as \"The Mother of All Demos\".) In the 1970s, Engelbart's ideas were further refined and extended to graphics by researchers at Xerox PARC and specifically Alan Kay, who went beyond text-based hyperlinks and used a GUI as the main interface for the Smalltalk programming language, which ran on the Xerox Alto computer, released in 1973. Most modern general-purpose GUIs are derived from this system.\nThe Xerox PARC GUI consisted of graphical elements such as windows, menus, radio buttons, and check boxes. The concept of icons was later introduced by David Canfield Smith, who had written a thesis on the subject under the guidance of Kay. The PARC GUI employs a pointing device along with a keyboard. These aspects can be emphasized by using the alternative term and acronym for \"windows, icons, menus, pointing device\" (WIMP). This effort culminated in the 1973 Xerox Alto, the first computer with a GUI, though the system never reached commercial production.\nThe first commercially available computer with a GUI was the 1979 PERQ workstation, manufactured by Three Rivers Computer Corporation. Its design was heavily influenced by the work at Xerox PARC. In 1981, Xerox eventually commercialized the ideas from the Alto in the form of a new and enhanced system \u2013 the Xerox 8010 Information System \u2013 more commonly known as the Xerox Star. These early systems spurred many other GUI efforts, including Lisp machines by Symbolics and other manufacturers, the Apple Lisa (which presented the concept of menu bar and window controls) in 1983, the Apple Macintosh 128K in 1984, and the Atari ST with Digital Research's GEM, and Commodore Amiga in 1985. Visi On was released in 1983 for the IBM PC compatible computers, but was never popular due to its high hardware demands. Nevertheless, it was a crucial influence on the contemporary development of Microsoft Windows.\nApple, Digital Research, IBM and Microsoft used many of Xerox's ideas to develop products, and IBM's Common User Access specifications formed the basis of the GUIs used in Microsoft Windows, IBM OS/2 Presentation Manager, and the Unix Motif toolkit and window manager. These ideas evolved to create the interface found in current versions of Microsoft Windows, and in various desktop environments for Unix-like operating systems, such as macOS and Linux. Thus most current GUIs have largely common idioms.\nPopularization.\nThe early 1980s saw growing interest in GUIs. The Apple Lisa was released in 1983, but was expensive and commercially unsuccessful. Individual applications for many platforms presented their own GUI variants. Despite the GUI's advantages, many reviewers questioned the value of the entire concept, citing hardware limits and problems in finding compatible software.\nIn 1984, Apple introduced the Macintosh via a a television commercial during Super Bowl XVIII, with allusions to George Orwell's novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The goal of the commercial was to make people think about computers, identifying the user-friendly interface as a personal computer which departed from prior business-oriented systems, and becoming a signature representation of Apple products.\nThe 1985 Atari ST shipped with the GEM GUI from Digital Research, which was also published for MS-DOS.\nThe Amiga 1000 was released the same year, though not widely available until 1986, with the Workbench graphical desktop. This interface ran as a separate task, meaning it was very responsive and, unlike other GUIs of the time, it didn't freeze up when a program was busy.\nWindows 95, accompanied by an extensive marketing campaign, was a major success in the marketplace at launch and shortly became the most popular desktop operating system.\nIn 2007, with the iPhone and later in 2010 with the introduction of the iPad, Apple popularized the post-WIMP style of interaction for multi-touch screens, and those devices were considered to be milestones in the development of mobile devices.\nThe GUIs familiar to most people as of the mid-late 2010s are Windows, macOS, and the X Window System interfaces for desktop and laptop computers, and Android, Apple's iOS, Symbian, BlackBerry OS, Windows Phone/Windows 10 Mobile, Tizen, WebOS, and Firefox OS for handheld (smartphone) devices.\nComparison to other interfaces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;People said it's more of a right-brain machine and all that\u2014I think there is some truth to that. I think there is something to dealing in a graphical interface and a more kinetic interface\u2014you're really \"moving\" information around, you're seeing it move as though it had substance. And you don't see that on a PC. The PC is very much of a conceptual machine; you move information around the way you move formulas, elements on either side of an equation. I think there's a difference.\nCommand-line interfaces.\nSince the commands available in command line interfaces can be many, complex operations can be performed using a short sequence of words and symbols. Custom functions may be used to facilitate access to frequent actions. \nCommand-line interfaces are more lightweight, as they only recall information necessary for a task; for example, no preview thumbnails or graphical rendering of web pages. This allows greater efficiency and productivity once many commands are learned. But reaching this level takes some time because the command words may not be easily discoverable or mnemonic. Also, using the command line can become slow and error-prone when users must enter long commands comprising many parameters or several different filenames at once. However, \"windows, icons, menus, pointer\" (WIMP) interfaces present users with many widgets that represent and can trigger some of the system's available commands.\nGUIs can be made quite hard when dialogs are buried deep in a system or moved about to different places during redesigns. Also, icons and dialog boxes are usually harder for users to script.\nWIMPs extensively use modes, as the meaning of all keys and clicks on specific positions on the screen are redefined all the time. Command-line interfaces use modes only in limited forms, such as for current directory and environment variables.\nMost modern operating systems provide both a GUI and some level of a CLI, although the GUIs usually receive more attention.\nGUI wrappers.\nGUI wrappers find a way around the command-line interface versions (CLI) of (typically) Linux and Unix-like software applications and their text-based UIs or typed command labels. While command-line or text-based applications allow users to run a program non-interactively, GUI wrappers atop them avoid the steep learning curve of the command-line, which requires commands to be typed on the keyboard. By starting a GUI wrapper, users can intuitively interact with, start, stop, and change its working parameters, through graphical icons and visual indicators of a desktop environment, for example. Applications may also provide both interfaces, and when they do the GUI is usually a WIMP wrapper around the command-line version. This is especially common with applications designed for Unix-like operating systems. The latter used to be implemented first because it allowed the developers to focus exclusively on their product's functionality without bothering about interface details such as designing icons and placing buttons. Designing programs this way also allows users to run the program in a shell script.\nThree-dimensional graphical user interface.\nMany environments and games use the methods of 3D graphics to project 3D GUI objects onto the screen. The use of 3D graphics has become increasingly common in mainstream operating systems (ex. Windows Aero, and Aqua (macOS)) to create attractive interfaces, termed eye candy (which includes, for example, the use of drop shadows underneath windows and the cursor), or for functional purposes only possible using three dimensions. For example, user switching is represented by rotating a cube with faces representing each user's workspace, and window management is represented via a Rolodex-style flipping mechanism in Windows Vista (see Windows Flip 3D). In both cases, the operating system transforms windows on-the-fly while continuing to update the content of those windows.\nThe GUI is usually WIMP-based, although occasionally other metaphors surface, such as those used in Microsoft Bob, 3dwm, File System Navigator, File System Visualizer, 3D Mailbox, and GopherVR. Zooming (ZUI) is a related technology that promises to deliver the representation benefits of 3D environments without their usability drawbacks of orientation problems and hidden objects. In 2006, Hillcrest Labs introduced the first ZUI for television. Other innovations include the menus on the PlayStation 2; the menus on the Xbox; Sun's Project Looking Glass; Metisse, which was similar to Project Looking Glass; BumpTop, where users can manipulate documents and windows with realistic movement and physics as if they were physical documents; Croquet OS, which is built for collaboration; and compositing window managers such as Enlightenment and Compiz. Augmented reality and virtual reality also make use of 3D GUI elements.\nIn science fiction.\n3D GUIs have appeared in science fiction literature and films, even before certain technologies were feasible or in common use.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12294", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12294", "title": "George Hamilton Gordon Aberdeen", "text": ""}
{"id": "12295", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12295", "title": "Gamete", "text": "Haploid sex cell\nA gamete ( , reproductive cell, or sex cell, is a haploid cell that fuses with another haploid cell during fertilization in organisms that reproduce sexually. The name gamete was introduced by the German cytologist Eduard Strasburger in 1878.\nGametes of both mating individuals can be the same size and shape, a condition known as isogamy. By contrast, in the majority of species, the gametes are of different sizes, a condition known as anisogamy or heterogamy that applies to humans and other mammals. The human ovum has approximately 100,000 times the volume of a single human sperm cell. The type of gamete an organism produces determines its sex and sets the basis for the sexual roles and sexual selection.\nIn humans and other species that produce two morphologically distinct types of gametes, and in which each individual produces only one type, a female is any individual that produces the larger type of gamete called an ovum, and a male produces the smaller type, called a sperm cell or spermatozoon. Sperm cells are small and motile due to the presence of a tail-shaped structure, the flagellum, that provides propulsion. In contrast, each egg cell or ovum is comparably large and non-motile.\nOogenesis, the process of female gamete formation in animals, involves meiosis (including meiotic recombination) of a diploid primary oocyte to produce a haploid ovum. Spermatogenesis, the process of male gamete formation in animals, involves meiosis in a diploid primary spermatocyte to produce haploid spermatozoa. In animals, ova are produced in the ovaries of females and sperm develop in the testes of males. During fertilization, a spermatozoon and an ovum, each carrying half of the genetic information of an individual, unite to form a zygote that develops into a new diploid organism.\nEvolution.\nIt is generally accepted that isogamy is the ancestral state from which anisogamy and oogamy evolved, although its evolution has left no fossil records. There are almost invariably only two gamete types, all analyses showing that intermediate gamete sizes are eliminated due to selection. Since intermediate sized gametes do not have the same advantages as small or large ones, they do worse than small ones in mobility and numbers, and worse than large ones in supply.\nDifferences between gametes and somatic cells.\nIn contrast to a gamete, which has only one set of chromosomes, a diploid somatic cell has two sets of homologous chromosomes, one of which is a copy of the chromosome set from the sperm and one a copy of the chromosome set from the egg cell. Recombination of the genes during meiosis ensures that the chromosomes of gametes are not exact duplicates of either of the sets of chromosomes carried in the parental diploid chromosomes but a mixture of the two.\nArtificial gametes.\nArtificial gametes, also known as in vitro derived gametes (IVD), stem cell-derived gametes (SCDGs), and in vitro generated gametes (IVG), are gametes derived from stem cells. The use of such artificial gametes would \"necessarily require IVF techniques\". Research shows that artificial gametes may be a reproductive technique for same-sex male couples, although a surrogate mother would still be required for the gestation period. Women who have passed menopause may be able to produce eggs and bear genetically related children with artificial gametes. Robert Sparrow wrote, in the Journal of Medical Ethics, that embryos derived from artificial gametes could be used to derive new gametes and this process could be repeated to create multiple human generations in the laboratory. This technique could be used to create cell lines for medical applications and for studying the heredity of genetic disorders. Additionally, this technique could be used for human enhancement by selectively breeding for a desired genome or by using recombinant DNA technology to create enhancements that have not arisen in nature.\nPlants.\nPlants that reproduce sexually also produce gametes. However, since plants have a life cycle involving alternation of diploid and haploid generations some differences from animal life cycles exist. Plants use meiosis to produce spores that develop into multicellular haploid gametophytes which produce gametes by mitosis. In animals there is no corresponding multicellular haploid phase. The sperm of plants that reproduce using spores are formed by mitosis in an organ of the gametophyte known as the antheridium and the egg cells by mitosis in a flask-shaped organ called the archegonium. Plant sperm cells are their only motile cells, often described as flagellate, but more correctly as ciliate.\nBryophytes have 2 flagella, horsetails have up to 200 and the mature spermatozoa of the cycad \"Zamia pumila\" has up to 50,000 flagella. Cycads and \"Ginkgo biloba\" are the only gymnosperms with motile sperm.\nIn the flowering plants, the female gametophyte is produced inside the ovule within the ovary of the flower. When mature, the haploid gametophyte produces female gametes which are ready for fertilization. The male gametophyte is produced inside a pollen grain within the anther and is non-motile, but can be distributed by wind, water or animal vectors. When a pollen grain lands on a mature stigma of a flower it germinates to form a pollen tube that grows down the style into the ovary of the flower and then into the ovule.\nThe pollen then produces non-motile sperm nuclei by mitosis that are transported down the pollen tube to the ovule where they are released for fertilization of the egg cell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12296", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12296", "title": "List of German proverbs", "text": ""}
{"id": "12300", "revid": "317363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12300", "title": "George R. R. Martin", "text": "American writer and television producer (born 1948)\nGeorge Raymond Richard Martin (born George Raymond Martin; September 20, 1948) also known by the initials G.R.R.M. is an American author, screenwriter, and television producer. He is best known as the author of the series of epic fantasy novels \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", which were adapted into the Primetime Emmy Award\u2013winning television series \"Game of Thrones\" (2011\u20132019) and its prequel series \"House of the Dragon\" (2022\u2013present). He also helped create the \"Wild Cards\" anthology series and contributed worldbuilding for the video game \"Elden Ring\" (2022).\nIn 2005, Lev Grossman of \"Time\" called Martin \"the American Tolkien\", and in 2011, he was included on the annual \"Time\" 100 list of the most influential people in the world. He is a longtime resident of Santa Fe, New Mexico, where he helped fund Meow Wolf and owns the Jean Cocteau Cinema. The city commemorates March 29 as George R.\u00a0R. Martin Day.\nEarly life.\nGeorge Raymond Martin (he adopted the confirmation name \"Richard\" at 13 years old) was born on September 20, 1948, in Bayonne, New Jersey, the son of Raymond Collins, a longshoreman, and Margaret Brady Martin. His mother's family had once been wealthy, owning a successful construction business, but lost it all in the Great Depression, something Martin was reminded about every day when he passed what had used to be his family's dock and house. He has two younger sisters, Darleen and Jane. He is predominantly of Irish descent; a DNA test on the series \"Finding Your Roots\" showed him to be 53.6% \"British and Irish\", 22.4% Ashkenazi Jewish, and 15.6% \"Broadly Northwestern European\".\nThe family first lived in a house on Broadway belonging to Martin's great-grandmother. In 1953, they moved to a federal housing project near the Bayonne docks. During Martin's childhood, his world consisted predominantly of \"First Street to Fifth Street\", between his grade school and his home. This limited world made him want to travel and experience other places, but the only way of doing so was through his imagination, and he became a voracious reader.\nMartin began writing and selling monster stories for pennies to other neighborhood children, dramatic readings included. He had to stop once a customer's mother complained about her child's nightmares. He also wrote stories about a mythical kingdom populated by his pet turtles \u2014 the turtles died frequently in their toy castle, so he decided they were killing each other off in \"sinister plots\". Martin had a habit of starting \"endless stories\" that he never completed, as they did not turn out as well on paper as he had imagined them.\nMartin attended Mary Jane Donohoe School and later Marist High School. While there, he became an avid comic-book fan, developing a strong interest in the superheroes being published by Marvel Comics, and later credited Stan Lee for being one of his greatest literary influences; \"Maybe Stan Lee is the greatest literary influence on me, even more than Shakespeare or Tolkien.\" A letter Martin wrote to the editor of \"Fantastic Four\" was printed in issue #20 (November 1963); it was the first of many sent, e.g., \"Fantastic Four\" #32, #34, and others. Fans who read his letters wrote him letters in turn, and through such contacts, Martin joined the fledgling comics fandom of the era, writing fiction for various fanzines; he bought the first ticket to the world's first Comic-Con, held in New York in 1964. In 1965, Martin won comic fandom's Alley Award for Best Fan Fiction for his prose superhero story \"Powerman vs. The Blue Barrier\".\nIn 1970, Martin earned a B.S. in journalism with a minor in history from Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism in Evanston, Illinois, graduating \"summa cum laude\"; he went on to complete his M.S. in Journalism in 1971, also from Medill. Eligible for the draft during the Vietnam War, to which he objected, Martin applied for and obtained conscientious objector status; he instead did alternative service work for two years (1972\u20131974) as a VISTA volunteer, attached to the Cook County Legal Assistance Foundation.\nCareer.\nEarly writing career.\nMartin began selling science fiction short stories professionally in 1970, at age 21. His first sale was \"The Hero\", sold to \"Galaxy\" magazine and published in its February 1971 issue; other sales soon followed. His first story to be nominated for the Hugo Award and Nebula Awards was \"With Morning Comes Mistfall\", published in 1973 in \"Analog\" magazine. In 1975 his story \"...for a single yesterday\" about a post-apocalyptic timetripper was selected for inclusion in \"Epoch\", a science fiction anthology edited by Roger Elwood and Robert Silverberg. His first novel, \"Dying of the Light\", was completed in 1976 right before he moved to Dubuque and published in 1977. That same year the enormous success of \"Star Wars\" had a huge impact on the publishing industry and science fiction, and he sold the novel for the same amount he would make in three years of teaching.\nThe short stories he was able to sell in his early 20s gave him some profit but not enough to pay his bills, which prevented him from becoming the full-time writer he wanted to be. The need for a day job occurred simultaneously with the American chess craze which followed Bobby Fischer's victory in the 1972 world chess championship. Martin's own chess skills and experience allowed him to be hired as a tournament director for the Continental Chess Association, which ran chess tournaments on the weekends. This gave him a sufficient income, and because the tournaments only ran on Saturdays and Sundays, it allowed him to work as a writer five days a week from 1973 to 1976. By the time the chess craze subsided and no longer provided an income, he had become much better established as a writer.\nTeaching.\nIn the mid-1970s, Martin met English professor George Guthridge from Dubuque, Iowa, at a science fiction convention in Milwaukee. Martin persuaded Guthridge (who later said that at that time he despised science fiction and fantasy) not only to give speculative fiction a second look, but also to write in the field himself. Guthridge has since been a finalist for the Hugo Award and twice for the Nebula Award for science fiction and fantasy. In 1998, Guthridge and Janet Berliner won the Bram Stoker Award for Superior Achievement in the Novel for their \"Children of the Dusk\".\nIn turn, Guthridge helped Martin in finding a job at Clarke University (then Clarke College). Martin \"wasn't making enough money to stay alive\" from writing and the chess tournaments, said Guthridge. From 1976 to 1978, Martin was an English and journalism instructor at Clarke, and he became Writer In Residence at the college from 1978 to 1979.\nConcentration on writing.\nWhile he enjoyed teaching, the sudden death of friend and fellow author Tom Reamy in late 1977 made Martin reevaluate his own life, and he eventually decided to try to become a full-time writer. In 1979 he resigned from his job and moved from Dubuque to Santa Fe, New Mexico at the end of the year. There he would live alone for almost three years, a period he described as tremendously productive in regard to writing.\nMartin is a member of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA); he served as the organization's Southwest Regional Director from 1977 to 1979, and as its vice-president from 1996 to 1998. In 1976, for Kansas City's MidAmeriCon, the 34th World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon), Martin and his friend and fellow writer-editor Gardner Dozois conceived of and organized the first Hugo Losers' Party for the benefit of all past and present Hugo-losing writers on the evening following the convention's Hugo Awards ceremony. Martin was nominated for two Hugos that year but lost both awards, for the novelette \"...and Seven Times Never Kill Man\" and the novella \"The Storms of Windhaven\", co-written with Lisa Tuttle. Although Martin often writes fantasy or horror, a number of his earlier works are science fiction tales occurring in a loosely defined future history, known informally as \"The Thousand Worlds\" or \"The Manrealm\".\nIn 2017, Martin recalled that he had started writing science fiction-horror hybrids in the late 1970s to disprove a statement from a critic claiming that science fiction and horror were opposites and therefore incompatible. Martin considered \"Sandkings\" (1979) the best known of these. Another was the novella \"Nightflyers\" (1980), whose screen and television rights were purchased by Vista in 1984, which produced a 1987 film adaptation, \"Nightflyers\", with a screenplay co-written by Martin. Martin was unhappy about having to cut plot elements in order to accommodate the film's small budget. While not a hit at theatres, Martin believes that the film saved his career, and that everything he has written since exists in large part because of it. He has also written at least one piece of political-military fiction, \"Night of the Vampyres\", collected in Harry Turtledove's anthology \"The Best Military Science Fiction of the 20th Century\" (2001).\nIn 1982, Martin published a vampire novel titled \"Fevre Dream\" set in the 19th century on the Mississippi River, in the heyday of the great paddle steamers. Unlike traditional vampire novels, in \"Fevre Dream\" vampires are not supernatural creatures, but are rather a different species related to humans created by evolution with superhuman powers. Critic Don D'Amassa has praised \"Fevre Dream\" for its strong 19th-century atmosphere and wrote: \"This is without question one of the greatest vampire novels of all time\". Martin followed up \"Fevre Dream\" with another horror novel, \"The Armageddon Rag\" (1983). The unexpected commercial failure of \"The Armageddon Rag\" \"essentially destroyed my career as a novelist at the time\", he recalled, and made him consider going into real estate instead.\nIn 1984, the new editor of Baen Books, Betsy Mitchell, called Martin to ask him if he had considered doing a collection of Haviland Tuf adventures. Martin, who had several favorite series characters like Solomon Kane, Elric, Nicholas van Rijn and Magnus Ridolph, had made an attempt to create such a character on his own in the 1970s with his Tuf stories. He was interested, but was too occupied with the writing of his next book, the never-completed novel \"Black and White and Red All Over\", which occupied most of his writing time the same year. But after the failure of \"The Armageddon Rag\", all editors rejected his upcoming novel, and desperate for money, he accepted Mitchell's offer and wrote some more Tuf stories which were collected in \"Tuf Voyaging\", which sold well enough for Mitchell to suggest a sequel. Martin was willing and agreed to do it, but before he got started he got an offer from Hollywood, where producer Philip DeGuere Jr. wanted to adapt \"The Armageddon Rag\" into a film. The film adaptation did not happen, but they stayed in touch, and when DeGuere became the producer for the revival of \"The Twilight Zone\", Martin was offered a job as a writer. Working for television paid a lot better than writing literature, so he decided to move to Hollywood to seek a new career. At first he worked as staff writer for the show, and then as an executive story consultant.\nAfter the CBS series was cancelled, Martin migrated over to the already-underway satirical science fiction series \"Max Headroom\". He worked on scripts and created the show's \"Ped Xing\" character. However, before his scripts could go into production, the ABC show was cancelled in the middle of its second season. Martin was hired as a writer-producer on the new dramatic fantasy series \"Beauty and the Beast\"; in 1989, he became the show's co-supervising producer and wrote 14 of its episodes.\nIn 1987, Martin published a collection of short horror stories in \"Portraits of His Children\". During this same period, Martin continued working in print media as a book-series editor, this time overseeing the development of the multi-author \"Wild Cards\" book series, which takes place in a shared universe in which a small slice of post\u2013World War II humanity gains superpowers after the release of an alien-engineered virus; new titles are published in the ongoing series from Tor Books. In \"Second Person\", Martin \"gives a personal account of the close-knit role-playing game (RPG) culture that gave rise to his \"Wild Cards\" shared-world anthologies\". An important element in the creation of the multiple-author series was a campaign of Chaosium's role-playing game \"Superworld\" (1983) that Martin ran in Albuquerque. Admitting he became completely obsessed with the game, he stopped writing literature for most of 1983, which he refers to as his \"lost year\", but his shrinking bank accounts made him realize he had to come up with something, and got the idea that perhaps the stories and characters created in \"Superworld\" could somehow become profitable. Martin's own contributions to \"Wild Cards\" have included Thomas Tudbury, \"The Great and Powerful Turtle\", a powerful psychokinetic whose flying \"shell\" consisted of an armored VW Beetle. As of June\u00a02011[ [update]], 21 \"Wild Cards\" volumes had been published in the series; earlier that same year, Martin signed the contract for the 22nd volume, \"Low Ball\" (2014), published by Tor Books. In early 2012, Martin signed another Tor contract for the 23rd \"Wild Cards\" volume, \"High Stakes\", which was released in August 2016.\nIn August 2016, Martin announced that Universal Cable Productions had acquired the rights to adapt the \"Wild Cards\" novels into a television series. He noted that he himself would not write for the adaptation due to focusing on \"A Song of Ice and Fire\".\nIn 2014, Martin said in a BBC interview that he writes using WordStar editor software, on an MS-DOS computer, because he dislikes having his work spell-checked and to avoid internet distractions. He uses a separate computer for common internet tasks.\n\"A Song of Ice and Fire\".\nIn 1991, Martin briefly returned to writing novels. He had grown frustrated that his TV pilots and screenplays were not getting made and that TV-related production limitations like budgets and episode lengths were forcing him to cut characters and trim battle scenes. This pushed Martin back towards writing books, where he did not have to worry about compromising his imagination. Admiring the works of J. R. R. Tolkien in his childhood, he wanted to write an epic fantasy, though he did not have any specific ideas.\nHis epic fantasy series, \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", was inspired by the Wars of the Roses, \"The Accursed Kings\" and \"Ivanhoe\". Though Martin originally conceptualized it as being three volumes, it is currently slated to comprise seven. The first, \"A Game of Thrones\", was published in 1996, followed by \"A Clash of Kings\" in 1998 and \"A Storm of Swords\" in 2000. In November 2005, \"A Feast for Crows\", the fourth novel in this series, became \"The New York Times\" No. 1 Bestseller. The fifth book, \"A Dance with Dragons\", was published July 12, 2011, and became an international bestseller, including achieving a No. 1 spot on the \"New York Times\" Bestseller List and many others; it remained on the \"New York Times\" list for 88 weeks.\nIn 2012, \"A Dance with Dragons\" made the final ballot for science fiction and fantasy's Hugo Award, World Fantasy Award, Locus Poll Award, and the British Fantasy Award; the novel went on to win the Locus Poll Award for Best Fantasy Novel. Two more novels are planned in the series: \"The Winds of Winter\" and the final volume \"A Dream of Spring\".\nOn April 25, 2018, Martin announced the release date of his new book, \"Fire &amp; Blood\", dealing with the history of House Targaryen, which was released on November 20, 2018. Should Martin die before finishing the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series, former collaborators have said that they will not conclude the series for him.\nHBO adaptation of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\".\nHBO Productions purchased the television rights for the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series in 2007. Although busy completing \"A Dance with Dragons\" and other projects, Martin was heavily involved in the production of the television series adaptation of his books. Martin's involvement included the selection of a production team and participation in scriptwriting; the opening credits list him as a co-executive producer of the series. The original pilot was shot between October 24 and November 19, 2009, on location in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Morocco. It was received so poorly by HBO executives that they did not make a decision for four months after the pilot was delivered. In March 2010, HBO's decision to greenlight the series was announced, with the production of the series scheduled to start June 2010. However, HBO demanded that the first episode be reshot, and wanted all the scenes from Morocco scrapped. The first episode (\"Winter Is Coming\") premiered on HBO in the United States and Canada on April 17, 2011. It was seen initially by 2.2 million viewers. The first season was nominated for 13 Emmy Awards, ultimately winning two: one for its opening title credits, and one for Peter Dinklage as Best Supporting Actor.\nHBO ordered a second season of \"Game of Thrones\" on April 19, 2011, two days after the series premiere. The second season obtained a 15% increase in budget in order to be able to stage the war's most important battle, the Battle of the Blackwater, in episode nine, which was written by Martin. Filming took place during 106 shooting days. During three-quarters of those, two crews (\"Dragon\" and \"Wolf\") were working simultaneously in different locations. Alan Taylor was promoted to co-executive producer and directed four episodes, including the season premiere and finale. David Petrarca and David Nutter each directed two episodes, while series cinematographer Alik Sakharov and filmmaker Neil Marshall directed the remaining two. The second season premiered in the United States on HBO on April 1, 2012, and concluded on June 3, 2012. U.S. viewership rose by approximately 8% over the course of the season, from 3.9 million to 4.2 million by the season finale. The second season won six of the twelve Emmy Awards for which it was nominated.\n\"Game of Thrones\" rapidly became a critical and commercial success after the second season. HBO renewed the series for a third season on April 10, 2012, nine days after the second season's premiere. Production began in July 2012 and concluded with the wrap of the unit filming in Iceland on November 24, 2012. The third season is based on the first half of the novel \"A Storm of Swords\". Benioff had previously said that \"A Storm of Swords\" would need to be adapted in two seasons on account of its length. Benioff and Weiss also noted that they thought of \"Game of Thrones\" as an adaptation of the series as a whole, rather than of individual novels, which gave them the liberty to move scenes back and forth across novels according to the requirements of the screen adaptation. Season 3 saw the first significant use of the Valyrian languages, spoken in doomed Valyria and its former colonies in Essos. The constructed languages were developed by conlanger David J. Peterson based on the few words Martin invented for the novels. Peterson had previously developed the Dothraki language, used principally in season 1. The third season premiered on HBO on March 31, 2013, and concluded on June 9, 2013. The third season was seen by 14.2 million viewers. It won 2 of the 16 Emmy Awards for which it was nominated.\nTwo days after third-season premiere, HBO ordered the fourth season on April 2, 2013, which began filming in July 2013. The season is adapted primarily from the second half of \"A Storm of Swords\", along with elements of \"A Feast for Crows\" and \"A Dance with Dragons.\" Showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss co-wrote seven out of ten episodes. The remaining three episodes were written by Bryan Cogman (two episodes), and George R. R. Martin (one episode). For this season, the filming lasted 136 days and was completed on November 21, 2013. The fourth season premiered in the United States on HBO on April 6, 2014, and concluded on June 15, 2014. The season was met with largely positive reviews. It won 4 of the 19 Emmy Awards for which it was nominated. With its fourth season, \"Game of Thrones\" has become the most-watched HBO series in history (surpassing the fourth season of \"The Sopranos\" which had a gross audience of 18.2 million viewers), averaging 18.4 million viewers across multiple platforms, including live viewing, encores, DVR views, HBO GO and On Demand views.\nUp until the fourth season, Martin wrote one episode for each season. In 2022, Martin said that he had been estranged from the show during the production process of the last 4 seasons (starting with season 5). In the early seasons, Martin wrote and read scripts, consulted on casting decisions and visited sets. Over time, however, he stepped back to focus on his long-delayed next \"Thrones\" novel, \"The Winds of Winter\". Following the gargantuan success of the fourth season, HBO ordered the fifth season on April 8, 2014, together with the sixth season, which began filming in July 2014. The season primarily adapts the storylines from \"A Feast for Crows\" and \"A Dance with Dragons,\" also with original content not found in Martin's novels. This season set a Guinness World Record for winning the highest number of Emmy Awards for a series in a single season and year, winning 12 out of 24 nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series.\nWith a budget over $100 million for the whole season, filming for the sixth season began in July 2015 and ended on December. The season filmed in five different countries: Northern Ireland, Spain, Croatia, Iceland, and Canada. This season saw the overall plot of the show diverging from the source material. Some of the season's storyline is derived from content not yet published in Martin's \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series, although a significant amount of material from \"A Feast for Crows\", \"A Dance with Dragons\" and the upcoming sixth novel \"The Winds of Winter\", which Martin previously outlined to showrunners David Benioff and D.B. Weiss, was used. The season was largely met with positive reviews. The \"Battle of the Bastards\" episode received immense critical acclaim, with many calling it one of the best television episodes of all time. U.S. viewership rose compared to the previous season, and by approximately 13 percent over its course, from 7.9 million to 8.9 million by the finale. The season won 12 of the 23 Emmy Awards for which it was nominated.\nThree days before the premiere of the episode \"The Red Woman\", HBO ordered the seventh season. Due to necessary weather conditions required for filming, the production of the penultimate season of the show was delayed that year. Filming began only on August 31, 2016, at Titanic Studios in Belfast, and ended in February 2017. Unlike previous seasons, the seventh and eighth seasons largely consisted of original content not found in the source material. This season comprised only seven episodes. The showrunners stated that they were unable to produce 10 episodes in the show's usual 12 to 14 month time frame, as Weiss said \"It's crossing out of a television schedule into more of a mid-range movie schedule\". The average runtime of an episode in this season was approximately 63 minutes. The series received 22 nominations for the 70th Primetime Emmy Awards and won 9 of them, including \"Outstanding Drama Series\".\nUnlike its prior seasons, the final one took a year gap for its production and filming. The eighth season consisted of only six episodes, though the average runtime of an episode was 68 minutes, the longest of all seasons, with \"The Long Night\" consisting of 81 minutes. The season was met with mixed reviews from critics. While the performances, production values and music score were praised, criticism was mainly directed at the shorter runtime of the season as well as numerous creative decisions made by the showrunners. Many commentators deemed it to be a disappointing conclusion to the series. Despite this, the season received 32 nominations at the 71st Primetime Emmy Awards, the most for a single season of television in history, and won twelve, including Outstanding Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Peter Dinklage.\nThree years after the show ended, a prequel series, \"House of the Dragon\", premiered on HBO on August 21, 2022. Based on parts of the novel \"Fire &amp; Blood\", the series is set about 200 years before the events of \"Game of Thrones.\" Ryan Condal and Miguel Sapochnik served as the showrunners for the first season. Five days after its premiere, the series was renewed for a second season by HBO. On September 1, Sapochnik departed as showrunner, with another veteran Game of Thrones director Alan Taylor replacing him as the co-showrunner for the second season.\nIn June 2022, it was reported that a Jon Snow sequel series with Kit Harington to reprise his role was in early development at HBO. The working title is \"Snow\" and Martin confirmed his involvement with the project and that Harington initiated the idea. Also in June, Martin said there were still three other live-action series in development: \"10,000 Ships\" (written by Amanda Segal), \"9 Voyages\" aka \"Sea Snake\" (written by Bruno Heller), and the Dunk &amp; Egg prequel series (written by Steven Conrad), tentatively titled either \"The Hedge Knight\" or \"Knight of the Seven Kingdoms.\"\nIn January 2021, an animated drama series was announced as in development at HBO Max. In July 2021, two more animated series were in development at HBO Max, with one being set in Yi Ti, a nation in Essos loosely based on Imperial China.\nThemes.\nMartin's work has been described as having \"complex story lines, fascinating characters, great dialogue, perfect pacing\" by literary critic Jeff VanderMeer. Dana Jennings of the \"New York Times\" described Martin's work as \"fantasy for grown ups\" and Lev Grossman wrote that it was dark and cynical. Martin's first novel, \"Dying of the Light\", set the tone for some of his future work; it unfolds on a mostly abandoned planet that is slowly becoming uninhabitable as it moves away from its sun. This story has a strong sense of melancholy. His characters are often unhappy or, at least, unsatisfied, in many cases holding on to idealisms in spite of an otherwise chaotic and ruthless world, and often troubled by their own self-seeking or violent actions, even as they undertake them. Many have elements of tragic heroes or antiheroes in them; reviewer T. M. Wagner writes: \"Let it never be said Martin doesn't share Shakespeare's fondness for the senselessly tragic.\"\nThe overall gloominess of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" can be an obstacle for some readers; the Inchoatus Group writes that, \"If this absence of joy is going to trouble you, or you're looking for something more affirming, then you should probably seek elsewhere.\" However, for many fans, it is precisely this level of \"realness\" and \"completeness\" \u2013 including many characters' imperfections, moral and ethical ambiguity, and (often sudden) consequential plot twists that is endearing about Martin's work. Many find that this is what makes the series' story arcs compelling enough to keep following despite its sheer brutality and intricately messy and interwoven plotlines; as TM Wagner points out:There's great tragedy here, but there's also excitement, humor, heroism even in weaklings, nobility even in villains, and, now and then, a taste of justice after all. It's a rare gift when a writer can invest his story with that much humanity.Martin's characters are multifaceted, each with intricate pasts, aspirations, and ambitions. \"Publishers Weekly\" writes of his ongoing epic fantasy \"A Song of Ice and Fire\": \"The complexity of characters such as Daenerys, Arya and the Kingslayer will keep readers turning even the vast number of pages contained in this volume, for the author, like Tolkien or Jordan, makes us care about their fates.\" Misfortune, injury, and death (including false death and reanimation) often befall major or minor characters, no matter how attached the reader has become. Martin has described his penchant for killing off important characters as being necessary for the story's depth: \"when my characters are in danger, I want you to be afraid to turn the page, (so) you need to show right from the beginning that you're playing for keeps\".\nIn distinguishing his work from others, Martin makes a point of emphasizing realism and plausible social dynamics above an over-reliance on magic and a simplistic \"good versus evil\" dichotomy, for which contemporary fantasy writing is often criticized. Notably, Martin's work makes a sharp departure from the prevalent \"heroic knights and chivalry\" schema that has become a mainstay in fantasy as derived from J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\". He specifically critiques the oversimplification of Tolkien's themes and devices by imitators in ways that he has humorously described as \"Disneyland Middle Ages\", which gloss over or ignore major differences between medieval and modern societies, particularly social structures, ways of living, and political arrangements. Martin has been described as \"the American Tolkien\" by literary critics. While Martin finds inspiration in Tolkien's legacy, he aims to go beyond what he sees as Tolkien's \"medieval philosophy\" of \"if the king was a good man, the land would prosper\" to delve into the complexities, ambiguities, and vagaries of real-life power: \"We look at real history and it's not that simple... Just having good intentions doesn't make you a wise king.\" Per this fact Martin has been credited with the rise of grimdark fantasy, a modern form of an \"anti-Tolkien\" approach to fantasy writing which, according to British science fiction and fantasy novelist Adam Roberts, is characterized by its reaction to Tolkien's idealism even though it owes a lot to Tolkien's work. The Canadian fantasy writer R. Scott Bakker \"says he wouldn't have been able to publish his fantasy novels without the success George R. R. Martin achieved first\". Similarly, Mark Lawrence, author of \"Prince of Thorns\", was inspired by Martin and impressed by his Red Wedding scene.\nThe author makes a point of grounding his work on a foundation of historical fiction, which he channels to evoke important social and political elements of primarily the European medieval era that differ markedly from elements of modern times, including the multigenerational, rigid, and often brutally consequential nature of the hierarchical class system of feudal societies that is in many cases overlooked in fantasy writing. Even as \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" is a fantasy series that employs magic and the surreal as central to the genre, Martin is keen to ensure that magic is merely one element of many that moves his work forward, not a generic deus ex machina that is itself the focus of his stories, which is something he has been very conscious about since reading Tolkien; \"If you look at \"The Lord of the Rings\", what strikes you, it certainly struck me, is that although the world is infused with this great sense of magic, there is very little onstage magic. So you have a sense of magic, but it's kept under very tight control, and I really took that to heart when I was starting my own series.\" Martin's ultimate aim is an exploration of the internal conflicts that define the human condition, which, in deriving inspiration from William Faulkner, he ultimately describes as the only reason to read any literature, regardless of genre.\nIn 2018, Martin called \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"The Great Gatsby\", \"Gone with the Wind\", \"Great Expectations\", \"Lonesome Dove\", \"Catch-22\", and \"Charlotte's Web\" \"favorites all, towering masterpieces, books that changed my life\".\nProducing.\nIn 2017, Martin confirmed he would serve as an executive producer of the HBO television series adaptation of the 2010 science fantasy novel \"Who Fears Death\" by Nnedi Okorafor. Martin also contributed to the 2022 video game titled \"Elden Ring\", writing the worldbuilding aspects for it. In February 2021, it was reported that Martin and Kalinda Vazquez were developing a TV adaptation of \"Roadmarks\" by Roger Zelazny, which Martin pitched to HBO in 2020. Martin will be an executive producer, Vazquez the showrunner, writer and executive producer. In March 2021, he signed an overall deal with HBO. Martin will serve as an executive producer of the Peacock TV adaptation in development of his \"Wild Cards\" book series, together with Melinda M. Snodgrass and Vince Gerardis, Martin's manager. He serves as an executive producer of the AMC series \"Dark Winds\" based on Tony Hillerman's Leaphorn &amp; Chee books. In 2021, Martin served as one of the producers of the short film \"Night of the Cooters\" based on the eponymous short story by Howard Waldrop.\nRelationship with fans.\nMartin actively contributes to his blog, \"Not a Blog\"; in April 2018, he moved his blog from Livejournal to his own website.\nMartin's official fan club is the \"Brotherhood Without Banners\", which has a regular posting board at the Forum of the website westeros.org, which is focused on his \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" fantasy series. At the annual World Science Fiction Convention every year, the Brotherhood Without Banners hosts a large, on-going hospitality suite that is open to all members of the Worldcon.\nMartin is opposed to fan fiction, which he views as copyright infringement and a bad exercise for aspiring writers in terms of developing skills in worldbuilding and character development.\nConventions.\nMartin is known for his regular attendance at science fiction conventions and comics conventions, and his accessibility to fans. In the early 1980s, critic and writer Thomas Disch identified Martin as a member of the \"Labor Day Group\", writers who regularly congregated at the annual Worldcon, usually held on or around the Labor Day weekend. Since the early 1970s, he has also attended regional science fiction conventions; further, since 1986, Martin has participated annually in Albuquerque's smaller regional convention Bubonicon, near his New Mexico home. He was the Guest of Honor at the 61st World Science Fiction Convention in Toronto, held in 2003.\nIn December 2016, Martin was a key speaker at the Guadalajara International Book Fair 2016 in Mexico where the author provided hints about the next two books in the series \"A Song of Ice and Fire\".\nIn 2020, Martin fulfilled his duties as \"toastmaster\" of the Hugo Awards. During the event, he mispronounced several names, including that of R. F. Kuang, which she considered a microaggression. Martin later apologized for mispronouncing the names.\nWriting pace.\nMartin has been criticized by his fanbase for the long periods between books in the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series, notably the six-year gap between the fourth volume, \"A Feast for Crows\" (2005), and the fifth volume, \"A Dance with Dragons\" (2011), and the fact that the next volume in the series, \"The Winds of Winter\", is still unpublished over 14 years later. In 2010, Martin had responded to fan criticisms by saying he was unwilling to write only his \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series, noting that working on other prose and compiling and editing different book projects have always been part of his working process. In 2014, musical duo Paul and Storm released the humorous song \"Write like the Wind\" that alludes to the perceived long time spans between book releases.\nPersonal life.\nIn the early 1970s, Martin was in a relationship with fellow science fiction/fantasy author Lisa Tuttle, with whom he co-wrote \"Windhaven\".\nWhile attending an East Coast science fiction convention he met his first wife, Gale Burnick; they were married in 1975 and moved from their Chicago apartment and into a house in Dubuque in 1976. Both of them grew tired of the hard winters there, and when she graduated from Clarke University in June 1979, he resigned from his job and they decided to move to New Mexico. The year before they had \"fallen in love\" with Santa Fe on their way to the 36th World Science Fiction Convention which was being held in Phoenix. His wife went down and bought a house while Martin stayed behind to sell their home and finish the semester. The marriage ended in divorce in 1979, before they could be reunited in Santa Fe. Instead he settled there alone from December that same year until September 1981, when what would be his longtime partner Parris McBride moved in with him. On February 15, 2011, Martin married McBride during a small ceremony at their Santa Fe home. On August 19, 2011, they held a larger wedding ceremony and reception at Renovation, the 69th World Science Fiction Convention. They have no children.\nHe and McBride are supporters of the Wild Spirit Wolf Sanctuary in New Mexico. In early 2013, he purchased Santa Fe's Jean Cocteau Cinema and Coffee House, which had been closed since 2006. He had the property completely restored, including its original 35mm capability. The restoration also added digital projection and sound; the Cocteau officially reopened for business on August 9, 2013. In 2019, he opened a bookstore named Beastly Books, after \"Beauty and the Beast\", next to Jean Cocteau. Martin has also supported Meow Wolf, an arts collective in Santa Fe, having pledged $2.7\u00a0million toward a new art space in January 2015.\nIn response to a question on his religious views, Martin replied: \"I suppose I'm a lapsed Catholic. You would consider me an atheist or agnostic. I find religion and spirituality fascinating. I would like to believe this isn't the end and there's something more, but I can't convince the rational part of me that makes any sense whatsoever.\"\nMartin is a fan of the New York Jets, the New York Giants and the New York Mets. He is also a fan of the Grateful Dead, and says that the band's music may have influenced his work.\nMartin made a guest appearance as himself in an episode, \"El Skeletorito\", of the Adult Swim show \"Robot Chicken\". He appeared in SyFy's \"Z Nation\" as a zombie version of himself in season two's \"The Collector\", where he is still signing copies of his new novel. In \"\", he is killed when watching a movie at the theatre. In AMC's TV show, \"Dark Winds\" Season 3, Episode 1, he appears as \"George\", opposite co-executive producer Robert Redford, playing chess in a Navajo jail cell.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 2014, Martin launched a campaign on Prizeo to raise funds for Wild Spirit Wolf Sanctuary and the Food Depot of Santa Fe. As part of the campaign, Martin offered one donor the chance to accompany him on a trip to the wolf sanctuary, including a helicopter ride and dinner. Martin also offered those donating $20,000 or more the opportunity to have a character named after them and \"killed off\" in an upcoming \"Song of Ice and Fire\" novel. The campaign garnered media attention and raised a total of $502,549.\nIn 2017, Martin announced that he was funding The Miskatonic Scholarship. The Miskatonic Scholarship allows a writer of Lovecraftian cosmic horror to attend the Odyssey Writing Workshop, a six-week writing workshop held at Saint Anselm College in Manchester, New Hampshire.\nMartin is a cultural advisor for Colossal Biosciences, a biotech and genetic engineering company. He was invited to meet three dire wolves the company had created in February 2025 stating, \"Maybe I was remembering a past life, when I ran with a pack in the Ice Age. \u2026 Whatever the reason, I have to say the rebirth of the direwolf has stirred me as no scientific news has since Neil Armstrong walked on the moon.\"\nPolitics.\nGrowing up, Martin avoided the draft to the Vietnam War by being a conscientious objector and did two years of alternative service. He generally opposes war and thought the Vietnam War was a \"terrible mistake for America\".\nWhile he did not endorse Barack Obama in 2008, Martin endorsed him for re-election in 2012 calling Obama the most intelligent president since Jimmy Carter. In 2014, Martin endorsed Democratic Senator Tom Udall of New Mexico.\nIn the midst of pressure to pull the 2014 feature film \"The Interview\" from theaters, the Jean Cocteau Cinema in Santa Fe, New Mexico, which has been owned by Martin since 2013, decided to show the film. Theater manager Jon Bowman told the \"Santa Fe New Mexican\", \"Martin feels strongly about the First Amendment and the idea of artists having the ability to speak their minds and not having to worry about being targets.\"\nImmediately following Bernie Sanders' defeat in the U.S. Democratic primary elections, he supported Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton in the general 2016 United States presidential election, and criticized Donald Trump during the election and following her defeat, commenting that Trump would \"become the worst president in American history\". In response to fans of Martin who compared Trump favorably to characters from \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", Martin doubled-down on his criticism of Trump by making the case to his fans that Trump shares many personality traits in common with King Joffrey, a near-universally hated character from the series, concluding that \"Trump is a Grown-Up Joffrey.\"\nIn May 2019, Martin endorsed Joe Biden for president in 2020.\nAwards.\nAwards and nominations.\nOther awards won:\nBibliography.\nWorks.\nNovels.\n\"A Song of Ice and Fire\" universe:\nStand-alones:\nShort stories.\nCollections:\nUncollected short stories:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12301", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12301", "title": "A Song of Ice and Fire", "text": "Series of epic fantasy novels by George R. R. Martin\nA Song of Ice and Fire is a series of high fantasy novels by the American author George R. R. Martin. Martin began writing the first volume, \"A Game of Thrones\", in 1991, and published it in 1996. Martin, who originally envisioned the series as a trilogy, has released five out of seven planned volumes. The most recent entry in the series, \"A Dance with Dragons\", was published in 2011. Martin plans to write the sixth novel, titled \"The Winds of Winter\". A seventh novel, \"A Dream of Spring\", is planned to follow.\n\"A Song of Ice and Fire\" depicts a violent world dominated by political realism. What little supernatural power exists is confined to the margins of the known world. Moral ambiguity pervades the books, and many of the storylines frequently raise questions concerning loyalty, pride, human sexuality, piety, and the morality of violence. The story unfolds through an alternating set of subjective points of view, the success or survival of any of which is never assured. Each chapter is told from a limited third-person perspective, drawn from a group of characters that expands from nine in the first novel to 31 by the fifth.\nThe novels are set on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos (the world as a whole does not have an established name). Martin's stated inspirations for the series include the Wars of the Roses and \"The Accursed Kings,\" a series of French historical novels by Maurice Druon. The work as a whole consists of three interwoven plots: a dynastic war among several families for control of Westeros, the ambition of the surviving members of the dethroned Targaryen dynasty to return from their exile in Essos and reassume the Iron Throne, and the growing threat posed by the powerful supernatural Others from the northernmost region of Westeros.\nAs of 2015, more than 90\u00a0million copies in 47 languages had been sold. The fourth and fifth volumes reached the top of the \"New York Times\" Best Seller lists when published in 2005 and 2011 respectively. Among the many derived works are several prequel novellas, two television series, a comic book adaptation, and several card, board, and video games. The series has received critical acclaim for its world-building, characters, and narrative.\nPlot synopsis.\n\"A Song of Ice and Fire\" takes place in a fictional world in which seasons often last for years and can end unpredictably. Before the events of the first novel, the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros were united under the Targaryen dynasty, establishing military supremacy through their control of dragons. The Targaryens ruled for nearly three hundred years, continuing beyond the extinction of the dragons. Their dynasty eventually ended with a rebellion led by Lord Robert Baratheon, in which Aerys II \"the Mad King\" Targaryen was killed and Robert proclaimed king of the Seven Kingdoms. At the beginning of \"A Game of Thrones\", 15 years have passed since Robert's rebellion, with a nine-year-long summer nearing its end.\nThe principal story chronicles the power struggle for the Iron Throne among the great Houses of Westeros following the death of King Robert in \"A Game of Thrones\". Robert's heir apparent, the 13-year-old Joffrey, is immediately proclaimed king through the machinations of his mother, Queen Cersei Lannister. When Lord Eddard \"Ned\" Stark \u2014 Robert's closest friend and chief advisor \u2014 discovers that Joffrey and his siblings are the product of incest between Cersei and her twin brother Ser Jaime Lannister, Eddard attempts to unseat Joffrey, but is betrayed and executed for treason. In response, Robert's younger brothers Stannis and Renly lay separate claims to the throne. During this period of instability, two of the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros attempt to become independent from the Iron Throne: Eddard's eldest son Robb is proclaimed King in the North, while Lord Balon Greyjoy desires to recover the independence of his kingdom, the Iron Islands. The so-called \"War of the Five Kings\" is in full progress by the middle of the second book, \"A Clash of Kings\". This story is told principally through the perspectives of Eddard's wife Catelyn, their children Sansa, Arya, and Bran, and Jaime and Cersei's younger brother Tyrion Lannister, with more point-of-view characters added as the novels continue.\nThe second storyline stems from the far north of Westeros, where an 8,000-year-old wall of ice, simply called \"the Wall\", defends the Seven Kingdoms from supernatural creatures known as the Others. The Wall's sentinels, the Sworn Brotherhood of the Night's Watch, also protect the realm from incursions by the \"wildlings\" or \"Free Folk\", a number of human tribes living on the north side of the Wall. The story of The Night's Watch is told primarily through the point of view of Jon Snow, Lord Eddard Stark's bastard son. Jon follows in the footsteps of his paternal uncle Benjen Stark and joins the Watch at a young age, rising quickly through the ranks. He eventually becomes Lord Commander of the Night's Watch. In the third volume, \"A Storm of Swords\", the Night's Watch storyline becomes increasingly entangled with the War of the Five Kings when King Stannis Baratheon arrives at The Wall.\nThe third storyline follows Daenerys Targaryen, daughter of Aerys II. On the continent of Essos, east of Westeros across the Narrow Sea, Daenerys is married off by her elder brother Viserys to a powerful warlord of the nomadic Dothraki. Over the course of her story, Daenerys slowly becomes an independent and intelligent ruler in her own right. Her rise to power is aided by the historic birth of three dragons, hatched from eggs given to her as wedding gifts. The three dragons soon become not only a symbol of her bloodline and her claim to the throne but also devastating weapons of war, which help her in the conquest of Slaver's Bay. The later books follow her ongoing conflict with the region's city-states, in which she aims to consolidate power, disrupt the Essosi slave trade, and gather support for her ambitions to reclaim Westeros.\nPublishing history.\nOverview.\nBooks in the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series are first published in hardcover and are later re-released as paperback editions. In the UK, Harper Voyager publishes special slipcased editions. The series has also been translated into more than 30 languages. All page totals given below are for the US first editions.\nFirst three novels (1991\u20132000).\nGeorge R. R. Martin was already a successful fantasy and sci-fi author and TV writer before writing his \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" book series. Martin had his first short story published in 1971 and his first novel in 1977. By the mid-1990s, he had won three Hugo Awards, two Nebula Awards, and other awards for his short fiction. Although his early books were well-received within the fantasy fiction community, his readership remained relatively small and Martin took on jobs as a writer in Hollywood in the mid-1980s. He worked principally on the revival of \"The Twilight Zone\" throughout 1986 and on \"Beauty and the Beast\" until 1990, but he also developed his own TV pilots and wrote feature film scripts. He grew frustrated that his pilots and screenplays were not getting made and that TV-related production limitations like budgets and episode lengths were forcing him to cut characters and trim battle scenes. This pushed Martin back towards writing books, where he did not have to worry about compromising the size of his imagination. Admiring the works of J. R. R. Tolkien in his childhood, he wanted to write an epic fantasy, though he did not have any specific ideas.\nWhen Martin was between Hollywood projects in the summer of 1991, he started writing a new science fiction novel called \"Avalon\". After three chapters, he had a vivid idea of a boy seeing a man's beheading and finding direwolves in the snow, which would eventually become the first non-prologue chapter of \"A Game of Thrones\". Putting \"Avalon\" aside, Martin finished this chapter in a few days and grew certain that it was part of a longer story. After a few more chapters, Martin perceived his new book as a fantasy story and started making maps and genealogies. However, the writing of this book was interrupted for a few years when Martin returned to Hollywood to produce his TV series \"Doorways\" that ABC had ordered but ultimately never aired.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The first scene...chapter one of the first book, the chapter where they find the direwolf pups...just came to me out of nowhere. I was...at work on a different novel, and suddenly I saw that scene. It didn't belong in the novel I was writing, but it came to me so vividly that I had to sit down and write it, and by the time I did, it led to a second chapter, and the second chapter was the Catelyn chapter where Ned has just come back.\"\n\u2014George R. R. Martin in 2014\nIn 1994, Martin gave his agent, Kirby McCauley, the first 200 pages and a two-page story projection as part of a planned trilogy with the novels \"A Dance with Dragons\" and \"The Winds of Winter\" intended to follow. When Martin had still not reached the novel's end at 1,400 manuscript pages, he felt that the series needed to be four and eventually six books long, which he imagined as two linked trilogies of one long story. Martin chose \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" as the overall series title: Martin saw the struggle of the cold Others and the fiery dragons as one possible meaning for \"Ice and Fire\", whereas the word \"song\" had previously appeared in Martin's book titles \"A Song for Lya\" and \"Songs the Dead Men Sing\", stemming from his obsessions with songs. Martin also named Robert Frost's 1920 poem \"Fire and Ice\" and cultural associations such as passion versus betrayal as possible influences for the series' title.\nThe revised finished manuscript for \"A Game of Thrones\" was 1,088 pages long (without the appendices), with the publication following in August 1996. \"The Wheel of Time \"author Robert Jordan had written a short endorsement for the cover that was influential in ensuring the book's and hence series' early success with fantasy readers. \"Blood of the Dragon\", a pre-release sample novella drawn from Daenerys's chapters, went on to win the 1997 Hugo Award for Best Novella. The first book was marketed as part of the \"\"Song of Ice and Fire\" trilogy\" in 1996, but by the second book's release, the \"trilogy\" suffix had been dropped and the series was retitled to \"A Song of Ice and Fire\".\nThe 300 pages removed from the \"Game of Thrones\" manuscript served as the opening of the second book, entitled \"A Clash of Kings\". It was released in February 1999 in the United States, with a manuscript length (without appendices) of 1,184 pages. \"A Clash of Kings\" was the first book of the \"Song of Ice and Fire\" series to make the best-seller lists, reaching 13 on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list in 1999. After the success of \"The Lord of the Rings\" films, Martin received his first inquiries to the rights of the \"Song of Ice and Fire\" series from various producers and filmmakers.\nMartin was several months late turning in the third book, \"A Storm of Swords\". The last chapter he had written was about the \"Red Wedding\", a pivotal scene notable for its violence (see Themes: Violence and death). \"A Storm of Swords\" was 1,521 pages in manuscript (without appendices), causing problems for many of Martin's publishers around the world. Bantam Books published \"A Storm of Swords\" in a single volume in the United States in November 2000, whereas some other-language editions were divided into two, three, or even four volumes. \"A Storm of Swords\" debuted at number 12 in the \"New York Times\" bestseller list.\nBridging the timeline gap (2000\u20132011).\nAfter \"A Game of Thrones\", \"A Clash of Kings\", and \"A Storm of Swords\", Martin originally intended to write three more books. The fourth book, tentatively titled \"A Dance with Dragons\", was to focus on Daenerys Targaryen's return to Westeros and the associated conflicts. Martin wanted to set this story five years after \"A Storm of Swords\" so that the younger characters could grow older and the dragons could grow larger. Agreeing with his publishers early on that the new book should be shorter than \"A Storm of Swords\", Martin set out to write the novel closer in length to \"A Clash of Kings\". A long prologue was to establish what had happened in the meantime, initially just as one chapter of Aeron Damphair on the Iron Islands at the Kingsmoot. Since the events on the Iron Islands were to have an impact in the book and could not be told with existing POV characters, Martin eventually introduced three new viewpoints.\nIn 2001, Martin was still optimistic that the fourth installment might be released in the last quarter of 2002. However, the five-year gap did not work for all characters during writing. On one hand, Martin was unsatisfied with covering the events during the gap solely through flashbacks and internal retrospection. On the other hand, it was implausible to have nothing happen for five years. After working on the book for about a year, Martin realized he needed an additional interim book, which he called \"A Feast for Crows\". The book would pick up the story immediately after the third book, and Martin scrapped the idea of a five-year gap. The material of the written 250-page prologue was mixed in as new viewpoint characters from Dorne and the Iron Islands. These expanded storylines and the resulting story interactions complicated the plot for Martin.\nThe manuscript length of \"A Feast for Crows\" eventually surpassed \"A Storm of Swords\". Martin was reluctant to make the necessary deep cuts to get the book down to publishable length, as that would have compromised the story he had in mind. Printing the book in \"microtype on onion skin paper and giving each reader a magnifying glass\" was also not an option for him. On the other hand, Martin rejected the publishers' idea of splitting the narrative chronologically into \"A Feast for Crows\", Parts One and Two. Being already late with the book, Martin had not even started writing all characters' stories, and also objected to ending the first book without any resolution for its many viewpoint characters as in previous books.\nWith the characters spread out across the world, a friend suggested that Martin divide the story geographically into two volumes, of which \"A Feast for Crows\" would be the first. This approach would give Martin the room to complete his commenced story arcs as he had originally intended, which he still felt was the best approach years later. Martin moved the unfinished characters' stories set in the east (Essos) and north (Winterfell and the Wall) into the next book, \"A Dance with Dragons\", and left \"A Feast for Crows\" to cover the events in King's Landing, the Riverlands, Dorne, and the Iron Islands. Both books begin immediately after the end of \"A Storm of Swords\", running in parallel instead of sequentially, and involve different casts of characters with only little overlap. Martin split Arya's chapters into both books after having already moved the three other most popular characters (Jon Snow, Tyrion, and Daenerys) into \"A Dance with Dragons\".\nUpon its release in October 2005 in the UK and November 2005 in the US, \"A Feast for Crows\" went straight to the top of \"The New York Times\" bestseller list. Among the positive reviewers was Lev Grossman of \"Time\", who dubbed Martin \"the American Tolkien\". However, fans and critics alike were disappointed with the story split that left the fates of several popular characters unresolved after \"A Storm of Swords\"' cliffhanger ending. With \"A Dance with Dragons\" said to be half-finished, Martin mentioned in the epilogue of \"A Feast for Crows\" that the next volume would be released by the next year. However, planned release dates were repeatedly pushed back. Meanwhile, HBO acquired the rights to turn \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" into a fantasy drama series in 2007 and aired the first of ten episodes covering \"A Game of Thrones\" in April 2011.\nWith around 1600 pages in manuscript length, \"A Dance with Dragons\" was eventually published in July 2011 after six years of writing, longer in page count and writing time than any of the preceding four novels. The story of \"A Dance with Dragons\" catches up with and goes beyond \"A Feast for Crows\" around two-thirds into the book, but nevertheless covers less story than Martin had intended, omitting at least one planned large battle sequence and leaving several character threads ending in cliffhangers. Martin attributed the delay mainly to his untangling \"the Meereenese knot\", which the interviewer understood as \"making the chronology and characters mesh up as various threads converged on [Daenerys]\". Martin also acknowledged spending too much time on rewriting and perfecting the story, but soundly rejected the theories of some of his critics that he had lost interest in the series or would bide his time to make more money.\nPlanned novels and future (2011\u2013present).\nMartin believed in 2012 the last two volumes of the series would be large books of 1500 manuscript pages each. The sixth book will be called \"The Winds of Winter\", taking the title of the last book of the originally planned trilogy. Displeased with the provisional title \"A Time for Wolves\" for the final volume, Martin ultimately chose \"A Dream of Spring\" as the title for the seventh book in 2006. Martin said in March 2012 that the final two novels will take readers farther north than any of the previous books, and that the Others will appear. Martin indicated he would not permit another writer to finish the book series.\n\"The Winds of Winter\".\n\"The Winds of Winter\" is to resolve the cliffhangers from \"A Dance with Dragons\" early on and \"will open with the two big battles that [the fifth book] was building up to, the Battle in the Ice and the Battle [...] of Slaver's Bay. And then take it from there.\" By the middle of 2010, Martin had already finished five chapters of \"The Winds of Winter\" from the viewpoints of Sansa Stark, Arya Stark, Arianne Martell, and Aeron Greyjoy, coming to around 100 completed pages. After the publication of \"A Dance with Dragons\" in 2011, Martin spent the remainder of the year on book tours, conventions, and continued working on his \"The World of Ice &amp; Fire\" companion guide and a new \"Tales of Dunk and Egg\" novella. In December 2011, Martin posted a chapter from \"The Winds of Winter\" from the viewpoint of Theon Greyjoy; several other chapters have been made public since. Four hundred pages of the sixth novel had been written as of October\u00a02012[ [update]], although Martin considered only 200 as \"really finished\"; the rest needed revising. During the Guadalajara International Book Fair in Mexico in early December 2016, Martin offered the following hint as to the tone of this book: \"There are a lot of dark chapters right now ... I've been telling you for 20 years that winter was coming. Winter is the time when things die, and cold and ice and darkness fill the world, so this is not going to be the happy feel-good that people may be hoping for. Some of the characters [are] in very dark places.\" Martin did not intend to separate the characters geographically again.\nIn 2011, Martin gave three years as a realistic estimate for finishing the sixth book at a good pace, but said ultimately the book \"will be done when it's done\", acknowledging that his publication estimates had been too optimistic in the past. In 2015 there were indications that the book would be published before the sixth season of the HBO show but in early January 2016 Martin confirmed that he had not met an end-of-year deadline that he had established with his publisher for release of the book before the sixth season. He also revealed there had been a previous deadline of October 2015 that he had considered achievable in May 2015, and that in September 2015 he had still considered the end-of-year deadline achievable. He further confirmed that some of the plot of the book might be revealed in the then-upcoming sixth season of \"Game of Thrones\". In February 2016, Martin stated that he dropped all his editing projects except for \"Wild Cards\", and that he would not be writing any teleplays, screenplays, short stories, introductions or forewords before delivering \"The Winds of Winter\". In March 2020, Martin stated that he was writing \"The Winds of Winter\" every day, and in June he hoped to be done with it in 2021. In October 2022, Martin said that he had written approximately three quarters of the book.\n\"A Dream of Spring\".\nMartin is not firm about ending the series with the seventh novel. With his stated goal of telling the story from beginning to end, he will not truncate the story to fit into an arbitrary number of volumes. He knows the ending in broad strokes as well as the future of the main characters, and plans to finish the series with bittersweet elements where not everyone will live happily ever after. Martin hopes to write an ending similar to \"The Lord of the Rings\" that he felt gave the story a satisfying depth and resonance. On the other hand, Martin noted the challenge to avoid a situation like the finale of the TV series \"Lost\", which left some fans disappointed by deviating too far from their own theories and desires.\nIn 2015, Martin said that he was not writing \"A Dream of Spring\" together with \"The Winds of Winter\", and in early 2016, he said he did not believe \"A Dream of Spring\" would be published before the last season of the HBO show.\nDuring a question-and-answer session at the 2016 Guadalajara International Book Fair, Martin emphasized: \"I'm not going to tell you how I'm going to end my book, but I suspect the overall flavor is going to be as much bittersweet as it is happy.\"\nIn April 2018, Martin commented he had not started working on the book, and in November he said that after \"The Winds of Winter\" he would decide what to do next: \"A Dream of Spring\" or the second volume of \"Fire &amp; Blood\" or one or two stories for the \"Tales of Dunk and Egg\".\nIn May 2019, Martin reiterated he had not started writing \"A Dream of Spring\" and would not do so before finishing \"The Winds of Winter\".\nOther writings.\nRegarding \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" as his masterpiece, Martin stated he would never write anything on this scale again and would only return to this fictional universe in the context of stand-alone novels. He prefers to write stories about characters from other \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" periods of history such as his \"Tales of Dunk and Egg\" project, instead of continuing the series directly. Martin said he would love to return to writing short stories, novellas, novelettes, and stand-alone novels from diverse genres such as science fiction, horror, fantasy, or even a murder mystery.\nInspiration and writing.\nGenre.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[Martin's \"Ice and Fire\" series] was groundbreaking (at least for me) in all kinds of ways. Above all, the books were extremely unpredictable, especially in a genre where readers have come to expect the intensely predictable. [...] \"A Game of Thrones\" was profoundly shocking when I first read it, and fundamentally changed my notions about what could be done with epic fantasy.\"\n\u2014Fantasy writer Joe Abercrombie in 2008 \nGeorge R. R. Martin believes the most profound influences to be the ones experienced in childhood. Having read H. P. Lovecraft, Robert E. Howard, Robert A. Heinlein, Eric Frank Russell, Andre Norton, Isaac Asimov, Fritz Leiber, and Mervyn Peake in his youth, Martin never categorized these authors' literature into science fiction, fantasy, or horror and will write from any genre as a result. Martin classified \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" as \"epic fantasy\", and specifically named Tad Williams' high fantasy epic \"Memory, Sorrow, and Thorn\" as very influential for the writing of the series. One of his favorite authors is Jack Vance, although Martin considered the series not particularly Vancean.\nMartin experienced some harsh winters when living in Dubuque a few years in the 1970s, and suspects these winters had an influence on his writing: \"I think a lot of the stuff in \"A Game of Thrones\", the snow and ice and freezing, comes from my memories of Dubuque\".\nThe medieval setting has been the traditional background for epic fantasy. However, where historical fiction leaves versed readers knowing the historical outcome, original characters may increase suspense and empathy for the readers. Yet Martin felt historical fiction, particularly when set during the Middle Ages, had an excitement, grittiness, and a realness to it that was absent in fantasy with a similar backdrop. Thus, he wanted to combine the realism of historical fiction with the magic appeal of the best fantasies, subduing magic in favor of battles and political intrigue. He also decided to avoid the conventional good versus evil setting typical for the genre, using the fight between Achilles and Hector in Homer's \"Iliad\", where no one stands out as either a hero or a villain, as an example of what he wants to achieve with his books.\nMartin is widely credited with broadening the fantasy fiction genre for adult content. Writing for \"The Atlantic\", Amber Taylor assessed the novels as hard fantasy with vulnerable characters to which readers become emotionally attached. CNN found in 2000 that Martin's mature descriptions were \"far more frank than those found in the works of other fantasy authors\", although Martin assessed the fantasy genre to have become rougher-edged a decade later and that some writers' work was going beyond the mature themes of his novels. Adam Roberts called Martin's series the most successful and popular example of the emerging subgenre of grimdark fantasy.\nWriting process.\nSetting out to write something on an epic scale, Martin projected to write three books of 800 manuscript pages in the very early stages of the series. His original 1990s contract specified one-year deadlines for his previous literary works, but Martin only realized later that his new books were longer and hence required more writing time. In 2000, Martin planned to take 18 months to two years for each volume and projected the last of the planned six books to be released five or six years later. However, with \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series evolving into the biggest and most ambitious story he has ever attempted writing, he still has two more books to finish as of 2025[ [update]]. Martin said he needed to be in his own office in Santa Fe, New Mexico to immerse himself in the fictional world and write. As of 2011[ [update]], Martin was still typing his fiction on an IBM PC compatible computer running MS-DOS with WordStar 4.0. He begins each day at 10\u00a0am with rewriting and polishing the previous day's work, and may write all day or struggle to write anything. Excised material and previous old versions are saved to be possibly re-inserted at a later time. Martin does not consider \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" a \"series\" but a single story published in several volumes.\nMartin set the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" story in a secondary world inspired by Tolkien's writing. Unlike Tolkien, who created entire languages, mythologies, and histories for Middle-earth long before writing \"The Lord of the Rings\", Martin usually starts with a rough sketch of an imaginary world that he improvises into a workable fictional setting along the way. He described his writing as coming from a subconscious level in \"almost a daydreaming process\", and his stories, which have a mythic rather than a scientific core, draw from emotion instead of rationality. Martin employs maps and a cast list topping 60 pages in the fourth volume, but keeps most information in his mind. His imagined backstory remains subject to change until published, and only the novels count as canon. Martin does not intend to publish his private notes after the series is finished.\nMartin drew much inspiration from actual history for the series, having several bookcases filled with medieval history for research and visiting historic European landmarks. For an American who speaks only English, the history of England proved the easiest source of medieval history for him, giving the series a British rather than a German or Spanish historic flavor. For example, Ned and Robb Stark resemble Richard, 3rd Duke of York, and his son Edward IV, and Queen Cersei resembles both Margaret of Anjou and Elizabeth Woodville. Martin immersed himself in many diverse medieval topics such as clothing, food, feasting, and tournaments to have the facts at hand if needed during writing. The series was in particular influenced by the Hundred Years' War, the Crusades, the Albigensian Crusade, and the Wars of the Roses, although Martin refrained from making any direct adaptations. Martin was also inspired by the French historical novels \"The Accursed Kings\" by Maurice Druon, which are about the French monarchy in the 13th and 14th centuries. Martin has also said that important events of the narrative, such as the \n\"Red Wedding\", a crucial twist in \"A Storm of Swords\", are based on events in Scottish history such as the Black Dinner of 1440 and the Massacre of Glencoe in 1692.\nMartin has also drawn from Roman history for inspiration, comparing Stannis Baratheon to the Roman Emperor Tiberius. \nThe story is written to follow principal landmarks with an ultimate destination, but leaves Martin room for improvisation. On occasion, improvised details significantly affected the planned story. By the fourth book, Martin kept more private notes than ever before to keep track of the many subplots, which became so detailed and sprawling by the fifth book as to be unwieldy. Martin's editors, copy editors, and readers monitor for accidental mistakes, although some errors have slipped into publication. For instance, Martin has inconsistently referred to certain characters' eye colors, and has described a horse as being of one sex and then another.\nNarrative structure.\nThe books are divided into chapters, each one narrated in the third person limited through the eyes of a point of view character, an approach Martin learned himself as a young journalism student. Beginning with nine POV characters in \"A Game of Thrones\", the number of POV characters grows to a total of 31 in \"A Dance with Dragons\" (see table). The short-lived one-time POV characters are mostly restricted to the prologues and epilogues. David Orr of \"The New York Times\" noted the importance of \"the Starks (good guys), the Targaryens (at least one good guy, or girl), the Lannisters (conniving), the Greyjoys (mostly conniving), the Baratheons (mixed bag), the Tyrells (unclear), and the Martells (ditto), most of whom are feverishly endeavoring to advance their ambitions and ruin their enemies, preferably unto death\". However, as \"Time\"'s Lev Grossman noted, readers \"experience the struggle for Westeros from all sides at once\", such that \"every fight is both triumph and tragedy [...] and everybody is both hero and villain at the same time\".\nModeled on \"The Lord of the Rings\", the story of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" begins with a tight focus on a small group (with everyone in Winterfell, except Daenerys) and then splits into separate stories. The storylines are to converge again, but finding the turning point in this complex series has been difficult for Martin and has slowed down his writing. Depending on the interview, Martin is said to have reached the turning point in \"A Dance with Dragons\", or to not quite have reached it yet in the books. The series' structure of multiple POVs and interwoven storylines was inspired by \"Wild Cards\", a multi-authored shared universe book series edited by Martin since 1985. As the sole author, Martin begins each new book with an outline of the chapter order and may write a few successive chapters from a single character's viewpoint instead of working chronologically. The chapters are later rearranged to optimize character intercutting, chronology, and suspense.\nInfluenced by his television and film scripting background, Martin tries to keep readers engrossed by ending each \"Song of Ice and Fire\" chapter with a tense or revelational moment, a twist or a cliffhanger, similar to a TV act break. Scriptwriting has also taught him the technique of \"cutting out the fat and leaving the muscle\", which is the final stage of completing a book, a technique that brought the page count in \"A Dance with Dragons\" down almost eighty pages. Dividing the continuous \"Song of Ice and Fire\" story into books is much harder for Martin. Each book shall represent a phase of the journey that ends in closure for most characters. A smaller portion of characters is left with clear-cut cliffhangers to make sure readers come back for the next installment, although \"A Dance with Dragons\" had more cliffhangers than Martin originally intended. Both one-time and regular POV characters are designed to have full character arcs ending in tragedy or triumph, and are written to hold the readers' interest and not be skipped in reading. Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not rely on the hero to come through unscathed and will instead feel the character's fear with each page turn.\nThe unresolved larger narrative arc encourages speculation about future story events. According to Martin, much of the key to \"A Song of Ice and Fire\"'s future lies over a dozen years in the fictional past, of which each volume reveals more. Events planned from the beginning are foreshadowed, although Martin is careful not to make the story predictable. The viewpoint characters, who serve as unreliable narrators, may clarify or provide different perspectives on past events. Therefore, what the readers believe to be true may not necessarily be true.\nCharacter development.\nRegarding the characters as the heart of the story, Martin planned the epic \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" to have a large cast of characters and many different settings from the beginning. \"A Feast for Crows\" has a 63-page list of characters, with many of the thousands of characters mentioned only in passing or disappearing from view for long stretches. When Martin adds a new family to the ever-growing number of genealogies in the appendices, he devises a secret about the personality or fate of the family members. However, their backstory remains subject to change until written down in the story. Martin drew most character inspiration from history (without directly translating historical figures) and his own experiences, but also from the manners of his friends, acquaintances, and people of public interest. Martin aims to \"make my characters real and to make them human, characters who have good and bad, noble and selfish well-mixed in their natures\". Jeff VanderMeer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" remarked that \"Martin's devotion to fully inhabiting his characters, for better or worse, creates the unstoppable momentum in his novels and contains an implied criticism of Tolkien's moral simplicity\" (see Themes: Moral ambiguity).\nMartin deliberately ignored the writing rule of never giving two characters names starting with the same letter. Instead, character names reflect the naming systems in various European family histories, where particular names were associated with specific royal houses and where even the secondary families assigned the same names repeatedly. The story of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" therefore has children called \"Robert\" in honor of King Robert of House Baratheon, a \"Brandon\" in every other generation of the Starks in commemoration of Brandon the Builder (of the Wall), and the syllable \"Ty\" commonly occurring in given names of House Lannister. Confident that readers would pay attention, Martin distinguished people sharing a given name by adding numbers or locations to their given names (e.g. Henry V of England). The family names were designed in association with ethnic groups (see backstory): the First Men in the North of Westeros had very simply descriptive names like Stark and Strong, whereas the descendants of the Andal invaders in the South have more elaborate, undescriptive house names like Lannister or Arryn, and the Targaryens (being Valyrians from the Eastern continent), have the most exotic names with the letter Y.\nAll characters are designed to speak with their own internal voices to capture their views of the world. \"The Atlantic\" pondered whether Martin ultimately intended the readers to sympathize with characters on both sides of the Lannister\u2013Stark feud long before plot developments force them to make their emotional choices. Contrary to most conventional epic fantasies, the characters of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" are vulnerable so that, according to \"The Atlantic\", the reader \"cannot be sure that good shall triumph, which makes those instances where it does all the more exulting.\" Martin gets emotionally involved in the characters' lives during writing, which makes the chapters with dreadful events sometimes very difficult to write. Seeing the world through the characters' eyes requires a certain amount of empathy with them, including the villains, all of whom he has said he loves as if they were his own children. Martin found that some characters had minds of their own and took his writing in different directions. He returns to the intended story if it does not work out, but these detours sometimes prove more rewarding for him.\nArya Stark, Tyrion Lannister, Jon Snow, and Daenerys Targaryen generate the most feedback from readers. They are also four of the \"big six\" main characters of the series, according to Martin (the other two being Sansa Stark and Bran Stark). Martin has stated that Tyrion is his personal favorite, as the grayest of the gray characters, with his cunning and wit making him the most fun to write. Martin has also said that Bran Stark is the hardest character to write. As the character most deeply involved in magic, Bran's story needs to be handled carefully within the supernatural aspects of the books. Bran is also the youngest viewpoint character, and has to deal with the series' adult themes like grief, loneliness, and anger. Martin set out to have the young characters grow up faster between chapters, but, as it was implausible for a character to take two months to respond, a finished book represents very little time passed. Martin hoped the planned five-year break would ease the situation and age the children to almost adults in terms of the Seven Kingdoms, but he later dropped the five-year gap (see section Bridging the timeline gap).\nThemes.\nModern fantasy may often embrace strangeness, but \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series is generally praised for what is perceived as a sort of medieval realism. Believing that magic should be used moderately in the epic fantasy genre, Martin set out to make the story feel more like historical fiction than contemporary fantasy, with less emphasis on magic and sorcery and more on battles, political intrigue, and the characters. Though the amount of magic has gradually increased throughout the story, the series is still to end with less overt magic than most contemporary fantasies. In Martin's eyes, literary effective magic needs to represent strange and dangerous forces beyond human comprehension, not advanced alien technologies or formulaic spells. As such, the characters understand only the natural aspects of their world, but not the magical elements like the Others.\nSince Martin drew on historical sources to build the world of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", Damien G. Walter of \"The Guardian\" saw a strong resemblance between Westeros and England in the period of the Wars of the Roses. \"The Atlantic\"'s Adam Serwer regarded \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" as \"more a story of politics than one of heroism, a story about humanity wrestling with its baser obsessions than fulfilling its glorious potential\", where the emergent power struggle stems from the feudal system's repression and not from the fight between good and evil. Martin not only wanted to reflect the frictions of the medieval class structures in the novels, but also explore the consequences of the leaders' decisions, as general goodness does not automatically make competent leaders and vice versa.\nA common theme in the fantasy genre is the battle between good and evil, which Martin rejects for not mirroring the real world. Attracted to gray characters, Martin instead endorses William Faulkner's view that only the human heart in conflict with itself was worth writing about. Martin explores the questions of redemption and character change in the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series. The multiple viewpoint structure allows characters to be explored from many sides, such that the supposed villains can provide their viewpoint.\nAlthough fantasy comes from an imaginative realm, Martin sees an honest necessity to reflect the real world where people, even beloved people, sometimes die ugly deaths. Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not expect the supposed hero to survive, and instead will feel the same tension and fear that the characters might. The novels also reflect the substantial death rates in war. The deaths of supernumerary extras, or of orcs or their equivalents, have no major effect on readers, whereas a friend's death has much more emotional impact. Martin prefers a hero's sacrifice to say something profound about human nature.\nAccording to Martin, the fantasy genre rarely focuses on sex and sexuality, instead often treating sexuality in a juvenile way or neglecting it completely. Martin, however, considers sexuality an important driving force in human life that should not be excluded from the narrative. Providing sensory detail for an immersive experience is more important than plot advancement for Martin, who aims to let the readers experience the novels' sex scenes, \"whether it's a great transcendent, exciting, mind blowing sex, or whether it's disturbing, twisted, dark sex, or disappointing perfunctory sex.\" Martin was fascinated by medieval contrasts where knights venerated their ladies with poems and wore their favors in tournaments while their armies mindlessly raped women in wartime. The non-existent concept of adolescence in the Middle Ages served as a model for Daenerys' sexual activity at the age of 13 in the books. The novels also allude to the incestuous practices in the Ptolemaic dynasty of Ancient Egypt to keep their bloodlines pure.\nMartin provides a variety of female characters to explore the place of women in a patriarchal society. Writing all characters as human beings with the same basic needs, dreams, and influences, his female characters are to cover the same wide spectrum of human traits as the males.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Science Fiction Weekly\" stated in 2000 that \"few would dispute that Martin's most monumental achievement to date has been the groundbreaking \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" historical fantasy series\", for which reviews have been \"orders of magnitude better\" than for his previous works, as Martin described to \"The New Yorker\". In 2007, \"Weird Tales\" magazine described the series as a \"superb fantasy saga\" that \"raised Martin to a whole new level of success\". Shortly before the release of \"A Dance with Dragons\" in 2011, Bill Sheehan of \"The Washington Post\" was sure that \"no work of fantasy has generated such anticipation since Harry Potter's final duel with Voldemort\", and Ethan Sacks of \"Daily News\" saw the series turning Martin into a darling of literary critics as well as mainstream readers, which was \"rare for a fantasy genre that's often dismissed as garbage not fit to line the bottom of a dragon's cage\". Salon.com's Andrew Leonard stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Publishers Weekly\" noted in 2000 that \"Martin may not rival Tolkien or Robert Jordan, but he ranks with such accomplished medievalists of fantasy as Poul Anderson and Gordon Dickson.\" After the fourth volume came out in 2005, \"Time\"'s Lev Grossman considered Martin a \"major force for evolution in fantasy\" and proclaimed him \"the American Tolkien\", explaining that, although Martin was \"[not] the best known of America's straight-up fantasy writers\" at the time and would \"never win a Pulitzer or a National Book Award\u00a0... his skill as a crafter of narrative exceeds that of almost any literary novelist writing today\". As Grossman said in 2011, the phrase \"American Tolkien\" \"has stuck to [Martin], as it was meant to\", being picked up by the media including \"The New York Times\" (\"He's much better than that\"), the \"New Yorker\", \"Entertainment Weekly\" (\"an acclaim that borders on fantasy blasphemy\"), \"The Globe and Mail\", and \"USA Today\". \"Time\" magazine named Martin one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2011, and \"USA Today\" named George R. R. Martin their Author of the Year 2011.\nAccording to \"The Globe and Mail\"'s John Barber, Martin manages simultaneously to master and transcend the genre so that \"Critics applaud the depth of his characterizations and lack of clich\u00e9 in books that are nonetheless replete with dwarves and dragons\". \"Publishers Weekly\" gave favorable reviews to the first three \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" novels at their points of release, saying that \"A Game of Thrones\" had \"superbly developed characters, accomplished prose and sheer bloody-mindedness\", that \"A Clash of Kings\" was \"notable particularly for the lived-in quality of [their fictional world and] for the comparatively modest role of magic\", and that \"A Storm of Swords\" was one \"of the more rewarding examples of gigantism in contemporary fantasy\". However, they found that \"A Feast for Crows\" as the fourth installment \"sorely misses its other half. The slim pickings here are tasty, but in no way satisfying.\" Their review for \"A Dance with Dragons\" repeated points of criticism for the fourth volume, and said that, although \"The new volume has a similar feel to \"Feast\"\", \"Martin keeps it fresh by focusing on popular characters [who were] notably absent from the previous book.\"\nAccording to the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"Martin's brilliance in evoking atmosphere through description is an enduring hallmark of his fiction, the settings much more than just props on a painted stage\", and the novels captivate readers with \"complex storylines, fascinating characters, great dialogue, perfect pacing, and the willingness to kill off even his major characters\". CNN remarked that \"the story weaves through differing points of view in a skillful mix of observation, narration and well-crafted dialogue that illuminates both character and plot with fascinating style\", and David Orr of \"The New York Times\" found that \"All of his hundreds of characters have grace notes of history and personality that advance a plot line. Every town has an elaborately recalled series of triumphs and troubles.\" Salon.com's Andrew Leonard \"couldn't stop reading Martin because my desire to know what was going to happen combined with my absolute inability to guess what would happen and left me helpless before his sorcery. At the end, I felt shaken and exhausted.\" \"The Christian Science Monitor\" advised reading the novels with an \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" encyclopedia at hand to \"catch all the layered, subtle hints and details that [Martin] leaves throughout his books. If you pay attention, you will be rewarded and questions will be answered.\"\nAmong the most critical voices were Sam Jordison and Michael Hann, both of \"The Guardian\". Jordison detailed his misgivings about \"A Game of Thrones\" in a 2009 review and summarized \"It's daft. It's unsophisticated. It's cartoonish. And yet, I couldn't stop reading\u00a0... Archaic absurdity aside, Martin's writing is excellent. His dialogue is snappy and frequently funny. His descriptive prose is immediate and atmospheric, especially when it comes to building a sense of deliciously dark foreboding [of the long impending winter].\" Hann did not consider the novels to stand out from the general fantasy genre, despite Martin's alterations to fantasy convention, although he rediscovered his childhood's views:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That when things are, on the whole, pretty crappy [in the real world], it's a deep joy to dive headfirst into something so completely immersive, something from which there is no need to surface from hours at a time. And if that immersion involves dragons, magic, wraiths from beyond death, shapeshifting wolves and banished princes, so be it.\nSales.\nThe reported overall sales figures of the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series vary. \"The New Yorker\" said in April 2011 (before the publication of \"A Dance with Dragons\") that more than 15\u00a0million \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" books had been sold worldwide, a figure repeated by \"The Globe and Mail\" in July 2011. Reuters reported in September 2013 that the books including print, digital and audio versions have sold more than 24\u00a0million copies in North America. \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported more than six million sold copies in North America by May 2011. \"USA Today\" reported 8.5\u00a0million copies in print and digital overall in July 2011, and over 12\u00a0million sold copies in print in December 2011. The series has been translated into more than 20 languages; \"USA Today\" reported the fifth book to be translated into over 40 languages. \"Forbes\" estimated that Martin was the 12th highest-earning author worldwide in 2011 at $15\u00a0million.\nMartin's publishers initially expected \"A Game of Thrones\" to be a best-seller, but the first installment did not even reach any lower positions in the bestseller list. This left Martin unsurprised, as it is \"a fool's game to think anything is going to be successful or to count on it\". However, the book slowly won the passionate advocacy of independent booksellers and the book's popularity grew by word of mouth. The series' popularity skyrocketed in subsequent volumes, with the second and third volumes making \"The New York Times\" Best Seller lists in 1999 and 2000, respectively. The series gained Martin's old writings new attention, and Martin's American publisher Bantam Spectra was to reprint his out-of-print solo novels.\nThe fourth installment, \"A Feast for Crows\", was an immediate best-seller at its 2005 release, hitting number one on \"The New York Times\" hardcover fiction bestseller list November 27, 2005, which for a fantasy novel suggested that Martin's books were attracting mainstream readers. The paperback edition of \"A Game of Thrones\" reached its 34th printing in 2010, surpassing the one million mark. Before it even premiered, the TV series had boosted sales of the book series, with \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" approaching triple-digit growth in year-on-year sales. Bantam was looking forward to seeing the tie-ins boost sales further, and Martin's British publisher Harper Voyager expected readers to rediscover their other epic fantasy literature. With a reported 4.5\u00a0million copies of the first four volumes in print in early 2011, the four volumes re-appeared on the paperback fiction bestseller lists in the second quarter of 2011.\nAt its point of publication in July 2011, \"A Dance with Dragons\" was in its sixth print with more than 650,000 hardbacks in print. It also had the highest single and first-day sales of any new fiction title published in 2011 at that point, with 170,000 hardcovers, 110,000 e-books, and 18,000 audio books reportedly sold on the first day. \"A Dance with Dragons\" reached the top of \"The New York Times\" bestseller list on July 31, 2011. Unlike most other big titles, the fifth volume sold more physical than digital copies early on, but nevertheless, Martin became the tenth author to sell 1\u00a0million Amazon Kindle e-books. All five volumes and the four-volume boxed set were among the top 100 best-selling books in the United States in 2011 and 2012.\nThe TV series has contributed significantly boosting sales of both the books and collectibles like box-sets, merchandise, and other items. The TV series also contributed to increasing the geographic coverage of the books, introducing new customers in emerging countries like India and Brazil to the book series. All this has significantly increased the overall book sales. As of April 2019, the book series has sold 90million copies worldwide.\nFandom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"After all, as some of you like to point out in your emails, I am sixty years old and fat, and you don't want me to 'pull a Robert Jordan' on you and deny you your book. Okay, I've got the message. You don't want me doing anything except \"A Song of Ice and Fire\". Ever. (Well, maybe it's okay if I take a leak once in a while?)\"\n\u2014George R. R. Martin on his blog in 2009\nDuring the 1980s and early 1990s, Martin's novels had slowly earned him a reputation in science fiction circles, although he said to only have received a few fans' letters a year in the pre-internet days. The publication of \"A Game of Thrones\" caused Martin's following to grow, with fan sites springing up and a Trekkie-like society of followers evolving that meet regularly. Westeros.org, one of the main \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" fansites with about seventeen thousand registered members as of 2011[ [update]], was co-founded in 1999 by a Swedish-based fan of Cuban descent, Elio M. Garc\u00eda Jr., as well as Linda Antonsson, who introduced him to the series; their involvement with Martin's work has now become semi-professional. The Brotherhood Without Banners, an unofficial fan club operating globally, was formed in 2001. Their founders and other longtime members are among Martin's good friends.\nMartin runs an official website and administers a lively blog with the assistance of Ty Franck. He also interacts with fandom by answering emails and letters, although he stated in 2005 that their sheer numbers might leave them unanswered for years. Since there are different types of conventions nowadays, he tends to go to three or four science-fiction conventions a year simply to go back to his roots and meet friends. He does not read message boards anymore, so that his writing will not be influenced by fans foreseeing twists and interpreting characters differently from what he intended.\nWhile Martin calls the majority of his fans \"great\", and enjoys interacting with them, he lost some of them because of the six years it took to release \"A Dance with Dragons\". A movement of disaffected fans called GRRuMblers formed in 2009, creating sites such as \"Finish the Book, George\" and \"Is Winter Coming?\" When fans' vocal impatience for \"A Dance with Dragons\" peaked shortly after, Martin issued a statement called \"To My Detractors\" on his blog that received media attention. \"The New York Times\" noted that it was not uncommon for Martin to be mobbed at book signings. \"The New Yorker\" called this \"an astonishing amount of effort to devote to denouncing the author of books one professes to love. Few contemporary authors can claim to have inspired such passion.\"\nDerived works.\nNovellas.\nMartin has written several prequel novellas. The \"Tales of Dunk and Egg\" series, three novellas set 90 years before the events of the novel series, feature the adventures of Ser Duncan the Tall and his squire \"Egg\", who later became King Aegon V Targaryen. The stories have no direct connection to the plot of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", although characters from it are mentioned in the series. The first installment, \"The Hedge Knight\", was published in the 1998 anthology \"Legends\". \"The Sworn Sword\" followed in 2003, published in \"Legends II\". Both were later adapted into graphic novels. The third novella, \"The Mystery Knight\", was first published in the 2010 anthology \"Warriors\" and in 2017 it was adapted as a graphic novel, as well. In 2015, the first three novellas were published as one illustrated collection, \"A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms\".\nThe novella \"The Princess and the Queen, or, the Blacks and the Greens\" appeared in Tor Books's 2013 anthology \"Dangerous Women\" and explains some of the Targaryen backstory two centuries before the events of the novels. \"The Rogue Prince, or, a King's Brother\", published in the 2014 anthology \"Rogues\", is itself a prequel to the events of \"The Princess and the Queen\". The novella \"The Sons of the Dragon\", published in the 2017 anthology \"The Book of Swords\", is the story of Aegon the Conqueror's two sons Aenys I and Maegor I \"The Cruel\". All three of these stories were incorporated as parts of \"Fire &amp; Blood\", a book chronicling the history of the Targaryen line.\nChapter sets from the novels were also compiled into three novellas that were released between 1996 and 2003 by \"Asimov's Science Fiction\" and \"Dragon\":\n\"Fire &amp; Blood\".\n\"Fire &amp; Blood\" is Martin's complete history of House Targaryen, released in two volumes. The first volume was released on November 20, 2018.\nTelevision series.\nWith the popularity of the series growing, HBO optioned \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" for a television adaptation in 2007. A pilot episode was produced in late 2009, and a series commitment for nine further episodes was made in March 2010. The series, titled \"Game of Thrones\", premiered in April 2011 to great acclaim and ratings (see \"Game of Thrones\" \u00a7\u00a0Reception). The network picked up the show for a second season covering \"A Clash of Kings\" two days later. Shortly after the conclusion of the first season, the show received 13 Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series, winning Outstanding Main Title Design and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Peter Dinklage's portrayal of Tyrion Lannister. HBO renewed \"Game of Thrones\" for a third season in April 2012, ten days after the season 2 premiere. Due to the length of the corresponding book, the third season only covered roughly the first half of \"A Storm of Swords\".\nEarly during the development of the TV series, Martin told major plot points to producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. Martin was confident he would have published at least \"The Winds of Winter\" before the TV series overtook him. Nevertheless, there were general concerns about whether Martin would be able to stay ahead of the show. As a result, head writers Benioff and Weiss learned more future plot points from Martin in 2013 to help them set up the show's new possible seasons. This included the end stories for all the core characters. Deviations from the books' storylines were considered, but a two-year hiatus to wait for new books was not an option for them (as the child actors continue to grow and the show's popularity would wane).\nShortly after the season 3 premiere in March 2013, the network renewed \"Game of Thrones\" for a fourth season, which would cover the second half of \"A Storm of Swords \"along with the beginnings of \"A Feast for Crows \"and \"A Dance With Dragons\". \"Game of Thrones\" was nominated for 15 Emmy Awards for season 3. Two days after the fourth season premiered in April 2014, HBO renewed \"Game of Thrones\" for a fifth and sixth season. Season 5 premiered on April 12, 2015, and set a Guinness World Records for winning the highest number of Emmy Awards for a series in a single season and year, winning 12 out of 24 nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series.\nThese episodes were watched by 8\u00a0million viewers, setting a record number for the series. On January 2, 2016, Martin confirmed that the sixth volume would not be published before the start of the sixth season of the HBO series. The sixth season premiered on April 24, 2016. These episodes received the most nominations for the 68th Primetime Emmy Awards with 23, winning 12, including the award for Outstanding Drama Series. The seventh season premiered on July 16, 2017. The eighth and final season premiered on April 14, 2019.\nA spin-off prequel series, \"House of the Dragon\", was later developed based on Martin's \"Fire &amp; Blood\". The first season premiered on August 21, 2022.\nOther works.\n\"A Song of Ice and Fire\" has spawned an industry of spin-off products. Fantasy Flight Games released a collectible card game, a board game, and two collections of artwork inspired by \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series. Various roleplaying game products were released by Guardians of Order and Green Ronin. Dynamite Entertainment adapted \"A Game of Thrones\" into a same-titled monthly comic in 2011. Video games \"\" and \"A Game of Thrones: The Board Game - Digital Edition\" were released in 2011 and 2020, respectively. The companion book \"The World of Ice &amp; Fire\" by Martin and the Westeros.org owners Elio M. Garc\u00eda Jr. and Linda Antonsson was published in October 2014. Other licensed products include full-sized weapon reproductions, a range of collectable figures, and a large number of gift and collectible items based on the television series. The popularity of the television series has made its version of the Iron Throne an icon of the entire media franchise.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12302", "revid": "143538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12302", "title": "World of A Song of Ice and Fire", "text": "Fictional world created by George R. R. Martin\nThe fictional world in which the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" novels by George R. R. Martin take place is divided into several continents, known collectively as The Known World.\nMost of the story takes place on the continent of Westeros and in a large political entity known as the Seven Kingdoms. Those kingdoms are spread across nine regions: the North, the Iron Islands, the Riverlands, the Vale, the Westerlands, the Stormlands, the Reach, the Crownlands, and Dorne. A massive wall of ice and old magic separates the Seven Kingdoms from the largely unmapped area to the north. The vast continent of Essos is located east of Westeros, across the Narrow Sea. The closest foreign nations to Westeros are the Free Cities, a collection of nine independent city-states along the western edge of Essos. The lands along the southern coastline of Essos are called the Lands of the Summer Sea and include Slaver's Bay and the ruins of Valyria. The latter is the former home of the ancestors of House Targaryen. To the south of Essos are the continents of Sothoryos and Ulthos, which in the narrative are largely unexplored.\nThe planet experiences erratic seasons of unpredictable duration that can last for many years. At the beginning of \"A Song of Ice and Fire\", Westeros has enjoyed a decade-long summer, and many fear that an even longer and harsher winter will follow.\nGeorge R. R. Martin set the \"Ice and Fire\" story in an alternative world to Earth, a \"secondary world\". Martin has also suggested that the world may be larger than the real world planet Earth. The \"Ice and Fire\" narrative is set in a post-magic world where people no longer believe in supernatural things such as the Others. Although the characters understand the natural aspects of their world, they do not know or understand its magical elements. Religion, though, has a significant role in the lives of people, and the characters practice many different religions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMaps.\n\"A Game of Thrones\", the first installment of the \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series, has two maps of Westeros. Each new book has added one or two maps so that, as of \"A Dance with Dragons\", seven maps of the fictional world are available in the books. Martin said in 2003 that complete world maps were not made available so that readers may better identify with people of the real Middle Ages who were uneducated about distant places. He also did not \"subscribe to the theory put forth in \"The Tough Guide To Fantasyland\" ... that eventually the characters must visit every place shown on The Map.\" He conceded, however, that readers may be able to piece together a world map by the end of the series. He was intentionally vague about the size of the \"Ice and Fire\" world, omitting a scale on the maps to discourage prediction of travel lengths based on measured distances. A new map artist was used in \"A Dance with Dragons\" so that the maps are available in two versions by James Sinclair and Jeffrey L. Ward, depending on the book. The old maps were redone to match the style of the new ones.\nA set of foldout maps was published on October 30, 2012, as \"The Lands of Ice and Fire\" (). The illustrator and cartographer Jonathan Roberts drew the maps, based on drafts by Martin. The twelve maps in the set are entitled \"The Known World\", \"The West\", \"Central Essos\", \"The East\", \"Westeros\", \"Beyond The Wall\", \"The Free Cities\", \"Slaver's Bay\", \"The Dothraki Sea\", \"King's Landing\", \"Braavos\", and \"Journeys\". The latter tracks the paths taken by the novels' characters.\nWesteros.\nThe story takes place primarily on an elongated continent called Westeros, which is roughly the size of South America. The continent is home to the Seven Kingdoms, located to the south side of the Wall, a massive man-made ice wall (allegedly fused with magic) 700 feet in height and spanning east\u2013west for 300 miles from coast to coast. The Seven Kingdoms are further divided into the so-called \"North\" and \"South\" by a swamp-rich isthmus called the Neck. The land north of the Wall still makes up a large chunk of Westeros (being roughly the size of Canada), but remains largely unmapped and unexplored, especially the ice field region north and west of a massive mountain range called the Frostfangs, which marks the farthest geographic limit of human settlements. The northern extent of the continent is therefore unknown, although thought to be continuous with a polar ice cap north of the Shivering Sea known as the White Waste.\nAt the novel's beginning, the majority of Westeros is united under the rule of a single king, whose seat is the \"Iron Throne\" in the city of King's Landing. The king has a large number of minor direct vassals in area known as the Crownlands, surrounding King's Landing; while each of the other regions is functionally controlled by a different major noble house, who all wield significant power in their own lands, while owing fealty to the Iron Throne. Martin here drew inspiration from medieval European history, in particular the Hundred Years' War, the Crusades, the Albigensian Crusade, and the Wars of the Roses.\nThe first inhabitants of the continent were the Children of the Forest, a nature-worshipping Stone Age anthropoid species who carved the faces of their gods in weirwood trees. Some time later, Bronze Age human settlers, known as the First Men, migrated from Essos via a land bridge at the southeastern end of the continent and gradually spread to the entire continent. The First Men's attempts to chop down forests and cultivate the land led to a millennia-long war with the Children of the Forest, that eventually was settled by an agreement known as \"The Pact\". This was the beginning of the Age of Heroes, during which the First Men adopted the religion of the Children of the Forest. Those gods later became known in Westeros as the Old Gods.\nEight thousand years before the events of the novels, an enigmatic arctic humanoid species called the Others emerged from the Land of Always Winter, the northernmost part of Westeros, during the decades-long winter known as \"The Long Night\". The Children of the Forest and the First Men allied to repel the Others, and then built the Wall barring passage from the far north. The region north of the Wall was since collectively known as the land \"Beyond the Wall\", and settled by tribal descendants of the First Men known as the Wildlings or Free Folk.\nSometime later, the Iron Age humans from Essos called the Andals invaded Westeros, bringing along the Faith of the Seven. One by one, kingdoms of the First Men south of the Neck fell to the Andals, and only the North remained unconquered. The Children of the Forest were slaughtered and disappeared from Andal lands. Over time, seven relatively stable feudal kingdoms were forged across Westeros, although their territories fluctuated over the next few thousand years through constant warfare, and no kingdom remained dominant for long:\nThree hundred years before the novels begin, the Targaryen dragonlord Aegon the Conqueror and his two sister-wives Visenya and Rhaenys, whose ancestors migrated from Valyria to Dragonstone a century prior, invaded the Westerosi mainland and landed his army at the mouth of the Blackwater Rush. The three assembled a temporary bastion called \"Aegonfort\", which later grew into the massive capital city known as King's Landing. Aided by their three formidable fire-breathing dragons, the Targaryen armies subdued six of the Seven Kingdoms through conquest or treaty, wiping out three of the seven ruling houses that refused to bend their knees, replacing house Durrandon with house Baratheon, house Gardener with house Tyrell, and house Hoare with houses Tully (in the Riverlands) and Greyjoy (on the Iron Islands). Only the defiant Dorne remained independent for almost another two hundred years through asymmetric guerrilla resistance, until it was finally absorbed under the Iron Throne through a marriage-alliance by King Daeron II in 187 AC. The Targaryens built the Iron Throne, forged from the swords of their defeated enemies by dragonfire. They also annexed the land regions of the riverlands and stormlands around the Blackwater Bay as the Crownlands. House Targaryen remained the ruling house of the Seven Kingdoms for almost three centuries until they were overthrown by a rebellion led by Robert Baratheon in 283 AC, who then became the first king of the Seven Kingdoms not of House Targaryen.\nMartin took the name Westeros from the Scottish region Wester Ross.\nThe southern half of Westeros is based on an inverted map of Ireland.\nThe North.\nThe North consists of the northern half of the Seven Kingdoms and is ruled by House Stark from their castle at Winterfell. The North is sparsely populated, but nearly as big as the other six southern kingdoms combined. Martin compared the North to Scotland. The climate is cold overall, with hard winters and mild snows common regardless of the season. Beyond the wall in the far north, the climate is polar with heavy snow while further south, it is milder with more rain. The region's northern border is the Gift, a stretch of land 50 leagues wide given to the possession of the Night's Watch. However, due to Wildling raids it is filled with abandoned towns and farms.\nAn isthmus called The Neck separates the North from the South. It is dominated by swamplands and is home to short, marsh-dwelling crannogmen ruled by House Reed of Greywater Watch, loyal bannermen of House Stark. The Neck's difficult wetland terrain is infested by predatory lizard-lions, restricting the only dryland passage to a causeway commanded by the almost impenetrable stronghold of Moat Cailin, which protected the North from land invasion from the south for thousands of years. The city of White Harbor, located at the mouth of the White Knife river, is a thriving port and the fifth largest settlement in the Seven Kingdoms.\nIllegitimate children born of a noble parent and acknowledged by said parent in the North are given the surname Snow.\nWinterfell.\nWinterfell is the ancestral castle of House Stark and the political capital of the North. Located at the geographical center of the North, it has a cold, subarctic climate with snowy winters and cool summers. The castle was built over a natural hot spring, whose scalding water runs inside the castle walls and warms its halls and rooms as well as the glass garden at its northwestern corner. There are several open pools where heated water collects within the godswood. The hot spring also prevents the ground from freezing. The castle has deep catacombs called \"the crypt\", where bodies of deceased Starks are entombed behind statues in their likeness with a direwolf at their feet and their swords in their hands. The tombs have been used since the old kings of the North, known as the Kings of Winter, were in power. They ruled since before the arrival of the Andals.\nTo depict Winterfell, both the pilot and season 1 of the television adaptation used the 16th century clock tower and ancient courtyard of Castle Ward in County Down, Northern Ireland. Doune Castle in Stirling, Scotland, which was previously featured as Castle Anthrax in the film \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", was also used for exterior scenes. Saintfield Estates stood in as Winterfell's godswood, an enclosed wooded area where characters can worship the old gods beside trees with faces carved in their bark. A car park stood in for Winterfell's courtyard, and a wine cellar was used to depict the Stark family crypt. Tollymore Forest featured prominently in the prologue of the pilot episode and in the pivotal scene where the Starks first find the direwolves. Cairncastle, meanwhile, served as the location where Ned Stark beheads the deserter Will. The interior of Winterfell, such as the Tower of the First Keep, the Great Hall, and Catelyn's bedchamber, were filmed at The Paint Hall studio. Set designer Gemma Jackson said, \"Winterfell was based on a Scottish castle.\"\nThe Wall.\nThe Wall is a huge structure of stone, ice, and magic on the northern border of the Seven Kingdoms. It is home to the Night's Watch, a brotherhood sworn to protect the realms of men from the threats beyond the Wall.\nThe Wall was inspired by Martin's visit to Hadrian's Wall, in the North of England close to the border with Scotland. Looking out over the hills, Martin wondered what a Roman centurion from the Mediterranean would feel, not knowing what threats might come from the north. This experience was so profound that a decade later, in 1991, he wanted to \"write a story about the people guarding the end of the world\", and ultimately \"the things that come out of the [fictional] north are a good deal more terrifying than Scotsmen or Picts\".\nMartin adjusted the size, length, and magical nature of the Wall for genre demands; Jon Snow's chapters describe it as approximately long and high in general, rising up to a perceived in spots due to huge foundation blocks. The top is wide enough for a dozen mounted knights to ride abreast (approximately 30\u00a0ft or 10\u00a0m), while the base is so thick that the Wall's gates are more like tunnels through the ice.\nThe novels' legends claim that the First Men, or more specifically Brandon the Builder with the possible help of children of the forest and giants, constructed the Wall some 8,000 years before the events of the series.\nThe Wall has since been maintained by the Night's Watch to guard the realms of men against threats from beyond, originally the Others, and later against wildling raids.\nA strip of land known as \"the Gift\", now stretching 50 leagues (about ) south of the wall, was given to them in perpetuity thousands of years earlier for cultivation. In \"A Game of Thrones\", of the nineteen castles built along the wall, only three are still manned: Castle Black with 600 men, and the Shadow Tower and Eastwatch-by-the-Sea with 200 men each. Parts of Castle Black have fallen into ruin.\nThe TV series' Castle Black and the Wall were filmed in the abandoned Magheramorne Quarry near Belfast, Northern Ireland, whereas the scenes shot atop the wall were filmed inside Paint Hall Studios. The composite set (with both exteriors and interiors) consisted of a large section of Castle Black including the courtyard, the ravenry, the mess hall, and the barracks, and used the stone wall of the quarry as the basis for the ice wall that protects Westeros from the dangers that dwell beyond. They also made a functional elevator to lift the rangers to the top of the Wall. A castle with real rooms and a working elevator were built near a cliff high. \"Working construction lifts were discovered at a nearby work site and rise 18 feet; CGI fills in the rest to make the wall appear 700 feet high.\" The area around the elevator was painted white to make it look like ice. Martin was surprised by the height and thought: \"Oh I may have made the wall too big!\" Martin observed: \"It's a pretty spectacular, yet miserable location. It is wet and rainy, and the mud is thick...[it] really gets the actors in the mood of being at the end of the world in all of this cold and damp and chill.\"\nBeyond the Wall.\n\"A Clash of Kings\" takes the story to the lands Beyond the Wall, although the first five books do not explore \"what lies really north ... but we will in the last two books\". The TV adaptation used Iceland as filming location for the lands Beyond the Wall. Martin, who has never been to Iceland, said Beyond the Wall was \"considerably larger than Iceland and the area closest to my Wall is densely forested, so in that sense it's more like Canada\u00a0\u2013 Hudson Bay or the Canadian forests just north of Michigan. And then as you get further and further north, it changes. You get into tundra and ice fields and it becomes more of an arctic environment. You have plains on one side and a very high range of mountains on the other. Of course, once again this is fantasy, so my mountains are more like the Himalayas.\" In an HBO featurette, Martin stated the lands beyond the wall make up a big part of Westeros, being roughly the size of Canada. The Valley of Thenn is one such location beyond the Wall, and north of that is the Lands of Always Winter, where the Others come from.\nDuring the first season, the HBO team used places that they could decorate with artificial snow for the north of the Wall, but a bigger landscape was chosen for Season 2. \"Primary filming for these scenes, which encompass both the Frostfangs and the Fist of the First Men, occurred at the Sv\u00ednafellsj\u00f6kull calving glacier in Skaftafell, Iceland, followed by shooting near Smyrlabj\u00f6rg and V\u00edk \u00ed M\u00fdrdal on H\u00f6f\u00f0abrekkuhei\u00f0i. Benioff said, \"We always knew we wanted something shatteringly beautiful and barren and brutal for this part of Jon's journey, because he's in the true North now. It's all real. It's all in camera. We're not doing anything in postproduction to add mountains or snow or anything.\"\nThe Iron Islands.\nThe Iron Islands are a group of seven islands to the west of Westeros \u2013 Pyke, Great Wyk, Old Wyk, Harlaw, Saltcliffe, Blacktyde, and Orkmont \u2013 in Ironman's Bay off the west coast of the continent. Ruled by House Greyjoy of Pyke, the isles are described as bare and barren, with the local weather being \"windy and cold, and damp\". The members of this seafaring nation are known in the rest of Westeros as Ironmen, and to themselves as Ironborn. Illegitimate children born in the Iron Islands are given the surname Pyke.\nFor fierce raids, the Ironmen are titled the \"terror of the seas\". They worship the Drowned God, who \"had made them to reave and rape, to carve out kingdoms and write their names in fire and blood and song\". The appendix of \"A Game of Thrones\" summarizes that the Ironmen once ruled over the Riverlands and much of the western coast of Westeros. When Aegon the Conqueror extinguished Harren the Black's line, he chose House Greyjoy as the new rulers of the Ironmen.\nPyke.\nPyke is the seat of House Greyjoy. The television adaptation filmed the scenes of Pyke's port at Lordsport Harbour in Ballintoy Harbour, in Northern Ireland's County Antrim. The sea has worn away much of the rock on which Pyke originally stood, so the castle now consists mostly of a main keep on the main island and smaller towers perched on rocks surrounded by sea.\nOld Wyk.\nOld Wyk is the smallest and holiest island in the Iron Islands. It is where Kingsmoots are held, and where the Grey King slew Nagga, a sea dragon, and made a court of his bones.\nThe Riverlands.\nThe Riverlands are the populous and fertile areas surrounding the forks of the river Trident on Westeros. While they form one of the nine regions of Westeros, the Riverlands' central location and geographic features made the region an inter-kingdom battle zone that changed hands rather than becoming its own 'eighth' kingdom of the Seven Kingdoms. Centrally located between the Westerlands, the Crownlands, the Vale, and the North and lacking the natural defenses of other regions, they have seen frequent warfare. The first ruler to unite the Riverlands was Benedict Justman, but the Justman dynasty died out three centuries later. The Durrandons conquered the Riverlands, but lost rule of it to Harwyn \"Hardhand\" Hoare, King of the Iron Islands. At the time of Aegon's conquest, the Riverlands were ruled by Harwyn's grandson, Harren the Black, king of the Iron Islands, and the Tullys were local nobles who rebelled against him by joining Aegon the Conqueror. As with Westerosi customs to give bastards a surname showing their origins, illegitimate children born in the Riverlands are given the surname Rivers.\nHarrenhal.\nHarrenhal is an enormous ruined castle and is the site of many important events in the novels. Harrenhal was built by Harren the Black, after his conquest of the Riverlands, intending to make it the largest fortification ever built in Westeros. The castle has been described as so large that an entire army was needed to garrison it. The Great Hall had 35 hearths and seated thousands. Shortly after the castle was completed, Aegon the Conqueror's dragon slew Harren, his sons, and his entire army by setting the castle alight.\nSince then, the ruins of the castle have been occupied by a variety of houses, all of which eventually became extinct. As a result, the people of Westeros believe the castle is cursed. The logistical and economic difficulties inherent in keeping such an enormous castle maintained and garrisoned has made it something of a white elephant. At the start of the War of the Five Kings, the castle is in ruin, with only a fraction of it habitable, and held by Lady Shella Whent, the last of her House, who is stripped of Harrenhal when the Lannisters seize her castle. The castle changes hands repeatedly over the course of the novels, many of those holding it meeting unpleasant ends.\nRiverrun.\nRiverrun is the ancestral stronghold of House Tully. The castle is located along one of the \"forks\" of the Trident and controls access to the interior of Westeros. The castle is bordered on two sides by the Tumblestone River and the Red Fork. The third side fronts on a massive manmade ditch. It was built by Ser Axel Tully on land he received from the Andal King Armistead Vance.\nThe castle is the location of Robb Stark's great victory over House Lannister and the site of his crowning. By the end of \"A Feast for Crows\", Brynden Tully surrenders the castle to Jaime Lannister to spare further bloodshed. Riverrun then passed into the hands of Emmon Frey, an ally of House Lannister.\nThe Twins.\nThe Twins is a large double castle straddling the Green Fork river; the two halves of the castle are connected by a bridge that is the only crossing of the river for hundreds of miles. The Twins is the seat of House Frey, which has grown wealthy by charging a toll of all those who cross for the past six centuries. Because the Freys are both wealthy and numerous, theirs is one of the most powerful houses sworn to House Tully. The castle's strategic position gives House Frey enormous importance in times of war.\nWhen Robb Stark goes to The Twins to repair his alliance with House Frey, the Freys massacre him, his mother, and his army (and in the TV adaptation, his wife): an event known as \"The Red Wedding\", which violates native customs of guest right and incurs enmity throughout the Seven Kingdoms, especially in the Riverlands and North.\nThe Vale of Arryn.\nThe Vale is the area surrounded almost completely by the Mountains of the Moon in the east of Westeros. The Vale is under the rulership of House Arryn, one of the oldest lines of Andal nobility and formerly Kings of Mountain and Vale. Their seat, the Eyrie, is a castle high in the mountains, small but considered unassailable. The only way to reach the Vale is by a mountain road teeming with animals called 'shadowcats', rock slides, and dangerous mountain clans. The mountain road ends at the Vale's sole entrance, the Bloody Gate: a pair of twin watchtowers, connected by a covered bridge, on the rocky mountain slopes over a very narrow path. The protection of the surrounding mountains gives the Vale itself a temperate climate, fertile meadows, and woods. The snowmelt from the mountains and a constant waterfall that never freezes, named Alyssa's Tears, provide plentiful water. The Vale has rich black soil, wide slow-moving rivers, and hundreds of small lakes. Illegitimate children born in the Vale are given the surname Stone.\nThe Eyrie.\nBased on the German castle of Neuschwanstein, the Eyrie is the seat of House Arryn. It is situated on the Giant's Lance and reachable only by a narrow mule trail, guarded by the Gates of the Moon and three small castles, titled Stone, Snow, and Sky. Travelers must enter the Gates of the Moon and its upper bailey before reaching the narrow path up the mountain. The steps up the Giant's Lance starts directly behind the Gates of the Moon. The Eyrie clings to the mountain and is six hundred feet above Sky. The last part of the climb to the Eyrie is something of a cross between a chimney and a stone ladder, which leads to the Eyrie's cellar entrance.\nThe Eyrie is the smallest of the great castles in the story, consisting of seven slim towers bunched tightly together. It has no stables, kennels, or smithies, but the towers can house 500 men, and the granary can sustain a small household for a year or more. The Eyrie does not keep livestock on hand; all dairy produce, meats, fruits, vegetables, etc., must be brought from the Vale below. Its cellars hold six great winches with long iron chains to draw supplies and occasionally guests from below. Oxen are used to raise and lower them. Winter snows can make supplying the fortress impossible. The Eyrie's dungeons, known as \"sky cells\", are left open to the sky on one side and have sloping floors that put prisoners in danger of slipping or rolling off the edge. Executions in the Eyrie are carried out via the Moon Door, which opens from the high hall onto a 600-foot drop.\nThe Eyrie is made of pale stone and primarily decorated with the blue and white colors of House Arryn. Elegant details provide warmth and comfort through plentiful fireplaces, carpets, and luxurious fabrics. Many of the chambers have been described to be warm and comfortable, with magnificent views of the Vale, the Mountains of the Moon, or the waterfall. The Maiden's Tower is the easternmost of the seven slender towers, so all the Vale can be seen from its windows and balconies. The apartments of the Lady of the Eyrie open over a small garden planted with blue flowers and ringed by white towers, containing grass and scattered statuary, with the central statue of a weeping woman believed to be Alyssa Arryn, around low, flowering shrubs. The lord's chambers have doors of solid oak, and plush velvet curtains covering windows of small rhomboid panes of glass. The High Hall has a blue silk carpet leading to the carved weirwood thrones of the Lord and Lady Arryn. The floors and walls are of milk-white marble veined with blue. Daylight enters down through high narrow arched windows along the eastern wall, and there are some fifty high iron sconces where torches may be lit.\nThe Eyrie was held by Lord Jon Arryn, who fostered Ned Stark and Robert Baratheon prior to Robert's Rebellion (also known as the War of the Usurper). After the war, Lord Arryn served as King Robert I Baratheon's Hand of the King (prime minister). After Lord Arryn was assassinated, his wife, Lady Lysa Arryn, took her sickly child, Robert, and fled to the Eyrie. Lysa refused to align herself with any of the claimants during the War of the Five Kings, but eventually pretends to a possible alliance with House Lannister after Lord Petyr Baelish agrees to marry her. Later Baelish kills Lysa after she attempts to murder her niece, Sansa Stark. As of \"Feast for Crows\", Baelish rules in the Eyrie as the Lord Protector and Regent for the sickly, epileptic Lord Robert \"Robin\" Arryn, and plans for Sansa to marry Harold Harding, who will become heir to the Eyrie and the Vale in the event of young Robin Arryn's death.\nFor the CGI compositions of the Vale of Arryn in the TV series, as seen in the establishing shot of the Eyrie and from the sky cells, the visual effects team used images and textures from the Greek rock formations of Meteora. Initially they had been considering the Zhangjiajie Mountains in China, but because the landscape base plates were shot in Northern Ireland, using Meteora resulted in a better option. Set designer Gemma Jackson said, \"A lot of the mosaics in the Eyrie were based on a beautiful chapel I visited in Rome.\" The interior of the High Hall of the Arryns was filmed at The Paint Hall, occupying one of the four soundstages there. Martin acknowledged that the set differed significantly from its presentation in the books: \"In the books, the room is long and rectangular. But [The Paint Hall soundstage] had essentially a square space, which they chose to put a round hall in, with a staircase curving up to a throne that was high above.\"\nThe Westerlands.\nThe Westerlands are the Westerosi lands to the west of the Riverlands and north of the Reach. They are ruled by House Lannister of Casterly Rock, formerly Kings of the Rock. People of this region are often called \"Westermen.\" Lannisport, lying hard by Casterly Rock, is the chief town of the region and one of the great ports and cities of Westeros. The Westerlands are rich in precious metals, mostly gold, which is the source of their wealth. Keeping with Westerosi customs to give bastards a surname showing their origins, illegitimate children born in the Westerlands are given the surname Hill.\nCasterly Rock.\nA stronghold carved from a mountain overlooking the harbor city of Lannisport and the sea beyond, Casterly Rock is the ancestral seat of House Lannister. According to popular legend, the hero known as Lann the Clever tricked the Casterlys into giving up the Rock, and took it for himself. The Rock is renowned as the wealthiest region due to its abundance of gold deposits, and it is one of the strongest castles of the Seven Kingdoms as it's a completely hollowed out mountain taller than even the Wall. It has never been taken in battle, despite attacks by the Iron Islanders and the plans of Robb Stark in the War of the Five Kings. It was held by Lord Tywin Lannister before the War of the Five Kings, but after his death, Queen Regent Cersei Lannister made one of her cousins castellan of the castle. As of \"A Dance with Dragons\", the narrative has not actually taken place in Casterly Rock, yet descriptions of it have been offered by the Lannisters in the POV chapters.\nWest of Casterly Rock is the coastal city of Lannisport. A busy port under the governance of the Lannisters of Casterly Rock, Lannisport thrives as a protected and wealthy city. The city is also home to many lesser Lannisters and other distant cousins with similar surnames, such as Lannys.\nGeorge R. R. Martin stated on his blog that he drew inspiration for Casterly Rock from the Rock of Gibraltar.\nThe Reach.\nThe Reach is the southwestern region of Westeros along the valleys of the Mander (the largest river in Westeros) and the Honeywine. It is the second-largest of the kingdoms in terms of geographical area (behind only the North) and is the most fertile and heavily populated region of Westeros. The wealth and power of the Reach comes from its warm, sunny climate, which grants bountiful harvests of farm foods and the most sought-after wines. During times of war, the expansive lands of the Reach and its abundance of foods protects their inhabitants from initial famine and sickness. The Reach is considered the home of chivalry in Westeros, and is the place where knighthood is looked upon with the greatest reverence, and where the rules for tourneys are the most stringent and managed. The most prominent population center in the Reach is Oldtown, Westeros's oldest and second largest city and port as well as the home to the Maesters' Citadel and the former religious seat of the Faith of the Seven, situated at the mouth of the Honeywine estuary.\nThe Reach was historically known as the Green Realm, ruled by King of the Reach from House Gardener in Highgarden. During Aegon's conquest, the last Gardener King, Mern IX, was killed along with all his heirs and kins on the Field of Fire. House Tyrell, the stewards to House Gardener, surrendered Highgarden to Aegon and were rewarded with both the castle and the position of overlords of the Reach. Illegitimate children born in the Reach are given the surname Flowers.\nDuring the reign of House Baratheon as the ruler of Westeros, the Reach is the second wealthiest region in the Seven Kingdom, behind only the mine-rich Westerlands. During the War of the Five Kings, in a significant political maneuver during the civil war, House Tyrell provides the starving populace of King's Landing with hundreds of carts of food, ensuring the positive image of House Tyrell foremost, and the alliance for the Iron Throne with House Baratheon as secondary. However, the Tyrells were responsible for the starvation in the first place, as part of their plan to help the pretender Renly Baratheon contend for the Iron Throne.\nOldtown.\nOldtown is one of the largest cities in Westeros and is by far the oldest, built by the First Men before the Andal Invasion. It survived the invasion by welcoming the Andals rather than resisting them. The city is located in the southwestern part of Westeros, at the mouth of the River Honeywine, where it opens onto Whispering Sound and the Sunset Sea beyond.\nOldtown is primarily known as the location of the Citadel, home of the order of Maesters who serve as councillors, doctors, scientists, and postmasters for the Seven Kingdoms. The city's Starry Sept was the seat of the Faith of the Seven until the construction of the Great Sept of Baelor in King's Landing. Aegon the Conqueror's reign is dated from his entrance into the city of Oldtown and his acknowledgment as king by the High Septon.\nOldtown is the second most important port in the Seven Kingdoms after King's Landing: trading ships from the Summer Islands, the Free Cities, the eastern cities, and the rest of Westeros constantly crowd into its harbors. The city itself is described as stunningly beautiful with a warm climate. Many rivers and canals crisscross its cobbled streets, and breathtaking stone mansions are common. The city lacks the squalor of King's Landing, which usurped its position as the preeminent city of Westeros.\nThe largest structure in the city, and the tallest structure in Westeros, is the Hightower, a massive stepped lighthouse which extends some into the sky and is topped by a huge beacon which can be seen for many miles out to sea. Oldtown is ruled from the Hightower by House Hightower. Originally kings in their own right, they later swore fealty to the Gardeners of Highgarden, and became vassals of the Tyrells after the Conquest. The Hightowers are known for their loyalty and stalwartness. The current ruler of the city is Lord Leyton Hightower.\nOldtown remained aloof from the War of the Five Kings, but late in the war the Ironborn under King Euron Greyjoy launched a massive raid along the coast, conquering the Shield Islands and parts of the Arbor before trying to blockade the mouth of the Honeywine. An attempt to attack the city harbor was repulsed by the city's defenders. Oldtown remains under threat from the Ironborn.\nThe Stormlands.\nThe Stormlands are the large cape between the Blackwater Bay and the Sea of Dorne and the cape's associated western hinterlands, named for the severe weathers in the coastal areas. The region is bordered in the east by the Narrow Sea, especially a large semi-enclosed bay known as the Shipbreaker Bay behind the island of Tarth; from King's Landing and the Crownlands in the north by a large forest known as the Kingswood; from the Reach in the west by the headwaters of the Mander River; and Dorne in the south by the expansive Red Mountains. The southwestern Stormlands are a borderland area historically contested among the Stormlands, the Reach and Dorne, known as the Dornish Marches.\nBefore Aegon's conquest, the Stormlands were ruled by the Storm Kings of House Durrandon founded by the legendary Durran Godsgrief. When Aegon the Conqueror invaded Westeros, his bastard half-brother Orys Baratheon slew the last Storm King in a duel and married the latter's daughter to establish House Baratheon, which has ruled the Stormlands as lord paramount afterwards. Highborn illegitimate children born in the Stormlands are given the surname Storm.\nStorm's End.\nStorm's End is the seat of House Baratheon and, before them, the ancestral seat of the Storm Kings extending back many thousands of years. According to legend, the first Storm King in the age of the First Men was Durran, who married Elenei, the daughter of the sea god and the goddess of the wind. In a rage her parents sent vast storms to shatter his keep and kill his wedding guests and family; whereupon Durran declared war against the gods and raised several castles over Shipbreaker Bay, each larger and more formidable than the last. Finally, the seventh castle stayed in place and resisted the storms. Some believe the Children of the Forest took a hand in its construction; others suggest that Brandon Stark, the builder of the Wall, advised Durran on its construction. The truth of the matter is unknown.\nStorm's End has never fallen to either siege or storm. Its outer defenses consist of a huge curtain wall, tall and thick on its thinnest side, nearly thick on its seaward side. The wall consists of a double course of stones with an inner core of sand and rubble. The wall is smooth and curving, the stones so well placed that the wind cannot enter. On the seaward side, there is a drop below the wall into the sea.\nThe castle itself consists of one huge drum tower crowned with formidable battlements, and so large that it can comfortably contain stables, barracks, armory and lord's chambers in the same structure. Although never taken in battle, Storm's End has endured several sieges and battles in recent history. The last Storm King, Argilac the Arrogant, abandoned his impressive defenses to meet the Targaryen commander, Orys Baratheon, in open battle during Aegon Targaryen's War of Conquest, and lost. This led to Orys Baratheon marrying Argilac's daughter and becoming Lord of Storm's End.\nDuring the War of the Usurper, Storm's End was besieged for a year by the host of Lord Mace Tyrell, who commanded the landward forces, while Paxter Redwyne's fleet of the Arbor kept the castle cut off by sea. Stannis Baratheon, commanding the defense, refused to yield and his men were reduced to eating rats. A smuggler named Davos ran the blockade to resupply the castle and Stannis rewarded him by knighting him and giving him lands, thus founding House Seaworth, but he also cut off the fingertips of his left hand as punishment for all his previous smuggling. After the war, Stannis was furious when his brother Robert, now king, gave the castle to their younger brother Renly and placed Stannis in command of Dragonstone. This led to many years of bitterness on Stannis' part.\nDuring the War of the Five Kings, Storm's End supported Renly when he attempted to usurp the crown, and was besieged by Stannis. When the castellan, Cortnay Penrose, refused to yield even after Renly's death, he was killed by Stannis' ally, the priestess Melisandre, and the castle surrendered. Later, the castle was besieged by a strong army under Mace Tyrell, but he abandoned the siege after a few weeks to return to King's Landing after the arrest of his daughter Margaery by the High Septon. As of \"A Dance with Dragons\", the castle remains in the hands of Stannis Baratheon.\nAt the end of \"A Dance with Dragons\" an army lands in the Stormlands led by Jon Connington and a young man claiming to be Aegon Targaryen, the son of Rhaegar Targaryen and Elia Martell and heir to the Iron Throne. To attract support, Aegon plans to conquer Storm's End and raise the banner of House Targaryen above the battlements.\nIn the TV adaptation, scenes in the Stormlands were filmed in Larrybane, Northern Ireland. The scene where Stannis' red priestess Melisandre gave birth to a shadow creature was filmed in the Cushendun Caves, also in Northern Ireland.\nThe Crownlands.\nThe Crownlands are the lands in Westeros surrounding King's Landing, ruled directly by the crown of the Iron Throne. The Targaryen kings consolidated this as one of the nine regions of Westeros, after their conquest of the Seven Kingdoms, from sparsely populated pieces of the Riverlands and Stormlands. The Crownlands form the entire coastline of Blackwater Bay, and include the original Targaryen homeland on the island of Dragonstone, at the Narrow Sea entrance to Blackwater Bay. Besides King's Landing, which is the largest city in Westeros, the Crownlands include many towns and castles. The illegitimate children born in the Crownlands are given the surname Waters.\nDragonstone.\nDragonstone was once the westernmost outpost of the ancient Freehold of Valyria. A century before the Doom, the Targaryen family moved to Dragonstone. When the Doom came upon Valyria, House Targaryen survived along with the last of the Valyrian dragons. Another century later, Aegon Targaryen and his sisters Rhaenys and Visenya launched a massive campaign of conquest from the island and eventually conquered all of Westeros except for Dorne, and North of the Wall. Aegon's progeny reigned as kings of the Seven Kingdoms for centuries, Dragonstone being the seat of the heir apparent to the Iron Throne.\nDragonstone is a massive, forbidding fortress, taking up a large portion of the island of the same name. The castle is unique in that the builders and sorcerers of Valyria carved its towers and keeps into the shapes of dragons and made ferocious gargoyles to cover its walls using both magic and masonry. The castle's lower levels are warmed by residual volcanic activity deep below the keep. There is a small port and town outside of the castle. Additionally, in a cave at the beachfront of the castle, huge deposits of Dragonglass can be found.\nDuring the War of the Usurper, before the sack of King's Landing, the Targaryen Queen Rhaella, who was pregnant, and her son Viserys were sent to Dragonstone along with part of the Targaryen fleet and a garrison of loyal soldiers. But after King's Landing fell, Robert Baratheon dispatched his brother Stannis to take the island stronghold. After a storm destroyed the royalist fleet, the Targaryen garrison tried to betray Viserys and his newborn sister, Daenerys, to Stannis (the queen had died in childbirth). But Targaryen loyalists led by Ser Willem Darry took the children away. Stannis conquered Dragonstone easily, and King Robert granted him ownership of the castle. Stannis felt slighted because his younger brother Renly then inherited Storm's End, the ancient seat of House Baratheon. Ser Axell Florent, one of the uncles of Stannis' wife Selyse Florent, acted as castellan.\nUpon Robert's death, Stannis declared himself king of the Seven Kingdoms and condemned the queen's children as bastards born of incest, as he had discovered with Jon Arryn. Dragonstone became his main seat. He returned there after the disastrous Battle of the Blackwater. His councilor, the red priestess Melisandre of Asshai, tried to convince him to let her raise the \"stone dragon\" of the castle through blood magic, but Lord Davos Seaworth convinced Stannis to go north to the Wall to help the Night's Watch instead. After Stannis abandoned Dragonstone, leaving the Bastard of Nightsong Rolland Storm as castellan, Queen Regent Cersei Lannister dispatched a fleet to barricade it. However, Ser Loras Tyrell, impatient to free the fleet to protect his home castle of Highgarden, attacked Dragonstone directly. He took the castle but lost a thousand men and was himself reportedly gravely wounded. As of \"A Dance with Dragons\", Dragonstone is now controlled by troops loyal to House Tyrell, and theoretically, once again under the control of the Iron Throne.\nOne scene set at Dragonstone, in which Stannis burns wooden sculptures of the Seven gods, was filmed at the beach of Downhill Strand. In Season 7 of the show, filming for Dragonstone took place at several locations in the Basque region of Spain: the islet of Gaztelugatxe in Bermeo, Itzurun Beach in Zumaia, and Muriola Beach in Barrika.\nKing's Landing.\nKing's Landing is the royal capital of Westeros and the Seven Kingdoms. King's Landing has an estimated population of half a million people, making it the most populous city in Westeros. It is situated on the Blackwater river on the spot where Aegon the Conqueror landed in Westeros to begin his conquest. The main city is surrounded by a wall, which is manned by the City Watch of King's Landing, which is nicknamed the gold cloaks, after the cloaks they wear. Within the walls, the city's natural landscape is dominated by three hills, named after Aegon and his two sister-wives Rhaenys and Visenya. Poorer smallfolk (commoners) build shanty settlements outside the city. King's Landing is described as extremely populous but unsightly and dirty. The stench of the city's waste can be smelled far beyond its walls and there is a vast divide between the city's poor and the wealthy elite.\nThe royal castle, called the Red Keep, sits on Aegon's Hill. It is the seat of the royal court. The Keep holds the Iron Throne. Aegon commissioned the throne's construction from the swords of his defeated enemies. According to legend, he kept the blades sharp because he believed that no ruler should ever sit comfortably. Centuries later, kings still cut themselves on the throne. It is a common belief that one who cuts himself on the throne has been \"rejected\" by the throne and is therefore not fit to rule.\nThe city also holds the Great Sept of Baelor, where the Most Devout convene with the High Septon. It is the holiest sept of the Seven. Since the city was built in a rush, most of it is made of slums called Flea Bottom, where residents are so poor they regularly subsist on \"bowls of brown\", a mystery stew that can include the meat of puppies and murder victims. King's Landing has a temperate, mediterranean climate with long, warm, sunny summers and mild winters although snow does occasionally occur.\nMartin compared King's Landing to medieval Paris or London. It was inspired by the view of Staten Island from his childhood home in Bayonne, New Jersey.\nThe first season of the TV adaptation used Malta's former capital Mdina to represent King's Landing. \"Like King's Landing, Mdina is a walled medieval city built upon a hill, but unlike King's Landing, Mdina is an inland city\u00a0\u2013 so the production was limited to interior shots such as side streets and the town gate, which can be seen when Ned Stark arrives. Nearby Fort Manoel doubled as the great Sept of Baelor,\" which can be seen when Ned Stark is executed. Various other locations around Malta represent the Red Keep, \"including the real-life residence of the president of Malta, San Anton Palace. The gates of Fort Ricasoli doubled as the Red Keep's gates; Fort St. Angelo was used for the scenes of Arya Stark chasing cats; and St. Dominic monastery stood in for the scene where Ned Stark confronts Cersei Lannister in the godswood.\"\n\"In season two, filming for King's Landing and the Red Keep shifted from Malta to the historic parts of Dubrovnik and the Min\u010deta, Bokar, and Lovrijenac fortresses in Croatia, which allowed for more exterior shots of an authentic walled medieval city.\" Parts of Season three were filmed there, too, as well as in nearby Trsteno. \"Known as \"the Pearl of the Adriatic\", the city proved to share many characteristics with the fictional capital: it had a well-preserved medieval look, with high walls and the sea at its side. According to David Benioff, executive producer of the show, \"King's Landing might be the single most important location in the entire show, and it has to look right\", and \"The minute we started walking around the city walls we knew that was it. You read the descriptions in the book and you come to Dubrovnik and that's what the actual city is. It has the sparkling sea, sun and beautiful architecture.\" Co-Executive Producer D.B. Weiss added \"To find a full-on, immaculately preserved medieval walled city that actually looks uncannily like King's Landing where the bulk of our show is set, that was in and of itself such an amazing find\". The Tourney of the Hand in season 1 was filmed in Shane's Castle, Northern Ireland.\nThe Red Keep interior are filmed at Belfast's studio The Paint Hall. Set designer Gemma Jackson said, \"When I was thinking about King's Landing, the whole red aspect of it, that immediately made me think of Rajasthan. The floor [at King's Landing] was from the Pantheon in Rome.\" Martin said that \"Our throne room is a spectacular throne room \u2013 we actually redressed a throne room built for [another] film. And again, it occupied a quarter of the Paint Hall, so it's very big, but in my mind [in the books], it's Westminster Abbey, it's St. Paul's Cathedral.\"\nDorne.\nDorne is the southernmost and least populated land of Westeros. The capital, Sunspear, is the seat of the ruling House Martell. As of the first five books, Doran Nymeros Martell is the Prince of Dorne and Lord of Sunspear. Doran's sister, Princess Elia, was married in a political alliance to Prince Rhaegar Targaryen, the Prince of Dragonstone and heir to the Iron Throne. They had two children, a daughter, Rhaenys, and a son, Aegon. During the Sack of King's Landing at the end of Robert's Rebellion, Princess Elia was raped and murdered by Gregor Clegane, a House Lannister bannerman (vassal). Her children were also killed in front of her. Prince Doran and his wife, Princess Mellaria, have three children, Arianne, Quentyn and Trystane. During the War of the Five Kings, Tyrion Lannister, as Hand of the King, turns the historical enmity of House Martell and Lannister into an alliance by sending King Joffrey's middle sibling and sister, Myrcella Baratheon, as the betrothed future bride to Trystane, the youngest child of Prince Doran, who is about her own age. The eldest child of Prince Doran, Arianne, is heir to House Martell, Sunspear and the rule of Dorne. The wealth of Dorne comes from their famous Sand Steeds, purebred horses of endurance, speed, and grace, and from spices, wines, fishing, fabrics, and textiles.\nDorne is bordered by the Sea of Dorne to the north, the islands known as the Stepstones to the east, and stretches from the high mountains of the Dornish marches, the Red Mountains, separating Dorne from the remainder of the Seven Kingdoms by land. The two major passes through the Red Mountains that connect Dorne with the rest of the continent are the Stone Way Pass and the Prince's Pass. The Prince's Pass leads to the Reach, while the Stone Way exits the mountains near Summerhall. The southern coast of the continent is bordered by the Summer Sea. Described as tropical in climate by George R. R. Martin, Dorne has the highest temperatures of any kingdom in Westeros, and is arid, with a rocky, mountainous, terrain that includes the only desert on the continent. Its rivers provide some fertile lands and during a long summer there is enough rain and other supplies of water to keep Dorne habitable. Inland water is almost as valuable as gold, and wells are jealously guarded. Notable locations of Dorne are Starfall, the seat of House Dayne, and Yronwood, the seat of House Yronwood, the most powerful of the Martell bannermen. Planky Town is a trade port town at the mouth of the River Greenblood.\nDornishmen have a reputation for hot-bloodedness. They differ both culturally and ethnically from other Westerosi due to the historical mass immigration of Rhoynish people. They have adopted many Rhoynish customs as well, including equal primogeniture. Dorne was the only kingdom in Westeros to successfully resist Aegon's conquest, even killing one of his dragons during the war. It was conquered by Daeron I over a century after the Targaryen invasion, but rose against him leading to his death. Finally under Daeron's cousin Daeron II they joined through marriage. This accomplishment has allowed Dorne to retain a measure of independence. Lords of the ruling House Martell still style themselves \"Prince\" and \"Princess\" in the Rhoynish fashion. Unlike most of the rest of Westeros, illegitimate children born in Dorne are treated nearly the same as legal offspring and given the surname Sand, as with Westerosi customs to give bastards a surname showing their origins.\nAccording to \"A Storm of Swords\", \"There were three sorts of Dornishmen [...]. There were the salty Dornishmen who lived along the coasts, the sandy Dornishmen of the deserts and long river valleys, and the stony Dornishmen who made their fastnesses in the passes and heights of the Red Mountains. The salty Dornishmen had the most Rhoynish blood, the stony Dornishmen the least. All three sorts seemed well represented in Doran\u2019s retinue. The salty Dornishmen were lithe and dark, with smooth olive skin and long black hair streaming in the wind. The sandy Dornishmen were even darker, their faces burned brown by the hot Dornish sun. They wound long bright scarfs around their helms to ward off sunstroke. The stony Dornishmen were biggest and fairest, sons of the Andals and the First Men, brownhaired or blond, with faces that freckled or burned in the sun instead of browning.\"\nIn the show, Dornish scenes were filmed in the Alc\u00e1zar of Seville, Seville, Spain.\nSummer Sea.\nBasilisk Isles.\nEast of Naath, the Basilisk Isles have been a festering sore of the Summer Sea, and a safe haven for pirates, slavers, sellswords, and outlaws. Ruins have been found on the Isle of Tears, the Isle of Toads, and Ax Island. The Isle of Tears is the largest island, with steep valleys and black bogs. It was conquered by the Ghiscari and it was called Gorgai for two centuries, until the dragonlords of Valyria captured it and renamed it Gorgossos. It was used as a prison by the Freehold, a place where they sent their most despicable criminals.\nNaath.\nNaath, also known as the Isle of Butterflies, is an island off the north-west coast of Sothoryos that lies west of the Basilisk Isles. The Naathi people have dark skin and golden eyes. They practice extreme pacifism, making music instead of war and refusing to eat meat, only fruit. This makes them especially vulnerable to slavers from Essos. Daenerys' interpreter Missandei is from Naath.\nSummer Islands.\nAs indicated on a map in \"A Storm of Swords\", the Summer Islands are a group of tropical islands situated to the south of Westeros, with a local fauna of talking birds, apes, and monkeys. The novels describe the island natives as dark-skinned people who speak their own language. They wear colored feathery clothes and live on fruit and fish. From their port city named Tall Trees Town, the Summer Isles export rare goods to Westeros such as wine, spices, feathers, but also a special kind of wood from which bows are made that have a longer range than most others. People of the Seven Kingdoms call the Summer Islanders' great vessels \"swan ships\", \"for their billowing white sails and for their figureheads, most of which depicted birds\". Samwell Tarly, who spends two chapters in \"A Feast for Crows\" aboard a swan ship, describes the Summer Islander women as wanton, and their gods as strange; they \"revered the elderly and celebrated their dead\" through sexual intercourse. As a prostitute explains to Tyrion in \"A Clash of Kings\", the Summer Islanders regard their sexuality as the gods' gift to worship them through mating, and hence many of their highborn youths and maidens serve in pleasure houses for a few years to honor the gods.\nEssos.\nPart of the narrative in \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" lies across the Narrow Sea from Westeros, an area comprising the large eastern continent named Essos. Being roughly the size of Eurasia, Essos has geography and climate that vary greatly. The western coastline is characterized by green rolling hills, the massive Forest of Qohor, and extensive island chains such as Braavos and Lys. The middle of the continent is covered by the flat grasslands of the Dothraki Sea and the arid lands known as the Red Waste to the east. Beyond the Red Waste lies the city of Qarth. The south is dominated by dry rolling hills and has a Mediterranean climate, with a coastline along the Summer Sea and Slaver's Bay. The north coast of the mainland is separated from the polar cap by the Shivering Sea. To the south, across the Summer Sea, lies the uncharted jungle continent of Sothoryos.\nMuch of the fictional history of Essos relates to Valyria, a city located on a peninsula in southern Essos and the origin of House Targaryen before the destruction of the Valyrian Empire in an unspecified cataclysm. After the destruction of Valyria, the cities of Astapor, Yunkai, and Meereen regained independence and ruled their respective areas as city-states. The area is known in the books as Slaver's Bay.\nFree Cities and vicinity.\nAcross the Narrow sea on the western side of Essos lie the nine Free Cities, independent city-states that are mostly on islands or along the coast. They are Lys, Myr, Pentos, Braavos, Lorath, Norvos, Qohor, Volantis and Tyrosh. Although most Free Cities are named early in the first novel, the books only provide a map of this region in \"A Dance with Dragons\". Mountains to the east separate the coast from the plains of the Dothraki Sea, though gaps in the mountain range provide the Dothraki people some access to the Free Cities. The Free Cities were colonies built by the ancient Valyrian Freehold, and later declared independence after the Doom of Valyria. An exception to this is Braavos, which was founded by refugees fleeing Valyrian expansion, escaped slaves and other rabble. The languages of the Free Cities are derivatives of High Valyrian.\nThe Free Cities span an area characterized by the river Rhoyne, which the local character Yandry describes as \"the greatest river in the world\". Its banks are the homeland of the Rhoynar, who worship the river as \"Mother Rhoyne\". As mapped in \"A Dance with Dragons\", the Rhoyne originates from the conjunction of two of its tributaries, the Upper Rhoyne and the Little Rhoyne, southeast of the ruins of Ghoyan Drohe. The headwaters of the Upper Rhoyne lie in Andalos, the homeland of the Andals between Braavos and Pentos. The Rhoyne's course runs southeast to turn due south after Dagger Lake, where river pirates hide on and around the many lake islands. The Rhoyne gains in width considerably as it gets fed by more tributaries, until it opens into the Summer Sea in a delta near the Free City of Volantis.\nBraavos.\nUnique among the Free Cities, Braavos was not a Valyrian colony, but a secret refuge from Valyrian expansion. It is a city spread over hundreds of tiny islands in a lagoon on the northwestern end of Essos, where the Narrow Sea and Shivering Sea meet. Braavos is home to the 'Iron Bank', one of the wealthiest banks in the known world. Braavos is also known for its swordsmen known as 'bravos', and its mysterious assassins, the Faceless Men. It is also famed for the Titan of Braavos, both a fortress and a statue. The ruler of Braavos is known as the Sealord and it is from the sea that the city's power and wealth flows. The hulls of Braavosi ships are painted purple and their merchant ships sail to many distant lands and bring their trade and wealth back home. Braavos has many moneylenders and the Iron Bank of Braavos lends money to foreign nations, especially The Crown, which has borrowed millions.\nBraavosi dress in flashy colors while the very rich and powerful dress in black and in blues that are almost black. Officials of Braavos, called keyholders and justiciars, wear drab coats of brown or grey. The city is also renowned worldwide for its courtesans. Every courtesan has her own barge and servants to work them. The beauty of famed courtesans has inspired many a song. They are showered with gifts from goldsmiths and craftsmen beg for their custom. Nobility and rich merchants pay the courtesans large amounts of money to appear alongside them at events, and bravos are known to kill each other in their names. The character Syrio Forel, former first sword of the Sealord of Braavos, introduces Arya Stark to a unique form of Braavosi sword fighting, called Water Dancing. The style is a refined form of fencing in which the practitioner stands sideways and wields a slender blade. Pugnacious bravos fill the city, frequently dueling to display their skill.\nBraavos was inspired by Venice, Italy. It was filmed in Croatian towns of \u0160ibenik, and Ka\u0161tel Gomilica In the TV series, locations used as Braavos included the Croatian town of \u0160ibenik and the Spanish town of Girona.\nPentos.\nPentos is a major trading port on a bay of the western coast. Dominated by an architecture of square brick towers, it is headed by a Prince who is chosen by the de facto rulers of the city, known as Magisters. Khalasars occasionally make their way this far from the Dothraki Sea, but the Pentoshi are spared much of the raiding and invasions by paying tribute to their khals. Men from Pentos wear dyed and forked beards. Unlike in most other Free Cities, slavery is outlawed and Pentos is forbidden from participating in the slave trade due to terms set by the victorious Braavosi in a past war. However, Pentos only heeds these terms on a surface level: servants of the wealthy and powerful are still treated as slaves, collared in bronze and branded without the financial means of refusing their masters, and influential Pentoshi figures such as Magister Illyrio Mopatis still deal covertly in the slave trade.\nIn the television adaptation, Daenerys's scenes in the pilot episode were filmed in Morocco. The production redressed and repainted the Jerusalem sets of \"Kingdom of Heaven\" near Ouarzazate, Morocco, to serve as the courtyard of Illyrio's mansion where Daenerys first meets Khal Drogo. When the pilot was delivered, HBO scrapped all of the footage shot in Morocco, and the Pentos scenes were re-shot in Malta. The exterior scenes at Illyrio's mansion in Pentos were shot at Verdala Palace, the 16th century summer palace of the president of Malta. The Azure Window, on the island of Gozo in Malta, was used for the location of Daenerys's wedding to Khal Drogo.\nWhen Pentos reappeared in Season 5, it was filmed in Croatia.\nVolantis.\nVolantis is a port on the southern coast of Essos, and is the oldest and proudest of the Free Cities. A fortification known as the Black Wall protects the oldest parts of the city. The Black Wall is inhabited entirely by the wealthiest citizens who can claim unbroken descent from Old Valyria. The city is ruled by three triarchs, who are elected every year by free landholders of Volantis, and defended by slave soldiers called the \"Tiger cloaks\". Volantis is incredibly important to the slave market, and in the city there are five slaves to every free man. All Volantene slaves have facial tattoos denoting their profession: for instance, sex slaves have tears tattooed on their faces, and the tiger cloaks have tiger stripes. The worship of R'hllor is the most influential religion of Volantis, especially among slaves.\nThe TV adaptation used locations in C\u00f3rdoba, Spain.\nCentral Essos.\nThis section covers the Essos locations east of the Free Cities that Daenerys Targaryen passes through on her travels in \"A Game of Thrones\" and \"A Clash of Kings\" before moving on to Slaver's Bay.\nValyria.\nValyria is a peninsula in South-Central Essos, west of Slaver's Bay. Before the Doom of Valyria, it was the seat of the Valyrian Freehold, a massive empire thousands of years old. The Valyrians are characterized by their silver hair and violet eyes. Valyria was called the Freehold because every man who owned land was allowed to vote for their leaders. The Valyrians also used slaves to mine the Fourteen Flames, a series of volcanoes rich with ore. They subjugated the Ghiscari and the Rhoynar and established all of the Free Cities, save Braavos. They did this through their knowledge of dragonlore. Twoscore noble dynasties, known as dragonlords, rode and controlled dragons. Eventually, an event known as the Doom of Valyria, apparently involving a violent eruption of the Fourteen Flames, destroyed the Freehold and made Valyria an archipelago in the newly-formed Smoking Sea. The Targaryens are descendants of Old Valyria who escaped after Daenys the Dreamer's dream foretold of the eruption. The other noble families of Valyria mocked them, believing Daenys to be mad. Her father, Aenar Targaryen, believed her and successfully relocated the family to Dragonstone, an island on the east coast of Westeros, making them the only surviving dragonlords after the Doom.\nDothraki Sea.\nThe Dothraki Sea is a vast, flat grassland on Essos. It is inhabited by the Dothraki people, a copper-skinned race of warlike nomads with their own language and unique culture. The Dothraki live in hordes called khalasars, each led by a chief called a khal. Khalasars are broken into groups, called khas, which are each led by one of the khal's captains, called kos. Each khal and his khalasar owe fealty to a ruling council of royal priestesses, called the dosh khaleen, whose members are each a former khal's consort, called a khaleesi during the reign of her husband, one who became part of the dosh khaleen following his death.\nDothraki are expert riders and their horses are of prime importance in their culture, used for food, transportation, raw materials, warfare, and establishing social standing. They regularly raid other peoples.\nGeorge R. R. Martin said \"The Dothraki were actually fashioned as an amalgam of a number of steppe and plains cultures ... Mongols and Huns, certainly, but also Alans, Sioux, Cheyenne, and various other Amerindian tribes ... seasoned with a dash of pure fantasy. So any resemblance to Arabs or Turks is coincidental. Well, except to the extent that the [historic] Turks were also originally horsemen of the steppes, not unlike the Alans, Huns, and the rest.\" He also noted that \"In general, though, while I do draw inspiration from history, I try to avoid direct one-for-one transplants, [so] it would not be correct to say that the Dothraki are Mongols.\" There are several similarities with another group of fearsome, nomadic warriors \u2013 the Scythians.\nThe Dothraki have only one permanent city, called Vaes Dothrak, which serves as their capital. The Dosh Khaleen hold the city as their seat. It is filled with statues stolen from other cities the Dothraki conquered or raided. There is a law that no Dothraki may shed blood within the boundaries of Vaes Dothrak and that those who do are cursed. Two gigantic bronze stallions, whose hooves meet midair, form an arch above the entryway to the city. For the first season of the TV adaptation, Sandy Brae in the Mourne Mountains of Northern Ireland was chosen to stand in for Vaes Dothrak. The bronze stallions making up the Horse Gate as the main entrance of Vaes Dothrak, were later added using CGI on two pedestals erected on location.\nLhazar.\nLhazar is an area of the semi-arid lands south of the Dothraki Sea. A region of pastures and hills, it is inhabited by the Lhazareen, a peaceful people with bronze skin, flat faces, and almond eyes. They are predominantly shepherds, called the Lamb Men by the Dothraki, who frequently prey on them. They worship a god called the Great Shepherd and believe that all of humanity is part of a single flock. The scenes at the village of the Lamb Men that is sacked by the Dothraki were filmed in Malta, at the farming town of Manikata.\nSlaver's Bay.\nSlaver's Bay is a marginal sea of the Summer Sea, lying to the south of the Dothraki Sea, to the west of Lhazar and thousands of leagues to the east of the Free Cities. The climate is very hot. After a first mention in \"A Game of Thrones\" in relation to slavery, Daenerys Targaryen conquers the three great Slaver's Bay port city-states Astapor, Yunkai, and Meereen in \"A Storm of Swords\". She stays in Meereen throughout most of \"A Dance with Dragons\".\nThe cities were built from the rubble of Old Ghis, an ancient rival of Valyria that was crushed by Valyria thousands of years before the series' events. The economies of the cities are largely based on slave labor and the slave trade. Treatment of slaves is often harsh, while citizens live in relative luxury. Professional soldiers of all three cities wear outlandish costumes and hairstyles that limit their usefulness in battle. The cities' militaries are highly dependent on additional slave and mercenary armies for the actual fighting.\nPresent inhabitants of the bay are a mixed race that no longer speak the old Ghiscari tongue but variations of High Valyrian with a characteristic growl. The ancient folk of Ghis, who name themselves the harpy's sons in Astapor, are said to have bristly red-black hair. The Good Masters of Astapor all appear alike to Daenerys as \"thick fleshy men with amber skin, broad noses, dark eyes. Their wiry hair was black or a dark red, or that queer mixture of red and black that was peculiar to Ghiscari\". Only the freeborn men of Astapor are permitted to wear garments called tokars, whose fringes display their status. Many Astapori women veil their face for the dust. The Astapori are drenched in sweet perfumes.\nAstapor.\nThe oldest city in Slaver's Bay. Astapor lies on the banks of the Worm River, a wide, slow, and crooked stream with wooded islands. Entering Astapor at the beginning of \"A Storm of Swords\", Daenerys experiences it as an ancient and dilapidated city that has long passed its glory days. The city is dominated by its red brick architecture, and Arstan Whitebeard explains to Daenerys that the saying \"Brick and blood built Astapor, ... and brick and blood her people\" refers to the slaves who make the bricks. Astapor's stepped pyramids, its fighting pits, streets, the surrounding walls and the Plaza of Pride are all made of red bricks. The so-called Plaza of Punishment at Astapor's main gates is even larger than the Plaza of Pride.\nThe Plaza of Pride, which has a red-brick fountain and a huge bronze harpy statue in its center, serves as an open air slave market and a marshaling area for the Unsullied, elite eunuch spearmen known for discipline and effectiveness. Astapor is the only city to sell Unsullied, but also sells bed slaves, fieldhands, scribes, craftsmen, and tutors. The Unsullied require a huge investment in both time and money by the Astapori who raise and train them, but they earn the most profitable of returns for the Good Masters of Astapor. The Unsullied wear spiked bronze hats, and they obey at all costs, even if it demands their death. They are given new slave names each day to be reminded of their worthlessness. In times of attack, unsold Unsullied are deployed to the massive, crumbling red-brick walls that the Astapori no longer man.\nDaenerys decides to buy all of Astapor's trained and untrained Unsullied, over 8600 in number, and tells them to kill all adult Astapori slavers and soldiers when she leaves the city. She gives the power over Astapor to a council of former slaves led by a healer, a scholar and a priest, and tens of thousands of former slaves join her on her travels to Yunkai. A former butcher named Cleon fends off a scheme to have the Good Masters re-established, and was crowned as the King of Astapor in reward.\nThe TV show used the coastal town of Essaouira, Morocco to film scenes in Astapor.\nYunkai.\nThe smallest of the three cities, Yunkai, like Meereen, does not trade in Unsullied but is known for its fighting pits and its pleasure houses, both of which turn out slaves at a brisk pace. The city is similar to Astapor in architecture except for its smaller size and its use of yellow brick in its buildings instead of red. The slavers of Yunkai are known as the Wise Masters. Because of the city's lack of Unsullied, it relies on a mixed professional and slave army of approximately 4,000 with at least 1,000 mercenaries. Typical for Ghiscari, Yunkai soldiers wear impractical armor and oiled hair teased into enormous shapes, limiting their effectiveness.\nYunkish scenes were filmed in A\u00eft Benhaddou, Morocco in the TV show.\nMeereen.\nThe largest of the three slaver cities, Meereen has a population equaling that of Astapor and Yunkai combined. The city is also the wealthiest, as besides slaves it produces wine, with a metallic taste, the lands surrounding it have massive deposits of copper, and it grows olives, before the slavers burned the trees to starve out Daenerys's army. The city has architecture similar to that of its neighbors, but it is made of bricks of many colors. Its landscape is dominated by a massive pyramid, named the Great Pyramid, and the Temple of Graces, which is capped by a golden dome. Meereen is unique among the Ghiscari cities in that it is filled with many temples and pyramids. The slavers of Meereen are known as the Great Masters. It is built on the banks of the river Skahadhazan. After Daenerys conquers the city she continues to rule it as its queen to learn how to rule. The city eventually becomes under siege by an alliance of various city-states led by Yunkai, while a resistance known as the Sons of the Harpy rise up within.\nFor the HBO television series, many of the scenes in Meereen were filmed in Split and the Fortress of Klis, Croatia. In Season 5, Daznak's Pit in the city was shot in the Plaza de Toros in Osuna, Spain.\nEastern Essos.\nRed Waste.\nThe Red Waste is a great desert-like area in the eastern part of Essos. Not much is known about it, since it was only briefly seen in \"A Clash of Kings\" when Daenerys Targaryen and her \"khalasar\" crossed it. The only known settlement in the region, Vaes Tolorro, is in ruins.\nQarth.\nFirst mentioned in \"A Game of Thrones\", the city of Qarth has not yet appeared on any maps in the books. However, the HBO \"Viewer's Guide\" world map and the opening titles of the TV series' second season show Qarth located at a strait between the Summer Sea and the Jade Sea in the south-east of Essos. Upon Daenerys' first visit to Qarth in \"A Clash of Kings\", the warlock Pyat Pree describes his city as the center of the world and as a gateway of commerce and culture between the east and west, and the north and south. The reader learns through Daenerys's eyes that the city is surrounded by three graded walls of thirty to fifty feet in height, respectively engraved with portraits of animals, war, and lovemaking. The city's buildings are of many colors, including rose, violet, and umber. Slender towers rise throughout the city, fountains adorn every square, and thousands of colored birds, blooming trees and flowers fill the city. The TV adaptation filmed Qarth on the island of Lokrum near Dubrovnik and constructed a set at the Dubac quarry in Croatia to double for the gates of Qarth.\nThe Qartheen are described as \"tall pale folk in linen and samite and tiger fur\", with the women wearing gowns that leave one breast bare, while the men sport beaded silk skirts. Daenerys perceives them as \"nothing if not polite\". Slaves serve their needs. The Pureborn, descendants of the city's ancient kings and queens, govern Qarth and also command the city's defenses. Three principal merchant groups battle amongst themselves and against the Pureborn for dominance of the city: the Thirteen, the Ancient Guild of Spicers, and the Tourmaline Brotherhood. Qarth's warlocks, whose lips are turned blue from a potion called \"the shade of the evening\", are said to brood over these factions; they are still feared although their power and prestige have waned over the years. Qarth is also home to the Sorrowful Men, a guild of assassins named so for whispering \"I am so sorry,\" before killing their victims. Daenerys leaves Qarth again at the end of \"A Clash of Kings\".\nUnvisited lands.\nAsshai and the Shadow Lands.\nAsshai and the Shadow Lands are mysterious locations in the \"Ice and Fire\" world. They are first mentioned in \"A Game of Thrones\" and were first mapped in \"The Lands of Ice and Fire\", lying on the far east of the known world. Martin is unsure if the books will ever take the readers to Asshai, but said that readers may learn more through the POV character Melisandre (who originates from Asshai) or through the memories and mentions of other characters. Jorah Mormont describes Asshai as a port city far to the south of the Dothraki Sea, at the end of the known world. Asshai exports such goods as black amethysts, amber, and dragonglass. At another time, Jorah Mormont tells Daenerys of great kingdoms to the east of the Red Waste, and lists Asshai by the Shadow as one of the cities full of wonders there. According to Martin, all ship travels between Westeros and Asshai go via the Summer Sea and the Jade Sea through the straits at Qarth, and that the common folk still believe the world to be flat. However, according to Martin, \"Asshai is not nearly important to trade as Yi Ti, and the rich port cities of Yi Ti (and Leng) and more easily reached via Qarth.\" Quaithe of the Shadow prophesies Daenerys in Qarth that \"To go north, you must journey south. To reach the west, you must go east [...] and to touch the light you must pass beneath the shadow.\" When Daenerys interprets this to mean she must go to Asshai, Quaithe says she would find the truth there.\nThere are many tales about the Shadow Lands, though how much truth they hold is unclear. The Dothraki believe that ghost grass covers the Shadow Lands, with stalks that glow in the dark and grow taller than a man on horseback. Daenerys heard that \"spellsingers, warlocks, and aeromancers practiced their arts openly in Asshai, while shadowbinders and bloodmages worked terrible sorceries in the black of night\". There are also Westerosi maesters in Asshai. The mages of Asshai teach others their healing powers, but also their spells requiring blood sacrifice. Ancient books of Asshai record the Azor Ahai prophecy followed by members of the R'hllor faith. Daenerys heard that dragons themselves originated from the Shadow Lands beyond Asshai and the islands of the Jade Sea, and they possibly still live there. Bran dreams of flying Dragons in Asshai. The petrified dragon eggs Illyrio gives to Daenerys are said to come from the Shadow Lands. The \"dour and frightening\" Shadow Men cover their bodies in tattoos and wear lacquered wooden masks, and the appearance of the Asshai'i is described as dark and solemn. The Dothraki believe the Asshai'i to be the spawn of shadows. The Asshai'i have a language of their own.\nIbben.\nIbben is a collection of islands north of Essos in the Bay of Whales. The largest of these islands is Ib, which contains the cities Port of Ibben and Ib Nor. Until the Doom of Valyria, Ibben was ruled by a God-King. Now power is held by the Shadow Council, which is made up of nobles, priests, and wealthy guildsmen. Ibben is first mentioned in \"A Game of Thrones\", where Tyrion talks of rumors that mammoths \"roam the cold wastes beyond the Port of Ibben\". In 2002, Martin said the narrative would \"probably not\" take readers to Ibben, which he described as a \"cold, mountainous, Iceland-sized island\" (i.e. 103,000\u00a0km2, 40,000 sq mi) in the Shivering Sea, with the Port of Ibben as the major city; some Ibbenese also live on smaller islands nearby or in colonies on Essos. Ibben is unmapped in the books as of \"A Dance with Dragons\", but similar to Martin's descriptions, the HBO \"Viewer's Guide\" world map gives the island's location as to the north-east of Essos. Martin said that due to a large whale population in the Shivering sea, many of the Ibbenses were whalers. The Ibbenses are known to chew whale blubber in order to maintain their metabolism in the cold climate. Several characters see Ibbenese whalers and cogs at the ports of King's Landing, Braavos, Maidenpool, Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, White Harbour, and the Iron Islands. The novels describe the people of Ibben as squat and hairy; Arya even meets an Ibbenese woman with a mustache. It is implied the people may be Neanderthals. Tyrion and Varys meet foul-smelling Ibbenese, who \"were as fond of axes as they were of each other\". Arya sees \"a dark brutal axeman from Ib\" in her dreams. The Ibbenese are said to speak with low, raspy voices and to have their own language.\nYi Ti.\nThe novels repeatedly describe Yi Ti as an empire with cities full of wonder, lying in the far east. As of \"A Dance with Dragons\", Yi Ti has not appeared on any maps in the books, but Martin specified that \"Yi Ti is to the south east of Qarth, generally, across the Jade Sea.\" The empire is first mentioned in \"A Game of Thrones\", talking of rumors that \"basilisks infested the jungles of Yi Ti\". Sailor stories presented in \"A Feast for Crows\" mention that a grey plague has hit Yi Ti. The god of the people of Yi Ti is called the Lion of Night. Daenerys sees people of Yi Ti as bright-eyed men in monkey-tail hats in the markets of Vaes Dothrak. Yi Ti has more cities than any other land in the known world, and according to Lomas Longstrider they are much larger and more splendid than cities in the west. According to Colloquo Votar there are three older cities buried beneath every YiTish city. The capital of the Golden Empire of Yi Ti is Yin, along the Jade Sea. Martin is unsure \"to what extent those peoples [like of Yi Ti] will ever enter this present story, however... their lands are very far away.\"\nPlains of Jogos Nhai.\nNorth of Yi Ti, the Plains of Jogos Nhai are windswept, with rolling hills. They are dominated by a race of mounted warriors called the Jogos Nhai. The Jogos Nhai live in yurts and tents, and are a nomadic people. They are short, squat, and have large heads and small faces. Men and women both have pointed skulls, a result of their custom of binding the heads of newborns. They also ride zorses, a striped mount that can withstand much more than the average horse. The Jogos Nhai do not fight among themselves and live in small clans bound by blood. They live in a state of perpetual war with outsiders and had been raiding many YiTish cities and have reduced around a hundred towns to ruin. Each tribe is commanded by a \"jhat\", or war chief, and a moonsinger, who is a priestess, healer, and judge. Moonsingers are generally female, and \"jhats\" are mostly male. (Paraphrased from \"The World of Ice and Fire)\"\nSothoryos.\nTo the south of Essos is the continent of Sothoryos (mistakenly spelled Sothoros in early novels). Sothoryos is the third continent of the known world, and is vast, plague-ridden, covered in jungles, and largely unexplored. It is reported to be as large as Essos and described as a \"land without end\" by Jaenara Belaerys, a Valyrian dragonlord from before the Doom of Valyria.\nThe continent is first named on a map in \"A Storm of Swords\" (2000), showing the cities of Yeen and Zamettar on it. The narrative itself first refers to the continent in \"A Feast for Crows\" (2005). Martin had described Sothoryos in 2002 as \"the southern continent, roughly equivalent to Africa, jungly, plague-ridden, and largely unexplored.\" The novels provide little other information. The swampy nature of Sothoryos is briefly referenced by Victarion in \"A Dance with Dragons\", and teak from Sothoryos is said to be used to build ships. A corsair's road runs along the continent's northern coast. \"A Dance with Dragons\" refers to the diseases on Sothoryos in regards to the wealthy but sick Yunkai slave trader Yezzan zo Qaggaz. Victarion describes some people as \"squat and hairy as the apes of Sothoros\", and some people fighting in Daznak's Pit for Daenerys's entertainment in \"A Dance with Dragons\" are described as \"brindle-skinned half-men from the jungles of Sothoros\". Martin said that, unlike other peoples in the novels, the brindled men of Sothoryos were pure fantasy constructs.\nUlthos.\nThe map collection \"The Lands of Ice and Fire\" also shows the north tip of a landmass named \"Ulthos\" to the south of Essos and east of Sothoryos. Asked whether this was another continent, Martin replied, \"Well, it's a large landmass. I am a little unclear on the formal definition of 'continent' as opposed to 'big island.' Also on the size of Ulthos, which after all sits at the edge of the known world. Terra incognita and all that.\"\nReferences.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12304", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12304", "title": "Grandmaster (chess)", "text": "Title in chess awarded by FIDE\nGrandmaster (GM) is a title awarded to chess players by the world chess organization FIDE. Apart from World Champion, Grandmaster is the highest title a chess player can attain. Once achieved, the title is held for life, though on rare occasions the title can be revoked for cheating.\nThe title of Grandmaster, along with the lesser FIDE titles of International Master (IM), FIDE Master (FM), and Candidate Master (CM), is open to all players regardless of gender. The great majority of grandmasters are men, but 44 women have been awarded the GM title as of 2025, out of a total of about 2000 grandmasters. There is also a Woman Grandmaster title with lower requirements awarded only to women.\nThere are also Grandmaster titles for composers and solvers of chess problems, awarded by the World Federation for Chess Composition (see List of grandmasters for chess composition). The International Correspondence Chess Federation (ICCF) awards the title of International Correspondence Chess Grandmaster. Both of these bodies are now independent of FIDE, but work in cooperation with it.\n\"Super grandmaster\" is an informal term to refer to the world's elite players. In the past this would refer to players with an Elo rating of over 2600, but as the average Elo rating of the top players has increased, it has typically come to refer to players with an Elo rating of over 2700. Super GMs have some name recognition and are typically the highest earners in chess.\nFIDE titles are awarded at the quarterly FIDE Council meetings. Players who have qualified for the GM title but have not yet been awarded it are informally referred to as \"GM-elect\".\nHistory.\nUsage of \"grandmaster\" for an expert in some field is recorded from 1590. The first known use of the term \"grandmaster\" in connection with chess was in the 18 February 1838 issue of \"Bell's Life\", in which a correspondent referred to William Lewis as \"our past grandmaster\". Subsequently, George Walker and others referred to Philidor as a grandmaster, and the term was also applied to a few other players.\nEarly tournament use.\nThe Ostend tournament of 1907 was divided into two sections: the Championship Tournament and the Masters' Tournament. The Championship section was for players who had previously won an international tournament. Siegbert Tarrasch won the Championship section, over Carl Schlechter, Dawid Janowski, Frank Marshall, Amos Burn, and Mikhail Chigorin. These players were described as grandmasters for the purposes of the tournament.\nThe San Sebasti\u00e1n 1912 tournament won by Akiba Rubinstein was a designated grandmaster event. Rubinstein won with 12\u00bd points out of 19. Tied for second with 12 points were Aron Nimzowitsch and Rudolf Spielmann.\nBy some accounts, in the St. Petersburg 1914 chess tournament, the title Grandmaster was formally conferred by Russian Tsar Nicholas II, who had partially funded the tournament. The Tsar reportedly awarded the title to the five finalists: Emanuel Lasker, Jos\u00e9 Ra\u00fal Capablanca, Alexander Alekhine, Siegbert Tarrasch, and Frank Marshall. Chess historian Edward Winter has questioned this, stating that the earliest known sources that support this story are an article by Robert Lewis Taylor in the June 15, 1940, issue of \"The New Yorker\" and Marshall's autobiography \"My 50 Years of Chess\" (1942).\nInformal and Soviet usage before 1950.\nBefore 1950, the term grandmaster was sometimes informally applied to world class players. The F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale des \u00c9checs (FIDE, or International Chess Federation) was formed in Paris in 1924, but at that time did not award formal titles.\nIn 1927, the Soviet Union's Chess Federation established the title of Grandmaster of the Soviet Union, in the form of the German loan word \"Gro\u00dfmeister\". At the time Soviet players were not competing outside their own country. This title was abolished in 1931, after having been awarded to Boris Verlinsky, who won the 1929 Soviet Championship. The title was brought back in 1935, and awarded to Mikhail Botvinnik, who thus became the first \"official\" Grandmaster of the USSR. Verlinsky did not get his title back.\nOfficial status (1950 onwards).\nIn 1950 FIDE created the titles of Grandmaster (GM), International Master (IM) and Woman Master (WM, later known as Woman International Master or WIM). The grandmaster title is sometimes called \"International Grandmaster\" (IGM), possibly to distinguish it from similar national titles, but the shortened form is far more common today.\nTitles were awarded by a resolution of the FIDE General Assembly and the Qualification Committee, with no formal written criteria. FIDE first awarded the Grandmaster title in 1950 to 27 players. These players were:\nSince FIDE did not award the Grandmaster title posthumously, world-class players who died prior to 1950, including World Champions Steinitz, Lasker, Capablanca, and Alekhine, never received the title. A few strong still living players such as British India's Sultan Khan, Germany's Paul Lipke and France's Eugene Znosko-Borovsky were not awarded titles. Sultan Khan was awarded the GM title posthumously in 2024.\n1953 regulations.\nTitle awards under the original regulations were subject to political concerns. Efim Bogoljubow, who had emigrated from the Soviet Union to Germany, was not entered in the first class of Grandmasters, even though he had played two matches for the World Championship with Alekhine. He received the title in 1951, by a vote of thirteen to eight with five abstentions. Yugoslavia supported his application, but all other Communist countries opposed it. In 1953, FIDE abolished the old regulations, although a provision was maintained that allowed older masters who had been overlooked to be awarded titles. The new regulations awarded the title of International Grandmaster of the FIDE to players meeting any of the following criteria:\n1957 regulations.\nAfter FIDE issued the 1953 title regulations, it was recognized that they were somewhat haphazard, and work began to revise the regulations. The FIDE Congress in Vienna in 1957 adopted new regulations, called the FAV system, in recognition of the work done by International Judge Giovanni Ferrantes (Italy), Alexander (probably Conel Hugh O'Donel Alexander), and Giancarlo Dal Verme (Italy). Under the 1957 regulations, the title of International Grandmaster of the FIDE was automatically awarded to:\nThe regulations also allowed titles to be awarded by a FIDE Congress on recommendation by the Qualification Committee. Recommendations were based on performance in qualifying tournaments, with the required score depending on the percentage of Grandmasters and International Masters in the tournament.\n1965 regulations.\nConcerns were raised that the 1957 regulations were too lax. At the FIDE Congress in 1961, GM Milan Vidmar said that the regulations \"made it possible to award international titles to players without sufficient merit\". At the 1964 Congress in Tel Aviv, a subcommittee was formed to propose changes to the regulations. The subcommittee recommended that the automatic award of titles be abolished, criticized the methods used for awarding titles based on qualifying performances, and called for a change in the makeup of the Qualification Committee. Several delegates supported the subcommittee recommendations, including GM Miguel Najdorf who felt that existing regulations were leading to an inflation of international titles. At the 1965 Congress in Wiesbaden FIDE raised the standards required for international titles. The International Grandmaster title regulations were:\nTo fulfill requirement 2b, the candidate must score one GM norm in a category 1a tournament or two norms within a three-year period in two Category 1b tournaments, or one Category 2a tournament and one Category 1b tournament.\nThe categories of tournaments are:\nSince FIDE titles are for life, a GM or IM does not count for the purposes of this requirement if he had not had a GM or IM result in the five years prior to the tournament.\nIn addition, no more than 50 percent plus one of the players can be from the same country for tournaments of 10 to 12 players, or no more than 50 percent plus two for larger tournaments.\nSeventy-four GM titles were awarded in 1951 through 1968. During that period, ten GM titles were awarded in 1965, but only one in 1966 and in 1968.\n1970 regulations.\nThe modern system for awarding FIDE titles evolved from the \"Dorazil\" proposals, presented to the 1970 Siegen Chess Olympiad FIDE Congress. The proposals were put together by Wilfried Dorazil (then FIDE Vice-President) and fellow Committee members Grandmaster Svetozar Gligori\u0107 and Professor Arpad Elo. The recommendations of the Committee report were adopted in full.\nIn essence, the proposals built on the work done by Professor Elo in devising his Elo rating system. The establishment of an updated list of players and their Elo rating enabled significantly strong international chess tournaments to be allocated a \"Category\", based on the average rating of the contestants. For instance, it was decided that 'Category 1' status would apply to tournaments with an average Elo rating of participants falling within the range 2251\u20132275; similarly Category 2 would apply to the range 2276\u20132300 etc. The higher the tournament Category, the stronger the tournament.\nAnother vital component involved the setting of meritorious norms for each Category of tournament. Players must meet or surpass the relevant score to demonstrate that they had performed at Grandmaster (GM) or International Master (IM) level. Scores were expressed as percentages of a perfect maximum score and decreased as the tournament Category increased, thereby reflecting the strength of a player's opposition and the relative difficulty of the task.\nTournament organisers could then apply the percentages to their own tournament format and declare in advance the actual score that participants must achieve to attain a GM or IM result (nowadays referred to as a norm).\nTo qualify for the Grandmaster title, a player needed to achieve three such GM results within a rolling period of three years. Exceptionally, if a player's contributory games totalled 30 or more, then the title could be awarded on the basis of two such results. There were also circumstances where the system could be adapted to fit team events and other competitions.\nThe full proposals included many other rules and regulations, covering such topics as:\nCurrent regulations.\nTo become a grandmaster, a player must achieve both of the following:\nThe Grandmaster title is also automatically conferred, without needing to fulfill the above criteria, when reaching the final 16 in the World Cup, winning the Women's World Cup, the World Junior Championship, or the World Senior Championship, or a Continental Chess Championship, given that the player's peak FIDE rating is at least 2300. Current regulations can be found in the FIDE Handbook.\nFIDE titles including the grandmaster title are valid for life, but FIDE regulations allow a title to be revoked for \"use of a FIDE title or rating to subvert the ethical principles of the title or rating system\" or if a player is found to have violated the anti-cheating regulations in a tournament on which the title application was based.\nExact regulations can be found in the https://.\nTitle inflation.\nA report prepared by Bart\u0142omiej Macieja for the Association of Chess Professionals mentions discussion at the 2008 FIDE Congress regarding a perceived decrease in value of the grandmaster title. The number of grandmasters had increased greatly between 1972 and 2008, but according to Macieja, the number of registered players rated over 2200 had increased even faster. Since that FIDE congress, discussion of the value of the grandmaster title has occasionally continued.\nHonorary grandmasters.\nStarting from 1977, FIDE awarded honorary Grandmaster titles to 32 players based on their past performances or other contributions to chess. The following players have been awarded honorary Grandmaster titles. Mari\u0107 and Honfi were awarded the title posthumously in the year of their death, and Sultan Khan 58 years later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "12305", "revid": "2308770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12305", "title": "Gotthold Ephraim Lessing", "text": "German Enlightenment writer (1729\u20131781)\nGotthold Ephraim Lessing (; ; 22 January 1729 \u2013 15 February 1781) was a German philosopher, dramatist, publicist and art critic, and a representative of the Enlightenment era. His plays and theoretical writings substantially influenced the development of German literature. He is widely considered by theatre historians to be the first dramaturg in his role at Abel Seyler's Hamburg National Theatre.\nThe word Dramaturgy first appears in his work \"Hamburg Dramaturgy.\"\nLife.\nLessing was born in Kamenz, a small town in Saxony, to pastor and theologian Johann Gottfried Lessing (1693\u20131770) and his wife Justine Salome Feller (1703\u20131777), daughter of pastor of Kamenz, Gottfried Feller (1674\u20131733). His father was a Lutheran minister and wrote on theology. Young Lessing studied at the Latin School in Kamenz from 1737 to 1741. With a father who wanted his son to follow in his footsteps, Lessing next attended the F\u00fcrstenschule St. Afra in Meissen. After completing his education at St. Afra's, he enrolled at Leipzig University where he pursued a degree in theology, medicine, philosophy, and philology (1746\u20131748).\nIt was here that his relationship with Karoline Neuber, a famous German actress, began. He translated several French plays for her, and his interest in theatre grew. During this time, he wrote his first play, \"The Young Scholar.\" Neuber eventually produced the play in 1748.\nFrom 1748 to 1760, Lessing lived in Leipzig and Berlin. He began to work as a reviewer and editor for the \"Vossische Zeitung\" and other periodicals. Lessing formed a close connection with his cousin, Christlob Mylius, and decided to follow him to Berlin. In 1750, Lessing and Mylius teamed together to begin a periodical publication named \"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Historie und Aufnahme des Theaters\". The publication ran only four issues, but it caught the public's eye and revealed Lessing to be a serious critic and theorist of drama.\nIn 1752, he took his master's degree in Wittenberg. From 1760 to 1765, he worked in Breslau (now Wroc\u0142aw) as secretary to General Tauentzien during the Seven Years' War between Britain and France, which had effects in Europe. It was during this time that he wrote his famous \"Laoco\u00f6n, or the Limitations of Poetry\".\nIn 1765, Lessing returned to Berlin, leaving in 1767 to work for three years at the Hamburg National Theatre. Actor-manager Konrad Ackermann began construction of Germany's first permanent national theatre in Hamburg, established by Johann Friedrich L\u00f6wen. The owners of the new Hamburg National Theatre hired Lessing as the theatre's critic of plays and acting, an activity later known as dramaturgy (based on his own words), making Lessing the very first dramaturge. The theatre's main backer was Abel Seyler, a former currency speculator who since became known as \"the leading patron of German theatre.\" There he met Eva K\u00f6nig, his future wife. His work in Hamburg formed the basis of his pioneering work on drama, titled \"Hamburgische Dramaturgie\". Unfortunately, because of financial losses due to pirated editions of the \"Hamburgische Dramaturgie\", the Hamburg Theatre closed just three years later.\nIn 1770, Lessing became librarian at the ducal library, now the Herzog August Library (\"Herzog-August-Bibliothek\", \"Bibliotheca Augusta\"), in Wolfenb\u00fcttel under the commission of the Duke of Brunswick. His tenure there was energetic, if interrupted by many journeys. In 1775, for example, he accompanied Prince Leopold to Italy. Follower of Spinoza's philosophy, on 14 October 1771, Lessing was initiated into Freemasonry in the lodge \"Zu den drei Goldenen Rosen\" in Hamburg.\nIn 1773, he discovered Archimedes' cattle problem in a Greek manuscript containing a poem of 44 lines, in the Herzog August Library in Wolfenb\u00fcttel. This problem would remain unsolved until 1880. In 1776, he married Eva K\u00f6nig, who was then a widow, in Jork (near Hamburg). She died in 1778 after giving birth to a short-lived son. On 15 February 1781, Lessing, aged 52, died during a visit to the wine dealer Angott in Brunswick.\nLessing was also famous for his friendship with Jewish-German philosopher Moses Mendelssohn. A 2003 biography of Mendelssohn's grandson, Felix, describes their friendship as one of the most \"illuminating metaphors [for] the clarion call of the Enlightenment for religious tolerance\". It was this relationship that sparked his interest in popular religious debates of the time. He began publishing heated pamphlets on his beliefs which were eventually banned. It was this banishment that inspired him to return to theatre to portray his views and to write \"Nathan the Wise\".\nWorks.\nEarly in his life, Lessing showed interest in the theatre. In his theoretical and critical writings on the subject\u2014as in his own plays\u2014he tried to contribute to the development of a new type of theatre in Germany. With this he especially turned against the then predominant literary theory of Gottsched and his followers. Lessing's \"Hamburgische Dramaturgie\" ran critiques of plays that were performed in the Hamburg Theatre, but after dealing with dissatisfied actors and actresses, Lessing redirected his writings to more of an analysis on the proper uses of drama. Lessing advocated the outline of drama in Aristotle's \"Poetics\". He believed the French Academy had devalued the uses of drama through their neoclassical rules of form and separation of genres. His repeated opinions on this issue influenced theatre practitioners who began the movement of rejecting theatre rules known as \"Sturm und Drang\" (\"Storm and Stress\"). He also supported serious reception of Shakespeare's works. He worked with many theatre groups (e.g. that of the Neuberin).\nIn Hamburg he tried with others to set up the German National Theatre. Today his own works appear as prototypes of the later developed bourgeois German drama. Scholars see \"Miss Sara Sampson\" and \"Emilia Galotti\" as amongst the first bourgeois tragedies, \"Minna von Barnhelm\" (Minna of Barnhelm) as the model for many classic German comedies, \"Nathan the Wise\" (\"Nathan der Weise\") as the first German drama of ideas (\"Ideendrama\"). His theoretical writings \"Laoco\u00f6n\" and \"Hamburg Dramaturgy\" (\"Hamburgische Dramaturgie\") set the standards for the discussion of aesthetic and literary theoretical principles. Lessing advocated that dramaturgs should carry their work out working directly with theatre companies rather than in isolation.In his religious and philosophical writings he defended the faithful Christian's right for freedom of thought. He argued against the belief in revelation and the holding on to a literal interpretation of the Bible by the predominant orthodox doctrine through a problem later to be called Lessing's Ditch. Lessing outlined the concept of the religious \"Proof of Power\": How can miracles continue to be used as a base for Christianity when we have no proof of miracles? Historical truths which are in doubt cannot be used to prove metaphysical truths (such as God's existence). As Lessing says it: \"That, then, is the ugly great ditch which I cannot cross, however often and however earnestly I have tried to make that leap.\"\nIn the final leg of his life, Lessing threw himself into an intense evaluation of theology and religion. He did much of his studying by reading manuscripts he found while working as a librarian. While working for the Duke, he formed a close friendship with a family by the name of Reimarus. The family held an unpublished manuscript by Hermann Samuel Reimarus which attacked the historicity of Christian revelation. Despite discouragement from his brother Karl Gotthelf Lessing, he began publishing pieces of the manuscript in pamphlets known as \"Fragments from an Unnamed Author\". The controversial pamphlets resulted in a heated debate between him and another theologian, Johann Melchior Goeze. In concern for tarnishing his reputation, Goeze requested the government put an end to the feud, and Lessing was silenced through a law that took away his freedom from censorship.\nIn response, Lessing relied upon his skills as a playwright to write what is undoubtedly his most influential play, \"Nathan the Wise\". In the play, Lessing set up tension between Judaism, Islam, and Christianity by having one character ask Nathan which religion was the most genuine. Nathan avoids the question by telling the parable of the three rings, which implies the idea that no specific religion is the \"correct religion.\" The Enlightenment ideas to which Lessing held tight were portrayed through his \"ideal of humanity,\" stating that religion is relative to the individual's ability to reason. \"Nathan the Wise\" is considered to be the first example of the German \"literature of humanity\". \nAs a child of the Enlightenment he trusted in a \"Christianity of Reason\", which oriented itself by the spirit of religion. He believed that human reason (initiated by criticism and dissent) would develop, even without help by a divine revelation. In his writing \"The Education of Humankind\" (\"Die Erziehung des Menschengeschlechts\"), often translated as \"The Education of the Human Race\", he extensively and coherently lays out his position.\nThe idea of freedom (for the theatre against the dominance of its French model; for religion from the church's dogma) is his central theme throughout his life. Therefore, he also stood up for the liberation of the upcoming middle and upper class from the nobility making up their minds for them. In his own literary existence he also constantly strove for independence. But his ideal of a possible life as a free author was hard to keep up against the economic constraints he faced. His project of authors self-publishing their works, which he tried to accomplish in Hamburg with C. J. Bode, failed in 1769.\nLessing is important as a literary critic for his work \"Laocoon: An Essay on the Limits of Painting and Poetry\". In this work, he argues against the tendency to take Horace's \"ut pictura poesis\" (as painting, so poetry) as prescriptive for literature. In other words, he objected to trying to write poetry using the same devices as one would in painting. Instead, poetry and painting each has its character (the former is extended in time; the latter is extended in space). This is related to Lessing's turn from French classicism to Aristotelian mimesis, discussed above.\nAttack by Johann Daniel M\u00fcller.\nThe Radical Pietist Johann Daniel M\u00fcller (born 1716 in Wissenbach/Nassau, today part of Eschenburg, deceased after 1785) published the following anonymous book against Lessing and Reimarus:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12306", "revid": "6941696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12306", "title": "Geotechnical engineering", "text": "Scientific study of earth materials in engineering problems\nGeotechnical engineering, also known as geotechnics, is the branch of civil engineering concerned with the engineering behavior of earth materials. It uses the principles of soil mechanics and rock mechanics to solve its engineering problems. It also relies on knowledge of geology, hydrology, geophysics, and other related sciences. \nGeotechnical engineering has applications in military engineering, mining engineering, petroleum engineering, coastal engineering, and offshore construction. The fields of geotechnical engineering and engineering geology have overlapping knowledge areas. However, while geotechnical engineering is a specialty of civil engineering, engineering geology is a specialty of geology.\nHistory.\nHumans have historically used soil as a material for flood control, irrigation purposes, burial sites, building foundations, and construction materials for buildings. Dykes, dams, and canals dating back to at least 2000 BCE\u2014found in parts of ancient Egypt, ancient Mesopotamia, the Fertile Crescent, and the early settlements of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa in the Indus valley\u2014provide evidence for early activities linked to irrigation and flood control. As cities expanded, structures were erected and supported by formalized foundations. The ancient Greeks notably constructed pad footings and strip-and-raft foundations. Until the 18th century, however, no theoretical basis for soil design had been developed, and the discipline was more of an art than a science, relying on experience.\nSeveral foundation-related engineering problems, such as the Leaning Tower of Pisa, prompted scientists to begin taking a more scientific-based approach to examining the subsurface. The earliest advances occurred in the development of earth pressure theories for the construction of retaining walls. Henri Gautier, a French royal engineer, recognized the \"natural slope\" of different soils in 1717, an idea later known as the soil's angle of repose. Around the same time, a rudimentary soil classification system was also developed based on a material's unit weight, which is no longer considered a good indication of soil type.\nThe application of the principles of mechanics to soils was documented as early as 1773 when Charles Coulomb, a physicist and engineer, developed improved methods to determine the earth pressures against military ramparts. Coulomb observed that, at failure, a distinct slip plane would form behind a sliding retaining wall and suggested that the maximum shear stress on the slip plane, for design purposes, was the sum of the soil cohesion, formula_1, and friction formula_2 formula_3, where formula_2 is the normal stress on the slip plane and formula_5 is the friction angle of the soil. By combining Coulomb's theory with Christian Otto Mohr's 2D stress state, the theory became known as Mohr-Coulomb theory. Although it is now recognized that precise determination of cohesion is impossible because formula_1 is not a fundamental soil property, the Mohr-Coulomb theory is still used in practice today.\nIn the 19th century, Henry Darcy developed what is now known as Darcy's law, describing the flow of fluids in a porous media. Joseph Boussinesq, a mathematician and physicist, developed theories of stress distribution in elastic solids that proved useful for estimating stresses at depth in the ground. William Rankine, an engineer and physicist, developed an alternative to Coulomb's earth pressure theory. Albert Atterberg developed the clay consistency indices that are still used today for soil classification. In 1885, Osborne Reynolds recognized that shearing causes volumetric dilation of dense materials and contraction of loose granular materials.\nModern geotechnical engineering is said to have begun in 1925 with the publication of \"Erdbaumechanik\" by Karl von Terzaghi, a mechanical engineer and geologist. Considered by many to be the father of modern soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering, Terzaghi developed the principle of effective stress, and demonstrated that the shear strength of soil is controlled by effective stress. Terzaghi also developed the framework for theories of bearing capacity of foundations, and the theory for prediction of the rate of settlement of clay layers due to consolidation. Afterwards, Maurice Biot fully developed the three-dimensional soil consolidation theory, extending the one-dimensional model previously developed by Terzaghi to more general hypotheses and introducing the set of basic equations of Poroelasticity. \nIn his 1948 book, Donald Taylor recognized that the interlocking and dilation of densely packed particles contributed to the peak strength of the soil. Roscoe, Schofield, and Wroth, with the publication of \"On the Yielding of Soils\" in 1958, established the interrelationships between the volume change behavior (dilation, contraction, and consolidation) and shearing behavior with the theory of plasticity using critical state soil mechanics. Critical state soil mechanics is the basis for many contemporary advanced constitutive models describing the behavior of soil. \nIn 1960, Alec Skempton carried out an extensive review of the available formulations and experimental data in the literature about the effective stress validity in soil, concrete, and rock in order to reject some of these expressions, as well as clarify what expressions were appropriate according to several working hypotheses, such as stress-strain or strength behavior, saturated or non-saturated media, and rock, concrete or soil behavior.\nRoles.\nGeotechnical investigation.\nGeotechnical engineers investigate and determine the properties of subsurface conditions and materials. They also design corresponding earthworks and retaining structures, tunnels, and structure foundations, and may supervise and evaluate sites, which may further involve site monitoring as well as the risk assessment and mitigation of natural hazards.\nGeotechnical engineers and engineering geologists perform geotechnical investigations to obtain information on the physical properties of soil and rock underlying and adjacent to a site to design earthworks and foundations for proposed structures and for the repair of distress to earthworks and structures caused by subsurface conditions. Geotechnical investigations involve surface and subsurface exploration of a site, often including subsurface sampling and laboratory testing of retrieved soil samples. Sometimes, geophysical methods are also used to obtain data, which include measurement of seismic waves (pressure, shear, and Rayleigh waves), surface-wave methods and downhole methods, and electromagnetic surveys (magnetometer, resistivity, and ground-penetrating radar). Electrical tomography can be used to survey soil and rock properties and existing underground infrastructure in construction projects.\nSurface exploration can include on-foot surveys, geological mapping, geophysical methods, and photogrammetry. Geological mapping and interpretation of geomorphology are typically completed in consultation with a geologist or engineering geologist. Subsurface exploration usually involves in-situ testing (for example, the standard penetration test and cone penetration test). The digging of test pits and trenching (particularly for locating faults and slide planes) may also be used to learn about soil conditions at depth. Large-diameter borings are rarely used due to safety concerns and expense. Still, they are sometimes used to allow a geologist or engineer to be lowered into the borehole for direct visual and manual examination of the soil and rock stratigraphy.\nVarious soil samplers exist to meet the needs of different engineering projects. The standard penetration test, which uses a thick-walled split spoon sampler, is the most common way to collect disturbed samples. Piston samplers, employing a thin-walled tube, are most commonly used to collect less disturbed samples. More advanced methods, such as the Sherbrooke block sampler, are superior but expensive. Coring frozen ground provides high-quality undisturbed samples from ground conditions, such as fill, sand, moraine, and rock fracture zones. \nGeotechnical centrifuge modeling is another method of testing physical-scale models of geotechnical problems. The use of a centrifuge enhances the similarity of the scale model tests involving soil because soil's strength and stiffness are susceptible to the confining pressure. The centrifugal acceleration allows a researcher to obtain large (prototype-scale) stresses in small physical models.\nFoundation design.\nThe foundation of a structure's infrastructure transmits loads from the structure to the earth. Geotechnical engineers design foundations based on the load characteristics of the structure and the properties of the soils and bedrock at the site. Generally, geotechnical engineers first estimate the magnitude and location of loads to be supported before developing an investigation plan to explore the subsurface and determine the necessary soil parameters through field and lab testing. Following this, they may begin the design of an engineering foundation. The primary considerations for a geotechnical engineer in foundation design are bearing capacity, settlement, and ground movement beneath the foundations. \nEarthworks.\nGeotechnical engineers are also involved in the planning and execution of earthworks, which include ground improvement, slope stabilization, and slope stability analysis. \nGround improvement.\nVarious geotechnical engineering methods can be used for ground improvement, including reinforcement geosynthetics such as geocells and geogrids, which disperse loads over a larger area, increasing the soil's load-bearing capacity. Through these methods, geotechnical engineers can reduce direct and long-term costs.\nSlope stabilization.\nGeotechnical engineers can analyze and improve slope stability using engineering methods. Slope stability is determined by the balance of shear stress and shear strength. A previously stable slope may be initially affected by various factors, making it unstable. Nonetheless, geotechnical engineers can design and implement engineered slopes to increase stability.\nSlope stability analysis.\nStability analysis is needed to design engineered slopes and estimate the risk of slope failure in natural or designed slopes by determining the conditions under which the topmost mass of soil will slip relative to the base of soil and lead to slope failure. If the interface between the mass and the base of a slope has a complex geometry, slope stability analysis is difficult and numerical solution methods are required. Typically, the interface's exact geometry is unknown, and a simplified interface geometry is assumed. Finite slopes require three-dimensional models to be analyzed, so most slopes are analyzed assuming that they are infinitely wide and can be represented by two-dimensional models.\nSub-disciplines.\nGeosynthetics.\nGeosynthetics are a type of plastic polymer products used in geotechnical engineering that improve engineering performance while reducing costs. This includes geotextiles, geogrids, geomembranes, geocells, and geocomposites. The synthetic nature of the products make them suitable for use in the ground where high levels of durability are required. Their main functions include drainage, filtration, reinforcement, separation, and containment. \nGeosynthetics are available in a wide range of forms and materials, each to suit a slightly different end-use, although they are frequently used together. Some reinforcement geosynthetics, such as geogrids and more recently, cellular confinement systems, have shown to improve bearing capacity, modulus factors and soil stiffness and strength. These products have a wide range of applications and are currently used in many civil and geotechnical engineering applications including roads, airfields, railroads, embankments, piled embankments, retaining structures, reservoirs, canals, dams, landfills, bank protection and coastal engineering.\nOffshore.\n\"Offshore\" (or \"marine\") \"geotechnical engineering\" is concerned with foundation design for human-made structures in the sea, away from the coastline (in opposition to \"onshore\" or \"nearshore\" engineering). Oil platforms, artificial islands and submarine pipelines are examples of such structures.\nThere are a number of significant differences between onshore and offshore geotechnical engineering. Notably, site investigation and ground improvement on the seabed are more expensive; the offshore structures are exposed to a wider range of geohazards; and the environmental and financial consequences are higher in case of failure. Offshore structures are exposed to various environmental loads, notably wind, waves and currents. These phenomena may affect the integrity or the serviceability of the structure and its foundation during its operational lifespan and need to be taken into account in offshore design.\nIn subsea geotechnical engineering, seabed materials are considered a two-phase material composed of rock or mineral particles and water. Structures may be fixed in place in the seabed\u2014as is the case for piers, jetties and fixed-bottom wind turbines\u2014or may comprise a floating structure that remains roughly fixed relative to its geotechnical anchor point. Undersea mooring of human-engineered floating structures include a large number of offshore oil and gas platforms and, since 2008, a few floating wind turbines. Two common types of engineered design for anchoring floating structures include tension-leg and catenary loose mooring systems.\nObservational method.\nFirst proposed by Karl Terzaghi and later discussed in a paper by Ralph B. Peck, the observational method is a managed process of construction control, monitoring, and review, which enables modifications to be incorporated during and after construction. The method aims to achieve a greater overall economy without compromising safety by creating designs based on the most probable conditions rather than the most unfavorable. Using the observational method, gaps in available information are filled by measurements and investigation, which aid in assessing the behavior of the structure during construction, which in turn can be modified per the findings. The method was described by Peck as \"learn-as-you-go\".\nThe observational method may be described as follows:\nThe observational method is suitable for construction that has already begun when an unexpected development occurs or when a failure or accident looms or has already happened. It is unsuitable for projects whose design cannot be altered during construction.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "12307", "revid": "17388019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12307", "title": "Gustave Flaubert", "text": "French novelist (1821\u20131880)\nGustave Flaubert ( , ; ; 12 December 1821 \u2013 8 May 1880) was a French novelist. He has been considered the leading exponent of literary realism in his country and abroad. According to the literary theorist Kornelije Kvas, \"in Flaubert, realism strives for formal perfection, so the presentation of reality tends to be neutral, emphasizing the values and importance of style as an objective method of presenting reality\". He is known especially for his debut novel \"Madame Bovary\" (1857), his \"Correspondence\", and his scrupulous devotion to his style and aesthetics. The celebrated short story writer Guy de Maupassant was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Flaubert.\nLife.\nEarly life and education.\nFlaubert was born in Rouen, in the Seine-Maritime department of Upper Normandy, in northern France. He was the second son of Anne Justine Caroline (n\u00e9e Fleuriot; 1793\u20131872) and Achille-Cl\u00e9ophas Flaubert (1784\u20131846), director and senior surgeon of the major hospital in Rouen. He began writing at an early age, as early as eight according to some sources.\nHe was educated at the Lyc\u00e9e Pierre-Corneille in Rouen, and did not leave until 1840, whereupon he went to Paris to study law. In Paris, he was an indifferent student and found the city distasteful. He made a few acquaintances, including Victor Hugo. Toward the end of 1840, he traveled in the Pyrenees and Corsica. In 1846, after an attack of epilepsy, he left Paris and abandoned the study of law.\nPersonal life.\nFrom 1846 to 1854, Flaubert had a relationship with the poet Louise Colet; his letters to her survived. After leaving Paris, he returned to Croisset, near the Seine, close to Rouen, and lived there for the rest of his life. He did however make occasional visits to Paris and England, where he apparently had a mistress.\nPolitically, Flaubert described himself as a \"romantic and liberal old dunce\" (), an \"enraged liberal\" (), a hater of all despotism, and one who celebrated every protest of the individual against power and monopolies.\nWith his lifelong friend Maxime Du Camp, he traveled in Brittany in 1846. In 1849\u201350 he went on a long journey to the Middle East, visiting Greece and Egypt. In Beirut he contracted syphilis. He spent five weeks in Istanbul in 1850. He visited Carthage in 1858 to conduct research for his novel \"Salammb\u00f4\".\nFlaubert did not marry or have children. In a 1852 letter to Colet, he explained his reasons for not wanting children, saying he would \"transmit to no one the aggravations and the disgrace of existence\".\nFlaubert was very open about his sexual activities with prostitutes in his travel writings. He suspected that a chancre on his penis was from a Maronite or a Turkish girl. He also engaged in intercourse with male prostitutes in Beirut and Egypt; in one of his letters, he describes a \"pockmarked young rascal wearing a white turban\".\nAccording to his biographer \u00c9mile Faguet, his affair with Louise Colet was his only serious romantic relationship.\nFlaubert was a diligent worker and often complained in his letters to friends about the strenuous nature of his work. He was close to his niece, Caroline Commanville, and had a close friendship and correspondence with George Sand. He occasionally visited Parisian acquaintances, including \u00c9mile Zola, Alphonse Daudet, Ivan Turgenev, and Edmond and Jules de Goncourt.\nThe 1870s were a difficult time for Flaubert. Prussian soldiers occupied his house during the War of 1870, and his mother died in 1872. After her death, he fell into financial difficulty due to business failures on the part of his niece's husband. Flaubert lived with venereal diseases most of his life. His health declined and he died at Croisset of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1880 at the age of 58. He was buried in the family vault in the cemetery of Rouen. A monument to him by Henri Chapu was unveiled at the museum of Rouen.\nWriting career.\nHis first finished work was \"November\", a novella, which was completed in 1842.\nIn September 1849, Flaubert completed the first version of a novel, \"The Temptation of Saint Anthony\". He read the novel aloud to Louis Bouilhet and Maxime Du Camp over the course of four days, not allowing them to interrupt or give any opinions. At the end of the reading, his friends told him to throw the manuscript in the fire, suggesting instead that he focus on day-to-day life rather than fantastic subjects.\nIn 1850, after returning from Egypt, Flaubert began work on \"Madame Bovary\". The novel, which took five years to write, was serialized in the \"Revue de Paris\" in 1856. The government brought an action against the publisher and author on the charge of immorality, which was heard during the following year, but both were acquitted. When \"Madame Bovary\" appeared in book form, it met with a warm reception.\nIn 1858, Flaubert travelled to Carthage to gather material for his next novel, \"Salammb\u00f4\". The novel was completed in 1862 after four years of work.\nDrawing on his youth, Flaubert next wrote \"L'\u00c9ducation sentimentale\" (\"Sentimental Education\"), an effort that took seven years. This was his last complete novel, published in the year 1869. The story focuses on the romantic life of a young man named Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Moreau at the time of the French Revolution of 1848 and the founding of the Second French Empire.\nIn the 1870s, Flaubert wrote an unsuccessful drama, \"Le Candidat\", and he published a reworked version of \"The Temptation of Saint Anthony\", portions of which had been published as early as 1857. He devoted much of his time to an ongoing project, \"Les Deux Cloportes\" (\"The Two Woodlice\"), which later became \"Bouvard et P\u00e9cuchet\", breaking the obsessive project only to write the \"Three Tales\" between 1875 and 1877. This book comprises three stories: \"Un C\u0153ur simple\" (\"A Simple Heart\"), \"La L\u00e9gende de Saint-Julien l'Hospitalier\" (\"The Legend of St. Julian the Hospitaller\"), and \"H\u00e9rodias\" (\"Herodias\"). After the publication of the stories, he spent the remainder of his life toiling on \"Bouvard et P\u00e9cuchet\", the unfinished version of which was posthumously published in 1881. It was a grand satire on the futility of human knowledge and the ubiquity of mediocrity. Flaubert believed the work to be his masterpiece, though the novel received only a very small print run and mostly lukewarm reviews.\nFlaubert was a prolific letter writer, and his letters have been collected in several publications.\nAt the time of his death, he may have been working on a further historical novel, based on the Battle of Thermopylae.\nPerfectionist style.\nFlaubert famously avoided the inexact, the abstract and the vaguely inapt expression, and scrupulously eschewed the clich\u00e9. In a letter to George Sand he said that he spent his time \"trying to write harmonious sentences, avoiding assonances\".\nFlaubert believed in and pursued the principle of finding \"le mot juste\" (\"the right word\"), which he considered as the key means to achieve high quality in literary art. He worked in sullen solitude, sometimes occupying a week in the completion of one page, never satisfied with what he had composed. In Flaubert's correspondence he intimates this, explaining correct prose did not flow out of him and that his style was achieved through work and revision. Flaubert said he wished to forge a style \"that would be rhythmic as verse, precise as the language of the sciences, undulant, deep-voiced as a cello, tipped with flame: a style that would pierce your idea like a dagger, and on which your thought would sail easily ahead over a smooth surface, like a skiff before a good tail wind.\" He famously said that \"an author in his book must be like God in the universe, present everywhere and visible nowhere.\"\nThis painstaking style of writing is also evident when one compares Flaubert's output over a lifetime to that of his peers (for example Balzac or Zola). Flaubert published much less prolifically than was the norm for his time and never got near the pace of a novel a year, as his peers often achieved during their peaks of activity. Walter Pater famously called Flaubert the \"martyr of style\".\nLegacy.\nIn the assessment of critic James Wood:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Novelists should thank Flaubert the way poets thank spring; it all begins again with him. There really is a time before Flaubert and a time after him. Flaubert decisively established what most readers and writers think of as modern realist narration, and his influence is almost too familiar to be visible. We hardly remark of good prose that it favors the telling and brilliant detail; that it privileges a high degree of visual noticing; that it maintains an unsentimental composure and knows how to withdraw, like a good valet, from superfluous commentary; that it judges good and bad neutrally; that it seeks out the truth, even at the cost of repelling us; and that the author's fingerprints on all this are paradoxically, traceable but not visible. You can find some of this in Defoe or Austen or Balzac, but not all of it until Flaubert.\nAs a writer, other than a pure stylist, Flaubert was nearly equal parts romantic and realist. Hence, members of various schools, especially realists and formalists, have traced their origins to his work. The exactitude with which he adapts his expressions to his purpose can be seen in all parts of his work, especially in the portraits he draws of the figures in his principal romances. The degree to which Flaubert's fame has extended since his death presents \"an interesting chapter of literary history in itself\". He is also credited with spreading the popularity of the color Tuscany Cypress, a color often mentioned in his chef-d'\u0153uvre \"Madame Bovary\".\nFlaubert's lean and precise writing style has had a large influence on 20th-century writers such as Franz Kafka and J. M. Coetzee. As Vladimir Nabokov discussed in his famous lecture series:\nThe greatest literary influence upon Kafka was Flaubert's. Flaubert who loathed pretty-pretty prose would have applauded Kafka's attitude towards his tool. Kafka liked to draw his terms from the language of law and science, giving them a kind of ironic precision, with no intrusion of the author's private sentiments; this was exactly Flaubert's method through which he achieved a singular poetic effect. The legacy of his work habits can best be described, therefore, as paving the way towards a slower and more introspective manner of writing.\nThe publication of \"Madame Bovary\" in 1856 was followed by more scandal than admiration; it was not understood at first that this novel was the beginning of something new: the scrupulously truthful portraiture of life. Gradually, this aspect of his genius was accepted, and it began to crowd out all others. At the time of his death, he was widely regarded as the most influential French Realist. Under this aspect Flaubert exercised an extraordinary influence over Guy de Maupassant, Edmond de Goncourt, Alphonse Daudet, and \u00c9mile Zola. Even after the decline of the Realist school, Flaubert did not lose prestige in the literary community; he continues to appeal to other writers because of his deep commitment to aesthetic principles, his devotion to style, and his indefatigable pursuit of the perfect expression.\nHis \"\u0152uvres Compl\u00e8tes\" (8 vols., 1885) were printed from the original manuscripts, and included, besides the works mentioned already, the two plays \"Le Candidat\" and \"Le Ch\u00e2teau des c\u0153urs\". Another edition (10 vols.) appeared in 1873\u201385. Flaubert's correspondence with George Sand was published in 1884 with an introduction by Guy de Maupassant.\nHe has been admired or written about by almost every major literary personality of the 20th century, including philosophers and sociologists such as Michel Foucault, Roland Barthes, Pierre Bourdieu, and Jean-Paul Sartre, the latter of whose partially psychoanalytic portrait of Flaubert in \"The Family Idiot\" was published in 1971. Georges Perec named \"Sentimental Education\" as one of his favourite novels. The Peruvian novelist Mario Vargas Llosa was another great admirer of Flaubert. Apart from \"Perpetual Orgy\", which is solely devoted to Flaubert's art, one can find lucid discussions in Vargas Llosa's \"Letters to a Young Novelist\" (published 2003). In a public lecture in May 1966 at the Kaufmann Art Gallery in New York, Marshall McLuhan claimed: \"I derived all my knowledge of media from people like Flaubert and Rimbaud and Baudelaire.\"\nOn the occasion of Flaubert's 198th birthday (12 December 2019), a group of researchers at CNRS published a neural language model under his name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12308", "revid": "45815995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12308", "title": "Gregory Chaitin", "text": "Argentine-American mathematician\nGregory John Chaitin ( ; born 25 June 1947) is an Argentine-American mathematician and computer scientist. Beginning in the late 1960s, Chaitin made contributions to algorithmic information theory and metamathematics, in particular a computer-theoretic result equivalent to G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem. He is considered to be one of the founders of what is today known as algorithmic (Solomonoff\u2013Kolmogorov\u2013Chaitin, Kolmogorov or program-size) complexity together with Andrei Kolmogorov and Ray Solomonoff. Along with the works of e.g. Solomonoff, Kolmogorov, Martin-L\u00f6f, and Leonid Levin, algorithmic information theory became a foundational part of theoretical computer science, information theory, and mathematical logic. It is a common subject in several computer science curricula. Besides computer scientists, Chaitin's work draws attention of many philosophers and mathematicians to fundamental problems in mathematical creativity and digital philosophy.\nMathematics and computer science.\nGregory Chaitin is Jewish. He attended the Bronx High School of Science and the City College of New York, where he (still in his teens) developed the theory that led to his independent discovery of algorithmic complexity.\nIn 1975 Chaitin defined Chaitin's constant \u03a9, a real number whose digits are equidistributed and which is sometimes informally described as an expression of the probability that a random program will halt. \u03a9 has the mathematical property that it is definable, with asymptotic approximations from below (but not from above), but not computable.\nChaitin is also the originator of using graph coloring to do register allocation in compiling, a process known as Chaitin's algorithm.\nHe was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center in New York, where he wrote more than 10 books that have been translated into about 15 languages. \nAfterwards Chaitin became interested in questions of metabiology and information-theoretic formalizations of the theory of evolution, and he was one of the founding members of the Institute for Advanced Studies at Mohammed VI Polytechnic University in Morocco.\nOther scholarly contributions.\nChaitin also writes about philosophy, especially metaphysics and philosophy of mathematics (particularly about epistemological matters in mathematics). In metaphysics, Chaitin claims that algorithmic information theory is the key to solving problems in the field of biology (obtaining a formal definition of 'life', its origin and evolution) and neuroscience (the problem of consciousness and the study of the mind).\nIn recent writings, he defends a position known as digital philosophy. In the epistemology of mathematics, he claims that his findings in mathematical logic and algorithmic information theory show there are \"mathematical facts that are true for no reason, that are true by accident\". Chaitin proposes that mathematicians must abandon any hope of proving those mathematical facts and adopt a quasi-empirical methodology.\nHonors.\nIn 1995 he was given the degree of doctor of science \"honoris causa\" by the University of Maine. In 2002 he was given the title of honorary professor by the University of Buenos Aires in Argentina, where his parents were born and where Chaitin spent part of his youth. In 2007 he was given a Leibniz Medal by Wolfram Research; the medal was designed by Stephen Wolfram and https://, using Chaitin\u2019s number calculated by Cristian Calude. In 2009 he was given the degree of doctor of philosophy \"honoris causa\" by the National University of C\u00f3rdoba. He was formerly a researcher at IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center and a professor at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12309", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12309", "title": "Goran Bregovi\u0107", "text": "Bosnian musician and composer (born 1950)\nGoran Bregovi\u0107 (; born 22 March 1950) is a recording artist from Bosnia and Herzegovina. He is one of the most internationally known modern musicians and composers of the Slavic speaking countries in the Balkans, and one of the few former Yugoslav musicians who have performed at major international venues such as Carnegie Hall, Royal Albert Hall and L'Olympia.\nA Sarajevo native, Bregovi\u0107 started out with the bands Kodeksi and Jutro, but rose to prominence as the main creative mind and lead guitarist of Bijelo Dugme, widely considered one of the most popular and influential recording acts ever to exist in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. After Bijelo Dugme split up, he embarked on several critically and commercially successful solo projects, and started composing film scores. Among his better known film scores are three of Emir Kusturica's films (\"Time of the Gypsies\", \"Arizona Dream\" and \"Underground\"). For \"Time of the Gypsies\", Bregovi\u0107 won a Golden Arena Award at the Pula Film Festival in 1990, among other awards. He has also composed for the Academy Award-nominated film \"La Reine Margot\" and the Cannes-entered film \"The Serpent's Kiss\".\nDuring his five-decade career, Bregovi\u0107 has composed for critically acclaimed singers, including Sezen Aksu, Kayah, Iggy Pop, \u0160aban Bajramovi\u0107, George Dalaras and Ces\u00e1ria \u00c9vora.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Sarajevo, PR Bosnia-Herzegovina, FPR Yugoslavia to a Croatian father Franjo Bregovi\u0107 and Serbian mother Borka Peri\u0161i\u0107, Goran grew up with two younger siblings\u2014brother Predrag and sister Dajana. Their father was from the Croatian region of Prigorje, specifically Sveti Petar \u010cvrstec village near Kri\u017eevci, while their mother was born in Virovitica to parents that had shortly before her birth arrived in the nearby village of \u010cemernica, settling there from the village of Kazanci near Gacko in East Herzegovina.\nGoran's maternal grandfather fought in the Royal Serbian Army at the Salonica front during World War I and as a reward received land in Slavonia, where he soon moved his family. When the Second World War began, Goran's grandfather joined the Yugoslav Partisans, and his grandmother, two uncles, aunt and mother were taken to the Jasenovac concentration camp, where at the gate of the camp they were exchanged for some captured Germans. The family arrived in Serbia whilst his grandmother supported the children throughout the war by smuggling tobacco from Herzegovina. She jumped off the train before entering the Belgrade train station. Goran's maternal uncle was Serb priest and Chetnik leader Radojica Peri\u0161i\u0107 (1906 - April 1945), one of the main leaders of the June 1941 uprising in eastern Herzegovina during World War II. During the war he was commander of the Chetnik Gacko Brigade, who were the first guerrilla force in Nazi-occupied Europe to liberate territory. Peri\u0161i\u0107 was killed by the Usta\u0161e in April 1945.\nFranjo Bregovi\u0107 fought on the Partisan side during World War II. Shortly after the war, he attended a Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) military school in Virovitica, a town where he met Goran's mother, Borka. Franjo Bregovi\u0107 soon landed his first job, teaching ballistics at a military school in Sarajevo, so the couple moved there. Goran, their first child, was born in 1950 in Sarajevo.\nGoran was 10 years old when his parents divorced. In later interviews, he mentioned his father's alcoholism as the reason for the breakdown of their marriage. Soon after the split, his father moved to Livno, taking Goran's younger brother Predrag with him while Goran remained living with his mother in Sarajevo, visiting his father and brother every summer in Livno. Their father soon retired and eventually moved back to his home village in Zagorje while Goran's brother Predrag later moved back to Sarajevo for university studies.\nGoran played violin in a music school. However, deemed untalented, he was thrown out during second grade. His musical education was thus reduced to what his friend taught him until Goran's mother bought him his first guitar in his early teens. Bregovi\u0107 wanted to enroll in a fine arts high school, but his aunt told his mother that it was supposedly full of homosexuals, which precipitated his mother's decision to send him to a technical (traffic) school. As a compromise for not getting his way, she allowed him to grow his hair long.\nEarly career.\nUpon entering high school, teenage Bregovi\u0107 joined the school band Izohipse, where he began on bass guitar. Soon, however, he was kicked out of that school too (this time for misbehavior \u2013 he crashed into a school-owned Mercedes-Benz). Bregovi\u0107 then entered grammar school and its school band Be\u0161tije (again as a bass guitar player). When he was 16, his mother left him and moved to the coast, meaning that other than having a few relatives to rely on, he mostly had to take care of himself. He did that by playing folk music in a kafana in Konjic, working on construction sites, and selling newspapers.\nSpotting him at a Be\u0161tije gig in 1969, \u017deljko Bebek invited eighteen-year-old Bregovi\u0107 to play bass guitar in his band Kodeksi, which Goran gladly accepted.\nKodeksi.\nEventually, Kodeksi shifted setup so Bregovi\u0107 moved from bass to lead guitar, resulting in Kodeksi having the following line-up during summer 1970: Goran Bregovi\u0107, \u017deljko Bebek, Zoran Red\u017ei\u0107 and Mili\u0107 Vuka\u0161inovi\u0107. All of them would eventually become members of Bijelo Dugme at some point in the future. At the time, they were largely influenced by Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. During the fall of 1970, this resulted in the departure of \u017deljko Bebek, who (both as rhythm guitar player and singer) got phased out of the band. At the end of the year, Goran's mother and Zoran's brother arrived in Naples and took them back to Sarajevo.\nJutro.\nIn the autumn of 1971, Bregovi\u0107 enrolled at the University of Sarajevo's Faculty of Philosophy, studying philosophy and sociology. He soon quit, however. At the same time, Mili\u0107 Vuka\u0161inovi\u0107 left for London, so Bregovi\u0107 formed a band with Nuno Arnautali\u0107 called Jutro (Morning), which Red\u017ei\u0107 soon joined as well. Over the next few years, the band changed line-ups frequently, and on 1 January 1974 modified its name to Bijelo Dugme (\"White Button\").\nBijelo Dugme.\nFrom 1974 to 1989, Bregovi\u0107 played lead guitar and was the main creative force behind Bijelo Dugme. For years they stood as one of the most popular bands in SFR Yugoslavia. Just as with Jutro previously, he continued as Bijelo Dugme's undisputed leader and decision-maker as well as its public face in the Yugoslav print and electronic media once the band started taking off commercially.\nOver the band's fifteen-year run, in addition to their enormous popularity at home, led by Bregovi\u0107, Bijelo Dugme made several attempts at expanding their prominence outside of Yugoslavia. In late 1975, while recording their second album, \"\u0160ta bi dao da si na mom mjestu\", in London, they additionally recorded an English language track called \"Playing the Part\" (translated version of their Serbo-Croatian track \"\u0160ta bi dao da si na mom mjestu\", itself an uncredited cover of Argent's 1972 track \"I Am the Dance of Ages\") that was packaged as a promo single for English music journalists. Never officially released for mass distribution, the track quickly fell into oblivion.\nBijelo Dugme had somewhat better luck with touring abroad, which almost entirely took place in the Eastern Bloc countries as part of their respective cultural exchange programs with SFR Yugoslavia. The band briefly toured the Polish People's Republic during April 1977, a 9-concert leg as part of the tour in support of their third album, \"Eto! Ba\u0161 ho\u0107u!\". During their 10-day Polish tour, the band played two concerts on back-to-back nights in Warsaw, followed by Olsztyn, Zielona G\u00f3ra, three shows on back-to-back days in Pozna\u0144, and finally two shows on the same day in Kalisz. While in Poland, they also shot a 30-minute television special for TVP3 Katowice, a regional Katowice-based branch of the state-owned Telewizja Polska. Later that year, following the tour's culmination at a triumphant open-air concert at Hajdu\u010dka \u010cesma in Belgrade, Bregovi\u0107 went to serve his mandatory Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) stint. Assigned to a Ni\u0161-based unit, the twenty-seven-year-old reported for service on 3 November 1977 and would spend the following year away from music, a period during which the band was also on hiatus.\nDuring early 1982, as part of an event bringing together past and future Winter Olympic hosts, the band played in Innsbruck, Austria as representatives of the city of Sarajevo and SFR Yugoslavia, the site of the upcoming Winter Olympics. On return to Yugoslavia from Innsbruck, the band had its baggage confiscated by the Yugoslav customs after undeclared musical equipment was found among their luggage. Some six months later, during summer 1982, Bijelo Dugme went on an impromptu tour of the People's Republic of Bulgaria, playing 41 shows throughout the country from 15 July to 31 August 1982. Despite the tour in support of their latest studio album, \"Do\u017eivjeti stotu\", being over for more than a year, and having no new material to promote, the band reportedly accepted the tour of Bulgaria in order to recover some of the funds they had lost after getting fined by the Yugoslav customs over the attempt to bring undeclared musical equipment into the country.\nIn summer 1985, following a decade of continuous rejection for tours of the Soviet Union by the cultural attach\u00e9 of the Soviet embassy in Yugoslavia, Bijelo Dugme was finally approved and booked to play in Moscow on 28 July 1985, on the same bill with fellow Yugoslav rock act Bajaga i Instruktori, at a huge open-air concert at Gorky Park as part of the 12th World Festival of Youth and Students. Ahead of the show, Bregovi\u0107 decided to sequester the band in Budva for two weeks in order to rehearse for the Moscow show, an indication of the seriousness with which they approached this particular concert. However, once in Moscow, due to overcrowding at Gorky Park and resulting safety concerns, the event was interrupted around 10 p.m. after the Bajaga i Instruktori set before Bijelo Dugme even had a chance to take the stage. Two days later on 30 July 1985, instead at the marquee Gorky Park in central Moscow, Bijelo Dugme got to play the Dynamo Arena on the city outskirts at an unpopular noon time slot.\nGuest appearances, collaborations and business venture.\nBetween Bijelo Dugme's studio releases and tours, in-demand Bregovi\u0107 worked on various side projects in Yugoslavia. These included releasing a solo record in 1976 and composing two movie soundtracks\u20141977's \"Leptirov oblak\" and 1979's \"Li\u010dne stvari\".\nHe also tried his hand at music production, producing Idoli's 1980 seven-inch single \"Malj\u010diki\" / \"Retko te vi\u0111am sa devojkama\" and co-producing, alongside Kornelije Kova\u010d, Zdravko \u010coli\u0107's fourth studio album, \"Malo poja\u010daj radio\", in 1981.\nBregovi\u0107 further made guest appearances on guitar on various studio recordings by different Yugoslav pop, folk, and rock acts: Neda Ukraden's track \"Tri djevojke\" (together with Bijelo Dugme bandmates Vlado Pravdi\u0107 and Zoran Red\u017ei\u0107) off her 1976 album \"Ko me to od nekud doziva\", Hanka Paldum's track \"Zbog tebe\" off her 1980 album \"\u010ce\u017enja\", \"Ne da/ne nego i/ili\" track by Kozmetika off their 1983 eponymous album, Valentino's track \"Pazi na ritam\" off their 1983 debut album \"ValentiNo1\", Riblja \u010corba's track \"Disko mi\u0161i\u0107\" off their 1985 album \"Istina\", Merlin's 1986 album \"Te\u0161ko meni sa tobom (a jo\u0161 te\u017ee bez tebe)\", Mjese\u010dari track \"Gdje izlazi\u0161 ovih dana\" off their 1988 album \"One \u0161etaju od 1 do 2\", and Piloti track \"Tiho, tiho\" off their 1990 album \"Nek te Bog \u010duva za mene\".\nDuring his time leading Bijelo Dugme, Bregovi\u0107 also became involved in the financial and organizational side of the music business. In 1984, dissatisfied with their respective financial terms at the state-owned Jugoton label, Bijelo Dugme bandleader Bregovi\u0107 and one of Yugoslavia's biggest pop stars, Zdravko \u010coli\u0107, got together to establish their own music label Kamarad, which\u2014via a deal with state-owned Diskoton and later another newly established private label Komuna\u2014would end up co-releasing all of Bijelo Dugme's subsequent studio albums including three of \u010coli\u0107's studio albums from 1984 to 1990. Considered an unusual move at the time in a communist country with nearly across-the-board public ownership that had just recently began allowing certain modes of private entrepreneurship, starting a privately owned record label\u2014combined with Bregovi\u0107's and \u010coli\u0107's high public profile in Yugoslavia\u2014got them both a lot of additional attention in the country's press. The company was registered in Radomlje near Dom\u017eale in SR Slovenia. Due to not having its own production facilities and distribution network, the new label entered a co-releasing agreement with Diskoton, thus essentially functioning as the legal entity that holds the licensing rights to the works of Bijelo Dugme and Zdravko \u010coli\u0107. Kamarad's debut co-release was \u010coli\u0107's 1984 studio album \"Ti si mi u krvi\" followed by Bijelo Dugme's self-titled studio album later that year with new vocalist Mladen \"Tifa\" Voji\u010di\u0107. The label would also co-release many of Dugme's and \u010coli\u0107's later best-of compilations in addition to Bregovi\u0107's movie soundtrack albums as well as Vesna Zmijanac's 1992 album \"Ako me umiri\u0161 sad\".\nSolo career.\nDuring the late 1980s, a period that would turn out to be the final years of Bijelo Dugme, Bregovi\u0107 entered the world of film music. His first project was Emir Kusturica's \"Time of the Gypsies\" (1989) and it turned out to be a great success (both the film and the soundtrack). Bregovi\u0107's collaboration with Kusturica continued as the musician composed the soundtrack (which was performed by Iggy Pop) for Kusturica's next film, \"Arizona Dream\" (1993). During the Bosnian War, Bregovi\u0107 relocated to Paris, but also lived in Belgrade. His next major project, music for Patrice Ch\u00e9reau's \"Queen Margot\", was a great success as well, and as a result, the film won two awards on the 1994 Cannes Film Festival. The next year's Golden Palm award went to \"Underground\", for which Goran Bregovi\u0107 composed the music.\nIn 1997, he worked with Turkish singer Sezen Aksu on her album \"D\u00fc\u011f\u00fcn ve Cenaze\" (\"Wedding and Funeral\"). After that album, he continued making composite albums with other musicians that were based on his music and singers' lyrics.\nHe made an album with George Dalaras in 1999 named \"Thessaloniki \u2013 Yannena with Two Canvas Shoes\". In the same year, Bregovi\u0107 recorded an album called \"Kayah i Bregovi\u0107\" (Kayah and Bregovi\u0107) with popular Polish singer Kayah, which sold over 700,000 copies in Poland (seven times platinum record).\nIn 2001, he recorded another album with another Polish singer, Krzysztof Krawczyk, titled \"Daj mi drugie \u017cycie\" (\"Give Me Second Life\").\nIn 2005, Bregovi\u0107 took part in three large farewell concerts of Bijelo Dugme.\nA number of works created by Bregovi\u0107 can be heard on the soundtrack to the 2006 film \"\", most notably \"\u0110ur\u0111evdan\". The film itself actually features more Bregovi\u0107 samples than the soundtrack.\nTwo musical numbers by Bregovi\u0107, \"Ne Siam Kurve Tuke Sijam Prostitutke\" and \"Gas, Gas\", were featured in the soundtrack of the 2012 Brazilian telenovela \"Salve Jorge\", on the television network Rede Globo.\nWedding and Funeral Orchestra.\nFor many years Bregovi\u0107 performed with a large ensemble of musicians: a brass band, bagpipes, a string ensemble, a tuxedo-clad all-male choir from Belgrade, women wearing traditional Bulgarian costumes, and Roma singers make up his 40-piece band and orchestra.\nSince 1998, and until about 2012, Bregovi\u0107 has been performing his music mainly in the form of concerts all over the world with his Wedding and Funeral Orchestra. This consists of 10 people (in the small version) or 37 (in the large version, although, in some instances, this number varies, depending on participants from the host country).\nSince 2012 the orchestra consists of 9 people (in the small version) or 19 (in the large version), as it played in New York at the Lincoln Center on 15 and 16 July 2016.\nThe small orchestra consists of Muharem \"Muki\" Rexhepi (vocals, drums), Bokan Stankovi\u0107 (first trumpet), Dragi\u0107 Veli\u0107ovi\u0107 (second trumpet), Stojan Dimov (sax, clarinet), Aleksandar Rajkovi\u0107 (first trombone, glockenspiel), Milo\u0161 Mihajlovi\u0107 (second trombone), female Bulgarian singers Daniela Radkova-Aleksandrova and Ljudmila Radkova-Trajkova, and Goran himself. \nThe large orchestra includes also string quartet: Ivana Mateij\u0107 (first violin), Bojana Jovanovi\u0107-Joti\u0107 (second violin), Sa\u0161a Mirkovi\u0107 (viola), and Tatjana Jovanovi\u0107-Mirkovi\u0107, as well as sextet of male voices: Dejan Pesi\u0107 (first tenor), Milan Pani\u0107 and Ranko Jovi\u0107 (second tenors), Aleksandar Novakovi\u0107 (baritone), Du\u0161an Ljubinkovi\u0107 and Sini\u0161a Dutina (basses).\nIn previous years, the following musicians have performed in the orchestra: Ogi Radivojevi\u0107 and Alen Ademovi\u0107 (vocals, drums), Dalibor Luki\u0107 (second trumpet), Dejan Manigodi\u0107 (tuba), Vaska Jankovska (vocals).\nIn 2013, as part of his Asia-Pacific tour (including Australia, New Zealand, and Hong Kong), Bregovi\u0107 performed with a string quartet, a male choir, Bulgarian singers and half of a brass band. The other part of the brass band \u2013 including bass and percussions \u2013 were being played from his computer. In 2017, he was a guest artist on Puerto Rican rapper Residente's album \"Residente\" on the song \"El Futuro Es Nuestro\" (Spanish for \"The Future is Ours\").\nEurovision.\nDuring the Eurovision 2008 final in Belgrade Arena, Serbia, he played as the interval act. He also composed the Serbian entry for the Eurovision Song Contest 2010; 'Ovo Je Balkan' sung by Milan Stankovi\u0107.\nMusical style.\nBregovi\u0107's compositions, extending Balkan musical inspirations to innovative extremes, draw upon European classicism and Balkan rhythms.\nBregovi\u0107's music carries Yugoslav, Bulgarian, Romani, Greek, Romanian, Albanian, Italian, Turkish and Polish themes and is a fusion of popular music, with traditional polyphonic music from the Balkans, tango and brass bands.\nPersonal life.\nBregovi\u0107's younger siblings, brother Predrag and sister Dajana, have lived in New York City and Split, respectively. His brother Predrag reportedly also spends time in the Syrmian village of Be\u0161ka in Serbia, where he owns a vineyard. Their sister Dajana Bregovi\u0107-Mari\u0107, a mother of four, died in May 2020 in Split, aged 61.\nMarriage, relationships, and children.\nDuring the early 1970s, from a brief relationship with a Sarajevo-based dancer named Jasenka, Bregovi\u0107's first child, daughter \u017deljka, was born out of wedlock. \u017deljka lives in Austria, where she gave birth to Goran's granddaughter, Bianca.\nWith Bijelo Dugme's mid-1970s breakout commercial success and Bregovi\u0107's increased public profile in Yugoslavia, details of his lifestyle and romantic relationships also became fodder for the country's press. Throughout the late 1970s and early 1980s, various Yugoslav print media outlets documented his high-profile relationship with Serbian model Ljiljana Tica, who reportedly inspired his song \"Bitanga i princeza\" off Bijelo Dugme's eponymous 1979 album.\nIn parallel to his relationship with Tica, Bregovi\u0107 maintained a relationship with D\u017eenana Sud\u017euka, a Bosnian Muslim model 11 years his junior, having reportedly first met her in 1977 when she was sixteen. Eventually, in 1993, Bregovi\u0107 married his long-time girlfriend Sud\u017euka in a civic wedding ceremony held in Paris with film director Emir Kusturica as the groom's best man and longtime Bijelo Dugme backing vocalist Amila Sulejmanovi\u0107 as the bride's maid of honour.\nThe couple has three daughters: Ema (born in March 1995), Una (February 2002), and Lulu (May 2004). Since the early 1990s, when not touring, Bregovi\u0107's primary residence has been in Paris, a city where he got married and his three daughters were born and raised. Additionally, he spends a lot of time in Belgrade, where he does most of his musical work. In a late-2000s interview, answering a question about where his home is, Bregovi\u0107 said: \"If you define 'home' as the place where you keep your winter coat during summer and your swimming trunks during winter, then my home is my Paris apartment\". His daughter Ema graduated from the Saint-Nazaire Fine Arts School in Nantes and became a conceptual artist.\nInjuries.\nOn 12 June 2008, fifty-eight-year-old Bregovi\u0107 sustained a spinal injury in Belgrade, breaking vertebrae by falling four meters from a cherry tree in the garden of his Senjak house. After being medically assessed, his condition was stated to be \"stable without neurological complications.\" Following surgery, he made a quick recovery and, within a month, on 8 and 9 July, held two big concerts in New York City, proving for more than two hours each night his performance skills had not suffered from the accident.\nPolitical views.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt's not accidental that both Bebek and I are members of the Communist League. Being a communist means being politically active and organized. It really gets on my nerves when I hear someone say: 'I feel like a communist, but I'm not a member [of the party]'. A politically inactive communist is not a communist. Only a politically organized communist is a real communist.\n-Bregovi\u0107 in December 1976 on his political activity\nIn 1971, twenty-one-year-old Bregovi\u0107\u2014a student at the University of Sarajevo's Faculty of Philosophy\u2014got accepted into the Yugoslav Communist League (SKJ), the only party in SFR Yugoslavia's political system.\nThroughout the mid-to-late 1970s, by now a famous rock musician in SFR Yugoslavia, Bregovi\u0107 often publicly expressed personal support for the communist ideology while underscoring importance of being active in the party.\nIn 1990\u2014with the dissolution of the SKJ and reinstatement of multi-party political system in Yugoslavia\u2014Bregovi\u0107 expressed public support for Ante Markovi\u0107's Union of Reform Forces of Yugoslavia (SRSJ), a centre-left social-democrat political party opposing ethnic nationalism and advocating for reform of Yugoslav communism into liberal market capitalism. Furthermore, he actively participated in the party's election campaign ahead of the general elections in the SR Bosnia and Herzegovina constituent unit of SFR Yugoslavia, lending his celebrity and contributing to the campaign in creative capacity. Despite securing public support, endorsements, and even active campaign participation from many prominent public figures in SR Bosnia and Herzegovina such as Emir Kusturica, Nele Karajli\u0107, Branko \u0110uri\u0107, etc., the party got only 8.9% of the total vote.\nOn 2 April 1999\u2014a week into the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia\u2014alongside Greek performers George Dalaras, Stavros Kouyioumtzis, and Alkistis Protopsalti as well as a number of others from different parts of the Balkans, Bregovi\u0107 played at an anti-war open-air concert at Thessaloniki's Aristotelous Square.\nIn the years following the Yugoslav Wars and breakup of Yugoslavia, Bregovi\u0107 has described himself as Yugonostalgic. In 2009, he stated: \"Yugoslavia is the intersection of so many worlds: Orthodox, Catholic, Muslim. With music, I don't have to represent anyone, except myself \u2013 because I speak the first language of the world, the one everyone understands: music.\"\nReal estate.\nBregovi\u0107 owns real estate all over the world, but divides most of his time between Belgrade, where he does most of his musical recording work, and Paris, where his spouse lives with their three daughters.\nHe reportedly owns properties in Paris, Istanbul, Belgrade, Zagreb, on Mount Jahorina, and Perast, many of which are used for commercial purposes such as touristic rentals, studio recording, and filming locations.\nIn Belgrade, Bregovi\u0107 owns multiple properties in the upscale Senjak neighbourhood. Some of his Belgrade properties in the neighbourhoods of Senjak and Dedinje were leased out as shooting locations for Serbian television series \"\u017dene sa Dedinja\", \"Dr\u017eavni slu\u017ebenik\", and \"Klan\".\nControversy.\nBregovi\u0107 has frequently been accused of plagiarizing other performers' works, as well as republishing his own previously released material as new.\nEnrico Macias plagiarism lawsuit.\nIn the mid-2000s, French singer-songwriter Enrico Macias reportedly sued Bregovi\u0107 over Bregovi\u0107's song \"In the Deathcar\" off the \"Arizona Dream\" soundtrack album, claiming it plagiarized Macias' song \"Solenzara\". Media outlets in the Balkans reported in 2015 that the French court ruled in Macias' favour, ordering Bregovi\u0107 to pay Macias \u20ac1 million in damages.\nIn response, via a press release distributed to media outlets throughout the Balkans, Bregovi\u0107's representative Svetlana Struni\u0107 claimed that there never was a plagiarism court process against Bregovi\u0107 in France.\nCancellations and entry bans.\n2015 cancelled concert in Poland.\nIn March 2015, Bregovi\u0107 performed a concert in Crimea after it was annexed by Russia in the previous year. The following month, the Life Festival in O\u015bwi\u0119cim, Poland canceled an appearance by Bregovi\u0107, saying that his statements were \"contrary to the values cherished by the Life Festival founders.\"\n2023 denial of entry into Moldova.\nIn August 2023, Bregovi\u0107 was denied from entering Moldova on the grounds of his allegedly open support for the Russian annexation of Crimea and invasion of Ukraine. He intended to play in a music festival in the country.\n2025 Latvia's list of personae non grateae.\nIn April 2025, at the recommendation of Latvia's State Security Service (VDD), Bregovi\u0107 has been put on the list of personae non gratae in Latvia, alongside Russian-Lithuanian singer Kristina Orbakait\u0117. According to the VDD, Bregovi\u0107 has made several appearances in \"occupied Crimea\" since 2014 along with \"frequently expressing his support for the aggressor Russia in public, while spreading discrediting messages against Western countries\".\nBregovi\u0107 responded to the accusations by stating he comes from \"a city marked by war\" and he \"would never support any war or aggression\".\n\"Not all his soundtracks compositions are commercially available.\"\n\"His compilations include soundtracks from different works.\"\nAnnotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12312", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12312", "title": "Gestation", "text": "Period during the carrying of an embryo\nGestation is the period of development during the carrying of an embryo, and later fetus, inside viviparous animals (the embryo develops within the parent). It is typical for mammals, but also occurs for some non-mammals. Mammals during pregnancy can have one or more gestations at the same time, for example in a multiple birth.\nThe time interval of a gestation is called the \"gestation period\". In obstetrics, \"gestational age\" refers to the time since the onset of the last menses, which on average is fertilization age plus two weeks.\nMammals.\nIn mammals, pregnancy begins when a zygote (fertilized ovum) implants in the female's uterus and ends once the fetus leaves the uterus during labor or an abortion (whether induced or spontaneous).\nHumans.\nIn humans, pregnancy can be defined clinically, biochemically or biologically. Clinically, pregnancy starts from first day of the mother's last period. Biochemically, pregnancy starts when a woman's human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels rise above 25 mIU/mL. Biologically, pregnancy starts at implantation of the fertilized egg.\nHuman pregnancy can be divided into three trimesters, each approximately three months long: the first, second, and third trimester. The first trimester is from the last menstrual period through the 13th week, the second trimester is 14th\u201328/29th week, and the third trimester is 29/30th\u201342nd week. Birth normally occurs at a gestational age of about 40 weeks, though it is common for births to occur from 37 to 42 weeks. Labor occurring prior to 37 weeks gestation is considered preterm labor and can result from multiple factors, including previous preterm deliveries.\nPrenatal care is important for the maintenance of a healthy pregnancy and surveillance of related complications. In high-income countries, prenatal care typically involves monthly visits during the first two trimesters, with an increasing number of visits closer to delivery. At these visits, healthcare providers will evaluate a variety of parental and fetal metrics, including fetal growth and heart rate, birth defects, maternal blood pressure, among others.\nAfter birth, health care providers will measure the baby's weight, vital signs, reflexes, head circumference, muscle tone, and posture to help determine the gestational age.\nVarious factors can influence the duration of gestation, including diseases in pregnancy and adequate prenatal care. The rates of morbidity and pre-existing diseases that predispose mothers to life-threatening, pregnancy-related complications in the United States are increasing. Inaccessibility of prenatal care may partially explain this ongoing disparity.\nPlacental mammals.\nDuring gestation in placental mammals, there is a gradual physiological increase in senescence in the maternal decidua (the specialized layer of endometrium that forms the base of the placental bed) and in placental cells. This increase in senescence is associated with a gradual physiological increase in DNA damage during gestation. A positive correlation between the gestation period and maximum lifespan was observed across 740 mammalian species. It was postulated that the rates of DNA damage and senescence may impact the gestation period as well as lifespan.\nNon-mammals.\nIn viviparous animals, the embryo develops inside the body of the mother, as opposed to outside in an egg (oviparity). The mother then gives live birth. The less developed form of viviparity is called ovoviviparity, in which the mother carries embryos inside eggs. Most vipers exhibit ovoviviparity. The more developed form of viviparity is called placental viviparity; mammals are the best example, but it has also evolved independently in other animals, such as in scorpions, some sharks, and in velvet worms. Viviparous offspring live independently and require an external food supply from birth. Certain lizards also employ this method such as the genera \"Tiliqua\" and \"Corucia.\" The placenta is attached directly to the mother in these lizards which is called viviparous matrotrophy.\nOvoviviparous animals develop within eggs that remain within the mother's body up until they hatch or are about to hatch. It is similar to viviparity in that the embryo develops within the mother's body. Unlike the embryos of viviparous species, ovoviviparous embryos are nourished by the egg yolk rather than by the mother's body. However, the mother's body does provide gas exchange. The young of ovoviviparous amphibians are sometimes born as larvae, and undergo metamorphosis outside the body of the mother.\nThe fish family Syngnathidae has the unique characteristic whereby females lay their eggs in a brood pouch on the male's chest, and the male incubates the eggs. Fertilization may take place in the pouch or before implantation in the water. Included in Syngnathidae are seahorses, the pipefish, and the weedy and leafy sea dragons. Syngnathidae is the only family in the animal kingdom to which the term \"male pregnancy\" has been applied.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12313", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12313", "title": "GNU General Public Licence", "text": ""}
{"id": "12316", "revid": "2707674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12316", "title": "Gamma function", "text": "Extension of the factorial function\nIn mathematics, the gamma function (represented by \u0393, capital Greek letter gamma) is the most common extension of the factorial function to complex numbers. Derived by Daniel Bernoulli, the gamma function formula_1 is defined for all complex numbers formula_2 except non-positive integers, and formula_3 for every positive integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The gamma function can be defined via a convergent improper integral for complex numbers with positive real part:\nformula_4The gamma function then is defined in the complex plane as the analytic continuation of this integral function: it is a meromorphic function which is holomorphic except at zero and the negative integers, where it has simple poles.\nThe gamma function has no zeros, so the reciprocal gamma function is an entire function. In fact, the gamma function corresponds to the Mellin transform of the negative exponential function:\nformula_5\nOther extensions of the factorial function do exist, but the gamma function is the most popular and useful. It appears as a factor in various probability-distribution functions and other formulas in the fields of probability, statistics, analytic number theory, and combinatorics.\nMotivation.\nThe gamma function can be seen as a solution to the interpolation problem of finding a smooth curve formula_6 that connects the points of the factorial sequence: formula_7 for all positive integer values of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The simple formula for the factorial, \"x\"! = 1 \u00d7 2 \u00d7 \u22ef \u00d7 \"x\" is only valid when x is a positive integer, and no elementary function has this property, but a good solution is the gamma function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe gamma function is not only smooth but analytic (except at the non-positive integers), and it can be defined in several explicit ways. However, it is not the only analytic function that extends the factorial, as one may add any analytic function that is zero on the positive integers, such as formula_8 for an integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Such a function is known as a pseudogamma function, the most famous being the Hadamard function.\nA more restrictive requirement is the functional equation which interpolates the shifted factorial formula_9 :\nformula_10\nBut this still does not give a unique solution, since it allows for multiplication by any periodic function formula_11 with formula_12 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, such as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nOne way to resolve the ambiguity is the Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem, which shows that formula_13 is the unique interpolating function for the factorial, defined over the positive reals, which is logarithmically convex, meaning that formula_14 is convex.\nDefinition.\nMain definition.\nThe notation formula_15 is due to Legendre. If the real part of the complex number\u00a0z is strictly positive (formula_16), then the integral\nformula_17\nconverges absolutely, and is known as the Euler integral of the second kind. (Euler's integral of the first kind is the beta function.) \nThe value formula_18 can be calculated as:\nformula_19\nUsing integration by parts, one sees that:\nformula_20\nRecognizing that formula_21 as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (so long as formula_16) and as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_23\nThus we have shown that formula_3 for any positive integer n by induction.\nThe identity formula_25 can be used (or, yielding the same result, analytic continuation can be used) to uniquely extend the integral formulation for formula_15 to a meromorphic function defined for all complex numbers z, except integers less than or equal to zero. It is this extended version that is commonly referred to as the gamma function.\nAlternative definitions.\nThere are many equivalent definitions.\nEuler's definition as an infinite product.\nFor a fixed integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, as the integer formula_27 increases, we have that\nformula_28\nIf formula_29 is not an integer then this equation is meaningless since, in this section, the factorial of a non-integer has not been defined yet. However, in order to define the Gamma function for non-integers, let us assume that this equation continues to hold when formula_29 is replaced by an arbitrary complex number &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_31\nMultiplying both sides by formula_32 gives\nformula_33This infinite product, which is due to Euler, converges for all complex numbers formula_2 except the non-positive integers, which fail because of a division by zero. In fact, the above assumption produces a unique definition of formula_1 as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIntuitively, this formula indicates that formula_1 is approximately the result of computing formula_37 for some large integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, multiplying by formula_38 to approximate &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and then using the relationship formula_39 backwards formula_40 times to get an approximation for formula_1; and furthermore that this approximation becomes exact as formula_27 increases to infinity.\nThe infinite product for the reciprocal\nformula_43\nis an entire function, converging for every complex number z.\nWeierstrass's definition.\nThe definition for the gamma function due to Weierstrass is also valid for all complex numbers\u00a0formula_2 except non-positive integers:\nformula_45\nwhere formula_46 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant. This is the Hadamard product of formula_47 in a rewritten form.\nProperties.\nGeneral.\nBesides the fundamental property discussed above:\nformula_48\nother important functional equations for the gamma function are Euler's reflection formula\nformula_49\nwhich implies\nformula_50\nand the Legendre duplication formula\nformula_51\nThe duplication formula is a special case of the multiplication theorem (see\u00a0 Eq.\u00a05.5.6):\nformula_52\nA simple but useful property, which can be seen from the limit definition, is:\nformula_53\nIn particular, with \"z\" = \"a\" + \"bi\", this product is\nformula_54\nIf the real part is an integer or a half-integer, this can be finitely expressed in closed form:\nformula_55\nPerhaps the best-known value of the gamma function at a non-integer argument is\nformula_56\nwhich can be found by setting formula_57 in the reflection formula, by using the relation to the beta function given below with &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, or simply by making the substitution formula_58 in the integral definition of the gamma function, resulting in a Gaussian integral. In general, for non-negative integer values of formula_27 we have:\nformula_60\nwhere the double factorial &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. See Particular values of the gamma function for calculated values.\nIt might be tempting to generalize the result that formula_61 by looking for a formula for other individual values formula_62 where formula_63 is rational, especially because according to Gauss's digamma theorem, it is possible to do so for the closely related digamma function at every rational value. However, these numbers formula_62 are not known to be expressible by themselves in terms of elementary functions. It has been proved that formula_65 is a transcendental number and algebraically independent of formula_66 for any integer formula_27 and each of the fractions formula_68. In general, when computing values of the gamma function, we must settle for numerical approximations.\nThe derivatives of the gamma function are described in terms of the polygamma function,\u00a0\"\u03c8\"(0)(\"z\"):\nformula_69\nFor a positive integer\u00a0m the derivative of the gamma function can be calculated as follows:\nformula_70\nwhere H(m) is the mth harmonic number and \u03b3 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.\nFor formula_71 the formula_27th derivative of the gamma function is:\nformula_73\nUsing the identity\nformula_74\nwhere formula_75 is the Riemann zeta function, and formula_76 is the formula_27-th Bell polynomial, we have in particular the Laurent series expansion of the gamma function \nformula_78\nInequalities.\nWhen restricted to the positive real numbers, the gamma function is a strictly logarithmically convex function. This property may be stated in any of the following three equivalent ways:\nThe last of these statements is, essentially by definition, the same as the statement that formula_89, where formula_90 is the polygamma function of order 1. To prove the logarithmic convexity of the gamma function, it therefore suffices to observe that formula_90 has a series representation which, for positive real x, consists of only positive terms.\nLogarithmic convexity and Jensen's inequality together imply, for any positive real numbers formula_92 and formula_93,\nformula_94\nThere are also bounds on ratios of gamma functions. The best-known is Gautschi's inequality, which says that for any positive real number x and any \"s\" \u2208 (0, 1),\nformula_95\nStirling's formula.\nThe behavior of formula_96 for an increasing positive real variable is given by Stirling's formula\nformula_97\nwhere the symbol formula_98 means asymptotic convergence: the ratio of the two sides converges to 1 in the limit This growth is faster than exponential, formula_99, for any fixed value of formula_100.\nAnother useful limit for asymptotic approximations for formula_101 is:\nformula_102\nWhen writing the error term as an infinite product, Stirling's formula can be used to define the gamma function: \nformula_103\nExtension to negative, non-integer values.\nAlthough the main definition of the gamma function\u2014the Euler integral of the second kind\u2014is only valid (on the real axis) for positive arguments, its domain can be extended with analytic continuation to negative arguments by shifting the negative argument to positive values by using either the Euler's reflection formula,\nformula_104\nor the fundamental property,\nformula_105\nwhen formula_106.\nFor example,\nformula_107\nResidues.\nThe behavior for non-positive formula_2 is more intricate. Euler's integral does not converge for formula_109, but the function it defines in the positive complex half-plane has a unique analytic continuation to the negative half-plane. One way to find that analytic continuation is to use Euler's integral for positive arguments and extend the domain to negative numbers by repeated application of the recurrence formula,\nformula_110\nchoosing formula_27 such that formula_112 is positive. The product in the denominator is zero when formula_2 equals any of the integers formula_114. Thus, the gamma function must be undefined at those points to avoid division by zero; it is a meromorphic function with simple poles at the non-positive integers.\nFor a function formula_115 of a complex variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, at a simple pole &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the residue of formula_115 is given by:\nformula_117\nFor the simple pole formula_118, the recurrence formula can be rewritten as:\nformula_119\nThe numerator at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is\nformula_120\nand the denominator\nformula_121\nSo the residues of the gamma function at those points are:\nformula_122The gamma function is non-zero everywhere along the real line, although it comes arbitrarily close to zero as \"z\" \u2192 \u2212\u221e. There is in fact no complex number formula_2 for which formula_124, and hence the reciprocal gamma function formula_125 is an entire function, with zeros at formula_126.\nMinima and maxima.\nOn the real line, the gamma function has a local minimum at \"z\"min \u2248 where it attains the value \u0393(\"z\"min) \u2248. The gamma function rises to either side of this minimum. The solution to \u0393(\"z\" \u2212 0.5) = \u0393(\"z\" + 0.5) is \"z\" = +1.5 and the common value is \u0393(1) = \u0393(2) = +1. The positive solution to \u0393(\"z\" \u2212 1) = \u0393(\"z\" + 1) is \"z\" = \"\u03c6\" \u2248 +1.618, the golden ratio, and the common value is \u0393(\"\u03c6\" \u2212 1) = \u0393(\"\u03c6\" + 1) = \"\u03c6\"! \u2248.\nThe gamma function must alternate sign between its poles at the non-positive integers because the product in the forward recurrence contains an odd number of negative factors if the number of poles between formula_2 and formula_112 is odd, and an even number if the number of poles is even. The values at the local extrema of the gamma function along the real axis between the non-positive integers are:\n \u0393() =,\n \u0393() =,\n \u0393() =,\n \u0393() =,\n \u0393() =, etc.\nIntegral representations.\nThere are many formulas, besides the Euler integral of the second kind, that express the gamma function as an integral. For instance, when the real part of z is positive,\nformula_129\nand\nformula_130\nformula_131\nwhere the three integrals respectively follow from the substitutions formula_132, formula_133 and formula_134 in Euler's second integral. The last integral in particular makes clear the connection between the gamma function at half integer arguments and the Gaussian integral: if formula_135 we get\nformula_136\nBinet's first integral formula for the gamma function states that, when the real part of z is positive, then:\nformula_137\nThe integral on the right-hand side may be interpreted as a Laplace transform. That is,\nformula_138\nBinet's second integral formula states that, again when the real part of z is positive, then:\nformula_139\nLet C be a Hankel contour, meaning a path that begins and ends at the point \u221e on the Riemann sphere, whose unit tangent vector converges to \u22121 at the start of the path and to 1 at the end, which has winding number 1 around 0, and which does not cross [0, \u221e). Fix a branch of formula_140 by taking a branch cut along [0, \u221e) and by taking formula_140 to be real when t is on the negative real axis. Assume z is not an integer. Then Hankel's formula for the gamma function is:\nformula_142\nwhere formula_143 is interpreted as formula_144. The reflection formula leads to the closely related expression\nformula_145\nagain valid whenever z is not an integer.\nContinued fraction representation.\nThe gamma function can also be represented by a sum of two continued fractions:\nformula_146\nwhere formula_147.\nFourier series expansion.\nThe logarithm of the gamma function has the following Fourier series expansion for formula_148\nformula_149\nwhich was for a long time attributed to Ernst Kummer, who derived it in 1847. However, Iaroslav Blagouchine discovered that Carl Johan Malmsten first derived this series in 1842.\nRaabe's formula.\nIn 1840 Joseph Ludwig Raabe proved that\nformula_150\nIn particular, if formula_151 then\nformula_152\nThe latter can be derived taking the logarithm in the above multiplication formula, which gives an expression for the Riemann sum of the integrand. Taking the limit for formula_153 gives the formula.\nPi function.\nAn alternative notation introduced by Gauss is the formula_154-function, a shifted version of the gamma function:\nformula_155\nso that formula_156 for every non-negative integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nUsing the pi function, the reflection formula is:\nformula_157\nusing the normalized sinc function; while the multiplication theorem becomes:\nformula_158\nThe shifted reciprocal gamma function is sometimes denoted &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, an entire function.\nThe volume of an n-ellipsoid with radii \"r\"1, ..., \"r\"\"n\" can be expressed as\nformula_159\nParticular values.\nIncluding up to the first 20 digits after the decimal point, some particular values of the gamma function are:\nformula_170\nThe complex-valued gamma function is undefined for non-positive integers, but in these cases the value can be defined in the Riemann sphere as \u221e. The reciprocal gamma function is well defined and analytic at these values (and in the entire complex plane):\nformula_171\nLog-gamma function.\nBecause the gamma and factorial functions grow so rapidly for moderately large arguments, many computing environments include a function that returns the natural logarithm of the gamma function, often given the name codice_1 or codice_2 in programming environments or codice_3 in spreadsheets. This grows much more slowly, and for combinatorial calculations allows adding and subtracting logarithmic values instead of multiplying and dividing very large values. It is often defined as\nformula_172\nThe digamma function, which is the derivative of this function, is also commonly seen.\nIn the context of technical and physical applications, e.g. with wave propagation, the functional equation\nformula_173\nis often used since it allows one to determine function values in one strip of width 1 in z from the neighbouring strip. In particular, starting with a good approximation for a\u00a0z with large real part one may go step by step down to the desired\u00a0z. Following an indication of Carl Friedrich Gauss, Rocktaeschel (1922) proposed for log\u0393(\"z\") an approximation for large Re(\"z\"):\nformula_174\nThis can be used to accurately approximate log\u0393(\"z\") for z with a smaller Re(\"z\") via (P.E.B\u00f6hmer, 1939)\nformula_175\nA more accurate approximation can be obtained by using more terms from the asymptotic expansions of log\u0393(\"z\") and \u0393(\"z\"), which are based on Stirling's approximation.\nformula_176\n as at constant . (See sequences and in the OEIS.)\nIn a more \"natural\" presentation:\nformula_177\n as at constant . (See sequences and in the OEIS.)\nThe coefficients of the terms with \"k\" &gt; 1 of \"z\"1\u2212\"k\" in the last expansion are simply\nformula_178\nwhere the \"Bk\" are the Bernoulli numbers.\nThe gamma function also has Stirling Series (derived by Charles Hermite in 1900) equal to\nformula_179\nProperties.\nThe Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem states that among all functions extending the factorial functions to the positive real numbers, only the gamma function is log-convex, that is, its natural logarithm is convex on the positive real axis. Another characterisation is given by the Wielandt theorem.\nThe gamma function is the unique function that simultaneously satisfies\nIn a certain sense, the log-gamma function is the more natural form; it makes some intrinsic attributes of the function clearer. A striking example is the Taylor series of log\u0393 around 1:\nformula_184\nwith \"\u03b6\"(\"k\") denoting the Riemann zeta function at k.\nSo, using the following property:\nformula_185\nan integral representation for the log-gamma function is:\nformula_186\nor, setting \"z\" = 1 to obtain an integral for \u03b3, we can replace the \u03b3 term with its integral and incorporate that into the above formula, to get:\nformula_187\nThere also exist special formulas for the logarithm of the gamma function for rational z.\nFor instance, if formula_188 and formula_27 are integers with formula_190 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then\nformula_191This formula is sometimes used for numerical computation, since the integrand decreases very quickly.\nIntegration over log-gamma.\nThe integral\nformula_192\ncan be expressed in terms of the Barnes G-function (see Barnes G-function for a proof):\nformula_193\nwhere Re(\"z\") &gt; \u22121.\nIt can also be written in terms of the Hurwitz zeta function:\nformula_194\nWhen formula_195 it follows that\nformula_196\nand this is a consequence of Raabe's formula as well. O. Espinosa and V. Moll derived a similar formula for the integral of the square of formula_197:\nformula_198\nwhere formula_199 is formula_200.\nD. H. Bailey and his co-authors gave an evaluation for\nformula_201\nwhen formula_202 in terms of the Tornheim\u2013Witten zeta function and its derivatives.\nIn addition, it is also known that\nformula_203\nApproximations.\nComplex values of the gamma function can be approximated using Stirling's approximation or the Lanczos approximation,\nformula_204\nThis is precise in the sense that the ratio of the approximation to the true value approaches 1 in the limit as goes to infinity.\nThe gamma function can be computed to fixed precision for formula_205 by applying integration by parts to Euler's integral. For any positive number\u00a0x the gamma function can be written\nformula_206\nWhen Re(\"z\") \u2208 [1,2] and formula_207, the absolute value of the last integral is smaller than formula_208. By choosing a large enough &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, this last expression can be made smaller than formula_209 for any desired value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Thus, the gamma function can be evaluated to formula_210 bits of precision with the above series.\nA fast algorithm for calculation of the Euler gamma function for any algebraic argument (including rational) was constructed by E.A. Karatsuba.\nFor arguments that are integer multiples of , the gamma function can also be evaluated quickly using arithmetic\u2013geometric mean iterations (see particular values of the gamma function).\nPractical implementations.\nUnlike many other functions, such as a Normal Distribution, no obvious fast, accurate implementation that is easy to implement for the Gamma Function formula_1 is easily found. Therefore, it is worth investigating potential solutions. For the case that speed is more important than accuracy, published tables for formula_1 are easily found in an Internet search, such as the Online Wiley Library. Such tables may be used with linear interpolation. Greater accuracy is obtainable with the use of cubic interpolation at the cost of more computational overhead. Since formula_1 tables are usually published for argument values between 1 and 2, the property formula_214 may be used to quickly and easily translate all real values formula_215 and formula_216 into the range formula_217, such that only tabulated values of formula_2 between 1 and 2 need be used.\nIf interpolation tables are not desirable, then the Lanczos approximation mentioned above works well for 1 to 2 digits of accuracy for small, commonly used values of z. If the Lanczos approximation is not sufficiently accurate, the Stirling's formula for the Gamma Function may be used.\nApplications.\nOne author describes the gamma function as \"Arguably, the most common special function, or the least 'special' of them. The other transcendental functions [...] are called 'special' because you could conceivably avoid some of them by staying away from many specialized mathematical topics. On the other hand, the gamma function \u0393(\"z\") is most difficult to avoid.\"\nIntegration problems.\nThe gamma function finds application in such diverse areas as quantum physics, astrophysics and fluid dynamics. The gamma distribution, which is formulated in terms of the gamma function, is used in statistics to model a wide range of processes; for example, the time between occurrences of earthquakes.\nThe primary reason for the gamma function's usefulness in such contexts is the prevalence of expressions of the type formula_219 which describe processes that decay exponentially in time or space. Integrals of such expressions can occasionally be solved in terms of the gamma function when no elementary solution exists. For example, if f is a power function and g is a linear function, a simple change of variables formula_220 gives the evaluation\nformula_221\nThe fact that the integration is performed along the entire positive real line might signify that the gamma function describes the cumulation of a time-dependent process that continues indefinitely, or the value might be the total of a distribution in an infinite space.\nIt is of course frequently useful to take limits of integration other than 0 and \u221e to describe the cumulation of a finite process, in which case the ordinary gamma function is no longer a solution; the solution is then called an incomplete gamma function. (The ordinary gamma function, obtained by integrating across the entire positive real line, is sometimes called the \"complete gamma function\" for contrast.)\nAn important category of exponentially decaying functions is that of Gaussian functions\nformula_222\nand integrals thereof, such as the error function. There are many interrelations between these functions and the gamma function; notably, the factor formula_223 obtained by evaluating formula_224 is the \"same\" as that found in the normalizing factor of the error function and the normal distribution.\nThe integrals discussed so far involve transcendental functions, but the gamma function also arises from integrals of purely algebraic functions. In particular, the arc lengths of ellipses and of the lemniscate, which are curves defined by algebraic equations, are given by elliptic integrals that in special cases can be evaluated in terms of the gamma function. The gamma function can also be used to calculate \"volume\" and \"area\" of n-dimensional hyperspheres.\nCalculating products.\nThe gamma function's ability to generalize factorial products immediately leads to applications in many areas of mathematics; in combinatorics, and by extension in areas such as probability theory and the calculation of power series. Many expressions involving products of successive integers can be written as some combination of factorials, the most important example perhaps being that of the binomial coefficient. For example, for any complex numbers z and n, with , we can write\nformula_225\nwhich closely resembles the binomial coefficient when n is a non-negative integer,\nformula_226\nThe example of binomial coefficients motivates why the properties of the gamma function when extended to negative numbers are natural. A binomial coefficient gives the number of ways to choose k elements from a set of n elements; if \"k\" &gt; \"n\", there are of course no ways. If \"k\" &gt; \"n\", (\"n\" \u2212 \"k\")! is the factorial of a negative integer and hence infinite if we use the gamma function definition of factorials\u2014dividing by infinity gives the expected value of 0.\nWe can replace the factorial by a gamma function to extend any such formula to the complex numbers. Generally, this works for any product wherein each factor is a rational function of the index variable, by factoring the rational function into linear expressions. If P and Q are monic polynomials of degree m and n with respective roots \"p\"1, ..., \"pm\" and \"q\"1, ..., \"qn\", we have\nformula_227\nIf we have a way to calculate the gamma function numerically, it is very simple to calculate numerical values of such products. The number of gamma functions in the right-hand side depends only on the degree of the polynomials, so it does not matter whether \"b\" \u2212 \"a\" equals 5 or 105. By taking the appropriate limits, the equation can also be made to hold even when the left-hand product contains zeros or poles.\nBy taking limits, certain rational products with infinitely many factors can be evaluated in terms of the gamma function as well. Due to the Weierstrass factorization theorem, analytic functions can be written as infinite products, and these can sometimes be represented as finite products or quotients of the gamma function. We have already seen one striking example: the reflection formula essentially represents the sine function as the product of two gamma functions. Starting from this formula, the exponential function as well as all the trigonometric and hyperbolic functions can be expressed in terms of the gamma function.\nMore functions yet, including the hypergeometric function and special cases thereof, can be represented by means of complex contour integrals of products and quotients of the gamma function, called Mellin\u2013Barnes integrals.\nAnalytic number theory.\nAn application of the gamma function is the study of the Riemann zeta function. A fundamental property of the Riemann zeta function is its functional equation:\nformula_228\nAmong other things, this provides an explicit form for the analytic continuation of the zeta function to a meromorphic function in the complex plane and leads to an immediate proof that the zeta function has infinitely many so-called \"trivial\" zeros on the real line. Borwein \"et al.\" call this formula \"one of the most beautiful findings in mathematics\". Another contender for that title might be\nformula_229\nBoth formulas were derived by Bernhard Riemann in his seminal 1859 paper \"Ueber die Anzahl der Primzahlen unter einer gegebenen Gr\u00f6\u00dfe\" (\"On the Number of Primes Less Than a Given Magnitude\"), one of the milestones in the development of analytic number theory\u2014the branch of mathematics that studies prime numbers using the tools of mathematical analysis.\nHistory.\nThe gamma function has caught the interest of some of the most prominent mathematicians of all time. Its history, notably documented by Philip J. Davis in an article that won him the 1963 Chauvenet Prize, reflects many of the major developments within mathematics since the 18th century. In the words of Davis, \"each generation has found something of interest to say about the gamma function. Perhaps the next generation will also.\"\n18th century: Euler and Stirling.\nThe problem of extending the factorial to non-integer arguments was apparently first considered by Daniel Bernoulli and Christian Goldbach in the 1720s. In particular, in a letter from Bernoulli to Goldbach dated 6 October 1729 Bernoulli introduced the product representation\nformula_230\nwhich is well defined for real values of x other than the negative integers.\nLeonhard Euler later gave two different definitions: the first was not his integral but an infinite product that is well defined for all complex numbers n other than the negative integers,\nformula_231\nof which he informed Goldbach in a letter dated 13 October 1729. He wrote to Goldbach again on 8 January 1730, to announce his discovery of the integral representation\nformula_232\nwhich is valid when the real part of the complex number n is strictly greater than \u22121 (i.e., formula_233). By the change of variables \"t\" = \u2212ln \"s\", this becomes the familiar Euler integral. Euler published his results in the paper \"De progressionibus transcendentibus seu quarum termini generales algebraice dari nequeunt\" (\"On transcendental progressions, that is, those whose general terms cannot be given algebraically\"), submitted to the St. Petersburg Academy on 28 November 1729. Euler further discovered some of the gamma function's important functional properties, including the reflection formula.\nJames Stirling, a contemporary of Euler, also attempted to find a continuous expression for the factorial and came up with what is now known as Stirling's formula. Although Stirling's formula gives a good estimate of \"n\"!, also for non-integers, it does not provide the exact value. Extensions of his formula that correct the error were given by Stirling himself and by Jacques Philippe Marie Binet.\n19th century: Gauss, Weierstrass and Legendre.\nCarl Friedrich Gauss rewrote Euler's product as\nformula_234\nand used this formula to discover new properties of the gamma function. Although Euler was a pioneer in the theory of complex variables, he does not appear to have considered the factorial of a complex number, as instead Gauss first did. Gauss also proved the multiplication theorem of the gamma function and investigated the connection between the gamma function and elliptic integrals.\nKarl Weierstrass further established the role of the gamma function in complex analysis, starting from yet another product representation,\nformula_235\nwhere \u03b3 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant. Weierstrass originally wrote his product as one for , in which case it is taken over the function's zeros rather than its poles. Inspired by this result, he proved what is known as the Weierstrass factorization theorem\u2014that any entire function can be written as a product over its zeros in the complex plane; a generalization of the fundamental theorem of algebra.\nThe name gamma function and the symbol \u0393 were introduced by Adrien-Marie Legendre around 1811; Legendre also rewrote Euler's integral definition in its modern form. Although the symbol is an upper-case Greek gamma, there is no accepted standard for whether the function name should be written \"gamma function\" or \"Gamma function\" (some authors simply write \"\u0393-function\"). The alternative \"pi function\" notation \u03a0(\"z\") = \"z\"! due to Gauss is sometimes encountered in older literature, but Legendre's notation is dominant in modern works.\nIt is justified to ask why we distinguish between the \"ordinary factorial\" and the gamma function by using distinct symbols, and particularly why the gamma function should be normalized to \u0393(\"n\" + 1) = \"n\"! instead of simply using \"\u0393(\"n\") = \"n\"!\". Consider that the notation for exponents, \"xn\", has been generalized from integers to complex numbers \"xz\" without any change. Legendre's motivation for the normalization is not known, and has been criticized as cumbersome by some (the 20th-century mathematician Cornelius Lanczos, for example, called it \"void of any rationality\" and would instead use \"z\"!). Legendre's normalization does simplify some formulae, but complicates others. From a modern point of view, the Legendre normalization of the gamma function is the integral of the additive character \"e\"\u2212\"x\" against the multiplicative character \"xz\" with respect to the Haar measure formula_236 on the Lie group R+. Thus this normalization makes it clearer that the gamma function is a continuous analogue of a Gauss sum.\n19th\u201320th centuries: characterizing the gamma function.\nIt is somewhat problematic that a large number of definitions have been given for the gamma function. Although they describe the same function, it is not entirely straightforward to prove the equivalence. Stirling never proved that his extended formula corresponds exactly to Euler's gamma function; a proof was first given by Charles Hermite in 1900. Instead of finding a specialized proof for each formula, it would be desirable to have a general method of identifying the gamma function.\nOne way to prove equivalence would be to find a differential equation that characterizes the gamma function. Most special functions in applied mathematics arise as solutions to differential equations, whose solutions are unique. However, the gamma function does not appear to satisfy any simple differential equation. Otto H\u00f6lder proved in 1887 that the gamma function at least does not satisfy any \"algebraic\" differential equation by showing that a solution to such an equation could not satisfy the gamma function's recurrence formula, making it a transcendentally transcendental function. This result is known as H\u00f6lder's theorem.\nA definite and generally applicable characterization of the gamma function was not given until 1922. Harald Bohr and Johannes Mollerup then proved what is known as the Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem: that the gamma function is the unique solution to the factorial recurrence relation that is positive and \"logarithmically convex\" for positive z and whose value at 1 is 1 (a function is logarithmically convex if its logarithm is convex). Another characterisation is given by the Wielandt theorem.\nThe Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem is useful because it is relatively easy to prove logarithmic convexity for any of the different formulas used to define the gamma function. Taking things further, instead of defining the gamma function by any particular formula, we can choose the conditions of the Bohr\u2013Mollerup theorem as the definition, and then pick any formula we like that satisfies the conditions as a starting point for studying the gamma function. This approach was used by the Bourbaki group.\nBorwein &amp; Corless review three centuries of work on the gamma function.\nReference tables and software.\nAlthough the gamma function can be calculated virtually as easily as any mathematically simpler function with a modern computer\u2014even with a programmable pocket calculator\u2014this was of course not always the case. Until the mid-20th century, mathematicians relied on hand-made tables; in the case of the gamma function, notably a table computed by Gauss in 1813 and one computed by Legendre in 1825.\nTables of complex values of the gamma function, as well as hand-drawn graphs, were given in \"Tables of Functions With Formulas and Curves\" by Jahnke and Emde, first published in Germany in 1909. According to Michael Berry, \"the publication in J&amp;E of a three-dimensional graph showing the poles of the gamma function in the complex plane acquired an almost iconic status.\"\nThere was in fact little practical need for anything but real values of the gamma function until the 1930s, when applications for the complex gamma function were discovered in theoretical physics. As electronic computers became available for the production of tables in the 1950s, several extensive tables for the complex gamma function were published to meet the demand, including a table accurate to 12 decimal places from the U.S. National Bureau of Standards.\nDouble-precision floating-point implementations of the gamma function and its logarithm are now available in most scientific computing software and special functions libraries, for example TK Solver, Matlab, GNU Octave, and the GNU Scientific Library. The gamma function was also added to the C standard library (math.h). Arbitrary-precision implementations are available in most computer algebra systems, such as Mathematica and Maple. PARI/GP, MPFR and MPFUN contain free arbitrary-precision implementations. In some software calculators, e.g. Windows Calculator and GNOME Calculator, the factorial function returns \u0393(\"x\" + 1) when the input x is a non-integer value.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12317", "revid": "1552971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12317", "title": "Georges Braque", "text": "French painter and sculptor (1882\u20131963)\nGeorges Braque ( ; ; 13 May 1882 \u2013 31 August 1963) was a major 20th-century French painter, collagist, draughtsman, printmaker and sculptor. His most notable contributions were in his alliance with Fauvism from 1905, and the role he played in the development of Cubism. Braque's work between 1908 and 1912 is closely associated with that of his colleague Pablo Picasso. Their respective Cubist works were indistinguishable for many years, yet the quiet nature of Braque was partially eclipsed by the fame and notoriety of Picasso.\nEarly life.\nGeorges Braque was born on 13 May 1882 in Argenteuil, Val-d'Oise. He grew up in Le Havre and trained to be a house painter and decorator like his father and grandfather. However, he also studied artistic painting during evenings at the \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure d'art et design Le Havre-Rouen, previously known as the \u00c9cole sup\u00e9rieure des Arts in Le Havre, from about 1897 to 1899. In Paris, he apprenticed with a decorator and was awarded his certificate in 1902. The next year, he attended the Acad\u00e9mie Humbert, also in Paris, and painted there until 1904. It was here that he met Marie Laurencin and Francis Picabia.\nFauvism.\nBraque's earliest works were impressionistic, but after seeing the work exhibited by the artistic group known as the \"Fauves\" (Beasts) in 1905, he adopted a Fauvist style. The Fauves, a group that included Henri Matisse and Andr\u00e9 Derain among others, used brilliant colors to represent emotional response. Braque worked most closely with the artists Raoul Dufy and Othon Friesz, who shared Braque's hometown of Le Havre, to develop a somewhat more subdued Fauvist style. In 1906, Braque traveled with Friesz to L'Estaque, to Antwerp, and home to Le Havre to paint.\nIn May 1907, he successfully exhibited works of the Fauve style in the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants. The same year, Braque's style began a slow evolution as he became influenced by Paul C\u00e9zanne who had died in 1906 and whose works were exhibited in Paris for the first time in a large-scale, museum-like retrospective in September 1907. The 1907 C\u00e9zanne retrospective at the greatly affected the avant-garde artists of Paris, resulting in the advent of Cubism.\nCubism.\nBraque's paintings of 1908\u20131912 reflected his new interest in geometry and simultaneous perspective. He conducted an intense study of the effects of light and perspective and the technical means that painters use to represent these effects, seeming to question the most standard of artistic conventions. In his village scenes, for example, Braque frequently reduced an architectural structure to a geometric form approximating a cube, yet rendered its shading so that it looked both flat and three-dimensional by fragmenting the image. He showed this in the painting \"Houses at l'Estaque\".\nBeginning in 1909, Braque began to work closely with Pablo Picasso who had been developing a similar proto-Cubist style of painting. At the time, Pablo Picasso was influenced by Gauguin, C\u00e9zanne, African masks and Iberian sculpture while Braque was interested mainly in developing C\u00e9zanne's ideas of multiple perspectives. \"A comparison of the works of Picasso and Braque during 1908 reveals that the effect of his encounter with Picasso was more to accelerate and intensify Braque\u2019s exploration of C\u00e9zanne\u2019s ideas, rather than to divert his thinking in any essential way.\" Braque's essential subject is the ordinary objects he has known practically forever. Picasso celebrates animation, while Braque celebrates contemplation. Thus, the invention of Cubism was a joint effort between Picasso and Braque, then residents of Montmartre, Paris. These artists were the style's main innovators. After meeting in October or November 1907, Braque and Picasso, in particular, began working on the development of Cubism in 1908. Both artists produced paintings of monochromatic color and complex patterns of faceted form, now termed Analytic Cubism.\nA decisive time of its development occurred during the summer of 1911, when Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso painted side by side in C\u00e9ret in the French Pyrenees, each artist producing paintings that are difficult\u2014sometimes virtually impossible\u2014to distinguish from those of the other. In 1912, they began to experiment with collage and Braque invented the \"papier coll\u00e9\" technique.\nOn 14 November 1908, the French art critic Louis Vauxcelles, in his review of Georges Braque's exhibition at Kahnweiler's gallery called Braque a daring man who despises form, \"reducing everything, places and a figures and houses, to geometric schemas, to cubes\".\nVauxcelles, on 25 March 1909, used the terms \"bizarreries cubiques\" (cubic oddities) after seeing a painting by Braque at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants.\nThe term 'Cubism', first pronounced in 1911 with reference to artists exhibiting at the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants, quickly gained wide use but Picasso and Braque did not adopt it initially. Art historian Ernst Gombrich described Cubism as \"the most radical attempt to stamp out ambiguity and to enforce one reading of the picture\u2014that of a man-made construction, a colored canvas.\" The Cubist style spread quickly throughout Paris and then Europe.\nThe two artists' productive collaboration continued and they worked closely together until the beginning of World War I in 1914, when Braque enlisted with the French Army. In May 1915, Braque received a severe head injury in battle at Carency and suffered temporary blindness. He was trepanned, and required a long period of recuperation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The things that Picasso and I said to one another during those years will never be said again, and even if they were, no one would understand them anymore. It was like being roped together on a mountain.\u2014\u200a\nLater work.\nBraque resumed painting in late 1916. Working alone, he began to moderate the harsh abstraction of cubism. He developed a more personal style characterized by brilliant color, textured surfaces, and\u2014after his relocation to the Normandy seacoast\u2014the reappearance of the human figure. He painted many still life subjects during this time, maintaining his emphasis on structure. One example of this is his 1943 work \"Blue Guitar\", which hangs in the Allen Memorial Art Museum. During his recovery he became a close friend of the cubist artist Juan Gris.\nHe continued to work during the remainder of his life, producing a considerable number of paintings, graphics, and sculptures. Braque, along with Matisse, is credited for introducing Pablo Picasso to Fernand Mourlot, and most of the lithographs and book illustrations he himself created during the 1940s and '50s were produced at the Mourlot Studios. In 1952\u201353 he also produced \"The Birds\", a ceiling painting for a room in the Louvre. In 1962 Braque worked with master printmaker Aldo Crommelynck to create his series of etchings and aquatints titled \"L\u2019Ordre des Oiseaux\" (\"The Order of Birds\"), which was accompanied by the poet Saint-John Perse's text.\nBraque died on 31 August 1963 in Paris. A state funeral was held in his honor in the Cour Carr\u00e9e of the Louvre. He is buried in the cemetery of the Church of St. Valery in Varengeville-sur-Mer, Normandy whose windows he designed. Braque's work is in most major museums throughout the world.\nStyle.\nBraque believed that an artist experienced beauty \"\u2026 in terms of volume, of line, of mass, of weight, and through that beauty [he] interpret[s] [his] subjective impression...\" He described \"objects shattered into fragments... [as] a way of getting closest to the object...Fragmentation helped me to establish space and movement in space\". He adopted a monochromatic and neutral color palette in the belief that such a palette would emphasize the subject matter.\nAlthough Braque began his career painting landscapes, during 1908 he, alongside Picasso, discovered the advantages of painting still lifes instead. Braque explained that he\n\"...\u00a0began to concentrate on still lifes, because in the still-life you have a tactile, I might almost say a manual space... This answered to the hankering I have always had to touch things and not merely see them... In tactile space you measure the distance separating you from the object, whereas in visual space you measure the distance separating things from each other. This is what led me, long ago, from landscape to still-life\" A still life was also more accessible, in relation to perspective, than landscape, and permitted the artist to see the multiple perspectives of the object. Braque's early interest in still lifes revived during the 1930s.\nDuring the period between the wars, Braque exhibited a freer, more relaxed style of Cubism, intensifying his color use and a looser rendering of objects. However, he still remained committed to the cubist method of simultaneous perspective and fragmentation. In contrast to Picasso, who continuously reinvented his style of painting, producing both representational and cubist images, and incorporating surrealist ideas into his work, Braque continued in the Cubist style, producing luminous, other-worldly still life and figure compositions. By the time of his death in 1963, he was regarded as one of the elder statesmen of the School of Paris, and of modern art.\n2010 theft.\nOn 20 May 2010, the Mus\u00e9e d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris reported the overnight theft of five paintings from its collection. The paintings taken were \"Le pigeon aux petits pois\" (\"The Pigeon with the Peas\") by Pablo Picasso, \"La Pastorale\" by Henri Matisse, \"L'Olivier Pr\u00e8s de l'Estaque\" (\"Olive Tree near Estaque\") by Georges Braque, \"La Femme \u00e0 l'\u00c9ventail\" (\"Woman with a Fan\") by Amedeo Modigliani and \"Nature Morte aux Chandeliers\" (\"Still Life with Chandeliers\") by Fernand L\u00e9ger and were valued at \u20ac100 million (\u00a0$123 million USD). A window had been smashed and CCTV footage showed a masked man taking the paintings. Authorities believe the thief acted alone. The man carefully removed the paintings from their frames, which he left behind.\nReferences and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "12318", "revid": "39088119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12318", "title": "Gilbert Cesbron", "text": "French writer\nGilbert Cesbron (13 January 1913, Paris \u2013 12 August 1979, Paris) was a French novelist.\nBiography.\nGilbert Cesbron (13 January 1913, Paris \u2013 12 August 1979, Paris) was a French novelist. Born in Paris, Cesbron attended what is now known as Lyc\u00e9e Condorcet. In 1944 he published his first novel, \"Les innocents de Paris\" (\"\"The Innocent of Paris\"), in Switzerland. He first achieved wide public acclaim with the publication of \"Notre prison est un royaume\" (\"Our Prison is a Kingdom\") in 1948 and \"Il est minuit, docteur Schweitzer\" (\"It is midnight, Doctor Schweitzer\") in 1950.\nIn his works Cesbron tended to illustrate and describe relevant social topics such as juvenile delinquency in \"Chiens perdus sans collier\" (\"Lost Dogs Without Collars\"), violence in \"Entre chiens et loups\" (\"Between Dogs and Wolves\"), euthanasia in \"Il est plus tard que tu ne penses\" (\"It is Later than You Think\") and working priests in \"Les Saints vont en enfer\" (\"Saints in Hell\"\").\nIn 1955, Cesbron's book \"Chiens perdus sans collier\", the story of an orphan boy and a benevolent judge, was made into a movie starring Jean Gabin and Robert Dalban.\nHe died on 12 August 1979 at his home at 126 Boulevard Saint-Germain in the 6th arrondissement of Paris. He is buried in Bourr\u00e9, Loir-et-Cher. His widow, Dominique, died in 2003.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12323", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12323", "title": "GNU Compiler Collection", "text": "Free and open-source compiler for various programming languages\n \nThe GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) (formerly GNU C Compiler) is a collection of compilers from the GNU Project that support various programming languages, hardware architectures, and operating systems. The Free Software Foundation (FSF) distributes GCC as free software under the GNU General Public License (GNU GPL). GCC is a key component of the GNU toolchain which is used for most projects related to GNU and the Linux kernel. With roughly 15 million lines of code in 2019, GCC is one of the largest free programs in existence. It has played an important role in the growth of free software, as both a tool and an example.\nWhen it was first released in 1987 by Richard Stallman, GCC 1.0 was named the GNU C Compiler since it only handled the C programming language. It was extended to compile C++ in December of that year. Front ends were later developed for Objective-C, Objective-C++, Fortran, Ada, Go, D, Modula-2, Rust and COBOL among others. The OpenMP and OpenACC specifications are also supported in the C and C++ compilers.\nAs well as being the official compiler of the GNU operating system, GCC has been adopted as the standard compiler by many other modern Unix-like computer operating systems, including most Linux distributions. Most BSD family operating systems also switched to GCC shortly after its release, although since then, FreeBSD and Apple macOS have moved to the Clang compiler, largely due to licensing reasons. GCC can also compile code for Windows, Android, iOS, Solaris, HP-UX, AIX, and MS-DOS compatible operating systems.\nGCC has been ported to more platforms and instruction set architectures than any other compiler, and is widely deployed as a tool in the development of both free and proprietary software. GCC is also available for many embedded systems, including ARM-based and Power ISA-based chips.\nHistory.\nIn late 1983, in an effort to bootstrap the GNU operating system, Richard Stallman asked Andrew S. Tanenbaum, the author of the Amsterdam Compiler Kit (also known as the \"Free University\" \"Compiler Kit\"), for permission to use that software for GNU. When Tanenbaum advised him that the compiler was not free, and that only the university was free, Stallman decided to work on a different compiler. His initial plan was to rewrite an existing compiler from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory from Pastel to C with some help from Len Tower and others. Stallman wrote a new C front end for the Livermore compiler, but then realized that it required megabytes of stack space, an impossibility on a 68000 Unix system with only 64\u00a0KB, and concluded he would have to write a new compiler from scratch. None of the Pastel compiler code ended up in GCC, though Stallman did use the C front end he had written.\nGCC was first released March 22, 1987, available by FTP from MIT. Stallman was listed as the author but cited others for their contributions, including Tower for \"parts of the parser, RTL generator, RTL definitions, and of the Vax machine description\", Jack Davidson and Christopher W. Fraser for the idea of using RTL as an intermediate language, and Paul Rubin for writing most of the preprocessor. Described as the \"first free software hit\" by Peter H. Salus, the GNU compiler arrived just at the time when Sun Microsystems was unbundling its development tools from its operating system, selling them separately at a higher combined price than the previous bundle, which led many of Sun's users to buy or download GCC instead of the vendor's tools. While Stallman considered GNU Emacs as his main project, by 1990 GCC supported thirteen computer architectures, was outperforming several vendor compilers, and was used commercially by several companies.\nEGCS fork.\nAs GCC was licensed under the GPL, programmers wanting to work in other directions\u2014particularly those writing interfaces for languages other than C\u2014were free to develop their own fork of the compiler, provided they meet the GPL's terms, including its requirements to distribute source code. Multiple forks proved inefficient and unwieldy, however, and the difficulty in getting work accepted by the official GCC project was greatly frustrating for many, as the project favored stability over new features. The FSF kept such close control on what was added to the official version of GCC 2.x (developed since 1992) that GCC was used as one example of the \"cathedral\" development model in Eric S. Raymond's essay \"The Cathedral and the Bazaar\".\nIn 1997, a group of developers formed the \"Experimental/Enhanced GNU Compiler System (EGCS)\" to merge several experimental forks into a single project. The basis of the merger was a development snapshot of GCC (taken around the 2.7.2 and later followed up to 2.8.1 release). Mergers included g77 (Fortran), PGCC (P5 Pentium-optimized GCC), many C++ improvements, and many new architectures and operating system variants.\nWhile both projects followed each other's changes closely, EGCS development proved considerably more vigorous, so much so that the FSF officially halted development on their GCC 2.x compiler, blessed EGCS as the official version of GCC, and appointed the EGCS project as the GCC maintainers in April 1999. With the release of GCC 2.95 in July 1999 the two projects were once again united. GCC has since been maintained by a varied group of programmers from around the world under the direction of a steering committee.\nGCC 3 (2002) removed a front-end for CHILL due to a lack of maintenance.\nBefore version 4.0 the Fortran front end was codice_1, which only supported FORTRAN 77, but later was dropped in favor of the new GNU Fortran front end that supports Fortran 95 and large parts of Fortran 2003 and Fortran 2008 as well.\nAs of version 4.8, GCC is implemented in C++.\nSupport for Cilk Plus existed from GCC 5 to GCC 7.\nGCC has been ported to a wide variety of instruction set architectures, and is widely deployed as a tool in the development of both free and proprietary software. GCC is also available for many embedded systems, including Symbian (called \"gcce\"), ARM-based, and Power ISA-based chips. The compiler can target a wide variety of platforms, including video game consoles such as the PlayStation 2, Cell SPE of PlayStation 3, and Dreamcast. It has been ported to \"more than 60 platforms\".\nSupported languages.\nAs of the 15.1 release,[ [update]] GCC includes front ends for C (codice_2), C++ (codice_3), Objective-C, Objective-C++, Fortran (codice_4), Ada (GNAT), Go (codice_5), D (codice_6, since 9.1), Modula-2 (codice_7, since 13.1), Rust (codice_8, since 15.1), COBOL (codice_9, since 15.1), and ALGOL 68 (codice_10, since 16.1) programming languages, with the OpenMP and OpenACC parallel language extensions being supported since GCC 5.1. Versions prior to GCC 7 also supported Java (codice_11), allowing compilation of Java to native machine code.\nThird-party front ends exist for many languages, such as Pascal (codice_12), Mercury, Modula-3, VHDL (codice_13) and PL/I. A few experimental branches exist to support additional languages, such as the GCC UPC compiler for Unified Parallel C.\nThe default target for C++ since GCC 16.1 is \"gnu++20\", a superset of C++20, and the default target for C since GCC 15 is \"gnu23\", a superset of C23, with strict standard support also available. GCC also provides experimental support for C2Y, C++23, and C++26.\nDesign.\nGCC's external interface follows Unix conventions. Users invoke a language-specific driver program (codice_2 for C, codice_3 for C++, etc.), which interprets command arguments, calls the actual compiler, runs the assembler on the output, and then optionally runs the linker to produce a complete executable binary.\nEach of the language compilers is a separate program that reads source code and outputs machine code. All have a common internal structure. A per-language front end parses the source code in that language and produces an abstract syntax tree (\"tree\" for short).\nThese are, if necessary, converted to the middle end's input representation, called \"GENERIC\" form; the middle end then gradually transforms the program towards its final form. Compiler optimizations and static code analysis techniques (such as FORTIFY_SOURCE, a compiler directive that attempts to discover some buffer overflows) are applied to the code. These work on multiple representations, mostly the architecture-independent GIMPLE representation and the architecture-dependent RTL representation. Finally, machine code is produced using architecture-specific pattern matching originally based on an algorithm of Jack Davidson and Chris Fraser.\nGCC was written primarily in C except for parts of the Ada front end. The distribution includes the standard libraries for Ada and C++ whose code is mostly written in those languages. On some platforms, the distribution also includes a low-level runtime library, libgcc, written in a combination of machine-independent C and processor-specific machine code, designed primarily to handle arithmetic operations that the target processor cannot perform directly.\nGCC uses many additional tools in its build, many of which are installed by default by many Unix and Linux distributions (but which, normally, aren't present in Windows installations), including Perl, Flex, Bison, and other common tools. In addition, it currently requires three additional libraries to be present in order to build: GMP, MPC, and MPFR.\nIn May 2010, the GCC steering committee decided to allow use of a C++ compiler to compile GCC. The compiler was intended to be written mostly in C plus a subset of features from C++. In particular, this was decided so that GCC's developers could use the destructors and generics features of C++.\nIn August 2012, the GCC steering committee announced that GCC now uses C++ as its implementation language. This means that to build GCC from sources, a C++ compiler is required that understands ISO/IEC C++03 standard.\nOn May 18, 2020, GCC moved away from ISO/IEC C++03 standard to ISO/IEC C++11 standard (i.e. needed to compile, bootstrap, the compiler itself; by default it however compiles later versions of C++).\nFront ends.\nEach front end uses a parser to produce the abstract syntax tree of a given source file. Due to the syntax tree abstraction, source files of any of the different supported languages can be processed by the same back end. GCC started out using LALR parsers generated with Bison, but gradually switched to hand-written recursive-descent parsers for C++ in 2004, and for C and Objective-C in 2006. As of 2021 all front ends use hand-written recursive-descent parsers.\nUntil GCC 4.0, the tree representation of the program was not fully independent of the processor being targeted. The meaning of a tree was somewhat different for different language front ends, and front ends could provide their own tree codes. This was simplified with the introduction of GENERIC and GIMPLE, two new forms of language-independent trees that were introduced with the advent of GCC 4.0. GENERIC is more complex, based on the GCC 3.x Java front end's intermediate representation. GIMPLE is a simplified GENERIC, in which various constructs are \"lowered\" to multiple GIMPLE instructions. The C, C++, and Java front ends produce GENERIC directly in the front end. Other front ends instead have different intermediate representations after parsing and convert these to GENERIC.\nIn either case, the so-called \"gimplifier\" then converts this more complex form into the simpler SSA-based GIMPLE form that is the common language for a large number of language- and architecture-independent global (function scope) optimizations.\nGENERIC and GIMPLE.\n\"GENERIC\" is an intermediate representation language used as a \"middle end\" while compiling source code into executable binaries. A subset, called \"GIMPLE\", is targeted by all the front ends of GCC.\nThe middle stage of GCC does all of the code analysis and optimization, working independently of both the compiled language and the target architecture, starting from the GENERIC representation and expanding it to register transfer language (RTL). The GENERIC representation contains only the subset of the imperative programming constructs optimized by the middle end.\nIn transforming the source code to GIMPLE, complex expressions are split into a three-address code using temporary variables. This representation was inspired by the SIMPLE representation proposed in the McCAT compiler by Laurie J. Hendren for simplifying the analysis and optimization of imperative programs.\nOptimization.\nOptimization can occur during any phase of compilation; however, the bulk of optimizations are performed after the syntax and semantic analysis of the front end and before the code generation of the back end; thus a common, though somewhat self-contradictory, name for this part of the compiler is the \"middle end.\"\nThe exact set of GCC optimizations varies from release to release as it develops, but includes the standard algorithms, such as loop optimization, jump threading, common subexpression elimination, instruction scheduling, and so forth. The RTL optimizations are of less importance with the addition of global SSA-based optimizations on GIMPLE trees, as RTL optimizations have a much more limited scope, and have less high-level information.\nSome of these optimizations performed at this level include dead-code elimination, partial-redundancy elimination, global value numbering, sparse conditional constant propagation, and scalar replacement of aggregates. Array dependence based optimizations such as automatic vectorization and automatic parallelization are also performed. Profile-guided optimization is also possible.\nC++ Standard Library (libstdc++).\nThe GCC project includes an implementation of the C++ Standard Library called libstdc++, licensed under the GPLv3 License with an exception to link non-GPL applications when sources are built with GCC. Since GCC Version 3, the C++ ABI is based on the ABI published by Intel for the Itanium C++ ABI.\nOther features.\nSome features of GCC include:\n Link-time optimization optimizes across object file boundaries to directly improve the linked binary. Link-time optimization relies on an intermediate file containing the serialization of some \"Gimple\" representation included in the object file. The file is generated alongside the object file during source compilation. Each source compilation generates a separate object file and link-time helper file. When the object files are linked, the compiler is executed again and uses the helper files to optimize code across the separately compiled object files.\n Plugins extend the GCC compiler directly. Plugins allow a stock compiler to be tailored to specific needs by external code loaded as plugins. For example, plugins can add, replace, or even remove middle-end passes operating on \"Gimple\" representations. Several GCC plugins have already been published, notably:\n* The Python plugin, which links against libpython, and allows one to invoke arbitrary Python scripts from inside the compiler. The aim is to allow GCC plugins to be written in Python.\n* The MELT plugin provides a high-level Lisp-like language to extend GCC.\n The support of plugins was once a contentious issue in 2007.\n The C++ language has an active proposal for transactional memory. It can be enabled in GCC 6 and newer when compiling with codice_16.\n Although the C++ language requires support for non-ASCII Unicode characters in identifiers, the feature has only been supported since GCC 10. As with the existing handling of string literals, the source file is assumed to be encoded in UTF-8. The feature is optional in C, but has been made available too since this change.\n GNU C extends the C programming language with several non-standard-features, including nested functions.\nArchitectures.\nThe primary supported (and best tested) processor families are 64- and 32-bit ARM, 64- and 32-bit x86 64 and x86 and 64-bit PowerPC and SPARC. \nGCC target processor families as of version 11.1 include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLesser-known target processors supported in the standard release have included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdditional processors have been supported by GCC versions maintained separately from the FSF version:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe GCJ Java compiler can target either a native machine language architecture or the Java virtual machine's Java bytecode. When retargeting GCC to a new platform, bootstrapping is often used. Motorola 68000, Zilog Z80, and other processors are also targeted in the GCC versions developed for various Texas Instruments, Hewlett Packard, Sharp, and Casio programmable graphing calculators.\nLicense.\nGCC is licensed under the GNU General Public License version 3. The \"GCC runtime exception\" permits compilation of proprietary programs (in addition to free software) with GCC headers and runtime libraries. This does not impact the license terms of GCC source code.\nHowever this exception is limited. For example, when non-GPL-compatible software is used together with GCC within the Compile Process follow the GPL for all of the propagated object code GCC generated becomes mandatory as it is derived from the GPL-licensed libraries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
