{"id": "12924", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12924", "title": "Georgian architecture", "text": "Architectural styles current in the English-speaking world between c. 1714 and 1830\n \nGeorgian architecture is the name given in most English-speaking countries to the set of architectural styles current between 1714 and 1830. It is named after the first four British monarchs of the House of Hanover, George I, George II, George III, and George IV, who reigned in continuous succession from August 1714 to June 1830.\nThe Georgian cities of the British Isles were Edinburgh, Bath, pre-independence Dublin, and London, and to a lesser extent York and Bristol. The style was revived in the late 19th century in the United States as Colonial Revival architecture and in the early 20th century in Great Britain as Neo-Georgian architecture; in both it is also called Georgian Revival architecture.\nIn the United States, the term \"Georgian\" is generally used to describe all buildings from the period, regardless of style; in Britain it is generally restricted to buildings that are \"architectural in intention\", and have stylistic characteristics that are typical of the period, though that covers a wide range.\nThe Georgian style is highly variable, but marked by symmetry and proportion based on the classical architecture of Greece and Rome, as revived in Renaissance architecture. Ornament is also normally in the classical tradition, but typically restrained, and sometimes almost completely absent on the exterior. The period brought the vocabulary of classical architecture to smaller and more modest buildings than had been the case before, replacing English vernacular architecture (or becoming the new vernacular style) for almost all new middle-class homes and public buildings by the end of the period.\nGeorgian architecture is characterized by its proportion and balance; simple mathematical ratios were used to determine the height of a window in relation to its width or the shape of a room as a double cube. Regularity, as with ashlar (uniformly cut) stonework, was strongly approved, imbuing symmetry and adherence to classical rules: the lack of symmetry, where Georgian additions were added to earlier structures remaining visible, was deeply felt as a flaw, at least before John Nash began to introduce it in a variety of styles. Regularity of housefronts along a street was a desirable feature of Georgian town planning. Until the start of the Gothic Revival in the early 19th century, Georgian designs usually lay within the Classical orders of architecture and employed a decorative vocabulary derived from ancient Rome or Greece.\nCharacteristics.\nIn towns, which expanded greatly during the period, landowners turned into property developers, and rows of identical terraced houses became the norm. Even the wealthy were persuaded to live in these in town, especially if provided with a square of garden in front of the house. There was an enormous amount of building in the period, all over the English-speaking world, and the standards of construction were generally high. Where they have not been demolished, large numbers of Georgian buildings have survived two centuries or more, and they still form large parts of the core of cities such as London, Edinburgh, Dublin, Newcastle upon Tyne and Bristol.\nThe period saw the growth of a distinct and trained architectural profession; before the mid-century \"the high-sounding title, 'architect' was adopted by anyone who could get away with it\". This contrasted with earlier styles, which were primarily disseminated among craftsmen through the direct experience of the apprenticeship system. But most buildings were still designed by builders and landlords together, and the wide spread of Georgian architecture, and the Georgian styles of design more generally, came from dissemination through pattern books and inexpensive suites of engravings. Authors such as the prolific William Halfpenny (active 1723\u20131755) had editions in America as well as Britain.\nA similar phenomenon can be seen in the commonality of housing designs in Canada and the United States (though of a wider variety of styles) from the 19th century through the 1950s, using pattern books drawn up by professional architects that were distributed by lumber companies and hardware stores to contractors and homebuilders.\nFrom the mid-18th century, Georgian styles were assimilated into an architectural vernacular that became part and parcel of the training of every architect, designer, builder, carpenter, mason and plasterer, from Edinburgh to Maryland.\nStyles.\nGeorgian succeeded the English Baroque of Sir Christopher Wren, Sir John Vanbrugh, Thomas Archer, William Talman, and Nicholas Hawksmoor with a transition running into the 1720s, overlapping with the more restrained Georgian style. The architect James Gibbs was a transitional figure, his earlier buildings are Baroque, reflecting the time he spent in Rome in the early 18th century, but he adjusted his style after 1720. Major architects to promote the change in direction from Baroque were Colen Campbell, author of the influential book \"Vitruvius Britannicus\" (1715\u20131725); Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington and his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 William Kent; Isaac Ware; Henry Flitcroft and the Venetian Giacomo Leoni, who spent most of his career in England. \nOther prominent architects of the early Georgian period include James Paine, Robert Taylor, and John Wood, the Elder. The European Grand Tour became very common for wealthy patrons in the period, and Italian influence remained dominant, though at the start of the period Hanover Square, Westminster (1713 on), developed and occupied by Whig supporters of the new dynasty, seems to have deliberately adopted German stylistic elements in their honour, especially vertical bands connecting the windows.\nThe styles that resulted fall within several categories. In the mainstream of Georgian style were both Palladian architecture\u2014and its whimsical alternatives, Gothic and Chinoiserie, which were the English-speaking world's equivalent of European Rococo. From the mid-1760s a range of Neoclassical modes were fashionable, associated with the British architects Robert Adam, James Gibbs, Sir William Chambers, James Wyatt, George Dance the Younger, Henry Holland and Sir John Soane. John Nash was one of the most prolific architects of the late Georgian era known as Regency style, he was responsible for designing large areas of London. Greek Revival architecture was added to the repertory, beginning around 1750, but increasing in popularity after 1800. Leading exponents were William Wilkins and Robert Smirke.\nIn Britain, brick or stone are almost invariably used; brick is often disguised with render. The Georgian terraces of Dublin are noted for their almost uniform use of red brick, for example, whereas equivalent terraces in Edinburgh are constructed from stone. In America and other colonies wood remained very common, as its availability and cost-ratio with the other materials was more favourable. Raked roofs were mostly covered in earthenware tiles until Richard Pennant, 1st Baron Penrhyn led the development of the slate industry in Wales from the 1760s, which by the end of the century had become the usual material.\nTypes of buildings.\nHouses.\nVersions of revived Palladian architecture dominated English country house architecture. Houses were increasingly placed in grand landscaped settings, and large houses were generally made wide and relatively shallow, largely to look more impressive from a distance. The height was usually highest in the centre, and the Baroque emphasis on corner pavilions often found on the continent generally avoided. In grand houses, an entrance hall led to steps up to a \"piano nobile\" or mezzanine floor where the main reception rooms were. Typically the basement area or \"rustic\", with kitchens, offices and service areas, as well as male guests with muddy boots, came some way above ground, and was lit by windows that were high on the inside, but just above ground level outside. A single block was typical, with perhaps a small court for carriages at the front marked off by railings and a gate, but rarely a stone gatehouse, or side wings around the court.\nWindows in all types of buildings were large and regularly placed on a grid; this was partly to minimize window tax, which was in force throughout the period in Great Britain. Some windows were subsequently bricked-in. Their height increasingly varied between the floors, and they increasingly began below waist-height in the main rooms, making a small balcony desirable. Before this the internal plan and function of the rooms can generally not be deduced from the outside. To open these large windows the sash window, already developed by the 1670s, became very widespread. Corridor plans became universal inside larger houses.\nInternal courtyards became more rare, except beside the stables, and the functional parts of the building were placed at the sides, or in separate buildings nearby hidden by trees. The views to and from the front and rear of the main block were concentrated on, with the side approaches usually much less important. The roof was typically invisible from the ground, though domes were sometimes visible in grander buildings. The roofline was generally clear of ornament except for a balustrade or the top of a pediment. Columns or pilasters, often topped by a pediment, were popular for ornament inside and out, and other ornament was generally geometrical or plant-based, rather than using the human figure. \nInside ornament was far more generous, and could sometimes be overwhelming. The chimneypiece continued to be the usual main focus of rooms, and was now given a classical treatment, and increasingly topped by a painting or a mirror. Plasterwork ceilings, carved wood, and bold schemes of wallpaint formed a backdrop to increasingly rich collections of furniture, paintings, porcelain, mirrors, and objets d'art of all kinds. Wood-panelling, very common since about 1500, fell from favour around the mid-century, and wallpaper included very expensive imports from China.\nSmaller houses in the country, such as vicarages, were simple regular blocks with visible raked roofs, and a central doorway, often the only ornamented area. Similar houses, often referred to as \"villas\" became common around the fringes of the larger cities, especially London, and detached houses in towns remained common, though only the very rich could afford them in central London.\nIn towns even most better-off people lived in terraced houses, which typically opened straight onto the street, often with a few steps up to the door. There was often an open space, protected by iron railings, dropping down to the basement level, with a discreet entrance down steps off the street for servants and deliveries; this is known as the \"area\". This meant that the ground floor front was now removed and protected from the street and encouraged the main reception rooms to move there from the floor above. Often, when a new street or set of streets was developed, the road and pavements were raised up, and the gardens or yards behind the houses remained at a lower level, usually representing the original one.\nTown terraced houses for all social classes remained resolutely tall and narrow, each dwelling occupying the whole height of the building. This contrasted with well-off continental dwellings, which had already begun to be formed of wide apartments occupying only one or two floors of a building; such arrangements were only typical in England when housing groups of batchelors, as in Oxbridge colleges, the lawyers in the Inns of Court or the Albany after it was converted in 1802. In the period in question, only in Edinburgh were working-class purpose-built tenements common, though lodgers were common in other cities. A curving crescent, often looking out at gardens or a park, was popular for terraces where space allowed. In early and central schemes of development, plots were sold and built on individually, though there was often an attempt to enforce some uniformity, but as development reached further out schemes were increasingly built as a uniform scheme and then sold.\nThe late Georgian period saw the birth of the semi-detached house, planned systematically, as a suburban compromise between the terraced houses of the city and the detached \"villas\" further out, where land was cheaper. There had been occasional examples in town centres going back to medieval times. Most early suburban examples are large, and in what are now the outer fringes of Central London, but were then in areas being built up for the first time. Blackheath, Chalk Farm and St John's Wood are among the areas contesting being the original home of the semi. Sir John Summerson gave primacy to the Eyre Estate of St John's Wood. A plan for this exists dated 1794, where \"the whole development consists of \"pairs of semi-detached houses\", So far as I know, this is the first recorded scheme of the kind\". In fact the French Wars put an end to this scheme, but when the development was finally built it retained the semi-detached form, \"a revolution of striking significance and far-reaching effect\".\nChurches.\nUntil the Church Building Act 1818, the period saw relatively few churches built in Britain, which was already well-supplied, although in the later years of the period the demand for Non-conformist and Roman Catholic places of worship greatly increased. Anglican churches that were built were designed internally to allow maximum audibility, and visibility, for preaching, so the main nave was generally wider and shorter than in medieval plans, and often there were no side-aisles. Galleries were common in new churches. Especially in country parishes, the external appearance generally retained the familiar signifiers of a Gothic church, with a tower or spire, a large west front with one or more doors, and very large windows along the nave, but all with any ornament drawn from the classical vocabulary. Where funds permitted, a classical temple portico with columns and a pediment might be used at the west front. Interior decoration was generally chaste; however, walls often became lined with plaques and monuments to the more prosperous members of the congregation.\nIn the colonies new churches were certainly required, and generally repeated similar formulae. British Non-conformist churches were often more classical in mood, and tended not to feel the need for a tower or steeple.\nThe archetypal Georgian church is St Martin-in-the-Fields in London (1720), by Gibbs, who boldly added to the classical temple fa\u00e7ade at the west end a large steeple on top of a tower, set back slightly from the main frontage. This formula shocked purists and foreigners, but became accepted and was very widely emulated, at home and in the colonies, for example at St Andrew's Church, Chennai in India. And in Dublin, the extremely similar St. George's Church, Dublin.\nThe 1818 Act allocated some public money for new churches required to reflect changes in population, and a commission to allocate it. Building of Commissioners' churches gathered pace in the 1820s, and continued until the 1850s. The early churches, falling into the Georgian period, show a high proportion of Gothic Revival buildings, along with the classically inspired.\nPublic buildings.\nPublic buildings generally varied between the extremes of plain boxes with grid windows and Italian Late Renaissance palaces, depending on budget. Somerset House in London, designed by Sir William Chambers in 1776 for government offices, was as magnificent as any country house, though never quite finished, as funds ran out. Barracks and other less prestigious buildings could be as functional as the mills and factories that were growing increasingly large by the end of the period. But as the period came to an end many commercial projects were becoming sufficiently large, and well-funded, to become \"architectural in intention\", rather than having their design left to the lesser class of \"surveyors\".\nColonial Georgian architecture.\nGeorgian architecture was widely disseminated in the English colonies during the Georgian era. American buildings of the Georgian period were very often constructed of wood with clapboards; even columns were made of timber, framed up, and turned on an oversized lathe. At the start of the period the difficulties of obtaining and transporting brick or stone made them a common alternative only in the larger cities, or where they were obtainable locally. Dartmouth College, Harvard University and the College of William and Mary offer leading examples of Georgian architecture in the Americas.\nUnlike the Baroque style that it replaced, which was mostly used for palaces and churches, and had little representation in the British colonies, simpler Georgian styles were widely used by the upper and middle classes. Perhaps the best remaining house is the pristine Hammond-Harwood House (1774) in Annapolis, Maryland, designed by the colonial architect William Buckland and modelled on the Villa Pisani at Montagnana, Italy as depicted in Andrea Palladio's \"I quattro libri dell'architettura\" (\"The Four Books of Architecture\").\nAfter independence, in the former American colonies, Federal-style architecture represented the equivalent of Regency architecture, with which it had much in common.\nIn Canada, the United Empire Loyalists embraced Georgian architecture as a sign of their fealty to Britain, and the Georgian style was dominant in the country for most of the first half of the 19th century. The Grange, for example, is a Georgian manor built in Toronto in 1817. In Montreal, English-born architect John Ostell worked on a significant number of remarkable constructions in the Georgian style such as the Old Montreal Custom House and the Grand s\u00e9minaire de Montr\u00e9al.\nIn Australia, the Old Colonial Georgian residential and non-residential styles were developed in the period from c.\u20091810\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091840, with some of the best preserved examples remaining in the state of Tasmania, still influencing works of contemporary traditional and new classical architects such as Tasmanian architect Jiri Lev.\nPost-Georgian developments.\nAfter about 1840, Georgian conventions were slowly abandoned as a number of revival styles, including Gothic Revival, that had originated in the Georgian period, developed and contested in Victorian architecture, and in the case of Gothic became better researched, and closer to their originals. Neoclassical architecture remained popular, and was the opponent of Gothic in the Battle of the Styles of the early Victorian period. In the United States the Federalist Style contained many elements of Georgian style, but incorporated revolutionary symbols.\nIn the early decades of the twentieth century when there was a growing nostalgia for its sense of order, the style was revived and adapted and in the United States came to be known as the Colonial Revival. The revived Georgian style that emerged in Britain during the same period is usually referred to as Neo-Georgian; the work of Edwin Lutyens and Vincent Harris includes some examples. The British town of Welwyn Garden City, established in the 1920s, is an example of \"pastiche\" or Neo-Georgian development of the early 20th century in Britain. Versions of the Neo-Georgian style were commonly used in Britain for certain types of urban architecture until the late 1950s, Bradshaw Gass &amp; Hope's Police Headquarters in Salford of 1958 being a good example. Architects such as Raymond Erith, and Donald McMorran were among the few architects who continued the neo-Georgian style into the 1960s. Both in the United States and Britain, the Georgian style is still employed by architects like Quinlan Terry, Julian Bicknell, Ben Pentreath, Robert Adam Architects, and Fairfax and Sammons for private residences. A debased form in commercial housing developments, especially in the suburbs, is known in the UK as mock-Georgian.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12926", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12926", "title": "Goshen, Indiana", "text": "Goshen ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Elkhart County, Indiana, United States. It is the smaller of the two principal cities of the Elkhart\u2013Goshen Metropolitan Statistical Area, which in turn is part of the South Bend\u2013Elkhart\u2013Mishawaka Combined Statistical Area. It is located in the northern part of Indiana near the Michigan border, in a region known as Michiana. Goshen is located 10 miles southeast of Elkhart, 25 miles southeast of South Bend, 120 miles east of Chicago, and 150 miles north of Indianapolis. The population of Goshen was 34,517 at the 2020 census.\nThe city is known as a prominent recreational vehicle and accessories manufacturing center, the home of Goshen College, a small Mennonite liberal arts college, and the Elkhart County 4-H Fair, one of the largest county fairs in the United States.\nHistory.\nBefore the arrival of white colonists, the land that is today Goshen, Indiana, was populated by Native Americans, specifically the Miami people, the Peoria people, and Potawatomi peoples. These people inhabited this land for thousands of years. In 1830, the US Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, requiring all indigenous people to relocate west of the Mississippi River.\nGoshen was platted in 1831. It was named after the Land of Goshen. The initial settlers consisted entirely of old stock \"Yankee\" immigrants, who were descended from the English Puritans who settled New England in the 1600s. The New England Yankee population that founded towns such as Goshen considered themselves the \"chosen people,\" and identified with the Israelites of the Old Testament and they thought of North America as their Canaan. They founded a large number of towns and counties across what is known as the Northern Tier of the upper midwest. It was in this context that Goshen was named.\nThe Yankee migration to Indiana was a result of several factors, one of which was the overpopulation of New England. The old-stock Yankee population had large families, often bearing up to ten children in one household. Most people were expected to have their own piece of land to farm, and due to the massive and nonstop population boom, land in New England became scarce as every son claimed his own farmstead. As a result, there was not enough land for every family to have a self-sustaining farm, and Yankee settlers began leaving New England for the Midwestern United States.\nThey were aided in this effort by the construction and completion of the Erie Canal which made traveling to the region much easier, causing an additional surge in migrants coming from New England. Added to this was the end of the Black Hawk War, which made the region much safer for white settlers to travel through and settle in. However, the Black Hawk War also forced the native people who called Goshen home for so long to leave. The 1833 Treaty of Chicago ultimately set the conditions that would force the Potawatomi in particular to leave the Midwest, Goshen included, in 1837. This forced exile is known today as the Potawatomi Trail of Death.\nThese settlers were primarily members of the Congregational Church, though due to the Second Great Awakening, many of them had converted to Methodism, and some had become Baptists before coming to what is now Indiana. The Congregational Church has subsequently gone through many divisions, and some factions, including those in Goshen, are now known as the Church of Christ and the United Church of Christ. When the New Englanders arrived in what is now Elkhart County there was nothing but a dense virgin forest and wild prairie. They laid out farms, constructed roads, erected government buildings, and established post routes.\nOn Palm Sunday, April 11, 1965, a large outbreak of tornadoes struck the Midwest. The most famous pair of tornadoes devastated the Midway Trailer Park (now inside the city limits of Goshen), and the Sunnyside Housing Addition in Dunlap, Indiana. Another, smaller F4 tornado also struck neighborhoods on the southeast side of Goshen on the same day. Statewide, 137 Hoosiers died in the storms\u201455 of them in Elkhart County. Days later, President Lyndon B. Johnson visited the Dunlap site.\nThe Goshen Historic District, added in 1983 to the National Register of Historic Places is bounded by Pike, RR, Cottage, Plymouth, Main, Purl, the Canal, and Second Sts. with the Elkhart County Courthouse at its center.\nIn April 2006, Goshen was the site of an immigration march. Officials estimated that from 2,000 to 3,000 people marched from Linway Plaza to the County Courthouse.\nGoshen has been called a \"sundown town\", and African Americans were allegedly prevented from living in, or entering, the town, under threat of violence. However, there was never a city ordinance or official policy to enforce such a restriction. Nevertheless, in March 2015, the city issued a formal apology for racial discrimination in the past. A documentary made at Goshen College, \"Goshen: A Sundown Town's Transformation\", tells the story of why Goshen has been called a sundown town.\nThe Elkhart County Courthouse, Fort Wayne Street Bridge, Goshen Carnegie Public Library, Goshen Historic District, William N. Violett House, and Violett-Martin House and Gardens are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nGeography.\nGoshen is located at . The Elkhart River winds its way through the city and through a dam on the south side making the Goshen Dam Pond. Rock Run Creek also runs through town. The city is divided east\u2013west by Main Street and north\u2013south by Lincoln Avenue.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nEnvironmental leadership.\nIn February 2018, the Elkhart River flooded as a result of heavy rain and snowmelt. The river rose to a record 13.2 feet, damaging more than 300 structures and prompting evacuations. City government has responded to the increase in severe weather such as flooding, hail, and heavy rains with measures including stormwater management, and \"an initiative to grow the town's tree canopy by 45%.\" Goshen completed 92 solar projects in 2019. Goshen outranked Phoenix, Sacramento, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Denver with its 2019 production of 116 watts of solar power per capita.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 31,719 people, 11,344 households, and 7,580 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 12,631 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 78.2% White, 2.6% African American, 0.5% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 14.8% from other races, and 2.7% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 28.1% of the population.\nThere were 11,344 households, of which 36.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.4% were married couples living together, 13.1% had a female householder with no husband present, 6.3% had a male householder with no wife present, and 33.2% were non-families. 27.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.2% had someone who was 65 years of age or older living alone. The average household size was 2.67, and the average family size was 3.23.\nThe median age in the city was 32.4 years. 27.4% of residents were under 18; 11.3% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.1% were from 25 to 44; 20% were from 45 to 64, and 14.9% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.9% male and 51.1% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 29,383 people, 10,675 households, and 7,088 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 11,264 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 83.15% White, 1.53% Black or African American, 0.26% Native American, 1.10% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 12.00% from other races, and 1.94% from two or more races. 19.33% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 10,675 households, of which 32.6% had children under 18 living with them, 50.8% were married couples living together, 10.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.6% were non-families. 27.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61, and the average family size was 3.14.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 25.9% under 18, 12.9% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 17.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.6 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 97.7 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $39,383, and the median income for a family was $46,877. Males had a median income of $32,159 versus $23,290 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,899. About 6.0% of families and 9.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.8% of those under age 18 and 5.3% of those aged 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nIndustry in Goshen centers around the automotive and recreational vehicle business. There are automotive component manufacturers such as Benteler; firms that build custom bodies onto chassis such as Supreme, Independent Protection, and Showhauler Trucks. RV manufacturing companies include Dutchmen, Forest River, and Keystone.\nGovernment.\nThe government consists of a mayor, a clerk-treasurer, a city council, and a youth advisor. The mayor and clerk are elected in a citywide vote. The city council consists of seven members. Five are elected from individual districts. Two are elected at large. The youth advisor position was added in 2016 and is elected by the students of Goshen High School.\nGina Leichty, a member of the Democratic Party, is the first woman to become Mayor of Goshen in its 192-year history. Leichty became Mayor following the resignation of former mayor Jeremy Stutsman. Stutsman left the mayorship to be CEO of a local nonprofit housing agency, LaCasa.\nEducation.\nGoshen Community Schools serves the portion of the city in Elkhart Township. This system consists of six elementary schools, Goshen Intermediate School, Goshen Junior High School, and Goshen High School.\nIn 2012, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Goshen High School as the 12th best high school in Indiana and the top 6% of high schools in the country.\nSmall parts of the city of Goshen are covered by several other school districts, including Middlebury Community Schools, Concord Community Schools, and WaNee Community Schools.\nAdditionally, Goshen is served by Bethany Christian Schools, a private Christian school for grades 4\u201312.\nGoshen College, located on the south side of town, has an enrollment of approximately 773, with 37% male and 63% female. Tuition and fees for the 2024\u20132025 year were $38,890.\nThe town has a free lending library, the Goshen Public Library.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nGoshen Municipal Airport is a public-use airport located about 3.5 miles southeast of downtown Goshen. The Goshen Board of Aviation Commissioners owns the airport.\nThe closest airports with regularly scheduled commercial service are South Bend International Airport (about away) and Fort Wayne International Airport (about away). O'Hare International Airport in Chicago is about away.\nBus.\nThe Interurban Trolley bus connects Goshen to the nearby city of Elkhart and the unincorporated town of Dunlap via Concord and Elkhart-Goshen routes. The routes pass at Elkhart's Amtrak station, allowing passengers to connect to the \"Capitol Limited\" and \"Lake Shore Limited\" trains. Riders can also transfer to the North Pointe and Bittersweet/Mishawaka routes. The former allows riders to connect to Elkhart's Greyhound bus station, while the later connects the riders to the city of Mishawaka and town of Osceola. The Bittersweet/Mishawaka route also allows them to transfer to TRANSPO Route 9 to connect to destinations throughout the South Bend-Goshen metropolitan region and the South Shore Line's South Bend International Airport station.\nRecreation.\nGoshen has seven parks and has a few different greenways and trails winding through the city, one of which runs along the old Mill Race and hydraulic canal, which was once used to power an old hydroelectric power plant. Plans were drawn up in 2005 call for the plant to be reopened and redevelopment to begin along the canal.\nThe Pumpkinvine Nature Trail runs from Goshen to Middlebury and Shipshewana, along the former Pumpkin Vine Railroad. The trail starts northeast of Goshen at Abshire Park. It is one of the recreational highlights of Goshen. Along with the Maple City Greenway and the Millrace trail, they provide many miles of easily accessible trails for walking, running, and biking.\nThe Elkhart County Fairgrounds are also located in the city, where the Elkhart County 4-H Fair is held in late July. It is the largest county fair in Indiana and one of the largest 4-H County Fairs in the United States.\nThe Goshen Air Show is also an annual event that takes place at the Goshen Municipal Airport.\nIn 2007, Downtown Goshen, Inc., a public-private partnership formed from the merger of Face of the City and the Downtown Action Team, started a First Fridays program. Occurring year round, First Fridays happens on the first Friday of each month with stores open until 9, music and other entertainment, and other events occurring within Goshen's downtown district.\nOne favorite pastime of Goshen residents is driving cars.\nCulture.\nThe south side Wal-Mart is rumored to be the first Wal-Mart in the United States to provide a covered stable for its frequent Amish customers. The Amish built the stable with lumber and other supplies donated by Wal-Mart.\n\"Lonesome Jim\" (2005) which was written by former resident James Strouse, directed by Steve Buscemi and starred Liv Tyler and Casey Affleck, was shot in Goshen.\nSister cities.\nGoshen has two sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12927", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12927", "title": "Nintendo game cube", "text": ""}
{"id": "12929", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12929", "title": "Gallipoli", "text": "Peninsula in northwestern Turkey\nThe Gallipoli Peninsula () is located in the southern part of East Thrace, the European part of Turkey, with the Aegean Sea to the west and the Dardanelles strait to the east.\nGallipoli is the Italian form of the Greek name (), meaning 'beautiful city', the original name of the modern town of Gelibolu. In antiquity, the peninsula was known as the Thracian Chersonese (; ).\nThe peninsula runs in a south-westerly direction into the Aegean Sea, between the Dardanelles (formerly known as the Hellespont), and the Gulf of Saros (formerly the bay of Melas). In antiquity, it was protected by the Long Wall, a defensive structure built across the narrowest part of the peninsula near the ancient city of Agora. The isthmus traversed by the wall was only 36 stadia in breadth or about , but the length of the peninsula from this wall to its southern extremity, Cape Mastusia, was 420 stadia or about .\nHistory.\nAntiquity and Middle Ages.\nIn ancient times, the Gallipoli Peninsula was known as the Thracian Chersonese (from Greek , 'peninsula') to the Greeks and later the Romans. It was the location of several prominent towns, including Cardia, Pactya, Callipolis (Gallipoli), Alopeconnesus (), Sestos, Madytos, and Elaeus. The peninsula was renowned for its wheat. It also benefited from its strategic importance on the main route between Europe and Asia, as well as from its control of the shipping route from Crimea. The city of Sestos was the main crossing-point on the Hellespont.\nAccording to Herodotus, the Thracian tribe of Dolonci () (or 'barbarians' according to Cornelius Nepos) held possession of the peninsula before Greek colonizers arrived. Then, settlers from Ancient Greece, mainly of Ionian and Aeolian stock, founded about 12 cities on the peninsula in the 7th century BC. The Athenian statesman Miltiades the Elder founded a major Athenian colony there around 560 BC. He took authority over the entire peninsula, augmenting its defences against incursions from the mainland. It eventually passed to his nephew, the more famous Miltiades the Younger, about 524 BC. The peninsula was abandoned to the Persians in 493 BC after the beginning of the Greco-Persian Wars (499\u2013478 BC).\nThe Persians were eventually expelled, after which the peninsula was for a time ruled by Athens, which enrolled it into the Delian League in 478 BC. The Athenians established a number of cleruchies on the Thracian Chersonese and sent an additional 1,000 settlers around 448 BC. Sparta gained control after the decisive Battle of Aegospotami in 404 BC, but the peninsula subsequently reverted to the Athenians. During the 4th century BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the focus of a bitter territorial dispute between Athens and Macedon, whose king Philip II sought its possession. It was eventually ceded to Philip in 338 BC.\nAfter the death of Philip's son Alexander the Great in 323 BC, the Thracian Chersonese became the object of contention among Alexander's successors. Lysimachus established his capital Lysimachia here. In 278 BC, Celtic tribes from Galatia in Asia Minor settled in the area. In 196 BC, the Seleucid king Antiochus III seized the peninsula. This alarmed the Greeks and prompted them to seek the aid of the Romans, who conquered the Thracian Chersonese, which they gave to their ally Eumenes II of Pergamon in 188 BC. At the extinction of the Attalid dynasty in 133 BC it passed again to the Romans, who from 129 BC administered it in the Roman province of Asia. It was subsequently made a state-owned territory () and during the reign of the emperor Augustus it was imperial property.\nThe Thracian Chersonese was part of the Eastern Roman Empire from its foundation in 395 AD. In 443 AD, Attila the Hun invaded the Gallipoli Peninsula during one of the last stages of his grand campaign that year. He captured both Callipolis and Sestus. Aside from a brief period from 1204 to 1235, when it was controlled by the Republic of Venice, the Byzantine Empire ruled the territory until 1356. During the night between 1 and 2 March 1354, a strong earthquake destroyed the city of Gallipoli and its city walls, weakening its defenses.\nOttoman era.\nOttoman conquest.\nWithin a month after the devastating 1354 earthquake the Ottomans besieged and captured the town of Gallipoli, making it the first Ottoman stronghold in Europe and the staging area for Ottoman expansion across the Balkans. The Savoyard Crusade recaptured Gallipoli for Byzantium in 1366, but the beleaguered Byzantines were forced to hand it back in September 1376. The Greeks living there were allowed to continue their everyday activities. In the 19th century, Gallipoli (, ) was a district () in the Vilayet of Adrianople, with about thirty thousand inhabitants: comprising Greeks, Turks, Armenians and Jews.\nCrimean War (1853\u20131856).\nGallipoli became a major encampment for British and French forces in 1854 during the Crimean War, and the harbour was also a stopping-off point between the western Mediterranean and Istanbul (formerly Constantinople).\nIn March 1854 British and French engineers constructed an line of defence to protect the peninsula from a possible Russian attack and secure control of the route to the Mediterranean Sea.\nFirst Balkan War (1912\u20131913).\nDuring the First Balkan War, the 1913 Battle of Bulair and several minor skirmishes took place where the Ottoman army fought in the Greek villages near Gallipoli\". The Report of the International Commission on the Balkan Wars mention destruction and massacres in the area by the Ottoman army against Greek and Bulgarian population.\nThe Ottoman Government, under the pretext that a village was within the firing line, ordered its evacuation within three hours. The residents abandoned everything they possessed, left their village and went to Gallipoli. Seven of the Greek villagers who stayed two minutes later than the three-hour limit allowed for the evacuation were shot by the soldiers. After the end of the Balkan War the exiles were allowed to return. But as the Government allowed only the Turks to rebuild their houses and furnish them, the exiled Greeks were compelled to remain in Gallipoli.\nWorld War I: Gallipoli Campaign (1914\u20131918).\nDuring World War I (1914\u20131918), French, British, and allied forces (Australian, New Zealand, Newfoundland, Irish and Indian) fought the Gallipoli campaign (1915\u20131916) in and near the peninsula, seeking to secure a sea route to relieve their eastern ally, Russia. The Ottomans set up defensive fortifications along the peninsula and contained the invading forces.\nIn early 1915, attempting to seize a strategic advantage in World War I by capturing the Bosporus Strait at Istanbul (formerly Constantinople), the British authorised an attack on the peninsula by French, British, and British Empire forces. The first Australian troops landed at ANZAC Cove early in the morning of 25 April 1915. After eight months of heavy fighting the last Allied soldiers withdrew by 9 January 1916.\nThe campaign, one of the greatest Ottoman victories during the war, is considered by historians as a humiliating Allied failure. Turks regard it as a defining moment in their nation's history and national identity, contributing to the establishment of the Republic of Turkey eight years later under President Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, who first rose to prominence as a commander at Gallipoli.\nThe Ottoman Empire instituted the Gallipoli Star as a military decoration in 1915 and awarded it throughout the rest of World War I.\nThe campaign was the first major military action of Australia and New Zealand (or ANZACs) as independent dominions, setting a foundation for Australian and New Zealand military history, and contributing to their developing national identities. The date of the landing, 25 April, is known as \"ANZAC Day\". It remains the most significant commemoration of military casualties and \"returned soldiers\" in Australia and New Zealand.\nOn the Allied side, one of the promoters of the expedition was Britain's First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill, whose bullish optimism caused damage to his reputation that took years to repair.\nPrior to the Allied landings in April 1915, the Ottoman Empire deported Greek residents from Gallipoli and the surrounding region and from the islands in the sea of Marmara, to the interior where they were at the mercy of hostile Turks. The Greeks had little time to pack and the Ottoman authorities permitted them to take only some bedding and the rest was handed over to the Government. The Turks then plundered the houses and properties. A testimony of a deportee described how the deportees were forced onto crowded steamers, standing-room only, then on disembarking, men of military age were removed (for forced labour in the labour battalions of the Ottoman army).\nThe Metropolitan bishop of Gallipoli wrote on 17 July 1915 that the extermination of the Christian refugees was methodical. He also mentions that \"The Turks, like beasts of prey, immediately plundered all the Christians' property and carried it off. The inhabitants and refugees of my district are entirely without shelter, awaiting to be sent no one knows where ...\". Many Greeks died from hunger and there were frequent cases of rape of women and young girls, as well as their forced conversion to Islam. In some cases, Muhacirs appeared in the villages even before the Greek inhabitants were deported and stoned the houses and threatened the inhabitants that they would kill them if they did not leave.\nGreco-Turkish War (1919\u20131922).\nGreek troops occupied Gallipoli on 4 August 1920 during the Greco-Turkish War of 1919\u201322, considered part of the Turkish War of Independence. After the Armistice of Mudros of 30 October 1918 it became a Greek prefecture centre as \"Kallipolis\". However, Greece was forced to cede Eastern Thrace after the Armistice of Mudanya of October 1922. Gallipoli was briefly handed over to British troops on 20 October 1922, but finally returned to Turkish rule on 26 November 1922.\nIn 1920, after the defeat of the Russian White army of General Pyotr Wrangel, a significant number of \u00e9migr\u00e9 soldiers and their families evacuated to Gallipoli from the Crimean Peninsula. From there, many went to European countries, such as Yugoslavia, where they found refuge.\nThere are now many cemeteries and war memorials on the Gallipoli peninsula.\nTurkish Republic.\nBetween 1923 and 1926 Gallipoli became the centre of Gelibolu Province, comprising the districts of Gelibolu, Eceabat, Ke\u015fan and \u015eark\u00f6y. After the dissolution of the province, it became a district centre in \u00c7anakkale Province.\nTourism significance.\nToday, the Gallipoli Peninsula is one of Turkey's most visited historical destinations, attracting hundreds of thousands of domestic and international visitors every year. The Gallipoli Peninsula Historical National Park preserves battlefields, cemeteries, and memorials of the Gallipoli Campaign, and ANZAC Day (25 April) ceremonies draw large numbers of Australians and New Zealanders. Various tour operators offer guided tours of the battlefields, memorials, and museums to help visitors understand the significance of the campaign.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12935", "revid": "43819313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12935", "title": "Gram stain", "text": "Investigative procedure in microbiology\nGram stain (Gram staining or Gram's method), is a method of staining used to classify bacterial species into two large groups: gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria. It may also be used to diagnose a fungal infection. The name comes from the Danish bacteriologist Hans Christian Gram, who developed the technique in 1884.\nGram staining differentiates bacteria by the chemical and physical properties of their cell walls. Gram-positive cells have a thick layer of peptidoglycan in the cell wall that retains the primary stain, crystal violet. Gram-negative cells have a thinner peptidoglycan layer that allows the crystal violet to wash out on addition of ethanol. They are stained pink or red by the counterstain, commonly safranin or fuchsine. Lugol's iodine solution is always added after addition of crystal violet to form a stable complex with crystal violet that strengthens the bonds of the stain with the cell wall.\nGram staining is almost always the first step in the identification of a bacterial group. While Gram staining is a valuable diagnostic tool in both clinical and research settings, not all bacteria can be definitively classified by this technique. This gives rise to \"gram-variable\" and \"gram-indeterminate\" groups.\nHistory.\nThe method is named after its inventor, the Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram (1853\u20131938), who developed the technique while working with Carl Friedl\u00e4nder in the morgue of the city hospital in Berlin in 1884. Gram devised his technique not for the purpose of distinguishing one type of bacterium from another but to make bacteria more visible in stained sections of lung tissue. Gram noticed that some bacterial cells possessed noticeable resistance to decolorization. Based on these observations, Gram developed the initial gram staining procedure, initially making use of Ehrlich's aniline-gentian violet, Lugol's iodine, absolute alcohol for decolorization, and Bismarck brown for counterstain. He published his method in 1884, and included in his short report the observation that the typhus bacillus did not retain the stain. Gram did not initially make the distinction between Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria using his procedure.\nUses.\nGram staining is a bacteriological laboratory technique used to differentiate bacterial species into two large groups (gram-positive and gram-negative) based on the physical properties of their cell walls. Gram staining can also be used to diagnose a fungal infection. Gram staining is not used to classify archaea, since these microorganisms yield widely varying responses that do not follow their phylogenetic groups.\nGram stains are performed on body fluid or biopsy when infection is suspected. Gram stains yield results much more quickly than culturing, and are especially important when infection would make an important difference in the patient's treatment and prognosis; examples are cerebrospinal fluid for meningitis and synovial fluid for septic arthritis.\nStaining mechanism.\nGram-positive bacteria have a thick mesh-like cell wall made of peptidoglycan (50\u201390% of cell envelope), and as a result are stained purple by crystal violet, whereas gram-negative bacteria have a thinner layer (10% of cell envelope), so do not retain the purple stain and are counter-stained pink by safranin. There are four basic steps of the Gram stain:\nCrystal violet (CV) dissociates in aqueous solutions into CV+ and chloride (Cl-) ions. These ions penetrate the cell wall of both gram-positive and gram-negative cells. The CV+ ion interacts with negatively charged components of bacterial cells and stains the cells purple.\nIodide (I- or I3-) interacts with CV+ and forms large complexes of crystal violet and iodine (CV\u2013I) within the inner and outer layers of the cell. Iodine is often referred to as a mordant, but is a trapping agent that prevents the removal of the CV\u2013I complex and, therefore, colors the cell.\nWhen a decolorizer such as alcohol or acetone is added, it interacts with the lipids of the cell membrane. A gram-negative cell loses its outer lipopolysaccharide membrane, and the inner peptidoglycan layer is left exposed. The CV\u2013I complexes are washed from the gram-negative cell along with the outer membrane. In contrast, a gram-positive cell becomes dehydrated from an ethanol treatment. The large CV\u2013I complexes become trapped within the gram-positive cell due to the multilayered nature of its peptidoglycan. The decolorization step is critical and must be timed correctly; the crystal violet stain is removed from both gram-positive and negative cells if the decolorizing agent is left on too long (a matter of seconds).\nAfter decolorization, the gram-positive cell remains purple and the gram-negative cell loses its purple color. Counterstain, which is usually positively charged safranin or basic fuchsine, is applied last to give decolorized gram-negative bacteria a pink or red color. Both gram-positive bacteria and gram-negative bacteria pick up the counterstain. The counterstain, however, is unseen on gram-positive bacteria because of the darker crystal violet stain.\nExamples.\nGram-positive bacteria.\nGram-positive bacteria generally have a single membrane (\"monoderm\") surrounded by a thick peptidoglycan.\nThis rule is followed by two phyla: Bacillota (except for the classes Mollicutes and Negativicutes) and the Actinomycetota. In contrast, members of the Chloroflexota (green non-sulfur bacteria) are monoderms but possess a thin or absent (class Dehalococcoidetes) peptidoglycan and can stain negative, positive or indeterminate; members of the Deinococcota stain positive but are diderms with a thick peptidoglycan.\nThe cell wall's strength is enhanced by teichoic acids, glycopolymeric substances embedded within the peptidoglycan. Teichoic acids play multiple roles, such as generating the cell's net negative charge, contributing to cell wall rigidity and shape maintenance, and aiding in cell division and resistance to various stressors, including heat and salt. Despite the density of the peptidoglycan layer, it remains relatively porous, allowing most substances to permeate. For larger nutrients, Gram-positive bacteria utilize exoenzymes, secreted extracellularly to break down macromolecules outside the cell.\nHistorically, the gram-positive forms made up the phylum Firmicutes, a name now used for the largest group. It includes many well-known genera such as \"Lactobacillus, Bacillus\", \"Listeria\", \"Staphylococcus\", \"Streptococcus\", \"Enterococcus\", and \"Clostridium\". It has also been expanded to include the Mollicutes, bacteria such as \"Mycoplasma and Thermoplasma\" that lack cell walls and so cannot be Gram-stained, but are derived from such forms.\nSome bacteria have cell walls which are particularly adept at retaining stains. These will appear positive by Gram stain even though they are not closely related to other gram-positive bacteria. These are called acid-fast bacteria, and can only be differentiated from other gram-positive bacteria by special staining procedures.\nGram-negative bacteria.\nGram-negative bacteria generally possess a thin layer of peptidoglycan between two membranes (\"diderm\"). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the most abundant antigen on the cell surface of most gram-negative bacteria, contributing up to 80% of the outer membrane of \"E. coli\" and \"Salmonella\". These LPS molecules, consisting of the O-antigen or O-polysaccharide, core polysaccharide, and lipid A, serve multiple functions including contributing to the cell's negative charge and protecting against certain chemicals. LPS's role is critical in host-pathogen interactions, with the O-antigen eliciting an immune response and lipid A acting as an endotoxin.\nAdditionally, the outer membrane acts as a selective barrier, regulated by porins, transmembrane proteins forming pores that allow specific molecules to pass. The space between the cell membrane and the outer membrane, known as the periplasm, contains periplasmic enzymes for nutrient processing. A significant structural component linking the peptidoglycan layer and the outer membrane is Braun's lipoprotein, which provides additional stability and strength to the bacterial cell wall.\nMost bacterial phyla are gram-negative, including the cyanobacteria, green sulfur bacteria, and most Pseudomonadota (exceptions being some members of the Rickettsiales and the insect-endosymbionts of the Enterobacteriales).\nGram-variable and gram-indeterminate bacteria.\nSome bacteria, after staining with the Gram stain, yield a gram-variable pattern: a mix of pink and purple cells are seen. In cultures of \"Bacillus, Butyrivibrio\", and \"Clostridium\", a decrease in peptidoglycan thickness during growth coincides with an increase in the number of cells that stain gram-negative. In addition, in all bacteria stained using the Gram stain, the age of the culture may influence the results of the stain.\nGram-indeterminate bacteria do not respond predictably to Gram staining and, therefore, cannot be determined as either gram-positive or gram-negative. Examples include many species of \"Mycobacterium\", including \"Mycobacterium bovis\", \"Mycobacterium leprae\" and \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\", the latter two of which are the causative agents of leprosy and tuberculosis, respectively. Bacteria of the genus \"Mycoplasma\" lack a cell wall around their cell membranes, which means they do not stain by Gram's method and are resistant to the antibiotics that target cell wall synthesis.\nOrthographic note.\nThe term \"Gram staining\" is derived from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; the eponym (Gram) is therefore capitalized but not the common noun (stain) as is usual for scientific terms. The initial letters of \"gram-positive\" and \"gram-negative\", which are eponymous adjectives, can be either capital \"G\" or lowercase \"g\", depending on what style guide (if any) governs the document being written. Lowercase style is used by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other style regimens such as the AMA style. Dictionaries may use lowercase, uppercase, or both. Uppercase \"Gram-positive\" or \"Gram-negative\" usage is also common in many scientific journal articles and publications. When articles are submitted to journals, each journal may or may not apply house style to the postprint version. Preprint versions contain whichever style the author happened to use. Even style regimens that use lowercase for the adjectives \"gram-positive\" and \"gram-negative\" still typically use capital for \"Gram stain\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12936", "revid": "27649307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12936", "title": "Gram-positive bacteria", "text": "Bacteria that give a positive result in the Gram stain test\nIn bacteriology, Gram-positive bacteria are bacteria that give a positive result in the Gram stain test, which is traditionally used to quickly classify bacteria into two broad categories according to their type of cell wall.\nThe Gram stain is used by microbiologists to place bacteria into two main categories, Gram-positive (+) and Gram-negative (\u2212). Gram-positive bacteria have a thick layer of peptidoglycan within the cell wall, and Gram-negative bacteria have a thin layer of peptidoglycan.\nGram-positive bacteria retain the crystal violet stain used in the test, resulting in a purple color when observed through an optical microscope. The thick layer of peptidoglycan in the bacterial cell wall retains the stain after it has been fixed in place by iodine. During the decolorization step, the decolorizer removes crystal violet from all other cells.\nConversely, Gram-negative bacteria cannot retain the violet stain after the decolorization step; alcohol used in this stage degrades the outer membrane of Gram-negative cells, making the cell wall more porous and incapable of retaining the crystal violet stain. Their peptidoglycan layer is much thinner and sandwiched between an inner cell membrane and a bacterial outer membrane, causing them to take up the counterstain (safranin or fuchsine) and appear red or pink.\nDespite their thicker peptidoglycan layer, Gram-positive bacteria are more receptive to certain cell wall\u2013targeting antibiotics than Gram-negative bacteria, due to the absence of the outer membrane.\nCharacteristics.\nIn general, the following characteristics are present in Gram-positive bacteria:\nOnly some species have a capsule, usually consisting of polysaccharides. Only some species are flagellates, and those with flagella have just two basal body rings for support, in contrast to the four found in Gram-negative bacteria. Both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria commonly have a surface layer called an S-layer. In Gram-positive bacteria, the S-layer is attached to the peptidoglycan layer. Gram-negative bacteria's S-layer is attached directly to the outer membrane. Specific to Gram-positive bacteria is the presence of teichoic acids in the cell wall. Some of these are lipoteichoic acids, which have a lipid component in the cell membrane that can assist in anchoring the peptidoglycan.\nClassification.\nAlong with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid method used to differentiate bacterial species. Such staining, together with growth requirement and antibiotic susceptibility testing, and other macroscopic and physiologic tests, forms a basis for practical classification and subdivision of the bacteria (e.g., see figure and pre-1990 versions of \"Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology\").\nHistorically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based primarily on Gram staining: Bacillota (positive in staining), Gracilicutes (negative in staining), Mollicutes (neutral in staining) and Mendocutes (variable in staining). Based on 16S ribosomal RNA phylogenetic studies of the late microbiologist Carl Woese and collaborators and colleagues at the University of Illinois, the monophyly of the Gram-positive bacteria was challenged, with major implications for the therapeutic and general study of these organisms. Based on molecular studies of the 16S sequences, Woese recognised twelve bacterial phyla. Two of these were Gram-positive and were divided on the proportion of the guanine and cytosine content in their DNA. The high G + C phylum was made up of the Actinobacteria, and the low G + C phylum contained the Firmicutes. The Actinomycetota include the \"Corynebacterium\", \"Mycobacterium\", \"Nocardia\" and \"Streptomyces\" genera. The (low G + C) Bacillota, have a 45\u201360% GC content, but this is lower than that of the Actinomycetota.\nImportance of the outer cell membrane in bacterial classification.\nAlthough bacteria are traditionally divided into two main groups, Gram-positive and Gram-negative, based on their Gram stain retention property, this classification system is ambiguous as it refers to three distinct aspects (staining result, envelope organization, taxonomic group), which do not necessarily coalesce for some bacterial species. The Gram-positive and Gram-negative staining response is also not a reliable characteristic as these two kinds of bacteria do not form phylogenetic coherent groups. However, although Gram staining response is an empirical criterion, its basis lies in the marked differences in the ultrastructure and chemical composition of the bacterial cell wall, marked by the absence or presence of an outer lipid membrane.\nAll Gram-positive bacteria are bound by a single-unit lipid membrane, and, in general, they contain a thick layer (20\u201380\u00a0nm) of peptidoglycan responsible for retaining the Gram stain. A number of other bacteria\u2014that are bound by a single membrane, but stain Gram-negative due to either lack of the peptidoglycan layer, as in the mycoplasmas, or their inability to retain the Gram stain because of their cell wall composition\u2014also show close relationship to the Gram-positive bacteria. For the bacterial cells bound by a single cell membrane, the term \"monoderm bacteria\" has been proposed.\nIn contrast to Gram-positive bacteria, all typical Gram-negative bacteria are bound by a cytoplasmic membrane and an outer cell membrane; they contain only a thin layer of peptidoglycan (2\u20133\u00a0nm) between these membranes. The presence of inner and outer cell membranes defines a new compartment in these cells: the periplasmic space or the periplasmic compartment. These bacteria have been designated as diderm bacteria. The distinction between the monoderm and diderm bacteria is supported by conserved signature indels in a number of important proteins (viz. DnaK, GroEL). Of these two structurally distinct groups of bacteria, monoderms are indicated to be ancestral. Based upon a number of observations including that the Gram-positive bacteria are the major producers of antibiotics and that, in general, Gram-negative bacteria are resistant to them, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in Gram-negative bacteria (diderms) has evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria, such as \"Deinococcus\", which stain Gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer and also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (Gram-positive) and diderm (Gram-negative) bacteria. The diderm bacteria can also be further differentiated between simple diderms lacking lipopolysaccharide, the archetypical diderm bacteria where the outer cell membrane contains lipopolysaccharide, and the diderm bacteria where outer cell membrane is made up of mycolic acid.\nExceptions.\nIn general, Gram-positive bacteria are monoderms and have a single lipid bilayer whereas Gram-negative bacteria are diderms and have two bilayers. Exceptions include:\nSome Bacillota species are not Gram-positive. The class Negativicutes, which includes \"Selenomonas\", are diderm and stain Gram-negative. Additionally, a number of bacterial taxa (viz. Negativicutes, Fusobacteriota, Synergistota, and Elusimicrobiota) that are either part of the phylum Bacillota or branch in its proximity are found to possess a diderm cell structure. However, a conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein distinguishes all traditional phyla of Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonadota, Aquificota, Chlamydiota, Bacteroidota, Chlorobiota, \"Cyanobacteria\", Fibrobacterota, Verrucomicrobiota, Planctomycetota, Spirochaetota, Acidobacteriota) from these other atypical diderm bacteria, as well as other phyla of monoderm bacteria (e.g., Actinomycetota, Bacillota, Thermotogota, Chloroflexota). The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional LPS (lipopolysaccharide)-containing Gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred.\nPathogenicity.\nIn the classical sense, six Gram-positive genera are typically pathogenic in humans. Two of these, \"Streptococcus\" and \"Staphylococcus\", are cocci (sphere-shaped). The remaining organisms are bacilli (rod-shaped) and can be subdivided based on their ability to form spores. The non-spore formers are \"Corynebacterium\" and \"Listeria\" (a coccobacillus), whereas \"Bacillus\" and \"Clostridium\" produce spores. The spore-forming bacteria can again be divided based on their respiration: \"Bacillus\" is a facultative anaerobe, while \"Clostridium\" is an obligate anaerobe. Also, \"Rathybacter\", \"Leifsonia\", and \"Clavibacter\" are three Gram-positive genera that cause plant disease. Gram-positive bacteria are capable of causing serious and sometimes fatal infections in newborn infants. Novel species of clinically relevant Gram-positive bacteria also include \"Catabacter hongkongensis\", which is an emerging pathogen belonging to Bacillota.\nBacterial transformation.\nTransformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from a donor bacterium to a recipient bacterium, the other two processes being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of donor bacterial DNA by a bacteriophage virus into a recipient host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.\nAs of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation among Gram-positive bacteria has been studied in medically important species such as \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", \"Streptococcus mutans\", \"Staphylococcus aureus\" and \"Streptococcus sanguinis\" and in Gram-positive soil bacteria \"Bacillus subtilis\" and \"Bacillus cereus\".\nOrthography: capitalization.\nThe adjectives \"Gram-positive\" and \"Gram-negative\" derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter \"G\" can be either a capital or lower-case, depending on which style guide, if any, governs the document being written. For instance, the style guide of the American CDC recommends writing: \"Gram stain\", \"this species is gram negative\", and \"a gram-negative species\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12937", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12937", "title": "Gram-negative bacteria", "text": "Group of bacteria that do not retain the Gram stain used in bacterial differentiation\nGram-negative bacteria are bacteria that, unlike Gram-positive bacteria, do not retain the crystal violet stain used in the Gram staining method of bacterial differentiation. Their defining characteristic is that their cell envelope consists of a thin peptidoglycan cell wall sandwiched between an inner (cytoplasmic) membrane and an outer membrane. These bacteria are found in all environments that support life on Earth.\nWithin this category, notable species include the model organism \"Escherichia coli\", along with various pathogenic bacteria, such as \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", \"Chlamydia trachomatis\", and \"Yersinia pestis\". They pose significant challenges in the medical field due to their outer membrane, which acts as a protective barrier against numerous antibiotics (including penicillin), detergents that would normally damage the inner cell membrane, and the antimicrobial enzyme lysozyme produced by animals as part of their innate immune system. Furthermore, the outer leaflet of this membrane contains a complex lipopolysaccharide (LPS) whose lipid A component can trigger a toxic reaction when the bacteria are lysed by immune cells. This reaction may lead to septic shock, resulting in low blood pressure, respiratory failure, reduced oxygen delivery, and lactic acidosis.\nSeveral classes of antibiotics have been developed to target Gram-negative bacteria, including aminopenicillins, ureidopenicillins, cephalosporins, beta-lactam-betalactamase inhibitor combinations (such as piperacillin-tazobactam), folate antagonists, quinolones, and carbapenems. Many of these antibiotics also cover Gram-positive bacteria. The antibiotics that specifically target Gram-negative organisms include aminoglycosides, monobactams (such as aztreonam), and ciprofloxacin.\nCharacteristics.\nConventional Gram-negative (LPS-diderm) bacteria display the following characteristics:\nHowever, the LPS-diderm group (corresponding to kingdom Pseudomonadati, formerly \"Hydrobacteria\") is not the only type of bacteria that stain negative. \"Mycobacterium\" (or rather most of Mycobacteriales), which does not belong in the group, have independently evolved an outer cell membrane, with a cell wall made of mycolic acid. This gives it very different structure and features.\nIn many Gram-negative bacteria, the IgaA membrane protein negatively regulates the Rcs phosphorelay system, a key envelope stress response pathway that helps maintain cell envelope integrity.\nClassification.\nAlong with cell shape, Gram staining is a rapid diagnostic tool and once was used to group species at the subdivision of Bacteria.\nHistorically, the kingdom Monera was divided into four divisions based on Gram staining: Firmicutes (+), Gracillicutes (\u2212), Mollicutes (0) and Mendocutes (var.).\nSince 1987, the monophyly of the Gram-negative bacteria has been disproven with molecular studies.\nCurrent knowledge divides the Gram-negatives into two large groups and some straddlers. The more \"conventional\" Gram-negatives with an LPS outer membrane do share a common ancestor and are grouped in kingdom Pseudomonadati. The less conventional ones are, as mentioned above, the order Mycobacteriales, have a mycolic acid cell wall and an outer membrane. The kingdom and the order are each monophyletic (or rather, not holyphyletic), but the \"LPS-diderm\" and \"mycolic-diderm\" groups are not, because some bacteria in the kingdom and the order do not, in fact, stain Gram negative. They will be discussed in the next section.\nTaxonomy.\nBacteria are traditionally classified based on their Gram-staining response into the Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Having just one membrane, the Gram-positive bacteria are also known as monoderm bacteria, while Gram-negative bacteria, having two membranes, are also known as diderm bacteria. It was traditionally thought that the groups represent lineages, i.e., the extra membrane only evolved once, such that Gram-negative bacteria are more closely related to one another than to any Gram-positive bacteria. While this is often true, the classification system breaks down in some cases, with lineage groupings not matching the staining result. Thus, Gram staining cannot be reliably used to assess familial relationships of bacteria. Nevertheless, staining often gives reliable information about the composition of the cell membrane, distinguishing between the presence or absence of an outer lipid membrane.\nOf these two structurally distinct groups of prokaryotic organisms, monoderm prokaryotes are thought to be ancestral. Based upon a number of different observations, including that the Gram-positive bacteria are the most sensitive to antibiotics and that the Gram-negative bacteria are, in general, resistant to antibiotics, it has been proposed that the outer cell membrane in Gram-negative bacteria (diderms) evolved as a protective mechanism against antibiotic selection pressure. Some bacteria such as \"Deinococcus\", which stain Gram-positive due to the presence of a thick peptidoglycan layer, but also possess an outer cell membrane are suggested as intermediates in the transition between monoderm (Gram-positive) and diderm (Gram-negative) bacteria. \nThe conventional LPS-\"diderm\" group of Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonadota, Aquificota, Chlamydiota, Bacteroidota, Chlorobiota, \"Cyanobacteria\", Fibrobacterota, Verrucomicrobiota, Planctomycetota, Spirochaetota, Acidobacteriota) are uniquely identified by a few conserved signature indel (CSI) in the HSP60 (GroEL) protein. The presence of this CSI in all sequenced species of conventional lipopolysaccharide-containing Gram-negative bacterial phyla provides evidence that these phyla of bacteria form a monophyletic clade and that no loss of the outer membrane from any species from this group has occurred. They have accordingly been assigned a kingdom Pseudomonadati (formerly \"Hydrobacteria\").\nThe difficulty lies in the other taxa that also have a diderm structure.\nExample species.\nThe proteobacteria are a major superphylum of Gram-negative bacteria, including \"E. coli\", \"Salmonella\", \"Shigella\", and other Enterobacteriaceae, \"Pseudomonas\", \"Moraxella\", \"Helicobacter\", \"Stenotrophomonas\", \"Bdellovibrio\", acetic acid bacteria, \"Legionella\" etc. Other notable groups of Gram-negative bacteria include the cyanobacteria, spirochaetes, and green sulfur bacteria.\nMedically-relevant Gram-negative diplococci include the four types that cause a sexually transmitted disease (\"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\"), a meningitis (\"Neisseria meningitidis\"), and respiratory symptoms (\"Moraxella catarrhalis\", A coccobacillus \"Haemophilus influenzae\" is another medically relevant coccal type.\nMedically relevant Gram-negative bacilli include a multitude of species. Some of them cause primarily respiratory problems (\"Klebsiella pneumoniae\", \"Legionella pneumophila\", \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\"), primarily urinary problems (\"Escherichia coli\", \"Proteus mirabilis\", \"Enterobacter cloacae\", \"Serratia marcescens\"), and primarily gastrointestinal problems (\"Helicobacter pylori\", \"Salmonella enteritidis\", \"Salmonella typhi\").\nGram-negative bacteria associated with hospital-acquired infections include \"Acinetobacter baumannii\", which cause bacteremia, secondary meningitis, and ventilator-associated pneumonia in hospital intensive-care units.\nBacterial transformation.\nTransformation is one of three processes for horizontal gene transfer, in which exogenous genetic material passes from one bacterium to another, the other two being conjugation (transfer of genetic material between two bacterial cells in direct contact) and transduction (injection of foreign DNA by a bacteriophage virus into the host bacterium). In transformation, the genetic material passes through the intervening medium, and uptake is completely dependent on the recipient bacterium.\nAs of 2014 about 80 species of bacteria were known to be capable of transformation, about evenly divided between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria; the number might be an overestimate since several of the reports are supported by single papers. Transformation has been studied in medically important Gram-negative bacteria species such as \"Helicobacter pylori\", \"Legionella pneumophila\", \"Neisseria meningitidis\", \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\" and \"Vibrio cholerae\". It has also been studied in Gram-negative species found in soil such as \"Pseudomonas stutzeri\", \"Acinetobacter baylyi\", and Gram-negative plant pathogens such as \"Ralstonia solanacearum\" and \"Xylella fastidiosa\".\nRole in disease.\nOne of the several unique characteristics of Gram-negative bacteria is the structure of the bacterial outer membrane. The outer leaflet of this membrane contains lipopolysaccharide (LPS), whose lipid A portion acts as an endotoxin. If Gram-negative bacteria enter the circulatory system, LPS can trigger an innate immune response, activating the immune system and producing cytokines (hormonal regulators). This leads to inflammation and can cause a toxic reaction, resulting in fever, an increased respiratory rate, and low blood pressure. That is why some infections with Gram-negative bacteria can lead to life-threatening septic shock.\nThe outer membrane protects the bacteria from several antibiotics, dyes, and detergents that would normally damage either the inner membrane or the cell wall (made of peptidoglycan). The outer membrane provides these bacteria with resistance to lysozyme and penicillin. The periplasmic space (space between the two cell membranes) also contains enzymes which break down or modify antibiotics. Drugs commonly used to treat Gram negative infections include amino, carboxy and ureido penicillins (ampicillin, amoxicillin, pipercillin, ticarcillin). These drugs may be combined with beta-lactamase inhibitors to combat the presence of enzymes that can digest these drugs (known as beta-lactamases) in the peri-plasmic space. Other classes of drugs that have Gram negative spectrum include cephalosporins, monobactams (aztreonam), aminoglycosides, quinolones, macrolides, chloramphenicol, folate antagonists, and carbapenems.\nOrthography: capitalization.\nThe adjectives \"Gram-positive\" and \"Gram-negative\" derive from the surname of Hans Christian Gram, a Danish bacteriologist; as eponymous adjectives, their initial letter \"G\" can be either capital or lower-case, depending on which style guide (e.g., that of the CDC), if any, governs the document being written. This is further explained at \"Gram staining \u00a7 Orthographic note\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12938", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12938", "title": "Greyhound", "text": "Dog breed\nThe English Greyhound, or simply the Greyhound, is a breed of dog, a sighthound which has been bred for coursing, greyhound racing and hunting. Some are kept as show dogs or pets.\nGreyhounds are defined as a tall, muscular, smooth-coated, \"S-shaped\" type of sighthound with a long tail and tough feet. Greyhounds are a separate breed from other related sighthounds, such as the Italian greyhound.\nThe Greyhound's combination of long, powerful legs, deep chest, flexible spine, and slim build allows it to reach average race speeds exceeding . A racing greyhound can reach a full speed of at least .\nHowever, the most common speeds at which they usually win races are . Its maximum speed is attained whether running on a straight track or a curved track.\nAppearance.\nMales are usually tall at the withers, and weigh on average . Females tend to be smaller, with shoulder heights ranging from and weights from , although weights can be above and below these average weights. Greyhounds have very short fur, which is easy to maintain. There are approximately 30 recognized color forms, of which variations of white, brindle, fawn (pale tan to dark deer-red), black, red, and blue (gray) can appear uniquely or in combination. Greyhounds are dolichocephalic, with a skull which is relatively long in comparison to its breadth, and an elongated muzzle.\nTemperament.\nGreyhounds are gentle and affectionate and make excellent pets. They do well in families with children, as long as the children are taught to treat the dog properly with politeness and appropriate respect. Greyhounds have a sensitive nature, and gentle commands work best as training methods.\nOccasionally, a Greyhound may bark; however, they are generally not barkers, which is beneficial in suburban environments, and they are usually as friendly to strangers as they are with their own families. A 2008 University of Pennsylvania study found that Greyhounds are one of the least aggressive dog breeds towards strangers, owners, and other dogs. However, Greyhounds can be prone to sleep startle/sleep aggression if suddenly disturbed while napping. Owners can encounter this problem, as many greyhounds sleep with their eyes at least partially open, appearing awake.\nA survey of those adopting rescue Greyhounds found that Greyhound adoptions have higher short term adoption success than shelters. The survey also found reported hyperactivity levels to be below that of shelter dogs.\nGreyhounds tend to be outgoing, happy and sociable with people and seem to relish human contact, even following owners from room to room at home (known colloquially as being a \"Velcro dog\"). Small animals including cats may be the subject of prey-driven behaviour by Greyhounds.\nSport.\nCoursing.\nThe original primary use of Greyhounds, both in the British Isles and on the Continent of Europe, was in the coursing of deer for meat and sport; later, specifically in Britain, they specialized in competition hare coursing. Some Greyhounds are still used for coursing, although artificial lure sports like lure coursing and racing are far more common and popular. Many leading 300- to 550-yard sprinters have bloodlines traceable back through Irish sires, within a few generations of racers that won events such as the Irish Coursing Derby or the Irish Cup.\nRacing.\nUntil the early 20th century, Greyhounds were principally bred and trained for hunting and coursing. During the 1920s, modern greyhound racing was introduced into the United States, England (1926), Northern Ireland (1927), Scotland (1927), and the Republic of Ireland (1927). Australia also has a significant racing culture.\nIn the United States, aside from professional racing, many Greyhounds enjoy success on the amateur race track. Organizations like the Large Gazehound Racing Association (LGRA) and the National Oval Track Racing Association (NOTRA) provide opportunities for Greyhounds to compete.\nCompanion.\nHistorically, the Greyhound has, since its first appearance as a hunting type and breed, enjoyed a specific degree of fame and definition in Western literature, heraldry and art as the most elegant or noble companion and hunter of the canine world. In modern times, the professional racing industry, with its large numbers of track-bred greyhounds, as well as international adoption programs aimed at re-homing dogs has redefined the breed as a sporting dog that will supply friendly companionship in its retirement. This has been prevalent in recent years due to track closures in the United States. Outside the racing industry and coursing community, the Kennel Clubs' registered breed still enjoys a modest following as a show dog and pet.\nHealth and physiology.\nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 11.5 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds. A 2005 Swedish study of insurance data found 60% of Greyhounds died by the age of 10, higher than the overall rate of 35% of dogs dying by the age of 10.\nThe speed of a Greyhound is due to its light but muscular build, large heart, highest percentage of oxidative\u2013glycolytic fast twitch muscle fibers (Type IIa) of any breed, double suspension gallop, and extreme flexibility of its spine. \"Double suspension rotary gallop\" describes the fastest running gait of the Greyhound in which all four feet are free from the ground in two phases, contracted and extended, during each full stride. \nCompared to humans, the activity of the anaerobic enzyme lactate dehydrogenase in greyhound muscles is about three times higher, but even so, their lactate dehydrogenase activity is lower than that muscles of antelopes and cheetahs when these are also compared to humans. The activity of the aerobic enzyme citrate synthase is comparable to that of human endurance runners; this indicates muscles capable of both high speeds and high endurance.\nThe musculature of both hindlimbs constitutes more than 18% of their body mass. The proportion of both forelimbs muscle mass is very similar. The proportion of back musculature is 12% of their body mass.\nDue to the Greyhound's unique physiology and anatomy, a veterinarian who understands the issues relevant to the breed is generally needed when the dogs need treatment, particularly when anesthesia is required. Greyhounds cannot metabolize barbiturate-based anesthesia in the same way that other breeds can because their livers have lower amounts of oxidative enzymes. Greyhounds demonstrate unusual blood chemistry, which can be misread by veterinarians not familiar with the breed and can result in an incorrect diagnosis.\nGreyhounds are very sensitive to insecticides. Many vets do not recommend the use of flea collars or flea spray on Greyhounds if the product is pyrethrin-based. Products like Advantage, Frontline, Lufenuron, and Amitraz are safe for use on Greyhounds, however, and are very effective in controlling fleas and ticks.\nGreyhounds have higher levels of red blood cells than other breeds. Since red blood cells carry oxygen to the muscles, this higher level allows the hound to move larger quantities of oxygen faster from the lungs to the muscles. Conversely, Greyhounds have lower levels of platelets than other breeds.\nDelayed haemorrhage following trauma or routine surgery is more common in Greyhounds, with one study reporting significant haemorrhage in 26% of Greyhounds following routine gonadectomy, compared to 0-2% in other dog breeds. This is often termed greyhound fibrinolytic syndrome or breed-associated hyperfibrinolysis, where in there is a disorder of the fibrinolysis system without derangement of the primary or secondary coagulation systems, and is also not related to platelet count. In this syndrome there is initial adequate hemostasis following trauma or routine surgical procedures, however 36\u201348 hours later the site undergoes inappropriate hyperfibrinolysis. This results in delayed bleeding which can result in significant morbidity and mortality. Standard pre-operative blood work does not identify those at risk It is distinct from common bleeding disorders in other breeds such as von Willebrand's disease, which is uncommon in Greyhounds. Although high-quality research data are lacking, it is thought that this condition can be prevented and treated by administering antifibrinolytic medication such as tranexamic acid via the oral or parenteral route. Intensive care and blood product administration may also be required in severe cases.\nGreyhounds do not have undercoats and thus are less likely to trigger dog allergies in humans (they are sometimes incorrectly referred to as \"hypoallergenic\"). The lack of an undercoat, coupled with a general lack of body fat, also makes Greyhounds more susceptible to extreme temperatures (both hot and cold); because of this, they must be housed inside. Some Greyhounds are susceptible to corns on their paw pads; a variety of methods are used to treat them.\nThyroxine levels in the Greyhound are below the normal reference range for dogs; thyroxine response to thyroid-stimulating hormone is also lowered. This can impact testing for thyroid disease but it is not a concern for health.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\n\"The true origin of the greyhound is unsure, but drawings of findings from the \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck site in Turkey (6000 BC), the finding of a greyhound-\"like\" dog in a funeral vase in the town of Fusa in Iran (4200 BC) or in rock art in Tassili (dated at 5000 \u2013 2000 BC) indicate that the greyhound is indeed one of the oldest breeds of dog.\".\nThe ancient skeletal remains of a dog identified as being of the greyhound/saluki form were excavated at Tell Brak in modern Syria, and dated as being approximately 4,000 years old. Dogs that look similar to Salukis and Greyhounds were increasingly depicted on Egyptian tombs from the Middle Kingdom (2134 BC\u20131785 BC) onward.\nHistorical literature by Arrian on the vertragus (from the Latin , a word of Celtic origin), the first recorded sighthound in Europe and possible antecedent of the Greyhound, suggested that its origin lies with the Celts from Eastern Europe or Eurasia. Systematic archaeozoology of Britain conducted in 1974 ruled out the existence of a true greyhound-type in Britain prior to the Roman occupation, which was further confirmed in 2000. Written evidence from the early period of Roman occupation, the Vindolanda tablets (No. 594), demonstrate that the occupying troops from Continental Europe either had with them in the North of England, or certainly knew of, the vertragus and its hunting use.\nDuring the Middle Ages, greyhounds could only be owned by rulers and nobles, having long been associated with heraldic symbols of the ruling class in England, France, and the Czech lands.\nThe earliest archaeological discovery found conclusively to be a greyhound specifically was at the Chot\u011bbuz fort in the Czech Republic. This comprised sighthound type \"gracile\" bones dating from the 8th to 9th century AD. These bones matched those of a high \"greyhound\", and were also genetically compared with the modern Greyhound and other sighthounds, and found to be almost completely identical with the modern Greyhound breed, with the exception of only four deletions and one substitution in the DNA sequences, which were interpreted as differences probably arising from 11 centuries of breeding of this type of dog.\nAll modern pedigree Greyhounds derive from the Greyhound stock recorded and registered first in private studbooks in the 18th century, then in public studbooks in the 19th century, which ultimately were registered with coursing, racing, and kennel club authorities of the United Kingdom. Historically, these sighthounds were used primarily for hunting in the open where their pursuit speed and keen eyesight were essential.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Greyhound\" is generally believed to come from the Old English . is the antecedent of the modern \"hound\", but the meaning of is undetermined, other than in reference to dogs in Old English and Old Norse. The word \"hund\" is still used for dogs in general in Scandinavian languages today. Its origin does not appear to have any common root with the modern word \"grey\" for color, and indeed the Greyhound is seen with a wide variety of coat colors. The lighter colors, patch-like markings and white appeared in the breed that was once ordinarily grey in color.\nThe Greyhound is the only dog mentioned by name in the Bible. Many versions, including the Jewish Publication Society and King James Version, name the Greyhound as one of the \"three that are stately of stride\". However, some newer biblical translations, including the New International Version, have changed this to 'strutting rooster'.\nAccording to Pokorny, the English term 'Greyhound' does not mean \"grey dog/hound\", but simply \"fair dog\". Subsequent words have been derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *g'her- \"shine, twinkle\": English 'grey', Old High German \"grey, old\", Old Icelandic \"piglet, pig\", Old Icelandic \"to dawn\", \"morning twilight\", Old Irish \"sun\", Old Church Slavonic \"morning twilight, brightness\". The common sense of these words is \"to shine; bright\".\nIn 1928, the first winner of Best in Show at Crufts was breeder/owner Mr. H. Whitley's Greyhound \"Primley Sceptre\". Greyhounds have won the award three times in total, the most recent being in 1956.\nHistorically, English Greyhounds were grouped: two for coursing, as a \"Brace\", three for hunting, as a \"Leash\", otherwise known as a \"couple and a half\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12939", "revid": "10149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12939", "title": "Geometric algebra", "text": "Algebraic structure designed for geometry\nIn mathematics, a geometric algebra (also known as a Clifford algebra) is an algebra that can represent and manipulate geometrical objects such as vectors. Geometric algebra is built out of two fundamental operations, addition and the geometric product. Multiplication of vectors results in higher-dimensional objects called multivectors. Compared to other formalisms for manipulating geometric objects, geometric algebra is noteworthy for supporting vector division (though generally not by all elements) and addition of objects of different dimensions.\nThe geometric product was first briefly mentioned by Hermann Grassmann, who was chiefly interested in developing the closely related exterior algebra. In 1878, William Kingdon Clifford greatly expanded on Grassmann's work to form what are now usually called Clifford algebras in his honor (although Clifford himself chose to call them \"geometric algebras\"). Clifford defined the Clifford algebra and its product as a unification of the Grassmann algebra and Hamilton's quaternion algebra. Adding the dual of the Grassmann exterior product allows the use of the Grassmann\u2013Cayley algebra. In the late 1990s, plane-based geometric algebra and conformal geometric algebra (CGA) respectively provided a framework for euclidean geometry and classical geometries. In practice, these and several derived operations allow a correspondence of elements, subspaces and operations of the algebra with geometric interpretations. For several decades, geometric algebras went somewhat ignored, greatly eclipsed by the vector calculus then newly developed to describe electromagnetism. The term \"geometric algebra\" was repopularized in the 1960s by David Hestenes, who advocated its importance to relativistic physics.\nThe scalars and vectors have their usual interpretation and make up distinct subspaces of a geometric algebra. Bivectors provide a more natural representation of the pseudovector quantities of 3D vector calculus that are derived as a cross product, such as oriented area, oriented angle of rotation, torque, angular momentum and the magnetic field. A trivector can represent an oriented volume, and so on. An element called a blade may be used to represent a subspace and orthogonal projections onto that subspace. Rotations and reflections are represented as elements. Unlike a vector algebra, a geometric algebra naturally accommodates any number of dimensions and any quadratic form such as in relativity.\nExamples of geometric algebras applied in physics include the spacetime algebra (and the less common algebra of physical space). Geometric calculus, an extension of GA that incorporates differentiation and integration, can be used to formulate other theories such as complex analysis and differential geometry, e.g. by using the Clifford algebra instead of differential forms. Geometric algebra has been advocated, most notably by David Hestenes and Chris Doran, as the preferred mathematical framework for physics. Proponents claim that it provides compact and intuitive descriptions in many areas including classical and quantum mechanics, electromagnetic theory, and relativity. GA has also found use as a computational tool in computer graphics and robotics.\nDefinition and notation.\nThere are a number of different ways to define a geometric algebra. Hestenes's original approach was axiomatic, \"full of geometric significance\" and equivalent to the universal Clifford algebra.\nGiven a finite-dimensional vector space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; over a field &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with a symmetric bilinear form (the \"inner product\", e.g., the Euclidean or Lorentzian metric) &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the geometric algebra of the quadratic space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the Clifford algebra &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, an element of which is called a multivector. The Clifford algebra is commonly defined as a quotient of the tensor algebra of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, though this definition is abstract, so the following definition is presented without requiring abstract algebra.\n* it contains &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as distinct subspaces\n* &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; \n* &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; generates &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as an algebra \n* &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is not generated by any proper subspace of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nTo cover degenerate symmetric bilinear forms, the last condition must be modified. It can be shown that these conditions uniquely characterize the geometric product.\nFor the remainder of this article, only the real case, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, will be considered. The notation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (respectively &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) will be used to denote a geometric algebra for which the bilinear form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has the signature &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (respectively &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nThe product in the geometric algebra is called the \"geometric product\", and the product in the contained exterior algebra is called the \"exterior product\" (frequently called the \"wedge product\" or the \"outer product\"). It is standard to denote these respectively by juxtaposition (i.e., suppressing any explicit multiplication symbol) and the symbol &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Their connection to the inner product will be elaborated on below.\nThe above definition of the geometric algebra is still somewhat abstract, so we summarize the properties of the geometric product here. For multivectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nThe exterior product has the same properties, except that the last property above is replaced by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nNote that in the last property above, the real number &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; need not be nonnegative if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is not positive-definite. An important property of the geometric product is the existence of elements that have a multiplicative inverse. For a vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, if formula_1 then formula_2 exists and is equal to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A nonzero element of the algebra does not necessarily have a multiplicative inverse. For example, if formula_3 is a vector in formula_4 such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the element formula_5 is both a nontrivial idempotent element and a nonzero zero divisor, and thus has no inverse.\nIt is usual to identify formula_6 and formula_4 with their images under the natural embeddings formula_8 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In this article, this identification is assumed. Throughout, the terms \"scalar\" and \"vector\" refer to elements of formula_6 and formula_4 respectively (and of their images under this embedding).\nGeometric product.\nFor vectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we may write the geometric product of any two vectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the sum of a symmetric product and an antisymmetric product:\n formula_11\nThus we can define the \"inner product\" of vectors as\n formula_12\nso that the symmetric product can be written as\n formula_13\nConversely, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is completely determined by the algebra. The antisymmetric part is the exterior product of the two vectors, the product of the contained exterior algebra:\n formula_14\nThen by simple addition:\n formula_15 the ungeneralized or vector form of the geometric product.\nThe inner and exterior products are associated with familiar concepts from standard vector algebra. Geometrically, formula_16 and formula_17 are parallel if their geometric product is equal to their inner product, whereas formula_16 and formula_17 are perpendicular if their geometric product is equal to their exterior product. In a geometric algebra for which the square of any nonzero vector is positive, the inner product of two vectors can be identified with the dot product of standard vector algebra. The exterior product of two vectors can be identified with the signed area enclosed by a parallelogram the sides of which are the vectors. The cross product of two vectors in formula_20 dimensions with positive-definite quadratic form is closely related to their exterior product.\nMost instances of geometric algebras of interest have a nondegenerate quadratic form. If the quadratic form is fully degenerate, the inner product of any two vectors is always zero, and the geometric algebra is then simply an exterior algebra. Unless otherwise stated, this article will treat only nondegenerate geometric algebras.\nThe exterior product is naturally extended as an associative bilinear binary operator between any two elements of the algebra, satisfying the identities\n formula_21\nwhere the sum is over all permutations of the indices, with formula_22 the sign of the permutation, and formula_23 are vectors (not general elements of the algebra). Since every element of the algebra can be expressed as the sum of products of this form, this defines the exterior product for every pair of elements of the algebra. It follows from the definition that the exterior product forms an alternating algebra.\nThe equivalent structure equation for Clifford algebra is\n formula_24\nwhere formula_25 is the Pfaffian of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and formula_26 provides combinations, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; indices divided into &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; parts and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the parity of the combination.\nThe Pfaffian provides a metric for the exterior algebra and, as pointed out by Claude Chevalley, Clifford algebra reduces to the exterior algebra with a zero quadratic form. The role the Pfaffian plays can be understood from a geometric viewpoint by developing Clifford algebra from simplices. This derivation provides a better connection between Pascal's triangle and simplices because it provides an interpretation of the first column of ones.\nBlades, grades, and basis.\nA multivector that is the exterior product of formula_27 linearly independent vectors is called a \"blade\", and is said to be of grade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A multivector that is the sum of blades of grade formula_27 is called a (homogeneous) multivector of grade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. From the axioms, with closure, every multivector of the geometric algebra is a sum of blades.\nConsider a set of formula_27 linearly independent vectors formula_30 spanning an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional subspace of the vector space. With these, we can define a real symmetric matrix (in the same way as a Gramian matrix)\n formula_31\nBy the spectral theorem, formula_32 can be diagonalized to diagonal matrix formula_33 by an orthogonal matrix formula_34 via\n formula_35\nDefine a new set of vectors &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, known as orthogonal basis vectors, to be those transformed by the orthogonal matrix:\n formula_36\nSince orthogonal transformations preserve inner products, it follows that formula_37 and thus the formula_38 are perpendicular. In other words, the geometric product of two distinct vectors formula_39 is completely specified by their exterior product, or more generally\n formula_40\nTherefore, every blade of grade formula_27 can be written as the exterior product of formula_27 vectors. More generally, if a degenerate geometric algebra is allowed, then the orthogonal matrix is replaced by a block matrix that is orthogonal in the nondegenerate block, and the diagonal matrix has zero-valued entries along the degenerate dimensions. If the new vectors of the nondegenerate subspace are normalized according to\n formula_43\nthen these normalized vectors must square to formula_44 or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. By Sylvester's law of inertia, the total number of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the total number of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;s along the diagonal matrix is invariant. By extension, the total number formula_45 of these vectors that square to formula_44 and the total number formula_47 that square to formula_48 is invariant. (The total number of basis vectors that square to zero is also invariant, and may be nonzero if the degenerate case is allowed.) We denote this algebra &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For example, formula_49 models three-dimensional Euclidean space, formula_50 relativistic spacetime and formula_51 a conformal geometric algebra of a three-dimensional space.\nThe set of all possible products of formula_52 orthogonal basis vectors with indices in increasing order, including formula_53 as the empty product, forms a basis for the entire geometric algebra (an analogue of the PBW theorem). For example, the following is a basis for the geometric algebra &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\n formula_54\nA basis formed this way is called a standard basis for the geometric algebra, and any other orthogonal basis for formula_4 will produce another standard basis. Each standard basis consists of formula_56 elements. Every multivector of the geometric algebra can be expressed as a linear combination of the standard basis elements. If the standard basis elements are formula_57 with formula_58 being an index set, then the geometric product of any two multivectors is\n formula_59\nThe terminology \"formula_60-vector\" is often encountered to describe multivectors containing elements of only one grade. In higher dimensional space, some such multivectors are not blades (cannot be factored into the exterior product of formula_60 vectors). By way of example, formula_62 in formula_63 cannot be factored; typically, however, such elements of the algebra do not yield to geometric interpretation as objects, although they may represent geometric quantities such as rotations. Only &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;- and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors are always blades in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-space.\nVersor.\nA &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-versor is a multivector that can be expressed as the geometric product of formula_60 invertible vectors. Unit quaternions (originally called versors by Hamilton) may be identified with rotors in 3D space in much the same way as real 2D rotors subsume complex numbers; for the details refer to Dorst.\nSome authors use the term \"versor product\" to refer to the frequently occurring case where an operand is \"sandwiched\" between operators. The descriptions for rotations and reflections, including their outermorphisms, are examples of such sandwiching. These outermorphisms have a particularly simple algebraic form. Specifically, a mapping of vectors of the form\n formula_65 extends to the outermorphism formula_66\nSince both operators and operand are versors there is potential for alternative examples such as rotating a rotor or reflecting a spinor always provided that some geometrical or physical significance can be attached to such operations.\nBy the Cartan\u2013Dieudonn\u00e9 theorem we have that every isometry can be given as reflections in hyperplanes and since composed reflections provide rotations then we have that orthogonal transformations are versors.\nIn group terms, for a real, non-degenerate &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, having identified the group formula_67 as the group of all invertible elements of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, Lundholm gives a proof that the \"versor group\" formula_68 (the set of invertible versors) is equal to the Lipschitz group formula_69 ( Clifford group, although Lundholm deprecates this usage).\nSubgroups of the Lipschitz group.\nWe denote the grade involution as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and reversion as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nAlthough the Lipschitz group (defined as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;) and the versor group (defined as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;) have divergent definitions, they are the same group. Lundholm defines the &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; subgroups of the Lipschitz group.\nMultiple analyses of spinors use GA as a representation.\nGrade projection.\nA &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-graded vector space structure can be established on a geometric algebra by use of the exterior product that is naturally induced by the geometric product.\nSince the geometric product and the exterior product are equal on orthogonal vectors, this grading can be conveniently constructed by using an orthogonal basis &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nElements of the geometric algebra that are scalar multiples of formula_53 are of grade formula_71 and are called \"scalars\". Elements that are in the span of formula_72 are of grade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and are the ordinary vectors. Elements in the span of formula_73 are of grade formula_74 and are the bivectors. This terminology continues through to the last grade of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors. Alternatively, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors are called pseudoscalars, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors are called pseudovectors, etc. Many of the elements of the algebra are not graded by this scheme since they are sums of elements of differing grade. Such elements are said to be of \"mixed grade\". The grading of multivectors is independent of the basis chosen originally.\nThis is a grading as a vector space, but not as an algebra. Because the product of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blade and an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blade is contained in the span of formula_71 through &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blades, the geometric algebra is a filtered algebra.\nA multivector formula_76 may be decomposed with the grade-projection operator &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which outputs the grade-&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; portion of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. As a result:\n formula_77\nAs an example, the geometric product of two vectors formula_78 since formula_79 and formula_80 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, for formula_81 other than formula_71 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nA multivector formula_76 may also be decomposed into even and odd components, which may respectively be expressed as the sum of the even and the sum of the odd grade components above:\n formula_84\n formula_85\nThis is the result of forgetting structure from a &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;-graded vector space to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-graded vector space. The geometric product respects this coarser grading. Thus in addition to being a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-graded vector space, the geometric algebra is a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-graded algebra, a superalgebra.\nRestricting to the even part, the product of two even elements is also even. This means that the even multivectors defines an \"even subalgebra\". The even subalgebra of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional geometric algebra is algebra-isomorphic (without preserving either filtration or grading) to a full geometric algebra of formula_86 dimensions. Examples include formula_87 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nRepresentation of subspaces.\nGeometric algebra represents subspaces of formula_4 as blades, and so they coexist in the same algebra with vectors from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional subspace formula_89 of formula_4 is represented by taking an orthogonal basis formula_91 and using the geometric product to form the blade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. There are multiple blades representing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; all those representing formula_89 are scalar multiples of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. These blades can be separated into two sets: positive multiples of formula_93 and negative multiples of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The positive multiples of formula_93 are said to have \"the same orientation\" as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the negative multiples the \"opposite orientation\".\nBlades are important since geometric operations such as projections, rotations and reflections depend on the factorability via the exterior product that (the restricted class of) &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blades provide but that (the generalized class of) grade-&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; multivectors do not when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nUnit pseudoscalars.\nUnit pseudoscalars are blades that play important roles in GA. A unit pseudoscalar for a non-degenerate subspace formula_89 of formula_4 is a blade that is the product of the members of an orthonormal basis for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. It can be shown that if formula_97 and formula_98 are both unit pseudoscalars for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then formula_99 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. If one doesn't choose an orthonormal basis for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then the Pl\u00fccker embedding gives a vector in the exterior algebra but only up to scaling. Using the vector space isomorphism between the geometric algebra and exterior algebra, this gives the equivalence class of formula_100 for all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Orthonormality gets rid of this ambiguity except for the signs above.\nSuppose the geometric algebra formula_101 with the familiar positive definite inner product on formula_102 is formed. Given a plane (two-dimensional subspace) of\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, one can find an orthonormal basis formula_103 spanning the plane, and thus find a unit pseudoscalar formula_104 representing this plane. The geometric product of any two vectors in the span of formula_105 and formula_106 lies in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, that is, it is the sum of a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vector and a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vector.\nBy the properties of the geometric product, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The resemblance to the imaginary unit is not incidental: the subspace formula_107 is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-algebra isomorphic to the complex numbers. In this way, a copy of the complex numbers is embedded in the geometric algebra for each two-dimensional subspace of formula_4 on which the quadratic form is definite.\nIt is sometimes possible to identify the presence of an imaginary unit in a physical equation. Such units arise from one of the many quantities in the real algebra that square to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and these have geometric significance because of the properties of the algebra and the interaction of its various subspaces.\nIn &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a further familiar case occurs. Given a standard basis consisting of orthonormal vectors formula_109 of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the set of \"all\" &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors is spanned by\n formula_110\nLabelling these &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_111 and formula_60 (momentarily deviating from our uppercase convention), the subspace generated by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vectors is exactly &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. This set is seen to be the even subalgebra of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and furthermore is isomorphic as an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-algebra to the quaternions, another important algebraic system.\nExtensions of the inner and exterior products.\nIt is common practice to extend the exterior product on vectors to the entire algebra of multivectors. This may be done through the use of the above-mentioned grade projection operator:\n formula_113 \u00a0 \u00a0 (the \"exterior product\")\nThis generalization is consistent with the above definition involving antisymmetrization. Another generalization related to the exterior product is the commutator product:\n formula_114 \u00a0 \u00a0 (the \"commutator product\")\nThe regressive product is the dual of the exterior product (respectively corresponding to the \"meet\" and \"join\" in this context). The dual specification of elements permits, for blades &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the intersection (or meet) where the duality is to be taken relative to a blade containing both &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (the smallest such blade being the join).\n formula_115\nwith &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; the unit pseudoscalar of the algebra. The regressive product, like the exterior product, is associative.\nThe inner product on vectors can also be generalized, but in more than one non-equivalent way. The paper gives a full treatment of several different inner products developed for geometric algebras and their interrelationships, and the notation is taken from there. Many authors use the same symbol as for the inner product of vectors for their chosen extension (e.g. Hestenes and Perwass). No consistent notation has emerged.\nThe original extension by Hestenes defines the inner (or dot) product as the lowest grade of the geometric product, except that any scalar part of the factors will not contribute (the dot product of a multivector by a scalar is 0):\n formula_116\nThe original intention was to make &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; true for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; scalars or vectors. Many authors don't use the restriction of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in the definition, which is equivalent to the \"fat dot\" product below.\nAmong the other several different generalizations of the inner product on vectors are:\n formula_117 \u00a0\u00a0(the \"left contraction\")\n formula_118 \u00a0\u00a0(the \"right contraction\")\n formula_119 \u00a0\u00a0(the \"scalar product\")\n formula_120 \u00a0\u00a0(the \"(fat) dot\" product)\n makes an argument for the use of contractions in preference to Hestenes's inner product; they are algebraically more regular and have cleaner geometric interpretations. \nA number of identities incorporating the contractions are valid without restriction of their inputs.\nFor example,\n formula_121\n formula_122\n formula_123\n formula_124 \n formula_125\n formula_126\nBenefits of using the left contraction as an extension of the inner product on vectors include that the identity formula_127 is extended to formula_128 for any vector formula_16 and multivector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and that the projection operation formula_130 is extended to formula_131 for any blade formula_132 and any multivector formula_76 (with a minor modification to accommodate null &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, given below).\nDual basis.\nLet formula_134 be a basis of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, i.e. a set of formula_52 linearly independent vectors that span the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional vector space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The basis that is dual to formula_134 is the set of elements of the dual vector space formula_137 that forms a biorthogonal system with this basis, thus being the elements denoted formula_138 satisfying\n formula_139\nwhere formula_140 is the Kronecker delta.\nGiven a nondegenerate quadratic form on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_137 becomes naturally identified with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the dual basis may be regarded as elements of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, but are not in general the same set as the original basis.\nGiven further a GA of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, let \n formula_142\nbe the pseudoscalar (which does not necessarily square to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) formed from the basis &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The dual basis vectors may be constructed as\n formula_143\nwhere the formula_144 denotes that the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;th basis vector is omitted from the product.\nA dual basis is also known as a reciprocal basis or reciprocal frame.\nA major usage of a dual basis is to separate vectors into components. Given a vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, scalar components formula_145 can be defined as\n formula_146\nin terms of which formula_16 can be separated into vector components as\n formula_148\nWe can also define scalar components formula_23 as\n formula_150\nin terms of which formula_16 can be separated into vector components in terms of the dual basis as\n formula_152\nA dual basis as defined above for the vector subspace of a geometric algebra can be extended to cover the entire algebra. For compactness, we'll use a single capital letter to represent an ordered set of vector indices. I.e., writing\n formula_153\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nwe can write a basis blade as\n formula_154\nThe corresponding reciprocal blade has the indices in opposite order:\n formula_155\nSimilar to the case above with vectors, it can be shown that\n formula_156\nwhere formula_157 is the scalar product.\nWith formula_76 a multivector, we can define scalar components as\n formula_159\nin terms of which formula_76 can be separated into component blades as\n formula_161\nWe can alternatively define scalar components\n formula_162\nin terms of which formula_76 can be separated into component blades as\n formula_164\nLinear functions.\nAlthough a versor is easier to work with because it can be directly represented in the algebra as a multivector, versors are a subgroup of linear functions on multivectors, which can still be used when necessary. The geometric algebra of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional vector space is spanned by a basis of formula_56 elements. If a multivector is represented by a formula_166 real column matrix of coefficients of a basis of the algebra, then all linear transformations of the multivector can be expressed as the matrix multiplication by a formula_167 real matrix. However, such a general linear transformation allows arbitrary exchanges among grades, such as a \"rotation\" of a scalar into a vector, which has no evident geometric interpretation.\nA general linear transformation from vectors to vectors is of interest. With the natural restriction to preserving the induced exterior algebra, the \"outermorphism\" of the linear transformation is the unique(1) = 1&lt;/math&gt; is usually added to ensure that the zero map is unique.}} extension of the versor. If formula_168 is a linear function that maps vectors to vectors, then its outermorphism is the function that obeys the rule\n formula_169\nfor a blade, extended to the whole algebra through linearity.\nModeling geometries.\nAlthough a lot of attention has been placed on CGA, GA is not just one algebra, it is one of a family of algebras with the same essential structure.\nVector space model.\nThe even subalgebra of formula_170 is isomorphic to the complex numbers, as may be seen by writing a vector formula_171 in terms of its components in an orthonormal basis and left multiplying by the basis vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, yielding\n formula_172\nwhere we identify formula_173 since\n formula_174\nSimilarly, the even subalgebra of formula_49 with basis formula_176 is isomorphic to the quaternions as may be seen by identifying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_177 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nEvery associative algebra has a matrix representation; replacing the three Cartesian basis vectors by the Pauli matrices gives a representation of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\n formula_178\nDotting the \"Pauli vector\" (a dyad):\n formula_179 with arbitrary vectors formula_180 and formula_181 and multiplying through gives:\n formula_182 (Equivalently, by inspection, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;)\nSpacetime model.\nIn physics, the main applications are the geometric algebra of Minkowski 3+1 spacetime, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, called spacetime algebra (STA), or less commonly, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, interpreted the algebra of physical space (APS).\nWhile in STA, points of spacetime are represented simply by vectors, in APS, points of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional spacetime are instead represented by paravectors, a three-dimensional vector (space) plus a one-dimensional scalar (time).\nIn spacetime algebra the electromagnetic field tensor has a bivector representation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Here, the formula_183 is the unit pseudoscalar (or four-dimensional volume element), formula_184 is the unit vector in time direction, and formula_185 and formula_132 are the classic electric and magnetic field vectors (with a zero time component). Using the four-current &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, Maxwell's equations then become\nIn geometric calculus, juxtaposition of vectors such as in formula_187 indicate the geometric product and can be decomposed into parts as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Here formula_93 is the covector derivative in any spacetime and reduces to formula_189 in flat spacetime. Where formula_190 plays a role in Minkowski &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-spacetime which is synonymous to the role of formula_189 in Euclidean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-space and is related to the d'Alembertian by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Indeed, given an observer represented by a future pointing timelike vector formula_184 we have\n formula_193\n formula_194\nBoosts in this Lorentzian metric space have the same expression formula_195 as rotation in Euclidean space, where formula_196 is the bivector generated by the time and the space directions involved, whereas in the Euclidean case it is the bivector generated by the two space directions, strengthening the \"analogy\" to almost identity.\nThe Dirac matrices are a representation of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, showing the equivalence with matrix representations used by physicists.\nHomogeneous models.\nHomogeneous models generally refer to a projective representation in which the elements of the one-dimensional subspaces of a vector space represent points of a geometry.\nIn a geometric algebra of a space of formula_52 dimensions, the rotors represent a set of transformations with formula_198 degrees of freedom, corresponding to rotations \u2013 for example, formula_20 when formula_200 and formula_201 when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Geometric algebra is often used to model a projective space, i.e. as a \"homogeneous model\": a point, line, plane, etc. is represented by an equivalence class of elements of the algebra that differ by an invertible scalar factor.\nThe rotors in a space of dimension formula_202 have formula_203 degrees of freedom, the same as the number of degrees of freedom in the rotations and translations combined for an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional space.\nThis is the case in \"Projective Geometric Algebra\" (PGA), which is used to represent Euclidean isometries in Euclidean geometry (thereby covering the large majority of engineering applications of geometry). In this model, a degenerate dimension is added to the three Euclidean dimensions to form the algebra &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. With a suitable identification of subspaces to represent points, lines and planes, the versors of this algebra represent all proper Euclidean isometries, which are always screw motions in 3-dimensional space, along with all improper Euclidean isometries, which includes reflections, rotoreflections, transflections, and point reflections. PGA allows projection, meet, and angle formulas to be derived from formula_204 - with a very minor extension to the algebra it is also possible to derive distances and joins.\nPGA is a widely used system that combines geometric algebra with homogeneous representations in geometry, but there exist several other such systems. The conformal model discussed below is homogeneous, as is \"Conic Geometric Algebra\", and see \"Plane-based geometric algebra\" for discussion of homogeneous models of elliptic and hyperbolic geometry compared with the Euclidean geometry derived from PGA.\nConformal model.\nWorking within GA, Euclidean space formula_205 (along with a conformal point at infinity) is embedded projectively in the CGA formula_51 via the identification of Euclidean points with 1D subspaces in the 4D null cone of the 5D CGA vector subspace. This allows all conformal transformations to be performed as rotations and reflections and is covariant, extending incidence relations of projective geometry to rounds objects such as circles and spheres.\nSpecifically, we add orthogonal basis vectors formula_207 and formula_208 such that formula_209 and formula_210 to the basis of the vector space that generates formula_49 and identify null vectors\n formula_212 as the point at the origin and\n formula_213 as a conformal point at infinity (see \"Compactification\"), giving\n formula_214\n(Some authors set formula_215 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.) This procedure has some similarities to the procedure for working with homogeneous coordinates in projective geometry, and in this case allows the modeling of Euclidean transformations of formula_216 as orthogonal transformations of a subset of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nA fast changing and fluid area of GA, CGA is also being investigated for applications to relativistic physics.\nTable of models.\nNote in this list that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be swapped and the same name applies; for example, with \"relatively\" little change occurring, see sign convention. For example, formula_217 and formula_218 are \"both\" referred to as the spacetime algebra.\nGeometric interpretation in the vector space model.\nProjection and rejection.\nFor any vector formula_16 and any invertible vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\n formula_220\nwhere the projection of formula_16 onto formula_222 (or the parallel part) is\n formula_223\nand the rejection of formula_16 from formula_222 (or the orthogonal part) is\n formula_226\nUsing the concept of a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as representing a subspace of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, this generalizes to projection of a general multivector onto any invertible &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as\n formula_227\nwith the rejection being defined as\n formula_228\nThe projection and rejection generalize to null blades formula_132 by replacing the inverse formula_230 with the pseudoinverse formula_231 with respect to the contractive product. The outcome of the projection coincides in both cases for non-null blades. For null blades &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the definition of the projection given here with the first contraction rather than the second being onto the pseudoinverse should be used, as only then is the result necessarily in the subspace represented by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe projection generalizes through linearity to general multivectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The projection is not linear in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and does not generalize to objects &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that are not blades.\nReflection.\nSimple reflections in a hyperplane are readily expressed in the algebra through conjugation with a single vector. These serve to generate the group of general rotoreflections and rotations.\nThe reflection formula_232 of a vector formula_233 along a vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, or equivalently in the hyperplane orthogonal to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is the same as negating the component of a vector parallel to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The result of the reflection will be \n formula_234\nThis is not the most general operation that may be regarded as a reflection when the dimension &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A general reflection may be expressed as the composite of any odd number of single-axis reflections. Thus, a general reflection formula_235 of a vector formula_16 may be written\n formula_237\nwhere\n formula_238 and formula_239\nIf we define the reflection along a non-null vector formula_222 of the product of vectors as the reflection of every vector in the product along the same vector, we get for any product of an odd number of vectors that, by way of example,\n formula_241\nand for the product of an even number of vectors that\n formula_242\nUsing the concept of every multivector ultimately being expressed in terms of vectors, the reflection of a general multivector formula_76 using any reflection versor formula_244 may be written\n formula_245\nwhere formula_246 is the automorphism of reflection through the origin of the vector space (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) extended through linearity to the whole algebra.\nRotations.\nIf we have a product of vectors formula_247 then we denote the reverse as\n formula_248\nAs an example, assume that formula_249 we get\n formula_250\nScaling formula_251 so that formula_252 then\n formula_253\nso formula_254 leaves the length of formula_255 unchanged. We can also show that\n formula_256\nso the transformation formula_254 preserves both length and angle. It therefore can be identified as a rotation or rotoreflection; formula_251 is called a rotor if it is a proper rotation (as it is if it can be expressed as a product of an even number of vectors) and is an instance of what is known in GA as a \"versor\".\nThere is a general method for rotating a vector involving the formation of a multivector of the form formula_259 that produces a rotation formula_260 in the plane and with the orientation defined by a &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-blade &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nRotors are a generalization of quaternions to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional spaces.\nExamples and applications.\nHypervolume of a parallelotope spanned by vectors.\nFor vectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; spanning a parallelogram we have\n formula_261\nwith the result that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is linear in the product of the \"altitude\" and the \"base\" of the parallelogram, that is, its area.\nSimilar interpretations are true for any number of vectors spanning an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional parallelotope; the exterior product of vectors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, that is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, has a magnitude equal to the volume of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-parallelotope. An &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-vector does not necessarily have a shape of a parallelotope \u2013 this is a convenient visualization. It could be any shape, although the volume equals that of the parallelotope.\nIntersection of a line and a plane.\nWe may define the line parametrically by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are position vectors for points P and T and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the direction vector for the line.\nThen\n formula_262 and formula_263\nso\n formula_264\nand\n formula_265\nRotating systems.\nA rotational quantity such as torque or angular momentum is described in geometric algebra as a bivector. Suppose a circular path in an arbitrary plane containing orthonormal vectors &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; is parameterized by angle.\n formula_266\nBy designating the unit bivector of this plane as the imaginary number\n formula_267\n formula_268\nthis path vector can be conveniently written in complex exponential form\n formula_269\nand the derivative with respect to angle is\n formula_270\nFor example, torque is generally defined as the magnitude of the perpendicular force component times distance, or work per unit angle. Thus the torque, the rate of change of work &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with respect to angle, due to a force &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is\n formula_271\nRotational quantities are represented in vector calculus in three dimensions using the cross product. Together with a choice of an oriented volume form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, these can be related to the exterior product with its more natural geometric interpretation of such quantities as a bivectors by using the dual relationship\n formula_272\nUnlike the cross product description of torque, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the geometric algebra description does not introduce a vector in the normal direction; a vector that does not exist in two and that is not unique in greater than three dimensions. The unit bivector describes the plane and the orientation of the rotation, and the sense of the rotation is relative to the angle between the vectors &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nGeometric calculus.\nGeometric calculus extends the formalism to include differentiation and integration including differential geometry and differential forms.\nEssentially, the vector derivative is defined so that the GA version of Green's theorem is true,\n formula_273\nand then one can write\n formula_274\nas a geometric product, effectively generalizing Stokes' theorem (including the differential form version of it).\nIn 1D when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a curve with endpoints &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then\n formula_273\nreduces to\n formula_276\nor the fundamental theorem of integral calculus.\nAlso developed are the concept of vector manifold and geometric integration theory (which generalizes differential forms).\nHistory.\nBefore the 20th century.\nAlthough the connection of geometry with algebra dates as far back at least to Euclid's \"Elements\" in the third century B.C. (see Greek geometric algebra), GA in the sense used in this article was not developed until 1844, when it was used in a \"systematic way\" to describe the geometrical properties and \"transformations\" of a space. In that year, Hermann Grassmann introduced the idea of a geometrical algebra in full generality as a certain calculus (analogous to the propositional calculus) that encoded all of the geometrical information of a space. Grassmann's algebraic system could be applied to a number of different kinds of spaces, the chief among them being Euclidean space, affine space, and projective space. Following Grassmann, in 1878 William Kingdon Clifford examined Grassmann's algebraic system alongside the quaternions of William Rowan Hamilton in . From his point of view, the quaternions described certain \"transformations\" (which he called \"rotors\"), whereas Grassmann's algebra described certain \"properties\" (or \"Strecken\" such as length, area, and volume). His contribution was to define a new product \u2013 the \"geometric product\" \u2013 on an existing Grassmann algebra, which realized the quaternions as living within that algebra. Subsequently, Rudolf Lipschitz in 1886 generalized Clifford's interpretation of the quaternions and applied them to the geometry of rotations in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; dimensions. Later these developments would lead other 20th-century mathematicians to formalize and explore the properties of the Clifford algebra.\nNevertheless, another revolutionary development of the 19th-century would completely overshadow the geometric algebras: that of vector analysis, developed independently by Josiah Willard Gibbs and Oliver Heaviside. Vector analysis was motivated by James Clerk Maxwell's studies of electromagnetism, and specifically the need to express and manipulate conveniently certain differential equations. Vector analysis had a certain intuitive appeal compared to the rigors of the new algebras. Physicists and mathematicians alike readily adopted it as their geometrical toolkit of choice, particularly following the influential 1901 textbook \"Vector Analysis\" by Edwin Bidwell Wilson, following lectures of Gibbs.\nIn more detail, there have been three approaches to geometric algebra: quaternionic analysis, initiated by Hamilton in 1843 and geometrized as rotors by Clifford in 1878; geometric algebra, initiated by Grassmann in 1844; and vector analysis, developed out of quaternionic analysis in the late 19th century by Gibbs and Heaviside. The legacy of quaternionic analysis in vector analysis can be seen in the use of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to indicate the basis vectors of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;: it is being thought of as the purely imaginary quaternions. From the perspective of geometric algebra, the even subalgebra of the Space Time Algebra is isomorphic to the GA of 3D Euclidean space and quaternions are isomorphic to the even subalgebra of the GA of 3D Euclidean space, which unifies the three approaches.\n20th century and present.\nProgress on the study of Clifford algebras quietly advanced through the twentieth century, although largely due to the work of abstract algebraists such as \u00c9lie Cartan, Hermann Weyl and Claude Chevalley. The \"geometrical\" approach to geometric algebras has seen a number of 20th-century revivals. In mathematics, Emil Artin's \"Geometric Algebra\" discusses the algebra associated with each of a number of geometries, including affine geometry, projective geometry, symplectic geometry, and orthogonal geometry. In physics, geometric algebras have been revived as a \"new\" way to do classical mechanics and electromagnetism, together with more advanced topics such as quantum mechanics and gauge theory. David Hestenes reinterpreted the Pauli and Dirac matrices as vectors in ordinary space and spacetime, respectively, and has been a primary contemporary advocate for the use of geometric algebra.\nIn computer graphics and robotics, geometric algebras have been revived in order to efficiently represent rotations and other transformations. For applications of GA in robotics (screw theory, kinematics and dynamics using versors), computer vision, control and neural computing (geometric learning) see Bayro (2010).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Arranged chronologically\"\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEnglish translations of early books and papers\nResearch groups"}
{"id": "12942", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12942", "title": "Genetic", "text": "Genetic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12945", "revid": "1318690465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12945", "title": "George Benson", "text": "American guitarist and singer (born 1943)\nGeorge Washington Benson (born March 22, 1943) is an American jazz fusion guitarist, singer, and songwriter. He began his professional career at the age of 19 as a jazz guitarist.\nA former child prodigy, Benson first came to prominence in the 1960s, playing soul jazz with Jack McDuff and others. He then launched a successful solo career, alternating between jazz, pop, R&amp;B singing, and scat singing. His album \"Breezin\"' was certified triple-platinum, hitting No. 1 on the \"Billboard\" album chart in 1976. His concerts were well attended through the 1980s, and he still has a large following. Benson has won ten Grammy Awards and has been honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nBiography.\nEarly career.\nBenson was born and raised in the Hill District of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. At the age of seven, he first played the ukulele in a corner drug store, for which he was paid a few dollars. At age eight, he played guitar in an unlicensed nightclub on Friday and Saturday nights, but the police soon closed the club down. At age nine, he started to record. Out of the four sides he cut, two were released: \"She Makes Me Mad\" backed with \"It Should Have Been Me\", with RCA Victor in New York. Although one source indicates this record was released under the name \"Little Georgie\", the 45rpm label is printed with the name George Benson. The single was produced by Leroy Kirkland for RCA's rhythm and blues label, Groove Records.\nBenson attended Connelley Vocational High School on Bedford Avenue in the Hill District. However, he dropped out, choosing to focus on music. In 1987, Benson received an honorary degree from Pittsburgh Public Schools.\nAs a youth, Benson learned how to play straight-ahead instrumental jazz during a relationship performing for several years with organist Jack McDuff. One of his many early guitar heroes was country-jazz guitarist Hank Garland. \nAt the age of 21, he recorded his first album as leader, \"The New Boss Guitar of George Benson\" (1964), featuring McDuff. Benson's next recording was \"It's Uptown\" (1966) with the George Benson Quartet, including Lonnie Smith on organ and Ronnie Cuber on baritone saxophone. Benson followed it up with \"The George Benson Cookbook\" (1967), also with Lonnie Smith and Ronnie Cuber on baritone and drummer Marion Booker. Miles Davis employed Benson in the mid-1960s, featuring his guitar on \"Paraphernalia\" on his 1968 Columbia release, \"Miles in the Sky\" before Benson went to Verve Records.\n1970s and 1980s.\nIn 1970, Benson released \"The Other Side of Abbey Road\", featuring renditions of songs from the Beatles' 1969 album \"Abbey Road\".\nBenson then signed with Creed Taylor's jazz label CTI Records, where he recorded several albums, with jazz heavyweights guesting, to some success, mainly in the jazz field. In addition to his own albums and performances, during this time Benson was a core member of the CTI All-Stars collective both touring and recording. As well as the collective's live albums, he also played and recorded on a number of the collective's members' individual albums, including Freddie Hubbard and Stanley Turrentine, notably on the latter's acclaimed album \"Sugar\" (1970). Benson played on Hubbard's 1971 album \"First Light\", which won a Grammy Award for Best Jazz Performance by a Group at the 15th Annual Grammy Awards, as well as five other Hubbard studio albums.\nBenson released a version of \"White Rabbit\" on the album of the same name in 1972, originally written and recorded by San Francisco rock group Great Society, and made famous by Jefferson Airplane. His 1974 release, \"Bad Benson\", climbed to the top spot in the \"Billboard\" jazz chart, while the 1976 follow-ups, \"Good King Bad\" (No. 51 Pop album) and \"Benson &amp; Farrell\" (with Joe Farrell), both reached the jazz top-three sellers.\nBy the mid-to-late 1970s, as he recorded for Warner Bros. Records, a whole new audience began to discover Benson. On 1976's \"Breezin\"', Benson sang a lead vocal on the track \"This Masquerade\", a song written by Leon Russell. Benson's version (notable also for the lush, romantic piano intro and solo by Jorge Dalto), became a huge pop hit and won a Grammy Award for Record of the Year. (He had sung vocals infrequently on albums earlier in his career, notably his rendition of \"Here Comes the Sun\" on \"The Other Side of Abbey Road\".) The rest of the album is instrumental, including his rendition of the 1975 Jos\u00e9 Feliciano composition \"Affirmation\".\nIn 1976, Benson embarked on a tour called George &amp; Minnie Live! with soul singer Minnie Riperton; she had recently been diagnosed with terminal breast cancer and would die in 1979. In addition, Benson appeared as a guitarist and backup vocalist on Stevie Wonder's song \"Another Star\" from Wonder's album \"Songs in the Key of Life\" (1976).\nHe also recorded the original version of \"The Greatest Love of All\" for the 1977 Muhammad Ali biopic, \"The Greatest\", which was later covered by Whitney Houston as \"Greatest Love of All.\" During this time Benson recorded with the German conductor Claus Ogerman. The live take of \"On Broadway,\" recorded a few months later from the 1978 release \"Weekend in L.A.\", also won a Grammy.\nThe Qwest record label (a subsidiary of Warner Bros., run by Quincy Jones) released Benson's breakthrough pop album \"Give Me the Night\", produced by Jones. Benson made it into the pop and R&amp;B top ten with the song \"Give Me the Night\" (written by former Heatwave keyboardist Rod Temperton). He had many hit singles such as \"Love All the Hurt Away\", \"Turn Your Love Around\", \"Inside Love\", \"Lady Love Me\", \"20/20\", \"Shiver\", and \"Kisses in the Moonlight\". More importantly, Jones encouraged Benson to search his roots for further vocal inspiration, and he rediscovered his love for Nat King Cole, Ray Charles and Donny Hathaway in the process, influencing a string of further vocal albums into the 1990s. Despite returning to his jazz and guitar playing most recently, this theme was reflected again much later in Benson's 2000 release \"Absolute Benson\", featuring a cover of one of Hathaway's most notable songs, \"The Ghetto\". Benson accumulated three other platinum LPs and two gold albums.\n1990s to present.\nIn 1990, Benson was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Music from the Berklee College of Music.\nTo commemorate the long relationship between Benson and Ibanez and to celebrate 30 years of collaboration on the GB Signature Models, Ibanez created the GB30TH, a limited-edition model with a gold-foil finish inspired by the traditional Japanese Garahaku art form.\nIn 2009, Benson was recognized by the National Endowment of the Arts as a Jazz Master, the United States highest honor in jazz. Benson performed at the 49th issue of the Ohrid Summer Festival in North Macedonia on July 25, 2009, and his tribute show to Nat King Cole, \"An Unforgettable Tribute to Nat King Cole\", as part of the Istanbul International Jazz Festival in Turkey on July 27. \nIn late 2009, Benson finished recording an album entitled \"Songs and Stories\" with Marcus Miller, producer John Burk, and session musicians David Paich and Steve Lukather. As part of the promotion for the album, Benson appeared or performed on \"The Tavis Smiley Show\", \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\" and \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\".\nHe performed at the 2011 Java Jazz Festival during March 4\u20136. On October 4, Benson released the album \"Guitar Man\", revisiting his 1960s/early-1970s guitar-playing roots with a 12-song collection of covers of both jazz and pop standards produced by John Burk.\nIn June 2013, Benson released his fourth album for Concord, \"\", which included Wynton Marsalis, Idina Menzel, Till Br\u00f6nner, and Judith Hill. In September, he returned to perform at Rock in Rio festival, in Rio de Janeiro, 35 years after his first performance at this festival, which was then the inaugural one.\nIn July 2016, Benson participated as a mentor in the Sky Arts programme \"Guitar Star\" in the search for the UK and Republic of Ireland's most talented guitarist.\nIn May 2018, Benson was featured on the Gorillaz single \"Humility\".\nOn July 12, 2018, it was announced that Benson had signed to Mascot Label Group.\nBenson stopped touring internationally at the start of 2024 due to ill health, cancelling a series of UK concerts that summer.\nBenson released a new album, \"Dreams Do Come True: When George Benson Meets Robert Farnon\" on July 19, 2024. The album was an abandoned project based on recordings with arranger and conductor Robert Farnon backed by the London Symphony Orchestra from 1989 that were thought to have been lost. Upon location of the masters, Benson played them for his current label, Rhino Entertainment, who encouraged Benson to complete the project. Were the album released when it was recorded it would have predated most of the wave of Great American Songbook albums released by popular artists at the end of the 20th century and well into the 21st century. Benson also announced plans for a four-night festival called \"Breezin' with the Stars\" planned for January 2025.\nPersonal life.\nBenson has been married to Johnnie Lee since 1965 and has seven children. Benson describes his music as focusing more on love and romance, due to his commitment to his family and religious practices, with Benson being a Jehovah's Witness. Benson has been a resident of Englewood, New Jersey.\nAwards.\nGrammy Awards.\nList of Grammy Awards and nominations received by George Benson.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12946", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12946", "title": "Grigory Barenblatt", "text": "Russian mathematician (1927\u20132018)\nGrigory Isaakovich Barenblatt (; 10 July 1927 \u2013 22 June 2018) was a Russian mathematician.\nEducation.\nBarenblatt graduated in 1950 from Moscow State University, Department of Mechanics and Mathematics. He received his Ph.D. in 1953 from Moscow State University under the supervision of A. N. Kolmogorov.\nCareer and research.\nBarenblatt also received a D.Sc. from Moscow State University in 1957. He was an emeritus Professor in Residence at the Department of Mathematics of the University of California, Berkeley and Mathematician at Department of Mathematics, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. He was G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics at the University of Cambridge from 1992 to 1994 and he was Emeritus G. I. Taylor Professor of Fluid Mechanics. His areas of research were:\nAwards and honors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12947", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12947", "title": "Grammatical tense", "text": "Expression of time reference in grammar\nIn grammar, tense is a category that expresses time reference. Tenses are usually manifested by the use of specific forms of verbs, particularly in their conjugation patterns.\nThe main tenses found in many languages include the past, present, and future. Some languages have only two distinct tenses, such as past and nonpast, or future and nonfuture, while some languages make finer tense distinctions, such as remote vs recent past, or near vs remote future. There are also tenseless languages, like most of the Chinese languages, however, these languages do refer to time in different ways.\nTenses generally express time relative to the moment of speaking. In some contexts, however, their meaning may be relativized to a point in the past or future which is established in the discourse (the moment being spoken about). This is called \"relative\" (as opposed to \"absolute\") tense. Some languages have different verb forms or constructions which manifest relative tense, such as pluperfect (\"past-in-the-past\") and \"future-in-the-past\".\nExpressions of tense are often closely connected with expressions of the category of aspect; sometimes what are traditionally called tenses (in languages such as Latin) may in modern analysis be regarded as combinations of tense with aspect. Verbs are also often conjugated for mood, and since in many cases the three categories are not manifested separately, some languages may be described in terms of a combined tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood (TAM) system.\nEtymology.\nThe English noun \"tense\" comes from Old French \"time\" (spelled in modern French through deliberate archaization), from Latin , \"time\". It is not related to the adjective \"tense\", which comes from Latin , the perfect passive participle of , \"stretch\".\nUses of the term.\nIn modern linguistic theory, tense is understood as a category that expresses (grammaticalizes) time reference; namely one which, using grammatical means, places a state or action at a time relative to that of the utterance. Nonetheless, in many descriptions of languages, particularly in traditional European grammar, the term \"tense\" is applied to verb forms or constructions that express not merely position in time, but also additional properties of the state or action \u2013 particularly aspectual or modal properties.\nThe category of aspect expresses how a state or action relates to time \u2013 whether it is seen as a complete event, an ongoing or repeated situation, etc. Many languages make a distinction between perfective aspect (denoting complete events) and imperfective aspect (denoting ongoing or repeated situations); the former may employ a perfect tense, but such a relationship between aspect and tense may not be simple. Some of the traditional \"tenses\" express time reference together with aspectual information. In Latin and French, for example, the imperfect denotes past time in combination with imperfective aspect, while other verb forms (the Latin perfect, and the French or ) are used for past time reference with perfective aspect.\nThe category of mood is used to express modality, which includes such properties as uncertainty, evidentiality, and obligation. Commonly encountered moods include the indicative, subjunctive, and conditional. Mood can be bound up with tense, aspect, or both, in particular verb forms. Hence, certain languages are sometimes analysed as having a single tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood (TAM) system, without separate manifestation of the three categories.\nThe term \"tense\", then, particularly in less formal contexts, is sometimes used to denote any combination of tense proper, aspect, and mood. As regards English, there are many verb forms and constructions which combine time reference with continuous and/or perfect aspect, and with indicative, subjunctive or conditional mood.\nParticular tense forms need not always carry their basic time-referential meaning in every case. For instance, the historical present is a use of the present tense to refer to past events. The phenomenon of \"fake tense\" is common crosslinguistically as a means of marking counterfactuality in conditionals and wishes.\nPossible tenses.\nNot all languages have tense: tenseless languages include Chinese and Dyirbal. Some languages have all three basic tenses (the past, present, and future), while others have only two: some have past and nonpast tenses, the latter covering both present and future times, as in Arabic, Japanese, and English; whereas others such as Greenlandic, Quechua, and Nivkh have future and nonfuture. Some languages have four or more tenses, making finer distinctions either in the past (e.g. remote vs. recent past) or in the future (e.g. near vs. remote future). The six-tense language Kalaw Lagaw Ya of Australia has the remote past, the recent past, the today past, the present, the today/near future and the remote future. Some languages, like the Amazonian Cubeo language, have a historical past tense, used for events perceived as historical.\nTenses that refer specifically to \"today\" are called hodiernal tenses; these can be either past or future. Apart from Kalaw Lagaw Ya, another language with such tenses is Mwera, a Bantu language of Tanzania. It is also suggested that in 17th-century French, the \"pass\u00e9 compos\u00e9\" served as a hodiernal past. Tenses that refer to the past before today or the future after today are called pre-hodiernal and post-hodiernal respectively. Some languages also have a crastinal tense, a future tense referring specifically to tomorrow (found in some Bantu languages); or a hesternal tense, a past tense referring specifically to yesterday (although this name is also sometimes used to mean pre-hodiernal). A tense for after tomorrow is thus called post-crastinal, and one for before yesterday is called pre-hesternal.\nAnother tense found in some languages, including Swahili, is the persistive tense, used to indicate that a state or ongoing action still continues (or, if in the negative, does not). The Washo language has tenses to indicate if an event occurred before the speaker's lifetime.\nSome languages have special tense forms that are used to express relative tense. Tenses that refer to the past relative to some time other than that of the utterance are called \"anterior\"; these include the pluperfect (for the past relative to a past time) and the future perfect (for the past relative to a future time). Similarly, \"posterior\" tenses refer to the future relative to the time under consideration, as with the English \"future-in-the-past\": (\"he said that\") \"he would go.\" Relative tenses are also sometimes analysed as aspects: the perfect aspect in the anterior case, or the prospective aspect in the posterior case.\nSome languages, such as Nez Perce or Cavine\u00f1a also have periodic tense markers that encode that the action occurs in a recurrent temporal period of the day (\"in the morning\", \"during the day\", \"at night\", \"until dawn\" etc) or of the year (\"in winter\").\nSome languages have cyclic tense systems. This is a form of temporal marking where tense is given relative to a reference point or reference span. In Burarra, for example, events that occurred earlier on the day of speaking are marked with the same verb forms as events that happened in the far past, while events that happened yesterday (compared to the moment of speech) are marked with the same forms as events in the present. This can be thought of as a system where events are marked as prior or contemporaneous to points of reference on a timeline.\nTense marking.\nMorphology of tense.\nTense is normally indicated by the use of a particular verb form \u2013 either an inflected form of the main verb, or a multi-word construction, or both in combination. Inflection may involve the use of affixes, such as the \"-ed\" ending that marks the past tense of English regular verbs, but can also entail stem modifications, such as ablaut, as found as in the strong verbs in English and other Germanic languages, or reduplication. Multi-word tense constructions often involve auxiliary verbs or clitics. Examples which combine both types of tense marking include the French \"pass\u00e9 compos\u00e9\", which has an auxiliary verb together with the inflected past participle form of the lexical verb; and the Irish past tense, where the proclitic \"do\" (in various surface forms) appears with the affixed or ablaut-modified past tense form of the lexical verb.\nIndications of tense are often bound up with indications of other verbal categories, such as aspect and mood. The conjugation patterns of verbs often also reflect agreement with categories pertaining to the subject, such as person, number and gender via portmanteau morphs. It is thus not always possible to identify elements that mark any specific category, such as tense, separately from the others.\nNominal tense.\n&lt;section begin=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nPROP:proprietive case\n&lt;section end=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nA few languages have been shown to mark tense information (as well as aspect and mood) on nouns. This may be called nominal tense, or more broadly nominal TAM which includes nominal marking of aspect and mood as well.\nFor example, the Kayardild language uses case markers to mark tense:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe verb stays the same, with the modal cases being used to show tense in the sentences.\nTenseless language.\nA \"tenseless language\" is one that does not mark tense information at all. Examples are Burmese, Dyirbal, most varieties of Chinese, Malay (including Indonesian), Thai, Yucatec Maya, Vietnamese, and in some analyses Greenlandic (Kalaallisut) and Guaran\u00ed.\nTenseless languages can and do refer to time, but they do so using lexical items that establish time reference, or by using combinations of aspect, mood. For example, most Sinitic languages express time reference chiefly by lexical means \u2013 through adjuncts, time phrases, and so on. (The same is done in tensed languages, to supplement or reinforce the time information conveyed by the choice of tense.) Time information is also sometimes conveyed as a secondary feature by markers of other categories, as with the aspect markers \"le\" and \"gu\u00f2\", which in most cases place an action in past time. However, much time information is conveyed implicitly by context \u2013 it is therefore not always necessary, when translating from a tensed to a tenseless language, say, to make explicit in the target language all of the information conveyed by the tenses in the source.\nFor example, in Mandarin, though the language is tenseless, the auxiliary verb \"hu\u00ec\" can be used to express an action that will occur in the future:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSyntax of tense.\nThe syntactic properties of tense have been prominent in formal analyses of how tense-marking interacts with word order. Some languages (such as French) allow an adverb (Adv) between a tense-marked verb (V) and its direct object (O); in other words, they permit [Verb-&lt;mark&gt;Adverb&lt;/mark&gt;-Object] order. In contrast, other languages (such as English) do not allow an adverb to come between a tense-marked lexical verb and its direct object, and instead require [Adverb-&lt;mark style=\"background:lightblue;\"&gt;Verb&lt;/mark&gt;-Object] order. (For tense-marked auxiliary verbs in English, either position of the adverb is possible.)\nTense in syntax is represented by the category label T, which is the head of a TP (tense phrase).\nIn particular languages.\nThe study of modern languages has been greatly influenced by the grammar of the Classical languages, since early grammarians, often monks, had no other reference point to describe their language. Latin terminology is often used to describe modern languages, sometimes with a change of meaning, as with the application of \"perfect\" to forms in English that do not necessarily have perfective meaning, or the terms \"Imperfekt\" and \"Perfekt\" to German past tense forms that mostly lack any relationship to the aspects suggested by those terms.\nIndo-European languages.\nProto-Indo-European verbs had present, aorist and perfect forms \u2013 these can be considered as representing two tenses (present and past) with different aspects. Most Indo-European languages have developed systems either with two morphological tenses (present or \"non-past\", and past) or with three (present, past and future). The tenses often form part of entangled tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood conjugation systems. Additional tenses, tense\u2013aspect combinations, etc., such as the future tense, can be provided by compound constructions using auxiliary verbs.\nLatin.\nLatin is traditionally described as having six tenses (the Latin for \"tense\" being \"tempus\", plural \"tempora\"):\nA newer grammar of Latin also lists these six but comments that \"The distinction between imperfective and perfective 'tenses' is really a distinction of aspect, which is at the basis of the whole conjugation system\"; and states that Latin thus has just three tenses: present, past, and future.\nImperfect tense verbs represent a past process combined with imperfective aspect, that is, they often stand for an ongoing past action or state at a past point in time (see secondary present) or represent habitual actions (see Latin tenses with modality) (e.g. 'he was eating', 'he used to eat'). The perfect tense combines the meanings of a simple past ('he ate') with that of an English perfect tense ('he has eaten'), which in ancient Greek are two different tenses (aorist and perfect).\nThe pluperfect, the perfect and the future perfect may also realise relative tenses, standing for events that are past at the time of another event (see secondary past): for instance, , , may mean respectively 'he had died', 'he has died' and 'he will have died'.\nLatin verbs are inflected for tense and aspect together with mood \u2013 indicative, subjunctive, and imperative (all finite); and infinitive and participle (both non-finite) \u2013 and voice (active or passive). Most forms inflected for tense consist of a verb stem and a suffix whose inflection expresses not only tense but (as a \"portmanteau morph\") also other categories (such as person and number). Some tenses are expressed by sequences of inflected verbs.\nRomance languages.\nThe Romance languages (descendants of Latin) have past, present and future morphological tenses, with additional aspectual distinction in the past. French is an example of a language where, as in German, the simple morphological perfective past (\"pass\u00e9 simple\") has mostly given way to a compound form (\"pass\u00e9 compos\u00e9\"), the former mostly reserved for use in formal contexts.\nAncient Greek.\nThe paradigms for tenses in Ancient Greek are similar to those in Latin, but with a three-way aspectual contrast in the past: the aorist, perfect and imperfect. Both aorist and imperfect verbs can represent a past event: through contrast, the imperfect verb often implies a longer duration (e.g. 'they urged him' vs. 'they persuaded him'). The aorist participle represents the first event of a two-event sequence, and the present participle an ongoing event at the time of another event. Perfect verbs stand for past actions if the result is still present (e.g. 'I have found it') or for present states resulting from a past event (e.g. 'I remember').\nGermanic languages.\nThe Germanic languages (which include English) have present (non-past) and past tenses formed morphologically, with future and other additional forms made using auxiliaries. In standard German, the compound past (\"Perfekt\") is preferred over the morphological past in spoken language.\nEnglish.\nEnglish has only two morphological tenses: the present (or non-past), as in \"he goes, and the past (or preterite), as in \"he went. The non-past usually references the present, but sometimes the future (as in \"the bus leaves tomorrow\"). In special uses such as the historical present it can refer to the past as well. These morphological tenses are marked either with a suffix (\"walk(s)\" ~ \"walked\") or with ablaut (\"sing(s)\" ~ \"sang\").\nIn some contexts, particularly in English language teaching, various tense\u2013aspect combinations are referred to loosely as tenses. Similarly, the term \"future tense\" is sometimes loosely applied to cases where modals such as \"will\" are used to talk about future points in time.\nSlavic languages.\nIn the Slavic languages, verbs are intrinsically perfective or imperfective. In Russian and other East Slavic languages, perfective verbs have past and \"future\" tenses, while imperfective verbs have past, present and \"future\", the imperfective \"future\" being a compound tense in most cases. The \"future tense\" of perfective verbs is formed in the same way as the present tense of imperfective verbs. However, in South Slavic languages, there may be a greater variety of forms \u2013 Bulgarian, for example, has present, past (both \"imperfect\" and \"aorist\") and \"future tenses\", for both perfective and imperfective verbs, as well as perfect forms made with an auxiliary (see Bulgarian verbs). However it doesn't have a real future tense, because the future tense is formed by the shortened version of the present of the verb \"hteti\" (\u0449\u0435) and it just adds present tense forms of person suffixes: \"-m\" (I), \"-\u0161\" (you), \"-\u00f8\" (he, she, it), \"-me\" (we), \"-te\" (you, plural), \"-t\" (they).\nCeltic languages.\nOld Irish, an early Celtic language, had past, present and future tenses. The past tense contrasts the perfective and imperfective aspects. Classical Irish, which underwent several changes to its verb morphology, had a three-way aspectual contrast of simple\u2013perfective\u2013imperfective in the past and present tenses.\nModern Scottish Gaelic on the other hand only has past, non-past and 'indefinite', and, in the case of the verb 'be' (including its use as an auxiliary), also present tense.\nPersian.\nPersian, an Indo-Iranian language, has past and non-past forms, with additional aspectual distinctions. Future can be expressed using the auxiliary \"x\u00e2stan\", but almost never in non-formal contexts, for which the present tense is used instead. For example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe adverb \"tomorrow\" is used to signal future time, with the verb being in the present (non-past) tense.\nHindustani.\nHindustani (Hindi and Urdu), an Indo-Aryan language, has indicative perfect past and indicative future forms, while the indicative present and indicative imperfect past conjugations exist only for the verb \"hon\u0101\" (to be). The indicative future is constructed using the future subjunctive conjugations (which used to be the indicative present conjugations in older forms of Hindi\u2013Urdu) by adding a future suffix \"-g\u0101\" that declines for gender and the number of the noun that the pronoun refers to. The forms of \"g\u0101\" are derived from the perfective participle forms of the verb \"j\u0101na\" ('to go'). The conjugations of the indicative perfect past and the indicative imperfect past are derived from participles (just like the past tense formation in Slavic languages) and hence they agree with the number and the gender of the noun which the pronoun refers to and not the pronoun itself. The perfect past doubles as the perfective aspect participle and the imperfect past conjugations act as the copula to mark imperfect past when used with the aspectual participles. Hindi\u2013Urdu has an overtly marked tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood system. Periphrastic Hindi\u2013Urdu verb forms (aspectual verb forms) consist of two elements, the first of these two elements is the aspect marker and the second element (the copula) is the common tense-mood marker. Hindi\u2013Urdu has three aspects\u02d0 \"Habitual\", \"Perfective\", and \"Progressive\"; and five moods\u02d0 \"Indicative\", \"Presumptive\", \"Subjunctive\", \"Contrafactual\", and \"Imperative\". \nAustronesian languages.\n&lt;section begin=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nDIR:directional\n&lt;section end=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nRapa.\nRapa is a French Polynesian language of the island of Rapa Iti. Verbs in the indigenous Old Rapa occur with a TAM (tense, aspect, or mood) marker which can be followed by directional or deictic particles. \"The primary tense\u2013aspect markers used in Old Rapa are the imperfective, progressive, perfective, past, imperative, and subjunctive.\" However, specific tense\u2013aspect\u2013modality (TAM) markers and the type of deictic or directional particle that follows express different types of meaning.\n\"TAM particle \"i\" marks past action. It is rarely used as a matrix TAM and is more frequently observed in past embedded clauses.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWuvulu-Aua.\nWuvulu-Aua does not have explicit tense, but rather time reference is conveyed by mood, aspect markers, and time phrases. Wuvulu speakers use a realis mood to describe the past as they can be certain about events that have occurred. In some cases, realis mood is used for the present \u2014 often for stative clauses. An irrealis mood is used for the future.\nTense in Wuvulu-Aua may also be implied by using time adverbials and aspectual markings. Wuvulu contains three verbal markers to indicate sequence of events. The preverbal adverbial \"lo\u0294o\" ('first') indicates the verb occurs before any other. The postverbal morpheme \"liai\" and \"linia\" are the respective intransitive and transitive suffixes indicating a repeated action. The postverbal morpheme \"li\" and \"liria\" are respectively intransitive and transitive suffixes indicating a completed action.\nMortlockese.\nMortlockese uses tense markers such as \"mii\" to denote the present state of a subject, \"aa\" to denote a present state that an object has changed to, \"k\u025e\" to describe something that has already been completed, \"p\u025e\" and \"l\u025b\" to describe the future, \"p\u02b7ap\u02b7\" to denote a possible action or state in the future, and \"s\u00e6n/mwo\" for something that has not yet happened. Each of these markers, except for \"aa\" and \"mii\", is used in conjunction with the subject proclitics. Additionally, \"mii\" can be used with any type of intransitive verb.\nOther languages.\nFinnish and Hungarian, both members of the Uralic language family, have morphological present (non-past) and past tenses. The Hungarian verb \"van\" (\"to be\") also has a future form.\nTurkish verbs conjugate for past, present and future, with a variety of aspects and moods.\nArabic verbs have past and non-past; future can be indicated by a prefix.\nKorean verbs have a variety of affixed forms which can be described as representing present, past and future tenses, although they can alternatively be considered to be aspectual. Similarly, Japanese verbs are described as having present and past tenses, although the distinction may be analysed as one of aspect. Some Wu Chinese languages, such as Shanghainese, use particles to mark some tenses. Other Chinese languages and many other East Asian languages generally lack inflection and are considered to be tenseless, although they often have aspect markers which convey information about time reference.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;section begin=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nDIR:directional particle\nDEIC:deictic particle&lt;section end=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "12948", "revid": "13604152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12948", "title": "Grammatical aspect", "text": "Grammatical category expressing how a verb extends over time\nIn linguistics, aspect is a grammatical category that expresses how a verbal action, event, or state, extends over time. For instance, perfective aspect is used in referring to an event conceived as bounded and only once occurring, without reference to any flow of time during the event (\"I helped him\"). Imperfective aspect is used for situations conceived as existing continuously or habitually as time flows (\"I was helping him\"; \"I used to help people\").\nFurther distinctions can be made, for example, to distinguish states and ongoing actions (continuous and progressive aspects) from repetitive actions (habitual aspect).\nCertain aspectual distinctions express a relation between the time of the event and the time of reference. This is the case with the perfect aspect, which indicates that an event occurred prior to but has continuing relevance at the time of reference: \"I have eaten\"; \"I had eaten\"; \"I will have eaten\".\nDifferent languages make different grammatical aspectual distinctions; some (such as Standard German; see below) do not make any. The marking of aspect is often conflated with the marking of tense and mood (see tense\u2013aspect\u2013mood). Aspectual distinctions may be restricted to certain tenses: in Latin and the Romance languages, for example, the perfective\u2013imperfective distinction is marked in the past tense, by the division between preterites and imperfects. Explicit consideration of aspect as a category first arose out of study of the Slavic languages; here verbs often occur in pairs, with two related verbs being used respectively for imperfective and perfective meanings.\nThe concept of grammatical aspect (or verbal aspect) should not be confused with perfect and imperfect \"verb forms\"; the meanings of the latter terms are somewhat different, and in some languages, the common names used for verb forms may not follow the actual aspects precisely.\nBasic concept.\nHistory.\nThe Indian linguist Yaska (circa 7th century BCE) dealt with grammatical aspect, distinguishing actions that are processes (\"bh\u0101va\"), from those where the action is considered as a completed whole (\"m\u016brta\"). This is the key distinction between the imperfective and perfective. Yaska also applied this distinction to a verb versus an action nominal.\nGrammarians of the Greek and Latin languages also showed an interest in aspect, but the idea did not enter into the modern Western grammatical tradition until the 19th century via the study of the grammar of the Slavic languages. The earliest use of the term recorded in the Oxford English Dictionary dates from 1853.\nModern usage.\nAspect is often confused with the closely related concept of tense, because they both convey information about time. While tense relates the time of referent to some other time, commonly the speech event, aspect conveys other temporal information, such as duration, completion, or frequency, as it relates to the time of action. Thus tense refers to temporally when while aspect refers to temporally how. Aspect can be said to describe the texture of the time in which a situation occurs, such as a single point of time, a continuous range of time, a sequence of discrete points in time, etc., whereas tense indicates its location in time.\nFor example, consider the following sentences: \"I eat\", \"I am eating\", \"I have eaten\", and \"I have been eating\". All are in the present tense, indicated by the present-tense verb of each sentence (\"eat\", \"am\", and \"have\"). Yet since they differ in aspect, each conveys different information or points of view as to how the action pertains to the present.\nGrammatical aspect is a formal property of a language, distinguished through overt inflection, derivational affixes, or independent words that serve as grammatically required markers of those aspects. For example, the K\u02bciche\u02bc language spoken in Guatemala has the inflectional prefixes - and - to mark incompletive and completive aspect; Mandarin Chinese has the aspect markers - , - , - , and - to mark the perfective, durative stative, durative progressive, and experiential aspects, and also marks aspect with adverbs; and English marks the continuous aspect with the verb \"to be\" coupled with present participle and the perfect with the verb \"to have\" coupled with past participle. Even languages that do not mark aspect morphologically or through auxiliary verbs, however, can convey such distinctions by the use of adverbs or other syntactic constructions.\nGrammatical aspect is distinguished from lexical aspect or \"Aktionsart\", which is an inherent feature of verbs or verb phrases and is determined by the nature of the situation that the verb describes.\nCommon aspectual distinctions.\nThe most fundamental aspectual distinction, represented in many languages, is between perfective aspect and imperfective aspect. This is the basic aspectual distinction in the Slavic languages.\nIt semantically corresponds to the distinction between the morphological forms known respectively as the aorist and imperfect in Greek, the preterite and imperfect in Spanish, the simple past () and imperfect in French, and the perfect and imperfect in Latin (from the Latin , meaning \"completed\").\nEssentially, the perfective aspect looks at an event as a complete action, while the imperfective aspect views an event as the process of unfolding or a repeated or habitual event (thus corresponding to the progressive/continuous aspect for events of short-term duration and to habitual aspect for longer terms).\nFor events of short durations in the past, the distinction often coincides with the distinction in the English language between the simple past \"X-ed,\" as compared to the progressive \"was X-ing\". Compare \"I wrote the letters this morning\" (i.e. finished writing the letters: an action completed) and \"I was writing the letters this morning\" (the letters may still be unfinished).\nIn describing longer time periods, English needs context to maintain the distinction between the habitual (\"I called him often in the past\" \u2013 a habit that has no point of completion) and perfective (\"I called him once\" \u2013 an action completed), although the construct \"used to\" marks both habitual aspect and past tense and can be used if the aspectual distinction otherwise is not clear.\nSometimes, English has a lexical distinction where other languages may use the distinction in grammatical aspect. For example, the English verbs \"to know\" (the state of knowing) and \"to find out\" (knowing viewed as a \"completed action\") correspond to the imperfect and perfect forms of the equivalent verbs in French and Spanish, and . This is also true when the sense of verb \"to know\" is \"to know somebody\", in this case opposed in aspect to the verb \"to meet\" (or even to the construction \"to get to know\"). These correspond to imperfect and perfect forms of in Spanish, and in French. In German, on the other hand, the distinction is also lexical (as in English) through verbs and , although the semantic relation between both forms is much more straightforward since means \"to know\" and means \"to learn\".\nAspect vis-\u00e0-vis tense.\nThe Germanic languages combine the concept of aspect with the concept of tense. Although English largely separates tense and aspect formally, its aspects (neutral, progressive, perfect, progressive perfect, and [in the past tense] habitual) do not correspond very closely to the distinction of perfective vs. imperfective that is found in most languages with aspect. Furthermore, the separation of tense and aspect in English is not maintained rigidly. One instance of this is the alternation, in some forms of English, between sentences such as \"Have you eaten?\" and \"Did you eat?\".\nIn European languages, rather than locating an event time, the way tense does, aspect describes \"the internal temporal constituency of a situation\", or in other words, aspect is a way \"of conceiving the flow of the process itself\". English aspectual distinctions in the past tense include \"I went, I used to go, I was going, I had gone\"; in the present tense \"I lose, I am losing, I have lost, I have been losing, I am going to lose\"; and with the future modal \"I will see, I will be seeing, I will have seen, I am going to see\". What distinguishes these aspects within each tense is not (necessarily) when the event occurs, but how the time in which it occurs is viewed: as complete, ongoing, consequential, planned, etc.\nIn most dialects of Ancient Greek, aspect is indicated uniquely by verbal morphology. For example, the very frequently used aorist, though a functional preterite in the indicative mood, conveys historic or 'immediate' aspect in the subjunctive and optative. The perfect in all moods is used as an aspectual marker, conveying the sense of a resultant state. E.g. \u2013 I see (present); \u2013 I saw (aorist); \u2013 I am in a state of having seen = I know (perfect). Turkish has a same/similar aspect, such as in G\u00f6rm\u00fc\u015f bulunuyorum/durumday\u0131m, where g\u00f6rm\u00fc\u015f means \"having seen\" and bulunuyorum/durumday\u0131m means \"I am in the state\". \nIn many Sino-Tibetan languages, such as Mandarin, verbs lack grammatical markers of tense, but are rich in aspect (Heine, Kuteva 2010, p.\u00a010). Markers of aspect are attached to verbs to indicate aspect. Event time is inferred through use of these aspectual markers, along with optional inclusion of adverbs.\nLexical vis-\u00e0-vis grammatical aspect.\nThere is a distinction between grammatical aspect, as described here, and lexical aspect. Other terms for the contrast \"lexical vs. grammatical\" include: \"situation vs. viewpoint\" and \"inner vs. outer\". Lexical aspect, also known as Aktionsart, is an inherent property of a verb or verb-complement phrase, and is not marked formally. The distinctions made as part of lexical aspect are different from those of grammatical aspect. Typical distinctions are between states (\"I owned\"), activities (\"I shopped\"), accomplishments (\"I painted a picture\"), achievements (\"I bought\"), and punctual, or semelfactive, events (\"I sneezed\"). These distinctions are often relevant syntactically. For example, states and activities, but not usually achievements, can be used in English with a prepositional \"for\"-phrase describing a time duration: \"I had a car for five hours\", \"I shopped for five hours\", but not \"*I bought a car for five hours\". Lexical aspect is sometimes called \"Aktionsart\", especially by German and Slavic linguists. Lexical or situation aspect is marked in Athabaskan languages.\nOne of the factors in situation aspect is telicity. Telicity might be considered a kind of lexical aspect, except that it is typically not a property of a verb in isolation, but rather a property of an entire verb \"phrase\". Achievements, accomplishments and semelfactives have telic situation aspect, while states and activities have atelic situation aspect.\nThe other factor in situation aspect is duration, which is also a property of a verb phrase. Accomplishments, states, and activities have duration, while achievements and semelfactives do not.\nIndicating aspect.\nIn some languages, aspect and time are very clearly separated, making them much more distinct to their speakers. There are a number of languages that mark aspect much more saliently than time. Prominent in this category are Chinese and American Sign Language, which both differentiate many aspects but rely exclusively on optional time-indicating terms to pinpoint an action with respect to time. In other language groups, for example in most modern Indo-European languages (except Slavic languages and some Indo-Aryan languages like Hindi), aspect has become almost entirely conflated, in the verbal morphological system, with time.\nIn Russian, aspect is more salient than tense in narrative. Russian, like other Slavic languages, uses different lexical entries for the different aspects, whereas other languages mark them morphologically, and still others with auxiliaries (e.g., English).\nIn Hindi, the aspect marker is overtly separated from the tense/mood marker. Periphrastic Hindi verb forms consist of two elements. The first of these two elements is the aspect marker and the second element (the copula) is the common tense/mood marker.\nIn literary Arabic ( \"al-fu\u1e63\u1e25\u0101\") the verb has two aspect-tenses: perfective (past), and imperfective (non-past). There is some disagreement among grammarians whether to view the distinction as a distinction in aspect, or tense, or both. The past verb ( \"al-fi\u02bfl al-m\u0101\u1e0d\u012b\") denotes an event ( \"\u1e25ada\u1e6f\") completed in the past, but it says nothing about the relation of this past event to present status. For example, \"wa\u1e63ala\", \"arrived\", indicates that arrival occurred in the past without saying anything about the present status of the arriver \u2013 maybe they stuck around, maybe they turned around and left, etc. \u2013 nor about the aspect of the past event except insofar as completeness can be considered aspectual. This past verb is clearly similar if not identical to the Greek aorist, which is considered a tense but is more of an aspect marker. In the Arabic, aorist aspect is the logical consequence of past tense. By contrast, the \"Verb of Similarity\" ( \"al-fi\u02bfl al-mu\u1e0d\u0101ri\u02bf\"), so called because of its resemblance to the active participial noun, is considered to denote an event in the present or future without committing to a specific aspectual sense beyond the incompleteness implied by the tense: (\"ya\u1e0dribu\", he strikes/is striking/will strike/etc.). Those are the only two \"tenses\" in Arabic (not counting \"amr\", command or imperative, which is traditionally considered as denoting future events.) To explicitly mark aspect, Arabic uses a variety of lexical and syntactic devices.\nContemporary Arabic dialects are another matter. One major change from al-fu\u1e63\u1e25\u0101 is the use of a prefix particle ( \"bi\" in Egyptian and Levantine dialects\u2014though it may have a slightly different range of functions in each dialect) to explicitly mark progressive, continuous, or habitual aspect: , \"bi-yiktib\", he is now writing, writes all the time, etc.\nAspect can mark the stage of an action. The prospective aspect is a combination of tense and aspect that indicates the action is in preparation to take place. The inceptive aspect identifies the beginning stage of an action (e.g. Esperanto uses \"ek-\", e.g. \"Mi ekman\u011das\", \"I am beginning to eat\".) and inchoative and ingressive aspects identify a change of state (\"The flowers started blooming\") or the start of an action (\"He started running\"). Aspects of stage continue through progressive, pausative, resumptive, cessive, and terminative.\nImportant qualifications:\nBy language.\nGermanic languages.\nEnglish.\nThe English tense\u2013aspect system has two morphologically distinct tenses, past and non-past, the latter of which is also known as the \"present-future\" or, more commonly and less formally, simply the \"present\". No marker of a distinct future tense exists on the verb in English; the futurity of an event may be expressed through the use of the auxiliary verbs \"will\" and \"shall\", by a non-past form plus an adverb, as in \"tomorrow we go to New York City\", or by some other means. Past is distinguished from non-past, in contrast, with internal modifications of the verb. These two tenses may be modified further for progressive aspect (also called \"continuous\" aspect), for the perfect, or for both. These two aspectual forms are also referred to as BE +ING and HAVE +EN, respectively, which avoids what may be unfamiliar terminology.\nAspects of the present tense:\nAspects of the past tense:\nAspects can also be marked on non-finite forms of the verb: \"(to) be eating\" (infinitive with progressive aspect), \"(to) have eaten\" (infinitive with perfect aspect), \"having eaten\" (present participle or gerund with perfect aspect), etc. The perfect infinitive can further be governed by modal verbs to express various meanings, mostly combining modality with past reference: \"I should have eaten\" etc. In particular, the modals \"will\" and \"shall\" and their subjunctive forms \"would\" and \"should\" are used to combine future or hypothetical reference with aspectual meaning: \nThe uses of the progressive and perfect aspects are quite complex. They may refer to the viewpoint of the speaker:\nI was walking down the road when I met Michael Jackson's lawyer. (Speaker viewpoint in middle of action)\nI have traveled widely, but I have never been to Moscow. (Speaker viewpoint at end of action)\nBut they can have other illocutionary forces or additional modal components:\nYou are being stupid now. (You are doing it deliberately)\nYou are not having chocolate with your sausages! (I forbid it)\nI am having lunch with Mike tomorrow. (It is decided)\nEnglish expresses some other aspectual distinctions with other constructions. \"Used to\" + VERB is a past habitual, as in \"I used to go to school,\" and \"going to / gonna\" + VERB is a prospective, a future situation highlighting current intention or expectation, as in \"I'm going to go to school next year.\"\nAfrican American Vernacular English.\nThe aspectual systems of certain dialects of English, such as African-American Vernacular English (see for example habitual be), and of creoles based on English vocabulary, such as Hawaiian Creole English, are quite different from those of standard English, and often reflect a more elaborate paradigm of aspectual distinctions (often at the expense of tense). The following table, appearing originally in Green (2002) shows the possible aspectual distinctions in AAVE in their prototypical, negative and stressed/emphatic affirmative forms:\nGerman vernacular and colloquial.\nAlthough Standard German does not have aspects, many Upper German and all West Central German dialects, and some more vernacular forms of German do make an aspectual distinction which partly corresponds with the English continuous form: alongside the standard present tense \"Ich esse\" ('I eat') and past \"Ich a\u00df\" ('I ate') there is the form \"Ich bin/war am essen/Essen\" ('I am/was at the eating'; capitalization varies). This is formed by the conjugated auxiliary verb \"sein\" (\"to be\") followed by the preposition and article \"am\" (=\"an dem\") and the infinitive, which German uses in many constructions as a verbal noun.\nIn the Tyrolean and other Bavarian regiolect the prefix *da can be found, which form perfective aspects. \"I hu's gleant\" (Ich habe es gelernt = I learnt it) vs. \"I hu's daleant\" (*Ich habe es DAlernt = I succeeded in learning).\nDutch.\nIn Dutch (a West Germanic language), two types of continuous form are used. Both types are considered Standard Dutch.\nThe first type is very similar to the non-standard German type. It is formed by the conjugated auxiliary verb \"zijn\" (\"to be\"), followed by \"aan het\" and the gerund (which in Dutch matches the infinitive). For example:\nThe second type is formed by one of the conjugated auxiliary verbs \"liggen\" (\"to lie\"), \"zitten\" (\"to sit\"), \"hangen\" (\"to hang\"), \"staan\" (\"to stand\") or \"lopen\" (\"to walk\"), followed by the preposition \"te\" and the infinitive. The conjugated verbs indicate the stance of the subject performing or undergoing the action.\nSometimes the meaning of the auxiliary verb is diminished to 'being engaged in'. Take for instance these examples:\nIn these cases, there is generally an undertone of irritation.\nSlavic languages.\nThe Slavic languages make a clear distinction between perfective and imperfective aspects; it was in relation to these languages that the modern concept of aspect originally developed.\nIn Slavic languages, a given verb is, in itself, either perfective or imperfective. Consequently, each language contains many pairs of verbs, corresponding to each other in meaning, except that one expresses perfective aspect and the other imperfective. (This may be considered a form of lexical aspect.) Perfective verbs are commonly formed from imperfective ones by the addition of a prefix, or else the imperfective verb is formed from the perfective one by modification of the stem or ending. Suppletion also plays a small role. Perfective verbs cannot generally be used with the meaning of a present tense \u2013 their present-tense forms in fact have future reference. An example of such a pair of verbs, from Polish, is given below:\nIn at least the East Slavic and West Slavic languages, there is a three-way aspect differentiation for verbs of motion with the determinate imperfective, indeterminate imperfective, and perfective. The two forms of imperfective can be used in all three tenses (past, present, and future), but the perfective can only be used with past and future. The indeterminate imperfective expresses habitual aspect (or motion in no single direction), while the determinate imperfective expresses progressive aspect. The difference corresponds closely to that between the English \"I (regularly) go to school\" and \"I am going to school (now)\". The three-way difference is given below for the Russian basic (unprefixed) verbs of motion.\nWhen prefixes are attached to Russian verbs of motion they become more or less normal imperfective/perfective pairs, with the indeterminate imperfective becoming the prefixed imperfective and the determinate imperfective becoming the prefixed perfective. For example, prefix \"\u043f\u0440\u0438-\" \"pri-\" + indeterminate \"\u0445\u043e\u0434\u0438\u0301\u0442\u044c\" \"khod\u00edt'\" = \"\u043f\u0440\u0438\u0445\u043e\u0434\u0438\u0301\u0442\u044c\" \"prikhod\u00edt'\" (to arrive (on foot), impf.); and prefix \"\u043f\u0440\u0438-\" \"pri-\" + determinate \"\u0438\u0434\u0442\u0438\u0301\" \"idt\u00ed\" = \"\u043f\u0440\u0438\u0439\u0442\u0438\" \"prijt\u00ed\" (to arrive (on foot), pf.).\nRomance languages.\nModern Romance languages merge the concepts of aspect and tense but consistently distinguish perfective and imperfective aspects in the past tense. This derives directly from the way the Latin language used to render both aspects and \"consecutio temporum\".\nItalian.\nItalian language example using the verb \"mangiare\" (\"to eat\"):\nThe \"imperfetto\"/\"trapassato prossimo\" contrasts with the \"passato remoto\"/\"trapassato remoto\" in that \"imperfetto\" renders an imperfective (continuous) past while \"passato remoto\" expresses an aorist (punctual/historical) past.\nOther aspects in Italian are rendered with other periphrases, like prospective (\"io sto per mangiare\" \"I'm about to eat\", \"io star\u00f2 per mangiare\" \"I shall be about to eat\"), or continuous/progressive (\"io sto mangiando\" \"I'm eating\", \"io star\u00f2 mangiando\" \"I shall be eating\").\nHindi.\nHindi has three aspects, habitual aspect, perfective aspect and the progressive aspect. Each of these three aspects are formed from their participles. The aspects of Hindi when conjugated into their personal forms can be put into five grammatical moods: indicative, presumptive, subjunctive, contrafactual, and imperative. In Hindi, the aspect marker is overtly separated from the tense/mood marker. Periphrastic Hindi verb forms consist of two elements. The first of these two elements is the aspect marker. The second element (the copula) is the common tense/mood marker.\nThere are a couple of verbs which can be used as the copula to the aspectual participles: \u0939\u094b\u0928\u093e (hon\u0101) [to be, happen], \u0930\u0939\u0928\u093e (r\u00eahn\u0101) [to stay, remain], \u0906\u0928\u093e (\u0101n\u0101) [to come], and \u091c\u093e\u0928\u093e (j\u0101n\u0101) [to go]. Each of these copulas provide a unique nuance to the aspect. The default (unmarked) copula is \u0939\u094b\u0928\u093e (hon\u0101) [to be]. These copulas can themselves be conjugated into an aspectual participle and used with another copula, hence forming subaspects. (See\u02d0 Hindi verbs) \nFinnic languages.\nFinnish and Estonian, among others, have a grammatical aspect contrast of telicity between telic and atelic. Telic sentences signal that the intended goal of an action is achieved. Atelic sentences do not signal whether any such goal has been achieved. The aspect is indicated by the case of the object: accusative is telic and partitive is atelic. For example, the (implicit) purpose of shooting is to kill, such that:\nIn rare cases corresponding telic and atelic forms can be unrelated by meaning.\nDerivational suffixes exist for various aspects. Examples:\nThere are derivational suffixes for verbs, which carry frequentative, momentane, causative, and inchoative aspect meanings. Also, pairs of verbs differing only in transitivity exist.\nAustronesian languages.\nRapa.\n&lt;section begin=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nDIR:directional\n&lt;section end=\"list-of-glossing-abbreviations\"/&gt;\nRapa is a French Polynesian language of the island of Rapa Iti. Verbs in the indigenous Old Rapa occur with a TAM (tense, aspect, or mood) marker which can be followed by directional or deictic particles. \"The primary tense\u2013aspect markers used in Old Rapa are the imperfective, progressive, perfective, past, imperative, and subjunctive.\" However, specific tense\u2013aspect\u2013modality (TAM) markers and the type of deictic or directional particle that follows express different types of meaning.\nThe imperfective TAM particle \"e\" \"denotes actions that have not yet occurred but are certain to occur, and inherent qualities\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe progressive TAM particle \"e\" denotes either \"action occurring at that exact moment\" or \"habitual action\" when used with deictic particle \"na\", and actions just witnessed and presumed to still be occurring (but \"not readily available for the speaker or addressee to see\") when used with deictic particle \"ra\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe perfective TAM particle \"ka\" denotes actions that have already occurred or have finished. \"It can also be used to mark habitual past (i.e., 'used to do something [every day], but no longer do') when used with deictic \"na\".\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"TAM particle \"i\" marks past action. It is rarely used as a matrix TAM and is more frequently observed in past embedded clauses.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHawaiian.\nThe Hawaiian language conveys aspect as follows:\nWuvulu.\nWuvulu language is a minority language in Pacific. The Wuvulu verbal aspect is hard to organize because of its number of morpheme combinations and the interaction of semantics between morphemes. Perfective, imperfective negation, simultaneous and habitual are four aspects markers in Wuvulu language.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt; \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTokelauan.\nThere are three types of aspects one must consider when analyzing the Tokelauan language: inherent aspect, situation aspect, and viewpoint aspect.\nThe inherent aspect describes the purpose of a verb and what separates verbs from one another. According to Vendler, inherent aspect can be categorized into four different types: activities, achievements, accomplishments, and states. Simple activities include verbs such as pull, jump, and punch. Some achievements are continue and win. Drive-a-car is an accomplishment while hate is an example of a state. Another way to recognize a state inherent aspect is to note whether or not it changes. For example, if someone were to hate vegetables because they are allergic, this state of hate is unchanging and thus, a state inherent aspect. On the other hand, an achievement, unlike a state, only lasts for a short amount of time. Achievement is the highpoint of an action.\nAnother type of aspect is situation aspect. Situation aspect is described to be what one is experiencing in his or her life through that circumstance. Therefore, it is his or her understanding of the situation. Situation aspect are abstract terms that are not physically tangible. They are also used based upon one's point of view. For example, a professor may say that a student who comes a minute before each class starts is a punctual student. Based upon the professor's judgment of what punctuality is, he or she may make that assumption of the situation with the student. Situation aspect is firstly divided into states and occurrences, then later subdivided under occurrences into processes and events, and lastly, under events, there are accomplishments and achievements.\nThe third type of aspect is viewpoint aspect. Viewpoint aspect can be likened to situation aspect such that they both take into consideration one's inferences. However, viewpoint aspect diverges from situation aspect because it is where one decides to view or see such event. A perfect example is the glass metaphor: Is the glass half full or is it half empty. The choice of being half full represents an optimistic viewpoint while the choice of being half empty represents a pessimistic viewpoint. Not only does viewpoint aspect separate into negative and positive, but rather different point of views. Having two people describe a painting can bring about two different viewpoints. One may describe a situation aspect as a perfect or imperfect. A perfect situation aspect entails an event with no reference to time, while an imperfect situation aspect makes a reference to time with the observation.\nTorau.\nAspect in Torau is marked with post-verbal particles or clitics. While the system for marking the imperfective aspect is complex and highly developed, it is unclear if Torau marks the perfective and neutral viewpoints. The imperfective clitics index one of the core arguments, usually the nominative subject, and follow the rightmost element in a syntactic structure larger than the word. The two distinct forms for marking the imperfective aspect are \"(i)sa-\" and \"e-\". While more work needs to be done on this language, the preliminary hypothesis is that \"(i)sa-\" encodes the stative imperfective and \"e-\" encodes the active imperfective. Reduplication always cooccurs with \"e-\", but it usually does not with \"(i)sa-.\" This example below shows these two imperfective aspect markers giving different meanings to similar sentences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Torau, the suffix -\"to\", which must attach to a preverbal particle, may indicate similar meaning to the perfective aspect. In realis clauses, this suffix conveys an event that is entirely in the past and no longer occurring. When \"-to\" is used in irrealis clauses, the speaker conveys that the event will definitely occur (Palmer, 2007). Although this suffix is not explicitly stated as a perfective viewpoint marker, the meaning that it contributes is very similar to the perfective viewpoint.\nMalay/Indonesian.\nLike many Austronesian languages, the verbs of the Malay language follow a system of affixes to express changes in meaning. To express the aspects, Malay uses a number of auxiliary verbs:\n*\"sudah\": perfective, 'saya sudah makan' = 'I have [already] eaten'\n*\"baru\": near perfective, 'saya baru makan' = 'I have just eaten'\n*\"belum\": imperfective, 'saya belum makan' = 'I have not eaten'\n*\"sedang\": progressive not implicating an end\n*\"masih\": progressive implicating an end\n*\"pernah\": semelfactive\nPhilippine languages.\nLike many Austronesian languages, the verbs of the Philippine languages follow a complex system of affixes to express subtle changes in meaning. However, the verbs in this family of languages are conjugated to express the aspects and not the tenses. Though many of the Philippine languages do not have a fully codified grammar, most of them follow the verb aspects that are demonstrated by Filipino or Tagalog.\nCreole languages.\nCreole languages typically use the unmarked verb for timeless habitual aspect, or for stative aspect, or for perfective aspect in the past. Invariant pre-verbal markers are often used. Non-stative verbs typically can optionally be marked for the progressive, habitual, completive, or irrealis aspect. The progressive in English-based Atlantic Creoles often uses \"de\" (from English \"be\"). Jamaican Creole uses \"a\" (from English \"are\") or \"de\" for the present progressive and a combination of the past time marker (\"did\", \"behn\", \"ehn\" or \"wehn\") and the progressive marker (\"a\" or \"de\") for the past progressive (e.g. \"did a\" or \"wehn de\"). Haitian Creole uses the progressive marker \"ap\". Some Atlantic Creoles use one marker for both the habitual and progressive aspects. In Tok Pisin, the optional progressive marker follows the verb. Completive markers tend to come from superstrate words like \"done\" or \"finish\", and some creoles model the future/irrealis marker on the superstrate word for \"go\".\nAmerican Sign Language.\nAmerican Sign Language (ASL) is similar to many other sign languages in that it has no grammatical tense but many verbal aspects produced by modifying the base verb sign.\nAn example is illustrated with the verb TELL. The basic form of this sign is produced with the initial posture of the index finger on the chin, followed by a movement of the hand and finger tip toward the indirect object (the recipient of the telling). Inflected into the unrealized inceptive aspect (\"to be just about to tell\"), the sign begins with the hand moving from in front of the trunk in an arc to the initial posture of the base sign (i.e., index finger touching the chin) while inhaling through the mouth, dropping the jaw, and directing eye gaze toward the verb's object. The posture is then held rather than moved toward the indirect object. During the hold, the signer also stops the breath by closing the glottis. Other verbs (such as \"look at\", \"wash the dishes\", \"yell\", \"flirt\") are inflected into the unrealized inceptive aspect similarly: The hands used in the base sign move in an arc from in front of the trunk to the initial posture of the underlying verb sign while inhaling, dropping the jaw, and directing eye gaze toward the verb's object (if any), but subsequent movements and postures are dropped as the posture and breath are held.\nOther aspects in ASL include the following: stative, inchoative (\"to begin to...\"), predispositional (\"to tend to...\"), susceptative (\"to... easily\"), frequentative (\"to... often\"), protractive (\"to... continuously\"), incessant (\"to... incessantly\"), durative (\"to... for a long time\"), iterative (\"to... over and over again\"), intensive (\"to... very much\"), resultative (\"to... completely\"), approximative (\"to... somewhat\"), semblitive (\"to appear to...\"), increasing (\"to... more and more\"). Some aspects combine with others to create yet finer distinctions.\nAspect is unusual in ASL in that transitive verbs derived for aspect lose their grammatical transitivity. They remain semantically transitive, typically assuming an object made prominent using a topic marker or mentioned in a previous sentence. See Syntax in ASL for details.\nTerms for various aspects.\nThe following aspectual terms are found in the literature. Approximate English equivalents are given.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12950", "revid": "44763467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12950", "title": "Glucose", "text": "Naturally produced monosaccharide\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nGlucose is a sugar with the molecular formula . It is the most abundant monosaccharide, a subcategory of carbohydrates. It is made from water and carbon dioxide during photosynthesis by plants and most algae. It is used by plants to make cellulose, the most abundant carbohydrate in the world, for use in cell walls, and by all living organisms to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is used by the cell as energy. Glucose is often abbreviated as Glc.\nIn energy metabolism, glucose is the most important source of energy in all organisms. Glucose for metabolism is stored as a polymer, in plants mainly as amylose and amylopectin, and in animals as glycogen. Glucose circulates in the blood of animals as blood sugar. The naturally occurring form is d-glucose, while its stereoisomer l-glucose is produced synthetically in comparatively small amounts and is less biologically active. Glucose is a monosaccharide containing six carbon atoms and an aldehyde group, and is therefore an aldohexose. The glucose molecule can exist in an open-chain (acyclic) as well as ring (cyclic) form. Glucose is naturally occurring and is found in its free state in fruits and other parts of plants. In animals, it is released from the breakdown of glycogen in a process known as glycogenolysis.\nGlucose, as intravenous sugar solution, is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is also on the list in combination with sodium chloride (table salt).\nThe name glucose is derived from Ancient Greek () 'wine, must', from () 'sweet'. The suffix \"-ose\" is a chemical classifier denoting a sugar.\nHistory.\nGlucose was first isolated from raisins in 1747 by the German chemist Andreas Marggraf. Glucose was discovered in grapes by another German chemist, Johann Tobias Lowitz, in 1792, and distinguished as being different from cane sugar (sucrose). Glucose is the term coined by Jean-Baptiste Dumas in 1838, which has prevailed in the chemical literature. Friedrich August Kekul\u00e9 proposed the term dextrose (from the Latin , meaning \"right\"), because in aqueous solutions of glucose, the plane of linearly polarized light is turned to the right. In contrast, l-fructose (usually referred to as d-fructose) (a ketohexose) and l-glucose (l-glucose) turn linearly polarized light to the left. The earlier notation according to the rotation of the plane of linearly polarized light (\"d\" and \"l\"-nomenclature) was later abandoned in favor of the d- and l-notation, which refers to the absolute configuration of the asymmetric center furthest from the carbonyl group, and in concordance with the configuration of d- or l-glyceraldehyde.\nSince glucose is a basic necessity of many organisms, a correct understanding of its chemical makeup and structure contributed greatly to a general advancement in organic chemistry. This understanding occurred largely as a result of the investigations of Hermann Emil Fischer, a German chemist who received the 1902 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his findings. The synthesis of glucose established the structure of organic material and consequently formed the first definitive validation of Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff's theories of chemical kinetics and the arrangements of chemical bonds in carbon-bearing molecules. Between 1891 and 1894, Fischer established the stereochemical configuration of all the known sugars and correctly predicted the possible isomers, applying Van 't Hoff equation of asymmetrical carbon atoms. The names initially referred to the natural substances. Their enantiomers were given the same name with the introduction of systematic nomenclatures, taking into account absolute stereochemistry (e.g. Fischer nomenclature, d/l nomenclature).\nFor the discovery of the metabolism of glucose Otto Fritz Meyerhof received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1922. Hans von Euler-Chelpin was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry along with Arthur Harden in 1929 for their \"research on the fermentation of sugar and their share of enzymes in this process\". In 1947, Bernardo Houssay (for his discovery of the role of the pituitary gland in the metabolism of glucose and the derived carbohydrates) as well as Carl and Gerty Cori (for their discovery of the conversion of glycogen from glucose) received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. In 1970, Luis Leloir was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of glucose-derived sugar nucleotides in the biosynthesis of carbohydrates.\nChemical and physical properties.\nGlucose forms white or colorless solids that are highly soluble in water and acetic acid but poorly soluble in methanol and ethanol. They melt at (\"\u03b1\") and (\"beta\"), decompose starting at with release of various volatile products, ultimately leaving a residue of carbon. Glucose has a pKa value of 12.16 at in water.\nWith six carbon atoms, it is classed as a hexose, a subcategory of the monosaccharides. d-Glucose is one of the sixteen aldohexose stereoisomers. The d-isomer, d-glucose, also known as dextrose, occurs widely in nature, but the l-isomer, l-glucose, does not. Glucose can be obtained by hydrolysis of carbohydrates such as milk sugar (lactose), cane sugar (sucrose), maltose, cellulose, glycogen, etc. Dextrose is commonly commercially manufactured from starches, such as corn starch in the US and Japan, from potato and wheat starch in Europe, and from tapioca starch in tropical areas. The manufacturing process uses hydrolysis via pressurized steaming at controlled pH in a jet followed by further enzymatic depolymerization. Unbonded glucose is one of the main ingredients of honey.\nThe term \"dextrose\" is often used in a clinical (related to patient's health status) or nutritional context (related to dietary intake, such as food labels or dietary guidelines), while \"glucose\" is used in a biological or physiological context (chemical processes and molecular interactions), but both terms refer to the same molecule, specifically D-glucose.\n\"Dextrose monohydrate\" is the hydrated form of D-glucose, meaning that it is a glucose molecule with an additional water molecule attached. Its chemical formula is \u00a0\u00b7\u00a0. Dextrose monohydrate is also called \"hydrated D-glucose\", and commonly manufactured from plant starches. Dextrose monohydrate is utilized as the predominant type of dextrose in food applications, such as beverage mixes\u2014it is a common form of glucose widely used as a nutrition supplement in production of foodstuffs. Dextrose monohydrate is primarily consumed in North America as a corn syrup or high-fructose corn syrup.\n\"Anhydrous dextrose\", on the other hand, is glucose that does not have any water molecules attached to it. Anhydrous chemical substances are commonly produced by eliminating water from a hydrated substance through methods such as heating or drying up (desiccation). Dextrose monohydrate can be dehydrated to anhydrous dextrose in industrial setting. Dextrose monohydrate is composed of approximately 9.5% water by mass; through the process of dehydration, this water content is eliminated to yield anhydrous (dry) dextrose.\nAnhydrous dextrose has the chemical formula , without any water molecule attached which is the same as glucose. Anhydrous dextrose on open air tends to absorb moisture and transform to the monohydrate, and it is more expensive to produce. Anhydrous dextrose (anhydrous D-glucose) has increased stability and increased shelf life, has medical applications, such as in oral glucose tolerance test.\nWhereas molecular weight (molar mass) for D-glucose monohydrate is 198.17 g/mol, that for anhydrous D-glucose is 180.16 g/mol The density of these two forms of glucose is also different.\nIn terms of chemical structure, glucose is a monosaccharide, that is, a simple sugar. Glucose contains six carbon atoms and an aldehyde group, and is therefore an aldohexose. The glucose molecule can exist in an open-chain (acyclic) as well as ring (cyclic) form\u2014due to the presence of alcohol and aldehyde or ketone functional groups, the form having the straight chain can easily convert into a chair-like hemiacetal ring structure commonly found in carbohydrates.\nStructure and nomenclature.\nGlucose is present in solid form as a monohydrate with a closed pyran ring (\u03b1-D-glucopyranose monohydrate, sometimes known less precisely by dextrose hydrate). In aqueous solution, on the other hand, a small proportion of glucose can be found in an open-chain configuration while remaining predominantly as \u03b1- or \u03b2-pyranose, which interconvert. From aqueous solutions, the three known forms can be crystallized: \u03b1-glucopyranose, \u03b2-glucopyranose and \u03b1-glucopyranose monohydrate. Glucose is a building block of the disaccharides lactose and sucrose (cane or beet sugar), of oligosaccharides such as raffinose and of polysaccharides such as starch, amylopectin, glycogen, and cellulose. The glass transition temperature of glucose is and the Gordon\u2013Taylor constant (an experimentally determined constant for the prediction of the glass transition temperature for different mass fractions of a mixture of two substances) is 4.5.\nOpen-chain form.\nAn open-chain form of glucose makes up less than 0.02% of the glucose molecules in an aqueous solution at equilibrium. The rest is one of two cyclic hemiacetal forms. In its open-chain form, the glucose molecule has an open (as opposed to cyclic) unbranched backbone of six carbon atoms, where C-1 is part of an aldehyde group . Therefore, glucose is also classified as an aldose, or an aldohexose. The aldehyde group makes glucose a reducing sugar giving a positive reaction with the Fehling test.\nCyclic forms.\nIn solutions, the open-chain form of glucose (either \"D-\" or \"L-\") exists in equilibrium with several cyclic isomers, each containing a ring of carbons closed by one oxygen atom. In aqueous solution, however, more than 99% of glucose molecules exist as pyranose forms. The open-chain form is limited to about 0.25%, and furanose forms exist in negligible amounts. The terms \"glucose\" and \"D-glucose\" are generally used for these cyclic forms as well. The ring arises from the open-chain form by an intramolecular nucleophilic addition reaction between the aldehyde group (at C-1) and either the C-4 or C-5 hydroxyl group, forming a hemiacetal linkage, .\nThe reaction between C-1 and C-5 yields a six-membered heterocyclic system called a pyranose, which is a monosaccharide sugar (hence \"-ose\") containing a derivatised pyran skeleton. The (much rarer) reaction between C-1 and C-4 yields a five-membered furanose ring, named after the cyclic ether furan. In either case, each carbon in the ring has one hydrogen and one hydroxyl attached, except for the last carbon (C-4 or C-5) where the hydroxyl is replaced by the remainder of the open molecule (which is or respectively).\nThe ring-closing reaction can give two products, denoted \"\u03b1-\" and \"\u03b2-\". When a glucopyranose molecule is drawn in the Haworth projection, the designation \"\u03b1-\" means that the hydroxyl group attached to C-1 and the group at C-5 lies on opposite sides of the ring's plane (a\" trans\" arrangement), while \"\u03b2-\" means that they are on the same side of the plane (a\" cis\" arrangement). Therefore, the open-chain isomer D-glucose gives rise to four distinct cyclic isomers: \u03b1-D-glucopyranose, \u03b2-D-glucopyranose, \u03b1-D-glucofuranose, and \u03b2-D-glucofuranose. These five structures exist in equilibrium and interconvert, and the interconversion is much more rapid with acid catalysis.\nThe other open-chain isomer L-glucose similarly gives rise to four distinct cyclic forms of L-glucose, each the mirror image of the corresponding D-glucose.\nThe glucopyranose ring (\u03b1 or \u03b2) can assume several non-planar shapes, analogous to the \"chair\" and \"boat\" conformations of cyclohexane. Similarly, the glucofuranose ring may assume several shapes, analogous to the \"envelope\" conformations of cyclopentane.\nIn the solid state, only the glucopyranose forms are observed.\nSome derivatives of glucofuranose, such as 1,2-\"O\"-isopropylidene-D-glucofuranose are stable and can be obtained pure as crystalline solids. For example, reaction of \u03b1-D-glucose with \"para\"-tolylboronic acid reforms the normal pyranose ring to yield the 4-fold ester \u03b1-D-glucofuranose-1,2:3,5-bis(\"p\"-tolylboronate).\nMutarotation.\nMutarotation consists of a temporary reversal of the ring-forming reaction, resulting in the open-chain form, followed by a reforming of the ring. The ring closure step may use a different group than the one recreated by the opening step (thus switching between pyranose and furanose forms), or the new hemiacetal group created on C-1 may have the same or opposite handedness as the original one (thus switching between the \u03b1 and \u03b2 forms). Thus, though the open-chain form is barely detectable in solution, it is an essential component of the equilibrium.\nThe open-chain form is thermodynamically unstable, and it spontaneously isomerizes to the cyclic forms. (Although the ring closure reaction could in theory create four- or three-atom rings, these would be highly strained, and are not observed in practice.) In solutions at room temperature, the four cyclic isomers interconvert over a time scale of hours, in a process called mutarotation. Starting from any proportions, the mixture converges to a stable ratio of \u03b1:\u03b2 36:64. The ratio would be \u03b1:\u03b2 11:89 if it were not for the influence of the anomeric effect. Mutarotation is considerably slower at temperatures close to .\nOptical activity.\nWhether in water or the solid form, d-(+)-glucose is dextrorotatory, meaning it will rotate the direction of polarized light clockwise as seen looking toward the light source. The effect is due to the chirality of the molecules, and indeed the mirror-image isomer, l-(\u2212)-glucose, is levorotatory (rotates polarized light counterclockwise) by the same amount. The strength of the effect is different for each of the five tautomers.\nThe d- prefix does not refer directly to the optical properties of the compound. It indicates that the C-5 chiral centre has the same handedness as that of d-glyceraldehyde (which was so labelled because it is dextrorotatory). The fact that d-glucose is dextrorotatory is a combined effect of its four chiral centres, not just of C-5; some of the other d-aldohexoses are levorotatory.\nThe conversion between the two anomers can be observed in a polarimeter since pure \u03b1-d-glucose has a specific rotation angle of +112.2\u00b0 mL/(dm\u00b7g), pure \u03b2-d-glucose of +17.5\u00b0 mL/(dm\u00b7g). When equilibrium has been reached after a certain time due to mutarotation, the angle of rotation is +52.7\u00b0 mL/(dm\u00b7g). By adding acid or base, this transformation is much accelerated. The equilibration takes place via the open-chain aldehyde form.\nIsomerisation.\nIn dilute sodium hydroxide or other dilute bases, the monosaccharides mannose, glucose, and fructose interconvert (via a Lobry de Bruyn\u2013Alberda\u2013Van Ekenstein transformation), so that a balance between these isomers is formed. This reaction proceeds via an enediol:\nBiochemical properties.\nGlucose is the most abundant monosaccharide. Glucose is also the most widely used aldohexose in most living organisms. One possible explanation for this is that glucose has a lower tendency than other aldohexoses to react nonspecifically with the amine groups of proteins. This reaction\u2014glycation\u2014impairs or destroys the function of many proteins, e.g. in glycated hemoglobin. Glucose's low rate of glycation can be attributed to its having a more stable cyclic form compared to other aldohexoses, which means it spends less time than they do in its reactive open-chain form. The reason for glucose having the most stable cyclic form of all the aldohexoses is that its hydroxy groups (with the exception of the hydroxy group on the anomeric carbon of d-glucose) are in the equatorial position. Presumably, glucose is the most abundant natural monosaccharide because it is less glycated with proteins than other monosaccharides. Another hypothesis is that glucose, being the only d-aldohexose that has all five hydroxy substituents in the equatorial position in the form of \u03b2-d-glucose, is more readily accessible to chemical reactions, for example, for esterification or acetal formation. For this reason, d-glucose is also a highly preferred building block in natural polysaccharides (glycans). Polysaccharides that are composed solely of glucose are termed glucans.\nGlucose is produced by plants through photosynthesis using sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide and can be used by all living organisms as an energy and carbon source. However, most glucose does not occur in its free form, but in the form of its polymers, i.e. lactose, sucrose, starch, and others which are energy reserve substances, and cellulose and chitin, which are components of the cell wall in plants or fungi and arthropods, respectively. These polymers, when consumed by animals, fungi, and bacteria, are degraded to glucose using enzymes. All animals are also able to produce glucose themselves from certain precursors as the need arises. Neurons, cells of the renal medulla, and erythrocytes depend on glucose for their energy production.&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 195\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\" .. Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a0195.&lt;/ref&gt; In adult humans, there is about of glucose, of which about is present in the blood. Approximately of glucose is produced in the liver of an adult in 24 hours.\nMany of the long-term complications of diabetes (e.g., blindness, kidney failure, and peripheral neuropathy) are probably due to the glycation of proteins or lipids. In contrast, enzyme-regulated addition of sugars to protein is called glycosylation and is essential for the function of many proteins.\nUptake.\nIngested glucose initially binds to the receptor for sweet taste on the tongue in humans. This complex of the proteins T1R2 and T1R3 makes it possible to identify glucose-containing food sources. Glucose mainly comes from food\u2014about per day is produced by conversion of food,&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 404\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\". Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a0404.&lt;/ref&gt; but it is also synthesized from other metabolites in the body's cells. In humans, the breakdown of glucose-containing polysaccharides happens in part already during chewing by means of amylase, which is contained in saliva, as well as by maltase, lactase, and sucrase on the brush border of the small intestine. Glucose is a building block of many carbohydrates and can be split off from them using certain enzymes. Glucosidases, a subgroup of the glycosidases, first catalyze the hydrolysis of long-chain glucose-containing polysaccharides, removing terminal glucose. In turn, disaccharides are mostly degraded by specific glycosidases to glucose. The names of the degrading enzymes are often derived from the particular poly- and disaccharide; inter alia, for the degradation of polysaccharide chains there are amylases (named after amylose, a component of starch), cellulases (named after cellulose), chitinases (named after chitin), and more. Furthermore, for the cleavage of disaccharides, there are maltase, lactase, sucrase, trehalase, and others. In humans, about 70 genes are known that code for glycosidases. They have functions in the digestion and degradation of glycogen, sphingolipids, mucopolysaccharides, and poly(ADP-ribose). Humans do not produce cellulases, chitinases, or trehalases, but the bacteria in the gut microbiota do.\nIn order to get into or out of cell membranes of cells and membranes of cell compartments, glucose requires special transport proteins from the major facilitator superfamily. In the small intestine (more precisely, in the jejunum), glucose is taken up into the intestinal epithelium with the help of glucose transporters via a secondary active transport mechanism called sodium ion-glucose symport via sodium/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1). Further transfer occurs on the basolateral side of the intestinal epithelial cells via the glucose transporter GLUT2, as well uptake into liver cells, kidney cells, cells of the islets of Langerhans, neurons, astrocytes, and tanycytes. Glucose enters the liver via the portal vein and is stored there as a cellular glycogen. In the liver cell, it is phosphorylated by glucokinase at position 6 to form glucose 6-phosphate, which cannot leave the cell. Glucose 6-phosphatase can convert glucose 6-phosphate back into glucose exclusively in the liver, so the body can maintain a sufficient blood glucose concentration. In other cells, uptake happens by passive transport through one of the 14 GLUT proteins. In the other cell types, phosphorylation occurs through a hexokinase, whereupon glucose can no longer diffuse out of the cell.\nThe glucose transporter GLUT1 is produced by most cell types and is of particular importance for nerve cells and pancreatic \u03b2-cells. GLUT3 is highly expressed in nerve cells. Glucose from the bloodstream is taken up by GLUT4 from muscle cells (of the skeletal muscle and heart muscle) and fat cells. GLUT14 is expressed exclusively in testicles. Excess glucose is broken down and converted into fatty acids, which are stored as triglycerides. In the kidneys, glucose in the urine is absorbed via SGLT1 and SGLT2 in the apical cell membranes and transmitted via GLUT2 in the basolateral cell membranes. About 90% of kidney glucose reabsorption is via SGLT2 and about 3% via SGLT1.\nBiosynthesis.\nIn plants and some prokaryotes, glucose is a product of photosynthesis. Glucose is also formed by the breakdown of polymeric forms of glucose like glycogen (in animals and mushrooms) or starch (in plants). The cleavage of glycogen is termed glycogenolysis, the cleavage of starch is called starch degradation.\nThe metabolic pathway that begins with molecules containing two to four carbon atoms (C) and ends in the glucose molecule containing six carbon atoms is called gluconeogenesis and occurs in all living organisms. The smaller starting materials are the result of other metabolic pathways. Ultimately almost all biomolecules come from the assimilation of carbon dioxide in plants and microbes during photosynthesis. The free energy of formation of \u03b1-d-glucose is 917.2 kilojoules per mole. In humans, gluconeogenesis occurs in the liver and kidney, but also in other cell types. In the liver about of glycogen are stored, in skeletal muscle about .&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 389\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\" . Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a0389.&lt;/ref&gt; However, the glucose released in muscle cells upon cleavage of the glycogen can not be delivered to the circulation because glucose is phosphorylated by the hexokinase, and a glucose-6-phosphatase is not expressed to remove the phosphate group. Unlike for glucose, there is no transport protein for glucose-6-phosphate. Gluconeogenesis allows the organism to build up glucose from other metabolites, including lactate or certain amino acids, while consuming energy. The renal tubular cells can also produce glucose.\nGlucose also can be found outside of living organisms in the ambient environment. Glucose concentrations in the atmosphere are detected via collection of samples by aircraft and are known to vary from location to location. For example, glucose concentrations in atmospheric air from inland China range from 0.8 to 20.1 pg/L, whereas east coastal China glucose concentrations range from 10.3 to 142 pg/L.\nGlucose degradation.\nIn humans, glucose is metabolized by glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway. Glycolysis is used by all living organisms, with small variations, and all organisms generate energy from the breakdown of monosaccharides. In the further course of the metabolism, it can be completely degraded via oxidative decarboxylation, the citric acid cycle (synonym \"Krebs cycle\") and the respiratory chain to water and carbon dioxide. If there is not enough oxygen available for this, the glucose degradation in animals occurs anaerobic to lactate via lactic acid fermentation and releases much less energy. Muscular lactate enters the liver through the bloodstream in mammals, where gluconeogenesis occurs (Cori cycle). With a high supply of glucose, the metabolite acetyl-CoA from the Krebs cycle can also be used for fatty acid synthesis. Glucose is also used to replenish the body's glycogen stores, which are mainly found in liver and skeletal muscle. These processes are hormonally regulated.\nIn other living organisms, other forms of fermentation can occur. The bacterium \"Escherichia coli\" can grow on nutrient media containing glucose as the sole carbon source. In some bacteria and, in modified form, also in archaea, glucose is degraded via the Entner-Doudoroff pathway. With glucose, a mechanism for gene regulation was discovered in \"E. coli\", the catabolite repression (formerly known as \"glucose effect\").\nUse of glucose as an energy source in cells is by either aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration, or fermentation. The first step of glycolysis is the phosphorylation of glucose by a hexokinase to form glucose 6-phosphate. The main reason for the immediate phosphorylation of glucose is to prevent its diffusion out of the cell as the charged phosphate group prevents glucose 6-phosphate from easily crossing the cell membrane. Furthermore, addition of the high-energy phosphate group activates glucose for subsequent breakdown in later steps of glycolysis.\nIn anaerobic respiration, one glucose molecule produces a net gain of two ATP molecules (four ATP molecules are produced during glycolysis through substrate-level phosphorylation, but two are required by enzymes used during the process). In aerobic respiration, a molecule of glucose is much more profitable in that a maximum net production of 30 or 32 ATP molecules (depending on the organism) is generated.\nTumor cells often grow comparatively quickly and consume an above-average amount of glucose by glycolysis, which leads to the formation of lactate, the end product of fermentation in mammals, even in the presence of oxygen. This is called the Warburg effect. For the increased uptake of glucose in tumors various SGLT and GLUT are overly produced.\nIn yeast, ethanol is fermented at high glucose concentrations, even in the presence of oxygen (which normally leads to respiration rather than fermentation). This is called the Crabtree effect.\nGlucose can also degrade to form carbon dioxide through abiotic means. This has been demonstrated to occur experimentally via oxidation and hydrolysis at 22\u00a0\u00b0C and a pH of 2.5.\nEnergy source.\nGlucose is a ubiquitous fuel in biology. It is used as an energy source in organisms, from bacteria to humans, through either aerobic respiration, anaerobic respiration (in bacteria), or fermentation. Glucose is the human body's key source of energy, through aerobic respiration, providing about 3.75\u00a0kilocalories (16\u00a0kilojoules) of food energy per gram. Breakdown of carbohydrates (e.g., starch) yields mono- and disaccharides, most of which is glucose. Through glycolysis and later in the reactions of the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, glucose is oxidized to eventually form carbon dioxide and water, yielding energy mostly in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The insulin reaction, and other mechanisms, regulate the concentration of glucose in the blood. The physiological caloric value of glucose, depending on the source, is 16.2 kilojoules per gram or 15.7 kJ/g (3.74 kcal/g). The high availability of carbohydrates from plant biomass has led to a variety of methods during evolution, especially in microorganisms, to utilize glucose for energy and carbon storage. Differences exist in which end product can no longer be used for energy production. The presence of individual genes, and their gene products, the enzymes, determine which reactions are possible. The metabolic pathway of glycolysis is used by almost all living beings. An essential difference in the use of glycolysis is the recovery of NADPH as a reductant for anabolism that would otherwise have to be generated indirectly.\nGlucose and oxygen supply almost all the energy for the brain, so its availability influences psychological processes. When glucose is low, psychological processes requiring mental effort (e.g., self-control, effortful decision-making) are impaired. In the brain, which is dependent on glucose and oxygen as the major source of energy, the glucose concentration is usually 4 to 6\u00a0mM (5\u00a0mM equals 90\u00a0mg/dL), but decreases to 2 to 3\u00a0mM when fasting. Confusion occurs below 1\u00a0mM and coma at lower levels.\nThe glucose in the blood is called blood sugar. Blood sugar levels are regulated by glucose-binding nerve cells in the hypothalamus. In addition, glucose in the brain binds to glucose receptors of the reward system in the nucleus accumbens. The binding of glucose to the sweet receptor on the tongue induces a release of various hormones of energy metabolism, either through glucose or through other sugars, leading to an increased cellular uptake and lower blood sugar levels. Artificial sweeteners do not lower blood sugar levels.\nThe blood sugar content of a healthy person in the short-time fasting state, e.g. after overnight fasting, is about 70 to 100\u00a0mg/dL of blood (4 to 5.5\u00a0mM). In blood plasma, the measured values are about 10\u201315% higher. In addition, the values in the arterial blood are higher than the concentrations in the venous blood since glucose is absorbed into the tissue during the passage of the capillary bed. Also in the capillary blood, which is often used for blood sugar determination, the values are sometimes higher than in the venous blood. The glucose content of the blood is regulated by the hormones insulin, incretin, and glucagon. Insulin lowers the glucose level, glucagon increases it. Furthermore, the hormones adrenaline, thyroxine, glucocorticoids, somatotropin, and adrenocorticotropin lead to an increase in the glucose level. There is also a hormone-independent regulation, which is referred to as glucose autoregulation. After food intake the blood sugar concentration increases. Values over 180\u00a0mg/dL in venous whole blood are pathological and are termed hyperglycemia, values below 40\u00a0mg/dL are termed hypoglycaemia. When needed, glucose is released into the bloodstream by glucose-6-phosphatase from glucose-6-phosphate originating from liver and kidney glycogen, thereby regulating the homeostasis of blood glucose concentration. In ruminants, the blood glucose concentration is lower (60\u00a0mg/dL in cattle and 40\u00a0mg/dL in sheep), because the carbohydrates are converted more by their gut microbiota into short-chain fatty acids.\nSome glucose is converted to lactic acid by astrocytes, which is then utilized as an energy source by brain cells; some glucose is used by intestinal cells and red blood cells, while the rest reaches the liver, adipose tissue, and muscle cells, where it is absorbed and stored as glycogen (under the influence of insulin). Liver cell glycogen can be converted to glucose and returned to the blood when insulin is low or absent; muscle cell glycogen is not returned to the blood because of a lack of enzymes. In fat cells, glucose is used to power reactions that synthesize some fat types and have other purposes. Glycogen is the body's \"glucose energy storage\" mechanism, because it is much more \"space efficient\" and less reactive than glucose itself.\nAs a result of its importance in human health, glucose is an analyte in glucose tests that are common medical blood tests. Eating or fasting prior to taking a blood sample has an effect on analyses for glucose in the blood; a high fasting glucose blood sugar level may be a sign of prediabetes or diabetes mellitus.\nThe glycemic index is an indicator of the speed of resorption and conversion to blood glucose levels from ingested carbohydrates, measured as the area under the curve of blood glucose levels after consumption in comparison to glucose (glucose is defined as 100). The clinical importance of the glycemic index is controversial, as foods with high fat contents slow the resorption of carbohydrates and lower the glycemic index, e.g. ice cream. An alternative indicator is the insulin index, measured as the impact of carbohydrate consumption on the blood insulin levels. The glycemic load is an indicator for the amount of glucose added to blood glucose levels after consumption, based on the glycemic index and the amount of consumed food.\nPrecursor.\nOrganisms use glucose as a precursor for the synthesis of several important substances. Starch, cellulose, and glycogen (\"animal starch\") are common glucose polymers (polysaccharides). Some of these polymers (starch or glycogen) serve as energy stores, while others (cellulose and chitin, which is made from a derivative of glucose) have structural roles. Oligosaccharides of glucose combined with other sugars serve as important energy stores. These include lactose, the predominant sugar in milk, which is a glucose-galactose disaccharide, and sucrose, another disaccharide which is composed of glucose and fructose. Glucose is also added onto certain proteins and lipids in a process called glycosylation. This is often critical for their functioning. The enzymes that join glucose to other molecules usually use phosphorylated glucose to power the formation of the new bond by coupling it with the breaking of the glucose-phosphate bond.\nOther than its direct use as a monomer, glucose can be broken down to synthesize a wide variety of other biomolecules. This is important, as glucose serves both as a primary store of energy and as a source of organic carbon. Glucose can be broken down and converted into lipids. It is also a precursor for the synthesis of other important molecules such as vitamin C (ascorbic acid). In living organisms, glucose is converted to several other chemical compounds that are the starting material for various metabolic pathways. Among them, all other monosaccharides&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 27\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\" . Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a027.&lt;/ref&gt; such as fructose (via the polyol pathway),&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 199\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\" . Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a0199, 200.&lt;/ref&gt; mannose (the epimer of glucose at position 2), galactose (the epimer at position 4), fucose, various uronic acids, and the amino sugars are produced from glucose.&lt;ref name=\"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides 214\"&gt;Peter C. Heinrich: \"L\u00f6ffler/Petrides Biochemie und Pathobiochemie\" . Springer-Verlag, 2014, , p.\u00a0214.&lt;/ref&gt; In addition to the phosphorylation to glucose-6-phosphate, which is part of the glycolysis, glucose can be oxidized during its degradation to glucono-1,5-lactone. Glucose is used in some bacteria as a building block in the trehalose or the dextran biosynthesis and in animals as a building block of glycogen. Glucose can also be converted from bacterial xylose isomerase to fructose. In addition, glucose metabolites produce all nonessential amino acids, sugar alcohols such as mannitol and sorbitol, fatty acids, cholesterol, and nucleic acids. Finally, glucose is used as a building block in the glycosylation of proteins to glycoproteins, glycolipids, peptidoglycans, glycosides, and other substances (catalyzed by glycosyltransferases) and can be cleaved from them by glycosidases.\nRegulatory role in cell differentiation.\nIn addition to its well-known function as a cellular energy source, glucose has been identified as a master regulator of tissue maturation. A 2025 study by Stanford Medicine uncovered that glucose, in its intact (non-metabolized) form, can bind to various regulatory proteins involved in gene expression. One such protein is IRF6, which alters its conformation upon glucose binding, thereby influencing the expression of genes associated with stem cell differentiation. This regulatory role is independent of glucose's catabolic function and has been observed across multiple tissue types, including skin, bone, fat, and white blood cells. The research demonstrated that even glucose analogs incapable of metabolism could promote differentiation, suggesting a signaling function for glucose. These findings have potential implications in understanding and treating diseases characterized by impaired differentiation, such as diabetes and certain cancers.\nPathology.\nDiabetes.\nDiabetes is a metabolic disorder where the body is unable to regulate levels of glucose in the blood either because of a lack of insulin in the body or the failure, by cells in the body, to respond properly to insulin. Each of these situations can be caused by persistently high elevations of blood glucose levels, through pancreatic burnout and insulin resistance. The pancreas is the organ responsible for the secretion of the hormones insulin and glucagon. Insulin is a hormone that regulates glucose levels, allowing the body's cells to absorb and use glucose. Without it, glucose cannot enter the cell and therefore cannot be used as fuel for the body's functions. If the pancreas is exposed to persistently high elevations of blood glucose levels, the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas could be damaged, causing a lack of insulin in the body. Insulin resistance occurs when the pancreas tries to produce more and more insulin in response to persistently elevated blood glucose levels. Eventually, the rest of the body becomes resistant to the insulin that the pancreas is producing, thereby requiring more insulin to achieve the same blood glucose-lowering effect, and forcing the pancreas to produce even more insulin to compete with the resistance. This negative spiral contributes to pancreatic burnout, and the disease progression of diabetes.\nTo monitor the body's response to blood glucose-lowering therapy, glucose levels can be measured. Blood glucose monitoring can be performed by multiple methods, such as the fasting glucose test which measures the level of glucose in the blood after 8 hours of fasting. Another test is the 2-hour glucose tolerance test (GTT)\u00a0\u2013 for this test, the person has a fasting glucose test done, then drinks a 75-gram glucose drink and is retested. This test measures the ability of the person's body to process glucose. Over time the blood glucose levels should decrease as insulin allows it to be taken up by cells and exit the blood stream.\nHypoglycemia management.\nIndividuals with diabetes or other conditions that result in low blood sugar often carry small amounts of sugar in various forms. One sugar commonly used is glucose, often in the form of glucose tablets (glucose pressed into a tablet shape sometimes with one or more other ingredients as a binder), hard candy, or sugar packet.\nSources.\nMost dietary carbohydrates contain glucose, either as their only building block (as in the polysaccharides starch and glycogen), or together with another monosaccharide (as in the hetero-polysaccharides sucrose and lactose). Unbound glucose is one of the main ingredients of honey. Glucose is extremely abundant and has been isolated from a variety of natural sources across the world, including male cones of the coniferous tree \"Wollemia nobilis\" in Rome, the roots of \"Ilex asprella\" plants in China, and straws from rice in California.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommercial production.\nGlucose is produced industrially from starch by enzymatic hydrolysis using glucose amylase or by the use of acids. Enzymatic hydrolysis has largely displaced acid-catalyzed hydrolysis reactions. The result is glucose syrup (enzymatically with more than 90% glucose in the dry matter) with an annual worldwide production volume of 20 million tonnes (as of 2011[ [update]]). This is the reason for the former common name \"starch sugar\". The amylases most often come from \"Bacillus licheniformis\" or \"Bacillus subtilis\" (strain MN-385), which are more thermostable than the originally used enzymes. Starting in 1982, pullulanases from \"Aspergillus niger\" were used in the production of glucose syrup to convert amylopectin to starch (amylose), thereby increasing the yield of glucose. The reaction is carried out at a pH = 4.6\u20135.2 and a temperature of 55\u201360\u00a0\u00b0C. Corn syrup has between 20% and 95% glucose in the dry matter. The Japanese form of the glucose syrup, Mizuame, is made from sweet potato or rice starch.\nMany crops can be used as the source of starch. Maize, rice, wheat, cassava, potato, barley, sweet potato, corn husk and sago are all used in various parts of the world. In the United States, corn starch (from maize) is used almost exclusively. Some commercial glucose occurs as a component of invert sugar, a roughly 1:1 mixture of glucose and fructose that is produced from sucrose. In principle, cellulose could be hydrolyzed to glucose, but this process is not yet commercially practical.\nConversion to fructose.\nIn the US, almost exclusively corn (more precisely, corn syrup) is used as glucose source for the production of isoglucose, which is a mixture of glucose and fructose, since fructose has a higher sweetening power\u00a0\u2013 with same physiological calorific value of 374 kilocalories per 100 g. The annual world production of isoglucose is 8 million tonnes (as of 2011[ [update]]). When made from corn syrup, the final product is high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS).\nCommercial usage.\nGlucose is mainly used for the production of fructose and of glucose-containing foods. In foods, it is used as a sweetener, humectant, to increase the volume and to create a softer mouthfeel. Various sources of glucose, such as grape juice (for wine) or malt (for beer), are used for fermentation to ethanol during the production of alcoholic beverages. Most soft drinks in the US use HFCS-55 (with a fructose content of 55% in the dry mass), while most other HFCS-sweetened foods in the US use HFCS-42 (with a fructose content of 42% in the dry mass). In Mexico, on the other hand, soft drinks are sweetened by cane sugar, which has a higher sweetening power. In addition, glucose syrup is used, inter alia, in the production of confectionery such as candies, toffee, and fondant. Typical chemical reactions of glucose when heated under water-free conditions are caramelization and, in presence of amino acids, the Maillard reaction.\nIn addition, various organic acids can be biotechnologically produced from glucose, for example by fermentation with \"Clostridium thermoaceticum\" to produce acetic acid, with \"Penicillium notatum\" for the production of araboascorbic acid, with \"Rhizopus delemar\" for the production of fumaric acid, with \"Aspergillus niger\" for the production of gluconic acid, with \"Candida brumptii\" to produce isocitric acid, with \"Aspergillus terreus\" for the production of itaconic acid, with \"Pseudomonas fluorescens\" for the production of 2-ketogluconic acid, with \"Gluconobacter suboxydans\" for the production of 5-ketogluconic acid, with \"Aspergillus oryzae\" for the production of kojic acid, with \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" for the production of lactic acid, with \"Lactobacillus brevis\" for the production of malic acid, with \"Propionibacter shermanii\" for the production of propionic acid, with \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" for the production of pyruvic acid and with \"Gluconobacter suboxydans\" for the production of tartaric acid. Potent, bioactive natural products like triptolide that inhibit mammalian transcription via inhibition of the XPB subunit of the general transcription factor TFIIH has been recently reported as a glucose conjugate for targeting hypoxic cancer cells with increased glucose transporter expression. Recently, glucose has been gaining commercial use as a key component of \"kits\" containing lactic acid and insulin intended to induce hypoglycemia and hyperlactatemia to combat different cancers and infections.\nAnalysis.\nWhen a glucose molecule is to be detected at a certain position in a larger molecule, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography analysis or lectin immunostaining is performed with concanavalin A reporter enzyme conjugate, which binds only glucose or mannose.\nClassical qualitative detection reactions.\nThese reactions have only historical significance:\nFehling test.\nThe Fehling test is a classic method for the detection of aldoses. Due to mutarotation, glucose is always present to a small extent as an open-chain aldehyde. By adding the Fehling reagents (Fehling (I) solution and Fehling (II) solution), the aldehyde group is oxidized to a carboxylic acid, while the Cu2+ tartrate complex is reduced to Cu+ and forms a brick red precipitate (Cu2O).\nTollens test.\nIn the Tollens test, after addition of ammoniacal AgNO3 to the sample solution, glucose reduces Ag+ to elemental silver.\nBarfoed test.\nIn Barfoed's test, a solution of dissolved copper acetate, sodium acetate, and acetic acid is added to the solution of the sugar to be tested and subsequently heated in a water bath for a few minutes. Glucose and other monosaccharides rapidly produce a reddish color and reddish brown copper(I) oxide (Cu2O).\nNylander's test.\nAs a reducing sugar, glucose reacts in the Nylander's test.\nOther tests.\nUpon heating a dilute potassium hydroxide solution with glucose to 100\u00a0\u00b0C, a strong reddish browning and a caramel-like odor develops. Concentrated sulfuric acid dissolves dry glucose without blackening at room temperature forming sugar sulfuric acid. In a yeast solution, alcoholic fermentation produces carbon dioxide in the ratio of 2.0454 molecules of glucose to one molecule of CO2. Glucose forms a black mass with stannous chloride. In an ammoniacal silver solution, glucose (as well as lactose and dextrin) leads to the deposition of silver. In an ammoniacal lead acetate solution, white lead glycoside is formed in the presence of glucose, which becomes less soluble on cooking and turns brown. In an ammoniacal copper solution, yellow copper oxide hydrate is formed with glucose at room temperature, while red copper oxide is formed during boiling (same with dextrin, except for with an ammoniacal copper acetate solution). With Hager's reagent, glucose forms mercury oxide during boiling. An alkaline bismuth solution is used to precipitate elemental, black-brown bismuth with glucose. Glucose boiled in an ammonium molybdate solution turns the solution blue. A solution with indigo carmine and sodium carbonate destains when boiled with glucose.\nInstrumental quantification.\nRefractometry and polarimetry.\nIn concentrated solutions of glucose with a low proportion of other carbohydrates, its concentration can be determined with a polarimeter. For sugar mixtures, the concentration can be determined with a refractometer, for example in the Oechsle determination in the course of the production of wine.\nPhotometric enzymatic methods in solution.\nThe enzyme glucose oxidase (GOx) converts glucose into gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide while consuming oxygen. Another enzyme, peroxidase, catalyzes a chromogenic reaction (Trinder reaction) of phenol with 4-aminoantipyrine to a purple dye.\nPhotometric test-strip method.\nThe test-strip method employs the above-mentioned enzymatic conversion of glucose to gluconic acid to form hydrogen peroxide. The reagents are immobilised on a polymer matrix, the so-called test strip, which assumes a more or less intense color. This can be measured reflectometrically at 510\u00a0nm with the aid of an LED-based handheld photometer. This allows routine blood sugar determination by nonscientists. In addition to the reaction of phenol with 4-aminoantipyrine, new chromogenic reactions have been developed that allow photometry at higher wavelengths (550\u00a0nm, 750\u00a0nm).\nAmperometric glucose sensor.\nThe electroanalysis of glucose is also based on the enzymatic reaction mentioned above. The produced hydrogen peroxide can be amperometrically quantified by anodic oxidation at a potential of 600 mV. The GOx is immobilized on the electrode surface or in a membrane placed close to the electrode. Precious metals such as platinum or gold are used in electrodes, as well as carbon nanotube electrodes, which e.g. are doped with boron. Cu\u2013CuO nanowires are also used as enzyme-free amperometric electrodes, reaching a detection limit of 50\u00a0\u03bcmol/L. A particularly promising method is the so-called \"enzyme wiring\", where the electron flowing during the oxidation is transferred via a molecular wire directly from the enzyme to the electrode.\nOther sensory methods.\nThere are a variety of other chemical sensors for measuring glucose. Given the importance of glucose analysis in the life sciences, numerous optical probes have also been developed for saccharides based on the use of boronic acids, which are particularly useful for intracellular sensory applications where other (optical) methods are not or only conditionally usable. In addition to the organic boronic acid derivatives, which often bind highly specifically to the 1,2-diol groups of sugars, there are also other probe concepts classified by functional mechanisms which use selective glucose-binding proteins (e.g. concanavalin A) as a receptor. Furthermore, methods were developed which indirectly detect the glucose concentration via the concentration of metabolized products, e.g. by the consumption of oxygen using fluorescence-optical sensors. Finally, there are enzyme-based concepts that use the intrinsic absorbance or fluorescence of (fluorescence-labeled) enzymes as reporters.\nCopper iodometry.\nGlucose can be quantified by copper iodometry.\nChromatographic methods.\nIn particular, for the analysis of complex mixtures containing glucose, e.g. in honey, chromatographic methods such as high performance liquid chromatography and gas chromatography are often used in combination with mass spectrometry. Taking into account the isotope ratios, it is also possible to reliably detect honey adulteration by added sugars with these methods. Derivatization using silylation reagents is commonly used. Also, the proportions of di- and trisaccharides can be quantified.\nIn vivo analysis.\nGlucose uptake in cells of organisms is measured with 2-deoxy-D-glucose or fluorodeoxyglucose. (18F)fluorodeoxyglucose is used as a tracer in positron emission tomography in oncology and neurology, where it is by far the most commonly used diagnostic agent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGlucose\nHexokinase\nATP\nADP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nGlucose 6-phosphate\nGlucose-6-phosphate&lt;br&gt;isomerase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nFructose 6-phosphate\nPhosphofructokinase-1\nATP\nADP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nFructose 1,6-bisphosphate\nFructose-bisphosphate&lt;br&gt;aldolase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\nDihydroxyacetone phosphate\n+\nGlyceraldehyde 3-phosphate\nTriosephosphate&lt;br&gt;isomerase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nGlyceraldehyde-3-phosphate&lt;br&gt;dehydrogenase\nNAD++ Pi\nNADH + H+\npx;\"&gt;NAD++ Pi\nNADH + H+\n2 \u00d7 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphoglycerate kinase\nADP\nATP\npx;\"&gt;ADP\nATP\n2 \u00d7 3-Phosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphoglycerate mutase\npx;\"&gt;\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 2-Phosphoglycerate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPhosphopyruvate&lt;br&gt;hydratase (enolase)\nH2O\npx;\"&gt;\u00a0\nH2O\n2 \u00d7 Phosphoenolpyruvate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 \nPyruvate kinase\nADP\nATP\npx;\"&gt;px;\"&gt;\n2 \u00d7 Pyruvate\n2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0 "}
{"id": "12955", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12955", "title": "George P\u00f3lya", "text": "Hungarian mathematician (1887\u20131985)\nGeorge P\u00f3lya (; ; December 13, 1887 \u2013 September 7, 1985) was a Hungarian-American mathematician. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Z\u00fcrich and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He made fundamental contributions to combinatorics, number theory, numerical analysis and probability theory. He is also noted for his work in heuristics and mathematics education. He has been described as one of The Martians, an informal category which included one of his most famous students at ETH Zurich, John von Neumann.\nLife and works.\nP\u00f3lya was born in Budapest, Austria-Hungary, to Anna Deutsch and Jakab P\u00f3lya, Hungarian Jews who had converted to Christianity in 1886. Although his parents were religious and he was baptized into the Catholic Church upon birth, George eventually grew up to be an agnostic. He received a PhD under Lip\u00f3t Fej\u00e9r in 1912, at E\u00f6tv\u00f6s Lor\u00e1nd University. He was a professor of mathematics from 1914 to 1940 at ETH Z\u00fcrich in Switzerland and from 1940 to 1953 at Stanford University. He remained a professor emeritus at Stanford for the rest of his career, working on a range of mathematical topics, including series, number theory, mathematical analysis, geometry, algebra, combinatorics, and probability. He was invited to speak at the ICM at Bologna in 1928, at Oslo in 1936 and at Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1950.\nOn September 7, 1985, P\u00f3lya died in Palo Alto, California due to complications of a stroke he suffered during that summer.\nHeuristics.\nEarly in his career, P\u00f3lya wrote with G\u00e1bor Szeg\u0151 two influential problem books, \"Problems and Theorems in Analysis\" (\"I: Series, Integral Calculus, Theory of Functions\" and \"II: Theory of Functions. Zeros. Polynomials. Determinants. Number Theory. Geometry\"). Later in his career, he spent considerable effort to identify systematic methods of problem-solving to further discovery and invention in mathematics for students, teachers, and researchers. He wrote five books on the subject: \"How to Solve It\", \"Mathematics and Plausible Reasoning\" (\"Volume I: Induction and Analogy in Mathematics\", and \"Volume II: Patterns of Plausible Inference\"), and \"Mathematical Discovery: On Understanding, Learning, and Teaching Problem Solving\" (volumes 1 and 2).\nIn \"How to Solve It\", P\u00f3lya provides general heuristics for solving a gamut of problems, including both mathematical and non-mathematical problems. The book includes advice for teaching students of mathematics and a mini-encyclopedia of heuristic terms. It was translated into several languages and has sold over a million copies. The book is still used in mathematical education. Douglas Lenat's Automated Mathematician and Eurisko artificial intelligence programs were inspired by P\u00f3lya's work.\nIn addition to his works directly addressing problem solving, P\u00f3lya wrote another short book called \"Mathematical Methods in Science\", based on a 1963 work supported by the National Science Foundation edited by Leon Bowden and published by the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) in 1977. As P\u00f3lya notes in the preface, Bowden carefully followed a tape recording of a course P\u00f3lya gave several times at Stanford in order to put the book together. P\u00f3lya notes in the preface \"that the following pages will be useful, yet they should not be regarded as a finished expression.\"\nLegacy.\nThere are three prizes named after P\u00f3lya, causing occasional confusion of one for another. In 1969 the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) established the George P\u00f3lya Prize, given alternately in two categories for \"a notable application of combinatorial theory\" and for \"a notable contribution in another area of interest to George P\u00f3lya.\"\nIn 1976 the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) established the George P\u00f3lya Award \"for articles of expository excellence\" published in the \"College Mathematics Journal\". In 1987 the London Mathematical Society (LMS) established the P\u00f3lya Prize for \"outstanding creativity in, imaginative exposition of, or distinguished contribution to, mathematics within the United Kingdom.\" In 1991, the MAA established the George P\u00f3lya Lectureship series.\nStanford University has a Polya Hall named in his honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12956", "revid": "1317628242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12956", "title": "OpenGL Utility Toolkit", "text": "The OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT) is an outdated library of utilities for OpenGL programs, which primarily perform system-level I/O with the host operating system. Functions performed include window definition, window control, and monitoring of keyboard and mouse input. Routines for drawing a number of geometric primitives (both in solid and wireframe mode) are also provided, including cubes, spheres and the Utah teapot. GLUT also has some limited support for creating pop-up menus.\nGLUT was written by Mark J. Kilgard, author of \"OpenGL Programming for the X Window System\" and \"The Cg Tutorial: The Definitive Guide to Programmable Real-Time Graphics\", while he was working for Silicon Graphics Inc.\nThe two aims of GLUT are to allow the creation of rather portable code between operating systems (GLUT is cross-platform) and to make learning OpenGL easier. Getting started with OpenGL programming while using GLUT often takes only a few lines of code and does not require knowledge of operating system\u2013specific windowing APIs.\nAll GLUT functions start with the codice_1 prefix (for example, codice_2 marks the current window as needing to be redrawn).\nImplementations.\nThe original GLUT library by Mark Kilgard supports the X Window System (GLX) and was ported to Microsoft Windows (WGL) by Nate Robins. Additionally, macOS ships with a GLUT framework that supports its own NSGL/CGL.\nKilgard's GLUT library is no longer maintained, and its license did not permit the redistribution of modified versions of the library. This spurred the need for free software or open source reimplementations of the API from scratch. The first such library was FreeGLUT, which aims to be a reasonably close reproduction, though introducing a small number of new functions to deal with GLUT's limitations. OpenGLUT, a fork of FreeGLUT, adds a number of new features to the original API, but work on it ceased in May 2005.\nMark Kilgard has a GitHub repository for GLUT. The glut.h header file contains the following license:\n /* Copyright (c) Mark J. Kilgard, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2006, 2010. */\n /* This program is freely distributable without licensing fees and is\n provided without guarantee or warrantee expressed or implied. This\n program is -not- in the public domain. */\nLimitations.\nSome of GLUT's original design decisions made it hard for programmers to perform desired tasks. This led many to create non-canon patches and extensions to GLUT.http:// Some free software or open source reimplementations also include fixes.\nSome of the more notable limitations of the original GLUT library include:\nSince it is no longer maintained (essentially replaced by the open source FreeGLUT) the above design issues are still not resolved in the original GLUT.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12957", "revid": "8458841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12957", "title": "Giovanni Boccaccio", "text": "Italian author and poet (1313\u20131375)\nGiovanni Boccaccio ( , ; ; 16 June 1313\u00a0\u2013 21 December 1375) was an Italian writer, poet, correspondent of Petrarch, and an important Renaissance humanist. Born in the town of Certaldo, he became so well known as a writer that he was sometimes simply known as \"the Certaldese\" and one of the most important figures in the European literary panorama of the fourteenth century. Some scholars (including Vittore Branca) define him as the greatest European prose writer of his time, a versatile writer who amalgamated different literary trends and genres, making them converge in original works, thanks to a creative activity exercised under the banner of experimentalism.\nHis most notable works are \"The Decameron\", a collection of short stories, and \"On Famous Women\". \"The Decameron\" became a determining element for the Italian literary tradition, especially after Pietro Bembo elevated the Boccaccian style to a model of Italian prose in the sixteenth century. Boccaccio wrote his imaginative literature mostly in Tuscan vernacular, as well as other works in Latin, and is particularly noted for his realistic dialogue which differed from that of his contemporaries, medieval writers who usually followed formulaic models for character and plot. The influence of Boccaccio's works was not limited to the Italian cultural scene but extended to the rest of Europe, exerting influence on authors such as Geoffrey Chaucer, a key figure in English literature, and the later writers Miguel de Cervantes, Lope de Vega and classical theatre in Spain.\nBoccaccio is considered one of the \"Three Crowns\" of Italian literature along with Dante Alighieri and Petrarch. He is remembered for being one of the precursors of humanism, of which he helped lay the foundations in the city of Florence, in conjunction with the activity of his friend and teacher Petrarch. He was the one who initiated Dante's criticism and philology: Boccaccio devoted himself to copying codices of the \"Divine Comedy\" and was a promoter of Dante's work and figure.\nIn the twentieth century, Boccaccio was the subject of critical-philological studies by Vittore Branca and Giuseppe Billanovich, and his \"Decameron\" was transposed to the big screen by the director and writer Pier Paolo Pasolini.\nBiography.\nChildhood and youth, 1313\u20131330.\nThe details of Boccaccio's birth are uncertain. He was born in Florence or in a village near Certaldo where his family was from. He was the son of Florentine merchant Boccaccino di Chellino and an unknown woman; he was likely born out of wedlock. Boccaccio's stepmother was called Margherita de' Mardoli.\nBoccaccio grew up in Florence. His father worked for the Compagnia dei Bardi and, in the 1320s, married Margherita dei Mardoli, who was of a well-to-do family. Boccaccio may have been tutored by Giovanni Mazzuoli and received from him an early introduction to the works of Dante. In 1326, his father was appointed head of a bank and moved with his family to Naples. Boccaccio was an apprentice at the bank but disliked the banking profession. He persuaded his father to let him study law at the \"Studium\" (the present-day University of Naples), where he studied canon law for the next six years. He also pursued his interest in scientific and literary studies.\nHis father introduced him to the Neapolitan nobility and the French-influenced court of Robert the Wise (the king of Naples) in the 1330s. Boccaccio became a friend of fellow Florentine Niccol\u00f2 Acciaioli, and benefited from Acciaioli's influence with Catherine of Valois-Courtenay, widow of Philip I of Taranto. Acciaioli later became a counselor to Queen Joanna I of Naples and, eventually, her \"Grand Seneschal\".\nIt seems that Boccaccio enjoyed law no more than banking, but his studies allowed him the opportunity to study widely and make good contacts with fellow scholars. His early influences included Paolo da Perugia (a curator and author of a collection of myths called the \"Collectiones\"), humanists Barbato da Sulmona and Giovanni Barrili, and theologian Dionigi di Borgo San Sepolcro.\nAdult years.\nIn Naples, Boccaccio began what he considered his true vocation of poetry. Works produced in this period include \"Il Filostrato\" and \"Teseida\" (the sources for Chaucer's \"Troilus and Criseyde\" and \"The Knight's Tale\", respectively), \"The Filocolo\" (a prose version of an existing French romance), and \"La caccia di Diana\" (a poem in \"terza rima\" listing Neapolitan women). The period featured considerable formal innovation, including possibly the introduction of the Sicilian octave, where it influenced Petrarch.\nBoccaccio returned to Florence in early 1341, avoiding the plague of 1340 in that city, but also missing the visit of Petrarch to Naples in 1341. He had left Naples due to tensions between the Angevin king and Florence. His father had returned to Florence in 1338, where he had gone bankrupt. His mother possibly died shortly afterwards. Boccaccio continued to work, although dissatisfied with his return to Florence, producing \"Comedia delle ninfe fiorentine\" in 1341 (also known as \"Ameto\"), a mix of prose and poems, completing the fifty-canto allegorical poem \"Amorosa visione\" in 1342, and \"Fiammetta\" in 1343. The pastoral piece \"Ninfale fiesolano\" probably dates from this time, also. In 1343, Boccaccio's father remarried Bice del Bostichi. The other children by his first marriage had all died, but he had another son named Iacopo in 1344.\nIn Florence, the overthrow of Walter of Brienne brought about the government of \"popolo minuto\" (\"small people\", workers). It diminished the influence of the nobility and the wealthier merchant classes and contributed to the relative decline of Florence. The city was hurt further in 1348 by the Black Death, which killed some three-quarters of the city's population and was later represented in Boccaccio's work \"The Decameron\".\nFrom 1347, Boccaccio spent much time in Ravenna, seeking new patronage and, despite his claims, it is not certain whether he was present in plague-ravaged Florence. His stepmother died during the epidemic and his father was closely associated with the government efforts as minister of supply in the city. His father died in 1349 and Boccaccio was forced into a more active role as head of the family.\nBoccaccio began work on \"The Decameron\" around 1349. It is probable that the structures of many of the tales date from earlier in his career, but the choice of a hundred tales and the frame-story \"lieta brigata\" of three men and seven women dates from this time. The work was largely complete by 1352. It was Boccaccio's final effort in literature and one of his last works in Tuscan vernacular; the only other substantial work was \"Corbaccio\" (dated to either 1355 or 1365). Boccaccio revised and rewrote \"The Decameron\" in 1370\u20131371. This manuscript has survived to the present day.\nFrom 1350, Boccaccio became closely involved with Italian humanism (although less of a scholar) and also with the Florentine government. His first official mission was to Romagna in late 1350. He revisited that city-state twice and also was sent to Brandenburg, Milan and Avignon. He also pushed for the study of Greek, housing Leontius Pilatus, and encouraging his tentative translations of works by Homer, Euripides, and Aristotle. In these years, he also took minor orders.\nIn October 1350, he was delegated to greet Francesco Petrarch as he entered Florence and also to have Petrarch as a guest at Boccaccio's home, during his stay. The meeting between the two was extremely fruitful and they were friends from then on, Boccaccio calling Petrarch his teacher and \"magister\". Petrarch at that time encouraged Boccaccio to study classical Greek and Latin literature. They met again in Padua in 1351, Boccaccio on an official mission to invite Petrarch to take a chair at the university in Florence. Although unsuccessful, the discussions between the two were instrumental in Boccaccio writing the \"Genealogia deorum gentilium\"; the first edition was completed in 1360 and this remained one of the key reference works on classical mythology for over 400 years. It served as an extended defence for the studies of ancient literature and thought. Despite the Pagan beliefs at its core, Boccaccio believed that much could be learned from antiquity. Thus, he challenged the arguments of clerical intellectuals who wanted to limit access to classical sources to prevent any moral harm to Christian readers. The revival of classical antiquity became a foundation of the Renaissance, and his defence of the importance of ancient literature was an essential requirement for its development. The discussions also formalized Boccaccio's poetic ideas. Certain sources also see a conversion of Boccaccio by Petrarch from the open humanist of the \"Decameron\" to a more ascetic style, closer to the dominant fourteenth-century ethos. For example, he followed Petrarch (and Dante) in the unsuccessful championing of an archaic and deeply allusive form of Latin poetry. In 1359, following a meeting with Pope Innocent VI and further meetings with Petrarch, it is probable that Boccaccio took some kind of religious mantle. There is a persistent (but unsupported) tale that he repudiated his earlier works as profane in 1362, including \"The Decameron\".\nIn 1360, Boccaccio began work on \"De mulieribus claris (\"On famous women\")\", a book offering biographies of 106 famous women, that he completed in 1374.\nA number of Boccaccio's close friends and other acquaintances were executed or exiled in the purge following the failed coup of 1361; although not directly linked to the conspiracy, in that year Boccaccio left Florence to reside in Certaldo, where he became less involved in government affairs. He did not undertake further missions for Florence until 1365, and travelled to Naples and then on to Padua and Venice, where he met up with Petrarch in grand style at Palazzo Molina, Petrarch's residence as well as the location of Petrarch's library. Boccaccio later returned to Certaldo; he met Petrarch only one more time, in 1368, again in Padua. Upon hearing of the death of Petrarch (19 July 1374), he wrote a commemorative poem, including it in his collection of lyric poems, the \"Rime\".\nHe returned to work for the Florentine government in 1365, undertaking a mission to Pope Urban V. The papacy returned to Rome from Avignon in 1367, and Boccaccio was again sent to Urban, offering congratulations. He also undertook diplomatic missions to Venice and Naples.\nOf his later works, the moralistic biographies gathered as \"De casibus virorum illustrium\" (1355\u201374) and \"De mulieribus claris\" (1361\u20131375) were the most significant. Other works include a dictionary of geographical allusions in classical literature, \"De montibus, silvis, fontibus, lacubus, fluminibus, stagnis seu paludibus, et de nominibus maris liber\". He gave a series of lectures on Dante at the Santo Stefano church in 1373 and these resulted in his final major work, the detailed \"Esposizioni sopra la Commedia di Dante\". Boccaccio and Petrarch were also two of the most educated people in early Renaissance in the field of archaeology.\nPetrarch even offered to purchase Boccaccio's library, so that it would become part of Petrarch's library. However, upon Boccaccio's death, his entire collection was given to the monastery of Santo Spirito, in Florence, where it still resides.\nBoccaccio's final years were troubled by illnesses, some relating to obesity and what often is described as dropsy, severe edema that would be described today as congestive heart failure. He died on 21 December 1375 in Certaldo, where he is buried.\nWorks.\nSee Consoli's bibliography for an exhaustive listing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12958", "revid": "51055334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12958", "title": "Giuseppe Verdi", "text": "Italian opera composer (1813\u20131901)\nGiuseppe Fortunino Francesco Verdi ( , ; 9 or 10 October 1813\u00a0\u2013 27 January 1901) was an Italian composer best known for his operas. He was born near Busseto, a small town in the modern province of Parma (at the time a department of the French Empire), to a family of moderate means, receiving a musical education with the help of a local patron, Antonio Barezzi. Verdi came to dominate the Italian opera scene after the era of Gioachino Rossini, Vincenzo Bellini, and Gaetano Donizetti, whose works significantly influenced him.\nIn his early operas, Verdi demonstrated sympathy with the Risorgimento movement which sought the unification of Italy. He also served briefly as an elected politician. The chorus \"Va, pensiero\" from his early opera \"Nabucco\" (1842), and similar choruses in later operas, were much in the spirit of the unification movement, and the composer himself became esteemed as a representative of these ideals. An intensely private person, Verdi did not seek to ingratiate himself with popular movements. As he became professionally successful, he was able to reduce his operatic workload and sought to establish himself as a landowner in his native region. He found further fame with the three peaks of his 'middle period': \"Rigoletto\" (1851), \"Il trovatore\" and \"La traviata\" (both 1853). He surprised the musical world by returning, after his success with the opera \"Aida\" (1871), with three late masterpieces: his \"Requiem\" (1874), and the operas \"Otello\" (1887) and \"Falstaff\" (1893).\nVerdi's operas remain among the most popular in the repertoire. In 2013, the bicentenary of his birth was widely celebrated around the world with television and radio broadcasts and live performances.\nLife.\nChildhood and education.\nVerdi, the first child of Carlo Giuseppe Verdi and Luigia Uttini, was born at their home in Le Roncole, a village near Busseto, then in the Taro department within the borders of the First French Empire. The baptismal register, prepared on 11 October 1813, lists his parents Carlo and Luigia as \"innkeeper\" and \"spinner\" respectively. Additionally, it lists Verdi as being \"born yesterday\", but since days were often considered to begin at sunset, this could have meant either 9 or 10 October. Following his mother, Verdi always celebrated his birthday on 9 October, the day he himself believed he was born.\nVerdi had a younger sister, Giuseppa, who died aged 17 in 1833. She is said to have been his closest friend during childhood. From age four Verdi was given private lessons in Latin and Italian by the village schoolmaster, Baistrocchi, and at six he attended the local school. After learning to play the organ, he showed so much interest in music that his parents finally provided him with a spinet. Verdi's gift for music was already apparent by 1820\u201321 when he began his association with the local church, serving in the choir, acting as an altar boy for a while, and taking organ lessons. After Baistrocchi's death, Verdi, at the age of eight, became the official paid organist.\nThe music historian Roger Parker points out that both of Verdi's parents belonged to families of small landowners and traders, certainly not the illiterate peasants from which Verdi later liked to present himself as having emerged... Carlo Verdi was energetic in furthering his son's education...something which Verdi tended to hide in later life... [T]he picture emerges of youthful precocity eagerly nurtured by an ambitious father and of a sustained, sophisticated and elaborate formal education.\nIn 1823, when he was 10, Verdi's parents arranged for the boy to attend school in Busseto, enrolling him in a \"Ginnasio\"\u2014an upper school for boys\u2014run by Don Pietro Seletti, while they continued to run their inn at Le Roncole. Verdi returned to Busseto regularly to play the organ on Sundays, covering the distance of several kilometres on foot. At age 11, Verdi received schooling in Italian, Latin, the humanities, and rhetoric. By the time he was 12, he began lessons with Ferdinando Provesi, \"maestro di cappella\" at San Bartolomeo, director of the municipal music school and co-director of the local \"Societ\u00e0 Filarmonica\" (Philharmonic Society). Verdi later stated: \"From the ages of 13 to 18 I wrote a motley assortment of pieces: marches for band by the hundred, perhaps as many little \"sinfonie\" that were used in church, in the theatre and at concerts, five or six concertos and sets of variations for pianoforte, which I played myself at concerts, many serenades, cantatas (arias, duets, very many trios) and various pieces of church music, of which I remember only a \"Stabat Mater\".\" This information comes from the \"Autobiographical Sketch\" which Verdi dictated to the publisher Giulio Ricordi late in life, in 1879, and remains the leading source for his early life and career. Written, understandably, with the benefit of hindsight, it is not always reliable when dealing with issues more contentious than those of his childhood.\nThe other director of the Philharmonic Society was Antonio Barezzi, a wholesale grocer and distiller, who was described by a contemporary as a \"manic dilettante\" of music. The young Verdi did not immediately become involved with the Philharmonic. By June 1827, he had graduated with honours from the \"Ginnasio\" and was able to focus solely on music under Provesi. By chance, when he was 13, Verdi was asked to step in as a replacement to play in what became his first public event in his home town; he was an immediate success mostly playing his own music to the surprise of many and receiving strong local recognition.\nBy 1829\u201330, Verdi had established himself as a leader of the Philharmonic: \"none of us could rival him\" reported the secretary of the organisation, Giuseppe Demald\u00e8. An eight-movement cantata, \"I deliri di Saul\", based on a drama by Vittorio Alfieri, was written by Verdi when he was 15 and performed in Bergamo. It was acclaimed by both Demald\u00e8 and Barezzi, who commented: \"He shows a vivid imagination, a philosophical outlook, and sound judgment in the arrangement of instrumental parts.\" In late 1829, Verdi had completed his studies with Provesi, who declared that he had no more to teach Verdi. At the time, Verdi had been giving singing and piano lessons to Barezzi's daughter Margherita; by 1831, they were unofficially engaged.\nVerdi set his sights on Milan, then the cultural capital of northern Italy, where he applied unsuccessfully to study at the Conservatory. Barezzi made arrangements for him to become a private pupil of Vincenzo Lavigna, who had been \"maestro concertatore\" at La Scala, and who described Verdi's compositions as \"very promising\". Lavigna encouraged Verdi to take out a subscription to La Scala, where he heard Maria Malibran in operas by Gioachino Rossini and Vincenzo Bellini. Verdi began making connections in the Milanese world of music that were to stand him in good stead. These included an introduction by Lavigna to an amateur choral group, the \"Societ\u00e0 Filarmonica\", led by Pietro Massini. Attending the \"Societ\u00e0\" frequently in 1834, Verdi soon found himself functioning as rehearsal director (for Rossini's \"La Cenerentola\") and continuo player. It was Massini who encouraged him to write his first opera, originally titled \"Rocester\", to a libretto by the journalist Antonio Piazza.\n1834\u20131842: First operas.\nIn mid-1834, Verdi sought to acquire Provesi's former post in Busseto but without success. But with Barezzi's help, he did obtain the secular post of \"maestro di musica\". He taught, gave lessons, and conducted the Philharmonic for several months before returning to Milan in early 1835. By the following July, he obtained his certification from Lavigna. Eventually in 1835 Verdi became director of the Busseto school with a three-year contract. He married Margherita in May 1836, and by March 1837, she had given birth to their first child, Virginia Maria Luigia on 26 March 1837. Icilio Romano followed on 11 July 1838. Both the children died young, Virginia on 12 August 1838, Icilio on 22 October 1839.\nIn 1837, the young composer asked for Massini's assistance to stage his opera in Milan. The La Scala impresario, Bartolomeo Merelli, agreed to put on \"Oberto\" (as the reworked opera was now called, with a libretto rewritten by Temistocle Solera) in November 1839. It achieved a respectable 13 additional performances, following which Merelli offered Verdi a contract for three more works. In 1838-1839 Verdi published his first music with the Milan publisher Giovanni Canti.\nWhile Verdi was working on his second opera \"Un giorno di regno\", Margherita died of encephalitis at the age of 26. Verdi adored his wife and children and was devastated by their early deaths. \"Un giorno\", a comedy, was premiered only a few months later. It was a flop and only given one performance. Following its failure, it is claimed Verdi vowed never to compose again, but in his \"Sketch\" he recounts how Merelli persuaded him to write a new opera.\nVerdi was to claim that he gradually began to work on the music for \"Nabucco\", the libretto of which had originally been rejected by the composer Otto Nicolai: \"This verse today, tomorrow that, here a note, there a whole phrase, and little by little the opera was written\", he later recalled. By the autumn of 1841 it was complete, originally under the title \"Nabucodonosor\". Well received at its first performance on 9 March 1842, \"Nabucco\" underpinned Verdi's success until his retirement from the theatre, twenty-nine operas (including some revised and updated versions) later. At its revival in La Scala for the 1842 autumn season it was given an unprecedented (and later unequalled) total of 57 performances; within three years it had reached (among other venues) Vienna, Lisbon, Barcelona, Berlin, Paris and Hamburg; in 1848 it was heard in New York, in 1850 in Buenos Aires. Porter comments that \"similar accounts...could be provided to show how widely and rapidly all [Verdi's] other successful operas were disseminated.\"\n1842\u20131849.\nA period of hard work for Verdi\u2014with the creation of twenty operas (excluding revisions and translations)\u2014followed over the next sixteen years, culminating in \"Un ballo in maschera\". This period was not without its frustrations and setbacks for the young composer, and he was frequently demoralised. In April 1845, in connection with \"I due Foscari\", he wrote: \"I am happy, no matter what reception it gets, and I am utterly indifferent to everything. I cannot wait for these next three years to pass. I have to write six operas, then \"addio\" to everything.\" In 1858 Verdi complained: \"Since \"Nabucco\", you may say, I have never had one hour of peace. Sixteen years in the galleys.\"\nAfter the initial success of \"Nabucco\", Verdi settled in Milan, making a number of influential acquaintances. He attended the \"Salotto Maffei\", Countess Clara Maffei's salons in Milan, becoming her lifelong friend and correspondent. A revival of \"Nabucco\" followed in 1842 at La Scala where it received a run of fifty-seven performances, and this led to a commission from Merelli for a new opera for the 1843 season. \"I Lombardi alla prima crociata\" was based on a libretto by Solera and premiered in February 1843. Inevitably, comparisons were made with \"Nabucco\"; but one contemporary writer noted: \"If [\"Nabucco\"] created this young man's reputation, \"I Lombardi\" served to confirm it.\"\nVerdi paid close attention to his financial contracts, making sure he was appropriately remunerated as his popularity increased. For \"I Lombardi\" and \"Ernani\" (1844) in Venice he was paid lire (including supervision of the productions); \"Attila\" and \"Macbeth\" (1847), each brought him lire. His contracts with the publishers Ricordi in 1847 were very specific about the amounts he was to receive for new works, first productions, musical arrangements, and so on. He began to use his growing prosperity to invest in land near his birthplace. In 1844 he purchased \"Il Pulgaro\", 62 acres (23 hectares) of farmland with a farmhouse and outbuildings, providing a home for his parents from May 1844. Later that year, he also bought the Palazzo Cavalli (now known as the Palazzo Orlandi) on the via Roma, Busseto's main street. In May 1848, Verdi signed a contract for land and houses at Sant'Agata in Busseto, which had once belonged to his family. It was here he built his own house, completed in 1880, now known as the Villa Verdi, where he lived from 1851 until his death.\nIn March 1843, Verdi visited Vienna (where Gaetano Donizetti was musical director) to oversee a production of \"Nabucco\". The older composer, recognising Verdi's talent, noted in a letter of January 1844: \"I am very, very happy to give way to people of talent like Verdi... Nothing will prevent the good Verdi from soon reaching one of the most honourable positions in the cohort of composers.\" Verdi travelled on to Parma, where the Teatro Regio di Parma was producing \"Nabucco\" with Giuseppina Strepponi in the cast. For Verdi, the performances were a personal triumph in his native region, especially as his father, Carlo, attended the first performance. Verdi remained in Parma for some weeks beyond his intended departure date. This fuelled speculation that the delay was due to Verdi's interest in Strepponi (who stated that their relationship began in 1843). Strepponi was in fact known for her amorous relationships (and many illegitimate children) and her history was an awkward factor in their relationship until they eventually agreed on marriage.\nAfter successful stagings of \"Nabucco\" in Venice (with twenty-five performances in the 1842/43 season), Verdi began negotiations with the impresario of La Fenice to stage \"I Lombardi\", and to write a new opera. Eventually, Victor Hugo's \"Hernani\" was chosen, with Francesco Maria Piave as librettist. \"Ernani\" was successfully premiered in 1844 and within six months had been performed at twenty other theatres in Italy, and also in Vienna. The writer Andrew Porter notes that for the next ten years, Verdi's life \"reads like a travel diary\u2014a timetable of visits...to bring new operas to the stage or to supervise local premieres\". La Scala premiered none of these new works, except for \"Giovanna d'Arco\". Verdi \"never forgave the Milanese for their reception of \"Un giorno di regno\"\".\nDuring this period, Verdi began to work more consistently with his librettists. He relied on Piave again for \"I due Foscari\", performed in Rome in November 1844, then on Solera once more for \"Giovanna d'Arco\", at La Scala in February 1845, while in August that year he was able to work with Salvadore Cammarano on \"Alzira\" for the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples. Solera and Piave worked together on \"Attila\" for La Fenice (March 1846).\nIn April 1844, Verdi took on Emanuele Muzio, eight years his junior, as a pupil and amanuensis. He had known him since about 1828 as another of Barezzi's prot\u00e9g\u00e9s. Muzio, who in fact was Verdi's only pupil, became indispensable to the composer. He reported to Barezzi that Verdi \"has a breadth of spirit, of generosity, a wisdom\". In November 1846, Muzio wrote of Verdi: \"If you could see us, I seem more like a friend, rather than his pupil. We are always together at dinner, in the cafes, when we play cards...; all in all, he doesn't go anywhere without me at his side; in the house we have a big table and we both write there together, and so I always have his advice.\" Muzio was to remain associated with Verdi, assisting in the preparation of scores and transcriptions, and later conducting many of his works in their premiere performances in the US and elsewhere outside Italy. He was chosen by Verdi as one of the executors of his will but predeceased the composer in 1890.\nAfter a period of illness, Verdi began work on \"Macbeth\" in September 1846. He dedicated the opera to Barezzi: \"I have long intended to dedicate an opera to you, as you have been a father, a benefactor and a friend for me. It was a duty I should have fulfilled sooner if imperious circumstances had not prevented me. Now, I send you \"Macbeth\", which I prize above all my other operas, and therefore deem worthier to present to you.\" In 1997 Martin Chusid wrote that \"Macbeth\" was the only one of Verdi's operas of his \"early period\" to remain regularly in the international repertoire, although in the 21st century \"Nabucco\" has also entered the lists.\nStrepponi's voice declined and her engagements dried up in the 1845 to 1846 period, and she returned to live in Milan whilst retaining contact with Verdi as his \"supporter, promoter, unofficial adviser, and occasional secretary\" until she decided to move to Paris in October 1846. Before she left Verdi gave her a letter that pledged his love. On the envelope, Strepponi wrote: \"5 or 6 October 1846. They shall lay this letter on my heart when they bury me.\"\nVerdi had completed \"I masnadieri\" for London by May 1847 except for the orchestration. This he left until the opera was in rehearsal, since he wanted to hear \"la [Jenny] Lind and modify her role to suit her more exactly\". Verdi agreed to conduct the premiere on 22 July 1847 at Her Majesty's Theatre, as well as the second performance. Queen Victoria and Prince Albert attended the first performance, and for the most part, the press was generous in its praise.\nFor the next two years, except for two visits to Italy during periods of political unrest, Verdi was based in Paris. Within a week of returning to Paris in July 1847, he received his first commission from the Paris Op\u00e9ra. Verdi agreed to adapt \"I Lombardi\" to a new French libretto; the result was \"J\u00e9rusalem\", which contained significant changes to the music and structure of the work (including an extensive ballet scene) to meet Parisian expectations. Verdi was awarded the Order of Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. To satisfy his contracts with the publisher Francesco Lucca, Verdi dashed off \"Il Corsaro\". Budden comments \"In no other opera of his does Verdi appear to have taken so little interest \"before\" it was staged.\"\nOn hearing the news of the \"Cinque Giornate\", the \"Five Days\" of street fighting that took place between 18 and 22 March 1848 and temporarily drove the Austrians out of Milan, Verdi travelled there, arriving on 5 April. He discovered that Piave was now \"Citizen Piave\" of the newly proclaimed Republic of San Marco. Writing a patriotic letter to him in Venice, Verdi concluded \"Banish every petty municipal idea! We must all extend a fraternal hand, and Italy will yet become the first nation of the world...I am drunk with joy! Imagine that there are no more Germans here!!\"\nVerdi had been admonished by the poet Giuseppe Giusti for turning away from patriotic subjects, the poet pleading with him to \"do what you can to nourish the [sorrow of the Italian people], to strengthen it, and direct it to its goal.\" Cammarano suggested adapting Joseph M\u00e9ry's 1828 play \"La Bataille de Toulouse\", which he described as a story \"that should stir every man with an Italian soul in his breast\". The premiere was set for late January 1849. Verdi travelled to Rome before the end of 1848. He found that city on the verge of becoming a (short-lived) republic, which commenced within days of \"La battaglia di Legnano\"'s enthusiastically received premiere. In the spirit of the time were the tenor hero's final words, \"Whoever dies for the fatherland cannot be evil-minded\".\nVerdi had intended to return to Italy in early 1848, but was prevented by work and illness, as well as, most probably, by his increasing attachment to Strepponi. Verdi and Strepponi left Paris in July 1849, the immediate cause being an outbreak of cholera, and Verdi went directly to Busseto to continue work on completing his latest opera, \"Luisa Miller\", for a production in Naples later in the year.\n1849\u20131853: Fame.\nVerdi was committed to the publisher Giovanni Ricordi for an opera\u2014which became \"Stiffelio\"\u2014for Trieste in the Spring of 1850; and, subsequently, following negotiations with La Fenice, developed a libretto with Piave and wrote the music for \"Rigoletto\" (based on Victor Hugo's \"Le roi s'amuse\") for Venice in March 1851. This was the first of a sequence of three operas (followed by \"Il trovatore\" and \"La traviata\") which were to cement his fame as a master of opera.\nThe failure of \"Stiffelio\" (attributable not least to the censors of the time taking offence at the taboo subject of the supposed adultery of a clergyman's wife and interfering with the text and roles) incited Verdi to take pains to rework it, although even in the completely recycled version of \"Aroldo\" (1857) it still failed to please. \"Rigoletto\", with its intended murder of royalty, and its sordid attributes, also upset the censors. Verdi would not compromise: What does the sack matter to the police? Are they worried about the effect it will produce?...Do they think they know better than I?...I see the hero has been made no longer ugly and hunchbacked!! Why? A singing hunchback...why not?...I think it splendid to show this character as outwardly deformed and ridiculous, and inwardly passionate and full of love. I chose the subject for these very qualities...if they are removed I can no longer set it to music.\nVerdi substituted a Duke for the King, and the public response and subsequent success of the opera all over Italy and Europe fully vindicated the composer. Aware that the melody of the Duke's song \"La donna \u00e8 mobile\" (\"Woman is fickle\") would become a popular hit, Verdi excluded it from orchestral rehearsals for the opera, and rehearsed the tenor separately.\nFor several months Verdi was preoccupied with family matters. These stemmed from the way in which the citizens of Busseto were treating Giuseppina Strepponi, with whom he was living openly in an unmarried relationship. She was shunned in the town and at church, and while Verdi appeared indifferent, she was certainly not. Furthermore, Verdi was concerned about the administration of his newly acquired property at Sant'Agata. A growing estrangement between Verdi and his parents was perhaps also attributable to Strepponi (the suggestion that this situation was sparked by the birth of a child to Verdi and Strepponi which was given away as a foundling lacks any firm evidence). In January 1851, Verdi broke off relations with his parents, and in April they were ordered to leave Sant'Agata; Verdi found new premises for them and helped them financially to settle into their new home. It may not be coincidental that all six Verdi operas written in the period 1849\u20131853 (\"La battaglia, Luisa Miller, Stiffelio, Rigoletto, Il trovatore\" and \"La traviata\"), have, uniquely in his oeuvre, heroines who are, in the opera critic Joseph Kerman's words, \"women who come to grief because of sexual transgression, actual or perceived\". Kerman, like the psychologist Gerald Mendelssohn, sees this choice of subjects as being influenced by Verdi's uneasy passion for Strepponi.\nVerdi and Strepponi moved into Sant'Agata on 1 May 1851. May also brought an offer for a new opera from La Fenice, which Verdi eventually realised as \"La traviata\". That was followed by an agreement with the Rome Opera Company to present \"Il trovatore\" for January 1853. Verdi now had sufficient earnings to retire, had he wished to. He had reached a stage where he could develop his operas as he wished, rather than be dependent on commissions from third parties. \"Il trovatore\" was in fact the first opera he wrote without a specific commission (apart from \"Oberto\"). At around the same time he began to consider creating an opera from Shakespeare's \"King Lear\". After first (1850) seeking a libretto from Cammarano (which never appeared), Verdi later (1857) commissioned one from Antonio Somma, but this proved intractable, and no music was ever written. Verdi began work on \"Il trovatore\" after the death of his mother in June 1851. The fact that this is \"the one opera of Verdi's which focuses on a mother rather than a father\" is perhaps related to her death.\nIn the winter of 1851\u201352, Verdi decided to go to Paris with Strepponi, where he concluded an agreement with the Op\u00e9ra to write what became \"Les v\u00eapres siciliennes\", his first original work in the style of grand opera. In February 1852, the couple attended a performance of Alexander Dumas \"fils\"'s play \"The Lady of the Camellias\"; Verdi immediately began to compose music for what would later become \"La traviata\".\nAfter his visit to Rome for \"Il trovatore\" in January 1853, Verdi worked on completing \"La traviata\", but with little hope of its success, due to his lack of confidence in any of the singers engaged for the season. Furthermore, the management insisted that the opera be given a historical, not a contemporary setting. The premiere in March 1853 was indeed a failure: Verdi wrote: \"Was the fault mine or the singers'? Time will tell.\" Subsequent productions (following some rewriting) throughout Europe over the following two years fully vindicated the composer; Roger Parker has written \"\"Il trovatore\" consistently remains one of the three or four most popular operas in the Verdian repertoire: but it has never pleased the critics\".\n1853\u20131860: Consolidation.\nIn the eleven years up to and including \"Traviata\", Verdi had written sixteen operas. Over the next eighteen years (up to \"Aida\"), he wrote only six new works for the stage. Verdi was happy to return to Sant'Agata and, in February 1856, was reporting a \"total abandonment of music; a little reading; some light occupation with agriculture and horses; that's all\". A couple of months later, writing in the same vein to Countess Maffei he stated: \"I'm not doing anything. I don't read. I don't write. I walk in the fields from morning to evening, trying to recover, so far without success, from the stomach trouble caused me by \"I vespri siciliani\". Cursed operas!\" An 1858 letter by Strepponi to the publisher L\u00e9on Escudier describes the kind of lifestyle that increasingly appealed to the composer: \"His love for the country has become a mania, madness, rage, and fury\u2014anything you like that is exaggerated. He gets up almost with the dawn, to go and examine the wheat, the maize, the vines, etc...Fortunately our tastes for this sort of life coincide, except in the matter of sunrise, which he likes to see up and dressed, and I from my bed.\"\nNonetheless, on 15 May, Verdi signed a contract with La Fenice for an opera for the following spring. This was to be \"Simon Boccanegra\". The couple stayed in Paris until January 1857 to deal with these proposals, and also the offer to stage the translated version of \"Il trovatore\" as a grand opera. Verdi and Strepponi travelled to Venice in March for the premiere of \"Simon Boccanegra\", which turned out to be \"a fiasco\" (as Verdi reported, although on the second and third nights, the reception improved considerably).\nWith Strepponi, Verdi went to Naples early in January 1858 to work with Somma on the libretto of the opera \"Gustave III\", which over a year later would become \"Un ballo in maschera\". By this time, Verdi had begun to write about Strepponi as \"my wife\" and she was signing her letters as \"Giuseppina Verdi\". Verdi raged against the stringent requirements of the Neapolitan censor stating: \"I'm drowning in a sea of troubles. It's almost certain that the censors will forbid our libretto.\" With no hope of seeing his \"Gustavo III\" staged as written, he broke his contract. This resulted in litigation and counter-litigation; with the legal issues resolved, Verdi was free to present the libretto and musical outline of \"Gustave III\" to the Rome Opera. There, the censors demanded further changes; at this point, the opera took the title \"Un ballo in maschera\".\nArriving in Sant'Agata in March 1859 Verdi and Strepponi found the nearby city of Piacenza occupied by about 6000 Austrian troops who had made it their base, to combat the rise of Italian interest in unification in the Piedmont region. In the ensuing Second Italian War of Independence the Austrians abandoned the region and began to leave Lombardy, although they remained in control of the Venice region under the terms of the armistice signed at Villafranca. Verdi was disgusted at this outcome: \"[W]here then is the independence of Italy, so long hoped for and promised?...Venice is not Italian? After so many victories, what an outcome... It is enough to drive one mad\" he wrote to Clara Maffei.\nVerdi and Strepponi now decided on marriage; they travelled to Collonges-sous-Sal\u00e8ve, a village then part of Piedmont. On 29 August 1859, the couple were married there, with only the coachman who had driven them there and the church bell ringer as witnesses. At the end of 1859, Verdi wrote to his friend Cesare De Sanctis \"[Since completing \"Ballo\"] I have not made any more music, I have not seen any more music, I have not thought anymore about music. I don't even know what colour my last opera is, and I almost don't remember it.\" He began to remodel Sant'Agata, which took most of 1860 to complete and on which he continued to work for the next twenty years. This included major work on a square room that became his workroom, his bedroom, and his office.\nPolitics.\nHaving achieved some fame and prosperity, Verdi began in 1859 to take an active interest in Italian politics. His early commitment to the Risorgimento movement is difficult to estimate accurately; in the words of the music historian Philip Gossett \"myths intensifying and exaggerating [such] sentiment began circulating\" during the nineteenth century. An example is the claim that when the \"Va, pensiero\" chorus in \"Nabucco\" was first sung in Milan, the audience, responding with nationalistic fervour, demanded an encore. As encores were expressly forbidden by the government at the time, such a gesture would have been extremely significant. But in fact the piece encored was not \"Va, pensiero\" but the hymn \"Immenso Jehova\".\nThe growth of the \"identification of Verdi's music with Italian nationalist politics\" perhaps began in the 1840s. In 1848, the nationalist leader Giuseppe Mazzini (whom Verdi had met in London the previous year) requested Verdi (who complied) to write a patriotic hymn. The opera historian Charles Osborne describes the 1849 \"La battaglia di Legnano\" as \"an opera with a purpose\" and maintains that \"while parts of Verdi's earlier operas had frequently been taken up by the fighters of the Risorgimento...this time the composer had given the movement its own opera\". It was not until 1859 in Naples, and only then spreading throughout Italy, that the slogan \"Viva Verdi\" was used as an acronym for \"Viva Vittorio Emanuele Re D'Italia\" (\"Long live Victor Emmanuel II, King of Italy\"), in reference to the then king of Sardinia and future king of Italy. After Italy was unified in 1861, many of Verdi's early operas were increasingly re-interpreted as Risorgimento works with hidden revolutionary messages that perhaps had not been originally intended by either the composer or his librettists.\nIn 1859, Verdi was elected as a member of the new provincial council, and was appointed to head a group of five who would meet with King Vittorio Emanuele II in Turin. They were enthusiastically greeted along the way and in Turin Verdi himself received much of the publicity. On 17 October Verdi met with Cavour, the architect of the initial stages of Italian unification. Later that year the government of Emilia was subsumed under the United Provinces of Central Italy, and Verdi's political life temporarily came to an end. Whilst still maintaining nationalist feelings, he declined in 1860 the office of provincial council member to which he had been elected \"in absentia\". Cavour however was anxious to convince a man of Verdi's stature that running for political office was essential to strengthening and securing Italy's future. The composer confided to Piave some years later that \"I accepted on the condition that after a few months I would resign.\" Verdi was elected on 3 February 1861 for the town of Borgo San Donnino (Fidenza) to the Parliament of Piedmont-Sardinia in Turin (which from March 1861 became the Parliament of the Kingdom of Italy), but following the death of Cavour in 1861, which deeply distressed him, he scarcely attended. Later, in 1874, Verdi was appointed a member of the Italian Senate, but did not participate in its activities.\n1860\u20131887: from \"La forza\" to \"Otello\".\nIn the months following the staging of \"Ballo\", Verdi was approached by several opera companies seeking a new work or making offers to stage one of his existing ones but refused them all. But when, in December 1860, an approach was made from Saint Petersburg's Imperial Theatre, the offer of francs plus all expenses was doubtless a strong incentive. Verdi came up with the idea of adapting the 1835 Spanish play \"Don Alvaro o la fuerza del sino\" by Angel Saavedra, which became \"La forza del destino\", with Piave writing the libretto. The Verdis arrived in Saint Petersburg in December 1861 for the premiere, but casting problems meant that it had to be postponed.\nReturning via Paris from Russia on 24 February 1862, Verdi met two young Italian writers, the twenty-year-old Arrigo Boito and Franco Faccio. Verdi had been invited to write a piece of music for the 1862 International Exhibition in London, and charged Boito with writing a text, which became the \"Inno delle nazioni\". Boito, as a supporter of the grand opera of Giacomo Meyerbeer and an opera composer in his own right, was later in the 1860s critical of Verdi's \"reliance on formula rather than form\", incurring the composer's wrath. Nevertheless, he was to become Verdi's close collaborator in his final operas. The Saint Petersburg premiere of \"La forza\" finally took place in September 1862, and Verdi received the Order of St. Stanislaus.\nA revival of \"Macbeth\" in Paris in 1865 was not a success, but he obtained a commission for a new work, \"Don Carlos\", based on the play \"Don Carlos\" by Friedrich Schiller. He and Giuseppina spent late 1866 and much of 1867 in Paris, where they heard, and did not warm to, Giacomo Meyerbeer's last opera, \"L'Africaine\", and Richard Wagner's overture to \"Tannh\u00e4user\". The opera's premiere in 1867 drew mixed comments. While the critic Th\u00e9ophile Gautier praised the work, the composer Georges Bizet was disappointed at Verdi's changing style: \"Verdi is no longer Italian. He is following Wagner.\"\nDuring the 1860s and 1870s, Verdi paid great attention to his estate around Busseto, purchasing additional land, dealing with unsatisfactory (in one case, embezzling) stewards, installing irrigation, and coping with variable harvests and economic slumps. In 1867, both Verdi's father Carlo, with whom he had restored good relations, and his early patron and father-in-law Antonio Barezzi, died. Verdi and Giuseppina decided to adopt Carlo's great-niece Filomena Maria Verdi, then seven years old, as their own child. She was to marry in 1878 the son of Verdi's friend and lawyer Angelo Carrara and her family became eventually the heirs of Verdi's estate.\n\"Aida\" was commissioned by the Egyptian government for the opera house built by the Khedive Isma'il Pasha to celebrate the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. The opera house actually opened with a production of \"Rigoletto\". The prose libretto in French by Camille du Locle, based on a scenario by the Egyptologist Auguste Mariette, was transformed into Italian verse by Antonio Ghislanzoni. Verdi was offered the enormous sum of francs for the opera (even though he confessed that Ancient Egypt was \"a civilization I have never been able to admire\"), and it was first performed in Cairo in 1871. Verdi spent much of 1872 and 1873 supervising the Italian productions of \"Aida\" at Milan, Parma and Naples, effectively acting as producer and demanding high standards and adequate rehearsal time. During the rehearsals for the Naples production he wrote his String Quartet, the only chamber music by him to survive, and the only major work in the form by an Italian of the 19th century.\nIn 1869, Verdi had been asked to compose a section for a Requiem mass in memory of Rossini. He compiled and completed the requiem, but its performance was abandoned (and its premiere did not take place until 1988). Five years later, Verdi reworked his \"Libera Me\" section of the Rossini Requiem and made it a part of his Requiem honouring Alessandro Manzoni, who had died in 1873. The complete Requiem was first performed at the cathedral in Milan on the anniversary of Manzoni's death on 22 May 1874. The \"spinto\" soprano Teresa Stolz, who had sung in La Scala productions from 1865 onwards, was the soloist in the first and many later performances of the Requiem; in February 1872, she had created Aida in its European premiere in Milan. She became closely associated personally with Verdi (exactly how closely remains conjectural), to Giuseppina Verdi's initial disquiet; but the women were reconciled and Stolz remained a companion of Verdi after Giuseppina's death in 1897 until his own death.\nVerdi conducted his Requiem in Paris, London and Vienna in 1875 and in Cologne in 1876. It seemed that it would be his last work. In the words of his biographer John Rosselli, it \"confirmed him as the unique presiding genius of Italian music. No fellow composer...came near him in popularity or reputation\". Verdi, now in his sixties, initially seemed to withdraw into retirement. He deliberately shied away from opportunities to publicise himself or to become involved with new productions of his works, but secretly he began work on \"Otello\", which Boito (to whom the composer had been reconciled by Ricordi) had proposed to him privately in 1879. The composition was delayed by a revision of \"Simon Boccanegra\" which Verdi undertook with Boito, produced in 1881, and a revision of \"Don Carlos\". Even when \"Otello\" was virtually completed, Verdi teased \"Shall I finish it? Shall I have it performed? Hard to tell, even for me.\" As news leaked out, Verdi was pressed by opera houses across Europe with enquiries; eventually the opera was triumphantly premiered at La Scala in February 1887.\n1887\u20131901: \"Falstaff\" and last years.\nFollowing the success of \"Otello\" Verdi commented, \"After having relentlessly massacred so many heroes and heroines, I have at last the right to laugh a little.\" He had considered a variety of comic subjects but had found none of them wholly suitable and confided his ambition to Boito. The librettist said nothing at the time but secretly began work on a libretto based on \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" with additional material taken from \"Henry IV, Part 1\" and \"Part 2\". Verdi received the draft libretto probably in early July 1889 after he had just read Shakespeare's play: \"Benissimo! Benissimo!... No one could have done better than you\", he wrote back to Boito. But he still had doubts: his age, his health (which he admits to being good) and his ability to complete the project: \"If I were not to finish the music?\". If the project failed, it would have been a waste of Boito's time, and have distracted him from completing his own new opera. Finally, on 10 July 1889, he wrote again: \"So be it! So let's do \"Falstaff\"! For now, let's not think of obstacles, of age, of illnesses!\" Verdi emphasised the need for secrecy but continued \"If you are in the mood, then start to write.\" Later he wrote to Boito: \"What joy to be able to say to the public: HERE WE ARE AGAIN!!! COME AND SEE US!\"\nThe first performance of \"Falstaff\" took place at La Scala on 9 February 1893. For the first night, official ticket prices were thirty times higher than usual. Royalty, aristocracy, critics and leading figures from the arts all over Europe were present. The performance was a huge success; numbers were encored, and at the end, the applause for Verdi and the cast lasted an hour. That was followed by a tumultuous welcome when the composer, his wife and Boito arrived at the Grand Hotel de Milan. Even more hectic scenes ensued when he went to Rome in May for the opera's premiere at the Teatro Costanzi; crowds of well-wishers at the railway station initially forced Verdi to take refuge in a tool-shed. He witnessed the performance from the Royal Box at the side of King Umberto and Queen Margherita.\nIn his last years, Verdi undertook a number of philanthropic ventures, publishing in 1894 a song for the benefit of earthquake victims in Sicily, and from 1895 onwards planning, building and endowing a rest-home for retired musicians in Milan, the Casa di Riposo per Musicisti, and building a hospital at Villanova sull'Arda, close to Busseto. His last major composition, the choral set of \"Four sacred pieces\", was published in 1898. In 1900 he was deeply upset at the assassination of King Umberto and sketched a setting of a poem in his memory, but was unable to complete it.\nWhile staying at the Grand Hotel, Verdi suffered a stroke on 21 January 1901. He gradually grew more feeble over the next week, during which Stolz cared for him, and died on 27 January at the age of 87.\nVerdi was initially buried in a private ceremony at Milan's Cimitero Monumentale. A month later, his body was moved to the crypt of the Casa di Riposo. On this occasion, \"Va, pensiero\" from \"Nabucco\" was conducted by Arturo Toscanini with a chorus of 820 singers. A huge crowd was in attendance, estimated at . Boito wrote to a friend, in words which recall the mysterious final scene of \"Don Carlos\", \"[Verdi] sleeps like a King of Spain in his Escurial, under a bronze slab that completely covers him.\"\nPersonality.\nNot all of Verdi's personal qualities were amiable. John Rosselli concluded after writing his biography that \"I do not very much like the man Verdi, in particular the autocratic rentier-cum-estate owner, part-time composer, and seemingly full-time grumbler and reactionary critic of the later years\", yet admits that like other writers, he must \"admire him, warts and all...a deep integrity runs beneath his life, and can be felt even when he is being unreasonable or wrong\".\nBudden suggests that \"With Verdi...the man and the artist in many ways developed side by side.\" Ungainly and awkward in society in his early years, \"as he became a man of property and underwent the civilizing influence of Giuseppina...[he] acquired assurance and authority.\" He also learnt to keep himself to himself, never discussing his private life and maintaining, when it suited him, legends about his supposed 'peasant' origins, his materialism and his indifference to criticism. Gerald Mendelsohn describes the composer as \"an intensely private man who deeply resented efforts to inquire into his personal affairs. He regarded journalists and would-be biographers, as well as his neighbours in Busseto and the operatic public at large, as an intrusive lot, against whose prying attentions he needed constantly to defend himself.\"\nVerdi was never explicit about his religious beliefs. Anti-clerical by nature in his early years, he nonetheless built a chapel at Sant'Agata but is little recorded as attending church. Strepponi wrote in 1871 \"I won't say [Verdi] is an atheist, but he is not much of a believer.\" Rosselli comments that in the Requiem \"The prospect of Hell appears to rule...[the Requiem] is troubled to the end,\" and offers little consolation.\nMusic.\nSpirit.\nThe writer Friedrich Schiller (four of whose plays were adapted as operas by Verdi) distinguished two types of artists in his 1795 essay \"On Na\u00efve and Sentimental Poetry\". The philosopher Isaiah Berlin ranked Verdi in the 'na\u00efve' category\u2014\"They are not...self-conscious. They do not...stand aside to contemplate their creations and express their own feelings...They are able...if they have genius, to embody their vision fully.\" (The 'sentimentals' seek to recreate nature and natural feelings on their own terms\u2014Berlin instances Richard Wagner\u2014\"offering not peace, but a sword\".) Verdi's operas are not written according to an aesthetic theory, or with a purpose to change the tastes of their audiences. In conversation with a German visitor in 1887 he is recorded as saying that, whilst \"there was much to be admired in [Wagner's operas] \"Tannh\u00e4user\" and \"Lohengrin\"...in his recent operas [Wagner] seemed to be overstepping the bounds of what can be expressed in music. For him \"philosophical\" music was incomprehensible.\" Although Verdi's works belong, as Rosselli admits \"to the most artificial of genres...[they] ring emotionally true: truth and directness make them exciting, often hugely so.\"\nPeriods.\nThe earliest study of Verdi's music, published in 1859 by the Italian critic Abramo Basevi, already distinguished four periods in Verdi's music. The early, 'grandiose' period, ended according to Basevi with \"La battaglia di Legnano\" (1849), and a 'personal' style began with the next opera \"Luisa Miller\". These two operas are generally agreed today by critics to mark the division between Verdi's 'early' and 'middle' periods. The 'middle' period is felt to end with \"La traviata\" (1853) and \"Les v\u00eapres siciliennes\" (1855), with a 'late' period commencing with \"Simon Boccanegra\" (1857) running through to \"Aida\" (1871). The last two operas, \"Otello\" and \"Falstaff\", together with the Requiem and the \"Four Sacred Pieces\", then represent a 'final' period.\nEarly period.\nVerdi was to claim in his \"Sketch\" that during his early training with Lavigna \"I did nothing but canons and fugues...No-one taught me orchestration or how to handle dramatic music.\" He is known to have written a variety of music for the Busseto Philharmonic society, including vocal music, band music and chamber works, (and including an alternative overture to Rossini's \"Barber of Seville\") but few of these works survive. (He may have given instructions before his death to destroy his early works).\nVerdi uses in his early operas (and, in his own stylized versions, throughout his later work) the standard elements of Italian opera content of the period, referred to by the opera writer Julian Budden as the 'Code Rossini', after the composer who established through his work and popularity the accepted templates of these forms; they were also used by the composers dominant during Verdi's early career, Bellini, Donizetti and Saverio Mercadante. Amongst the essential elements are the aria, the duet, the ensemble, and the finale sequence of an act. The aria format, centred on a soloist, typically involved three sections; a slow introduction, marked typically cantabile or adagio, a \"tempo di mezzo\" which might involve chorus or other characters, and a cabaletta, an opportunity for bravura singing for the soloist. The duet was similarly formatted. Finales, covering climactic sequences of action, used the various forces of soloists, ensemble and chorus, usually culminating with an exciting stretto section. Verdi was to develop these and the other formulae of the generation preceding him with increasing sophistication during his career.\nThe operas of the early period show Verdi learning by doing and gradually establishing mastery over the different elements of opera. \"Oberto\" is poorly structured, and the orchestration of the first operas is generally simple, sometimes even basic. The musicologist Richard Taruskin suggested \"the most striking effect in the early Verdi operas, and the one most obviously allied to the mood of the Risorgimento, was the big choral number sung\u2014crudely or sublimely, according to the ear of the beholder\u2014in unison. The success of \"Va, pensiero\" in \"Nabucco\" (which Rossini approvingly denoted as \"a grand aria sung by sopranos, contraltos, tenors and basses\"), was replicated in the similar \"O Signor, dal tetto natio\" in \"I lombardi\" and in 1844 in the chorus \"Si ridesti il Leon di Castiglia\" in \"Ernani\", the battle hymn of the conspirators seeking freedom. In \"I due Foscari\" Verdi first uses recurring themes identified with main characters; here and in future operas the accent moves away from the 'oratorio' characteristics of the first operas towards individual action and intrigue.\nFrom this period onwards Verdi also develops his instinct for \"tinta\" (literally 'colour'), a term which he used for characterising elements of an individual opera score\u2014Parker gives as an example \"the rising 6th that begins so many lyric pieces in \"Ernani\"\". \"Macbeth\", even in its original 1847 version, shows many original touches; characterization by key (the Macbeths themselves generally singing in sharp keys, the witches in flat keys), a preponderance of minor key music, and highly original orchestration. In the 'dagger scene' and the duet following the murder of Duncan, the forms transcend the 'Code Rossini' and compellingly propel the drama. Verdi was to comment in 1868 that Rossini and his followers missed \"the golden thread that binds all the parts together and, rather than a set of numbers without coherence, makes an opera\". \"Tinta\" was for Verdi this \"golden thread\", an essential unifying factor in his works.\nMiddle period.\nThe writer David Kimbell states that in \"Luisa Miller\" and \"Stiffelio\" (the earliest operas of this period) there appears to be a \"growing freedom in the large scale structure...and an acute attention to fine detail\". Others echo those feelings. Julian Budden expresses the impact of \"Rigoletto\" and its place in Verdi's output as follows: \"Just after 1850 at the age of 38, Verdi closed the door on a period of Italian opera with \"Rigoletto\". The so-called \"ottocento\" in music is finished. Verdi will continue to draw on certain of its forms for the next few operas, but in a totally new spirit.\" One example of Verdi's wish to move away from \"standard forms\" appears in his feelings about the structure of \"Il trovatore\". To his librettist, Cammarano, Verdi plainly states in a letter of April 1851 that if there were no standard forms\u2014\"cavatinas, duets, trios, choruses, finales, etc. ... and if you could avoid beginning with an opening chorus...\", he would be quite happy.\nTwo external factors had their impacts on Verdi's compositions of this period. One is that with increasing reputation and financial security he no longer needed to commit himself to the productive treadmill, had more freedom to choose his own subjects, and had more time to develop them according to his own ideas. In the years 1849 to 1859, he wrote eight new operas, compared with fourteen in the previous ten years.\nAnother factor was the changed political situation; the failure of the 1848 revolutions led both to some diminution of the Risorgimento ethos (at least initially) and a significant increase in theatre censorship. This is reflected both in Verdi's choices of plots dealing more with personal relationships than political conflict, and in a (partly consequent) dramatic reduction in the operas of this period in the number of choruses (of the type which had first made him famous)\u2014not only are there on average 40% fewer choruses in the 'middle' period operas compared to the 'early' period', but whereas virtually all the 'early' operas commence with a chorus, only one (\"Luisa Miller\") of the 'middle' period operas begin this way. Instead, Verdi experiments with a variety of means, e.g. a stage band (\"Rigoletto\"), an aria for bass (\"Stiffelio\"), a party scene (\"La traviata\"). Chusid also notes Verdi's increasing tendency to replace full-scale overtures with shorter orchestral introductions. Parker comments that \"La traviata\", the last opera of the 'middle' period, is \"again a new adventure. It gestures towards a level of 'realism'...the contemporary world of waltzes pervades the score, and the heroine's death from disease is graphically depicted in the music.\" Verdi's increasing command of musical highlighting of changing moods and relationships is exemplified in act 3 of \"Rigoletto\", where Duke's flippant song \"La donna \u00e8 mobile\" is followed immediately by the quartet \"Bella figlia dell'amore\", contrasting the rapacious Duke and his inamorata with the (concealed) indignant Rigoletto and his grieving daughter. Taruskin asserts this is \"the most famous ensemble Verdi ever composed\".\nLate period.\n Chusid notes Strepponi's description of the operas of the 1860s and 1870s as being \"modern\" whereas Verdi described the pre-1849 works as \"the cavatina operas\", as further indication that \"Verdi became increasingly dissatisfied with the older, familiar conventions of his predecessors that he had adopted at the outset of his career,\" Parker sees a physical differentiation of the operas from \"Les v\u00eapres siciliennes\" (1855) to \"Aida\" (1871) is that they are significantly longer, and with larger casts, than previous works. They also reflect a shift towards the French genre of grand opera, notable in more colourful orchestration, counterpointing of serious and comic scenes, and greater spectacle. The opportunities of transforming Italian opera by utilising such resources appealed to him. For a commission from the Paris Op\u00e9ra he expressly demanded a libretto from Eug\u00e8ne Scribe, the favourite librettist of Meyerbeer, telling him: \"I want\u2014in fact, I must have\u2014a grandiose, impassioned and original subject.\" The result was \"Les v\u00eapres siciliennes\", and the scenarios of \"Simon Boccanegra\" (1857), \"Un ballo in maschera\" (1859), \"La forza del destino\" (1862), \"Don Carlos\" (1867) and \"Aida\" (1871) all meet the same criteria. Porter notes that \"Un ballo\" marks an almost complete synthesis of Verdi's style with the grand opera hallmarks, such that \"huge spectacle is not mere decoration but essential to the drama...musical and theatrical lines remain taut [and] the characters still sing as warmly, passionately and personally as in \"Il trovatore\".\"\nWhen the composer Ferdinand Hiller asked Verdi whether he preferred \"Aida\" or \"Don Carlos\", Verdi replied that \"Aida\" had \"more bite and (if you'll forgive the word), more \"theatricality\"\". During the rehearsals for the Naples production of \"Aida\" Verdi amused himself by writing his only string quartet, a sprightly work which shows in its last movement that he had not lost the skill for fugue-writing that he had learned with Lavigna.\nFinal works.\nVerdi's three last major works continued to show new developments in conveying drama and emotion. The first to appear, in 1874, was his Requiem, scored for operatic forces but by no means an \"opera in ecclesiastical dress\" (the words in which Hans von B\u00fclow condemned it before even hearing it). Although in the Requiem Verdi puts to use many of the techniques he learned in opera, its musical forms and emotions are not those of the stage. Verdi's tone painting at the opening of the Requiem is vividly described by the Italian composer Ildebrando Pizzetti, writing in 1941: \"in [the words] murmured by an invisible crowd over the slow swaying of a few simple chords, you straightaway sense the fear and sadness of a vast multitude before the mystery of death. In the [following] \"Et lux perpetuum\" the melody spreads it wings...before falling back on itself...you hear a sigh for consolation and eternal peace.\"\nBy the time \"Otello\" premi\u00e8red in 1887, more than 15 years after \"Aida\", the operas of Verdi's (predeceased) contemporary Richard Wagner had begun their ascendancy in popular taste, and many sought or identified Wagnerian aspects in Verdi's latest composition. Budden points out that there is little in the music of \"Otello\" that relates to the \"verismo\" opera of the younger Italian composers, and little if anything which can be construed as a homage to the New German School. Nonetheless, there is still much originality, building on the strengths which Verdi had already demonstrated; the powerful storm which opens the opera \"in medias res\", the recollection of the love duet of Act I in Otello's dying words (more an aspect of \"tinta\" than \"leitmotif\"), imaginative touches of harmony in Iago's \"Era la notte\" (Act II).\nFinally, six years later, appeared \"Falstaff\", Verdi's only comedy apart from the early, ill-fated \"Un giorno di regno\". In this work, Parker writes that: \"The listener is bombarded by a stunning diversity of rhythms, orchestral textures, melodic motifs and harmonic devices. Passages that in earlier times would have furnished material for an entire number here crowd in on each other, shouldering themselves unceremoniously to the fore in bewildering succession\". Rosselli writes: \"In \"Otello\" Verdi had miniaturized the forms of romantic Italian opera; in \"Falstaff\" he miniaturized himself...[M]oments...crystallize a feeling...as though an aria or duet had been precipitated into a phrase.\" The opera ends with a fugue featuring the lines: \"Tutto nel mondo \u00e8 burla ... Tutti gabbati!...Ma ride ben chi ride La risata final.\" (\"Everything in the world is a jest ... but he laughs well who laughs the final laugh\").\nLegacy.\nReception.\nAlthough Verdi's operas brought him a popular following, not all contemporary critics approved of his work. The English critic Henry Chorley allowed in 1846 that \"he is the only modern man...having a style\u2014for better or worse\", but found all his output unacceptable. \"[His] faults [are] grave ones, calculated to destroy and degrade taste beyond those of any Italian composer in the long list\" wrote Chorley, whilst conceding that \"howsoever incomplete may have been his training, howsoever mistaken his aspirations may have proved...he \"has\" aspired.\" But by the time of Verdi's death, 55 years later, his reputation was assured, and the 1910 edition of \"Grove's Dictionary\" pronounced him \"one of the greatest and most popular opera composers of the nineteenth century\".\nVerdi had no pupils apart from Muzio and no school of composers sought to follow his style. By his death, \"verismo\" was the accepted style of young Italian composers. The New York Metropolitan Opera frequently staged \"Rigoletto\", \"Trovatore\" and \"Traviata\" during this period and featured \"Aida\" in every season from 1898 to 1945. Interest in the operas reawakened in mid-1920s Germany and this sparked a revival in England and elsewhere. From the 1930s onward there began to appear scholarly biographies and publications of documentation and correspondence.\nIn 1959 the Instituto di Studi Verdiani (from 1989 the Istituto Nazionale di Studi Verdiani) was founded in Parma and became a leading centre for research and publication of Verdi studies, and in the 1970s the American Institute for Verdi Studies was founded at New York University.\nNationalism in the operas.\nHistorians have debated how political Verdi's operas were. In particular, the \"Chorus of the Hebrew Slaves\" (known as \"Va, pensiero\") from the third act of the opera \"Nabucco\" was used an anthem for Italian patriots, who were seeking to unify their country and free it from foreign control in the years up to 1861 (the chorus's theme of exiles singing about their homeland, and its lines such as \"O mia patria, si bella e perduta\" / \"O my country, so lovely and so lost\" were thought to have resonated with many Italians). Beginning in Naples in 1859 and spreading throughout Italy, the slogan \"Viva VERDI\" was used as an acronym for \"Viva Vittorio Emanuele Re D'Italia\" (\"Long live Victor Emmanuel King of Italy\"), referring to Victor Emmanuel II. Marco Pizzo argues that after 1815, music became a political tool, and many songwriters expressed ideals of freedom and equality. Pizzo claims that Verdi was part of this movement, for his operas were inspired by the love of country, the struggle for Italian independence, and spoke to the sacrifice of patriots and exiles. George Martin claims Verdi was \"the greatest artist\" of the Risorgimento. \"Throughout his work its values, its issues recur constantly, and he expressed them with great power\".\nBut Mary Ann Smart argues that music critics at the time seldom mentioned any political themes. Likewise, Roger Parker argues that the political dimension of Verdi's operas was exaggerated by nationalistic historians in the late 19th century.\nFrom the 1850s onwards, Verdi's operas displayed few patriotic themes because of the heavy censorship by the absolutist regime in power. Verdi later became disillusioned by politics, but he was personally active part in the political world of events of the Risorgimento and was elected to the first Italian parliament in 1861.\nMemorials and cultural portrayals.\nFour Italian conservatories, the Milan Conservatory (the same that had not accepted him as a student) and those in Turin, Como and Ravenna are named after Verdi, as are many Italian theatres.\nVerdi's hometown of Busseto displays Luigi Secchi's statue of a seated Verdi in 1913, next to the Teatro Verdi built in his honour in the 1850s. It is one of many statues of the composer in Italy. The Giuseppe Verdi Monument, a 1906 marble memorial, sculpted by Pasquale Civiletti, is located in Verdi Square in New York City. The monument includes a statue of Verdi himself and life-sized statues of four characters from his operas.\nVerdi has been the subject of several film and stage works. These include the 1938 film directed by Carmine Gallone, \"Giuseppe Verdi\", starring Fosco Giachetti; the 1982 miniseries, \"The Life of Verdi\", directed by Renato Castellani, where Verdi was played by Ronald Pickup, with narration by Burt Lancaster in the English version; and the 1985 play \"After Aida\", by Julian Mitchell (1985). He is a character in the 2011 opera \"Risorgimento!\" by Italian composer Lorenzo Ferrero.\nVerdi today.\nVerdi's operas are frequently staged around the world. All of his operas are available in recordings, and on DVD \u2013 Naxos Records offers a complete boxed set.\nModern productions may differ substantially from those originally envisaged by the composer. Jonathan Miller's 1982 version of \"Rigoletto\" for English National Opera, set in the world of modern American mafiosi, received critical plaudits. But the same company's staging in 2002 of \"Un ballo in maschera\" as \"A Masked Ball\", directed by Calixto Bieito, including \"satanic sex rituals, homosexual rape, [and] a demonic dwarf\", got a general critical thumbs down.\nExcerpts from the Requiem were featured at the funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. On 12 March 2011 during a performance of \"Nabucco\" at the Opera di Roma celebrating 150 years of Italian unification, the conductor Riccardo Muti paused after \"Va, pensiero\" and turned to address the audience (which included the then Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi) to complain about cuts in state funding of culture; the audience then joined in a repeat of the chorus. In 2014, the pop singer Katy Perry appeared at the Grammy Award wearing a dress designed by Valentino, embroidered with the music of \"Dell'invito trascorsa \u00e8 gi\u00e0 l'ora\" from the start of \"La traviata\". The bicentenary of Verdi's birth in 2013 was celebrated around the world, both in performances and broadcasts.\nIn 2011, Anthony Tommasini ranked Verdi eighth on his list of the ten greatest composers of classical music: \"That a new production of a Verdi opera, like Willy Decker\u2019s spare, boldly reimagined staging of \"La Traviata\" at the Metropolitan Opera, can provoke such heated passions among audiences is testimony to the enduring richness of Verdi\u2019s works...Though Verdi had an ornery side, he was a decent man, an Italian patriot and the founder of a retirement home for musicians still in operation in Milan.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12959", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12959", "title": "Godwins Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "12960", "revid": "16182278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12960", "title": "German Navy", "text": "Maritime warfare branch of Germany's military\nMilitary unit\nThe German Navy (, ) is part of the unified (Federal Defense), the German Armed Forces. The German Navy was originally known as the \"Bundesmarine\" (Federal Navy) from 1956 to 1995, when \"Deutsche Marine\" (German Navy) became the official name with respect to the 1990 incorporation of the East German \"Volksmarine\" (People's Navy). It is deeply integrated into the NATO alliance. Its primary mission is protection of Germany's territorial waters and maritime infrastructure as well as sea lines of communication. Apart from this, the German Navy participates in peacekeeping operations, and renders humanitarian assistance and disaster relief. It also participates in anti-piracy operations.\nHistory.\nGerman Naval history has its roots in the naval history of the Holy Roman Empire, to which the Dutch Navy and even the Spanish Navy once belonged. Proper German language early maritime history is represented by the Hanseatic League and the Brandenburg Navy, later Prussian Navy.\nThe modern German Navy traces its roots back to the \"Reichsflotte\" (Imperial Fleet) of the revolutionary era of 1848\u201352. The \"Reichsflotte\" was the first German navy to sail under the black-red-gold flag. Founded on 14 June 1848 by the orders of the democratically elected Frankfurt Parliament, the \"Reichsflotte\"'s brief existence ended with the failure of the revolution and it was disbanded on 2 April 1852; thus, the modern day navy celebrates its birthday on 14 June.\nThe small Prussian Navy evolved in 1867 into the North German Federal Navy, which was mainly for coast defence. It became the Imperial German Navy in 1871. From 1919 to 1935, only a small \"Reichsmarine\" was permitted. Under Nazi Germany, it was transformed into the \"Kriegsmarine\", which was disbanded in 1945 after the end of World War II in Europe.\nBetween May 1945 and 1956, the German Mine Sweeping Administration and its successor organizations, made up of former \"Kriegsmarine\" members, became something of a transition stage for the German navy, allowing the future \"Marine\" to draw on recently experienced personnel upon its formation. Also, from 1949 to 1952 the United States Navy maintained the Naval Historical Team in Bremerhaven. This group of former \"Kriegsmarine\" officers acting as historical and tactical consultants to the Americans, was significant in establishing a German element in the NATO senior naval staff. In 1956, with West Germany's accession to NATO, the \"Bundesmarine\" (Federal Navy), as the navy was known colloquially, was formally established. In the same year the East German \"Volkspolizei See\" (literally People's Police Sea) became the \"Volksmarine\" (People's Navy). During the Cold War all of the German Navy's combat vessels were assigned to NATO's Allied Forces Baltic Approaches's naval command NAVBALTAP.\nWith the accession of former East Germany's states to the Federal Republic of Germany in 1990 the \"Volksmarine\" along with the whole National People's Army became part of the \"Bundeswehr\". Since 1995 the name \"German Navy\" is used in international context, while the official name since 1956 remains \"Marine\" without any additions. As of August 2024, the strength of the navy is 15,531 men and women.\nA number of naval forces have operated in different periods. See\nCurrent operations.\nGerman warships permanently participate in all four NATO Maritime Groups. The German Navy is also engaged in operations against international terrorism such as Operation Enduring Freedom and NATO Operation Active Endeavour.\nPresently the largest operation the German Navy is participating in is UNIFIL off the coast of Lebanon. The German contribution to this operation is two frigates, four fast attack craft, and two auxiliary vessels. The naval component of UNIFIL has been under German command.\nThe navy operates a number of development and testing installations as part of an inter-service and international network. Among these is the Centre of Excellence for Operations in Confined and Shallow Waters (COE CSW), an affiliated centre of Allied Command Transformation. The COE CSW was established in April 2007 and officially accredited by NATO on 26 May 2009. It is co-located with the staff of the German Flotilla 1 in Kiel whose Commander is double-hatted as Director, COE CSW.\nEquipment.\nShips and submarines.\nIn total, there are about 65 commissioned ships in the German Navy, including; 11 frigates, 5 corvettes, 2 minesweepers, 10 minehunters, 6 submarines, 11 replenishment ships and 20 miscellaneous auxiliary vessels. The displacement of the navy is 220,000 tonnes.\nShips of the German Navy include:\nIn addition, the German Navy and the Royal Netherlands Navy are in cooperation in the \"Ark Project\". This agreement made the Ark Project responsible for the strategic sealift of German armed forces where the full-time charter of three roll-on-roll-off cargo and troop ships are ready for deployments. In addition, these ships are also kept available for the use of the other European NATO countries. The three vessels have a combined displacement of 60,000 tonnes.\nIncluding these ships, the total ships' displacement available to the \"Deutsche Marine\" is 280,000 tonnes.\nProcurement of joint support ships (either two JSS800 for an amphibious group of 800 soldiers, or three smaller JSS400), was planned during the 1995\u20132010 period but the programme appears now to have been abandoned, not having been mentioned in two recent defence reviews. The larger ships would have been tasked for strategic troop transport and amphibious operations, and were to displace 27,000 to 30,000 tons for 800 soldiers.\nAircraft.\nThe naval air arm of the German Navy is called the \"Marinefliegerkommando\". The \"Marinefliegerkommando\" operates 56 aircraft, in May 2021 it was announced that the German Navy intended to replace the P-3C aircraft with Boeing P-8 Poseidon MPA aircraft through a FMS agreement from 2025 onwards.\nStructure.\nThe German Navy is commanded by the Inspector of the Navy (\"Inspekteur der Marine\") supported by the Navy Command (\"Marinekommando\") in Rostock.\nFuture developments.\nPlanned investments.\nAs of August 2025, Germany plans to invest \u20ac350 billion in new equipment through 2041. These investments come on top of the special fund of \u20ac100 billion. This includes the following estimated budgets:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12961", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12961", "title": "G\u00c9ANT", "text": "European computer network for research and education\nG\u00c9ANT (\"Gigabit European Academic Network\") is the pan-European data network for the research and education community. It interconnects national research and education networks (NRENs) across Europe, enabling collaboration on projects ranging from biological science, to earth observation, to arts and culture. The G\u00c9ANT project combines a high-bandwidth, high-capacity 50,000\u00a0km network with a growing range of services. These allow researchers to collaborate, working together wherever they are located. Services include identity and trust, multi-domain monitoring perfSONAR MDM, dynamic circuits and roaming via the eduroam service.\nTogether with European NRENs, G\u00c9ANT connects 50 million users in over 10,000 institutions. Through links to research networks in other regions (such as Internet2 and ESnet in the US, AfricaConnect in Africa, TEIN in Asia-Pacific and RedCLARA in Latin America), G\u00c9ANT enables collaboration between researchers in over half the world's countries.\nCo-funded by the European Commission and Europe's NRENs, the G\u00c9ANT network was built and is operated by the G\u00c9ANT Association. The G\u00c9ANT project is a collaboration between 38 partners.\nHistory.\nThe G\u00c9ANT project began in November 2000, entered full production operation in December 2001 (fully replacing a network called TEN-155). Originally due to finish in October 2004, it was subsequently extended until April 2005.\nThe second generation network, named G\u00c9ANT2, began in September 2004 and continued through 2009, growing the network to 30 national networks in 34 countries.\nThe next G\u00c9ANT project (GN3) began on 1 April 2009 and continued until April 2013. This was then superseded by the GN3plus project which was scheduled to run for two years. It is funded under the EC's seventh research and development Research Framework Programme (often referred to as FP7).\nThis was followed by the GN4 series of projects (GN4-1, GN4-2, and GN4-3) funded within the seven-year Horizon 2020 Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA). \nThe project is now in its fifth iteration (GN5) funded under the seven-year Horizon Europe FPA. GN5-1 ran from January 2023 to December 2024. GN5-2, the current project, started in January 2025. \nTechnology.\nAs well as providing the high-bandwidth links across Europe, the G\u00c9ANT network also acts as a testbed for new technology.\nIt was the first \"hybrid\" network deployed on an international scale, combining routed IP and switched infrastructure. This enables the network to offer general traffic alongside virtual \"private\" network paths for projects, such as the Large Hadron Collider, which have particular requirements involving dedicated bandwidth, security and flexibility.\nG\u00c9ANT supported native IPv6 since 2002 and multicast IPv6 since 2004. It is involved in network research, in areas such as carrier class network technologies, photonic switching, federated network architectures and virtualisation.\nIn 2013 a substantial network migration program was completed, meaning users could be offered multiple 100\u00a0Gbit/s links, with the core network supporting 500\u00a0Gbit/s and a network design that will support up to 8\u00a0Tbit/s.\nAlready, over 1 petabyte of data is transferred every day via the G\u00c9ANT backbone network.\nParticipants.\nThe G\u00c9ANT project is a collaboration between 50 partners: 37 European NREN, IUCC (representing Israel), NORDUnet (representing the five Nordic countries), and 11 associate members. \nThe full list of NREN project partners is available on the website.\nGlobal links.\nG\u00c9ANT links to research networks in other world regions, including:\nThese links not only help international research collaboration but also aid with projects that deliver societal benefit, such as e-health, telemedicine and weather forecasting/disaster warning systems. Allowing researchers to work within their own countries also stems migration from less developed countries, helping bridge the digital divide.\nExample projects.\nG\u00c9ANT is used by research communities, such as:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12962", "revid": "44342193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12962", "title": "\u0393-Hydroxybutyric acid", "text": "Chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u03b3-Hydroxybutyric acid, also known as \"gamma\"-hydroxybutyric acid, GHB, or 4-hydroxybutanoic acid, is a naturally occurring neurotransmitter and a depressant drug. It is a precursor to GABA, glutamate, and glycine in certain brain areas. It acts on the GHB receptor and is a weak agonist at the GABAB receptor. GHB has been used in medicine as a general anesthetic and as treatment for cataplexy, narcolepsy, and alcoholism. It is also used illicitly for performance enhancement, date rape, and recreation.\nIt is commonly used in the form of a salt, such as sodium \u03b3-hydroxybutyrate (NaGHB, sodium oxybate, or Xyrem) or potassium \u03b3-hydroxybutyrate (KGHB, potassium oxybate). GHB is produced as a result of fermentation, and is found in small quantities in some beers and wines, beef, and small citrus fruits.\nSuccinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency causes GHB to accumulate in the blood.\nIn medicine.\nGHB is used in medicine in the treatment of narcolepsy and, more rarely, alcohol dependence, although its efficacy for that is uncertain. A 2010 Cochrane review concluded that \"GHB appears better than NTX and disulfiram in maintaining abstinence and preventing craving in the medium term (3 to 12 months)\". It is sometimes used off-label for the treatment of fibromyalgia. GHB is the active ingredient of the prescription medication sodium oxybate (Xyrem). Sodium oxybate is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of cataplexy associated with narcolepsy and excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) associated with narcolepsy.\nGHB has been shown to reliably increase slow-wave sleep and decrease the tendency for REM sleep in modified multiple sleep latency tests.\nThe FDA-approved labeling for sodium oxybate suggests no evidence GHB has teratogenic, carcinogenic, or hepatotoxic properties. Its favorable safety profile relative to ethanol may explain why GHB continues to be investigated as a candidate for alcohol substitution.\nThe combination calcium oxybate/magnesium oxybate/potassium oxybate/sodium oxybate is also available as Xywav.\nRecreational use.\nGHB is a central nervous system depressant used as an intoxicant. It has many street names. Its effects are comparable to those of ethanol (alcohol) and MDMA, such as euphoria, disinhibition, enhanced libido and empathogenic states. A review comparing ethanol to GHB concluded that the dangers of the two drugs were similar. At higher doses, GHB may induce nausea, dizziness, drowsiness, agitation, visual disturbances, depressed breathing, amnesia, unconsciousness, and death. One potential cause of death from GHB consumption is polydrug toxicity, as co-administration with other central nervous system (CNS) depressants such as alcohol or benzodiazepines can result in an additive effect (potentiation), as they all bind to gamma-aminobutyric acid (or \"GABA\") receptor sites. The effects of GHB can last from 1.5 to 4\u00a0hours, or longer with large doses. Consuming GHB with alcohol can cause respiratory arrest and vomiting in combination with unarousable sleep, which can lead to death.\nRecreational doses generally provide a feeling of euphoria, and larger doses create deleterious effects such as reduced motor function and drowsiness. The sodium salt of GHB has a salty taste. Other salt forms such as calcium GHB and magnesium GHB have also been reported, but the sodium salt is by far the most common.\nSome prodrugs, such as \u03b3-butyrolactone (GBL), convert to GHB in the stomach and bloodstream. Other prodrugs exist, such as 1,4-butanediol (1,4-B). GBL and 1,4-B are normally found as pure liquids, but they can be mixed with other more harmful solvents when intended for industrial use (e.g. as paint stripper or varnish thinner).\nGHB can be manufactured with little knowledge of chemistry by mixing another drug, GBL, with an alkali hydroxide such as sodium hydroxide, to form the GHB salt. Due to the ease of manufacture and the availability of its precursors, it is not usually produced in illicit laboratories like other synthetic drugs, but in private homes by low-level producers or GBL is simply consumed directly.\nGHB is colourless and odourless.\nParty use.\nGHB has been used as a club drug, apparently starting in the 1990s, as small doses of GHB can act as a euphoriant and are believed to be aphrodisiac. Slang terms for GHB include \"liquid ecstasy\", \"lollipops\", \"liquid X\" or \"liquid E\" due to its tendency to produce euphoria and sociability and its use in the dance party scene.\nSports and athletics.\nSome athletes have been known to use GHB, or its analogs, due to marketing claims that the drug acts as an anabolic agent. However, no such evidence exists to suggest links between the use of GHB and muscle development or performance improvement.\nUsage as a date-rape drug.\nGHB became known to the general public as a date-rape drug by the late 1990s. GHB is colourless and odorless and has been described as \"very easy to add to drinks\". When consumed, the victim will quickly feel groggy and sleepy and may become unconscious. Upon recovery they may have an impaired ability to recall events that have occurred during the period of intoxication. In these situations evidence and the identification of the perpetrator of the rape is often difficult.\nIt is also difficult to establish how often GHB is used to facilitate rape as it is difficult to detect in a urine sample after a day, and many victims may only recall the rape some time after its occurrence; however, a 2006 study suggested that there was \"no evidence to suggest widespread date rape drug use\" in the UK, and that less than 2% of cases involved GHB, while 17% involved cocaine, and a survey in the Netherlands published in 2010 found that the proportion of drug-related rapes where GHB was used appeared to be greatly overestimated by the media. More recently, a study in Western Australia reviewed the pre-hospital context given in medical records around emergency department presentations with analytical confirmation of GHB exposure. This study found that most cases reported daily dosing and subsequent accidental overdose rather than their presentation being associated with date-rape.\nThere have been several high-profile cases of GHB as a date-rape drug that received national attention in the United States. In early 1999, a 15-year-old girl, Samantha Reid of Rockwood, Michigan, died from GHB poisoning. Reid's death inspired the legislation titled the \"Hillory J. Farias and Samantha Reid Date-Rape Drug Prohibition Act of 2000\". This is the law that made GHB a Schedule 1 controlled substance. In the United Kingdom, British serial killer Stephen Port administered GHB to his victims by adding it to drinks given to them, raping them, and murdering four of them in his flat in Barking, East London.\nGHB can be detected in hair. Hair testing can be a useful tool in court cases or for the victim's own information. Most over-the-counter urine test kits test only for date-rape drugs that are benzodiazepines, which GHB is not. To detect GHB in urine, the sample must be taken within four hours of GHB ingestion, and cannot be tested at home.\nAdverse effects.\nCombination with alcohol.\nIn humans, GHB has been shown to reduce the elimination rate (thus increasing the elimination time) of alcohol. This may explain the respiratory arrest that has been reported after ingestion of both drugs. A review of the details of 194 deaths attributed to or related to GHB over a ten-year period found that most were from respiratory depression caused by interaction with alcohol or other drugs.\nDeaths.\nOne publication has investigated 226 deaths attributed to GHB. Of the 226 deaths included, 213 had a cardiorespiratory arrest and 13 had fatal accidents. Seventy-one of these deaths (34%) had no co-intoxicants. Postmortem blood GHB was 18\u20134400\u00a0mg/L (median=347) in deaths negative for co-intoxicants.\nOne report has suggested that sodium oxybate overdose might be fatal, based on deaths of three patients who had been prescribed the drug. However, for two of the three cases, post-mortem GHB concentrations were 141 and 110\u00a0mg/L, which is within the expected range of concentrations for GHB after death, and the third case was a patient with a history of intentional drug overdose. The toxicity of GHB has been an issue in criminal trials, as in the death of Felicia Tang, where the defense argued that death was due to GHB, not murder.\nGHB is produced in the body in very small amounts, and blood levels may climb after death to levels in the range of 30\u201350\u00a0mg/L. Levels higher than this are found in GHB deaths. Levels lower than this may be due to GHB or to postmortem endogenous elevations.\nNeurotoxicity.\nIn multiple studies, GHB has been found to impair spatial memory, working memory, learning and memory in rats with chronic ad\u00admin\u00adis\u00adtra\u00adtion. These effects are associated with decreased NMDA receptor expression in the cerebral cortex and possibly other areas as well. In addition, the neu\u00adro\u00adtox\u00adicity appears to be caused by oxidative stress.\nAddiction.\nAddiction occurs when repeated drug use disrupts the normal balance of brain circuits that control rewards, memory and cognition, ultimately leading to compulsive drug taking.\nRats forced to consume massive doses of GHB will intermittently prefer GHB solution to water.\nWithdrawal.\nGHB has also been associated with a withdrawal syndrome of insomnia, anxiety, and tremor that usually resolves within three to twenty-one days. The withdrawal syndrome can be severe producing acute delirium and may require hospitalization in an intensive care unit for management. Management of GHB dependence involves considering the person's age, comorbidity and the pharmacological pathways of GHB. The mainstay of treatment for severe withdrawal is supportive care and benzodiazepines for control of acute delirium, but larger doses are often required compared to acute delirium of other causes (e.g. &gt; 100\u00a0mg/d of diazepam). Baclofen has been suggested as an alternative or adjunct to benzodiazepines based on anecdotal evidence and some animal data. However, there is less experience with the use of baclofen for GHB withdrawal, and additional research in humans is needed. Baclofen was first suggested as an adjunct because benzodiazepines do not affect GABAB receptors and therefore have no cross-tolerance with GHB while baclofen, which works via GABAB receptors, is cross-tolerant with GHB and may be more effective in alleviating withdrawal effects of GHB.\nGHB withdrawal is not widely discussed in textbooks and some psychiatrists, general practitioners, and even hospital emergency physicians may not be familiar with this withdrawal syndrome.\nOverdose.\nOverdose of GHB can sometimes be difficult to treat because of its multiple effects on the body. GHB tends to cause rapid unconsciousness at doses above 3500\u00a0mg, with single doses over 7000\u00a0mg often causing life-threatening respiratory depression, and higher doses still inducing bradycardia and cardiac arrest. Other side-effects include convulsions (especially when combined with stimulants), and nausea/vomiting (especially when combined with alcohol).\nThe greatest threat to life due to GHB overdose (with or without other substances) is respiratory arrest. Other relatively common causes of death due to GHB ingestion include aspiration of vomitus, positional asphyxia, and trauma sustained while intoxicated (e.g., motor vehicle accidents while driving under the influence of GHB). The risk of aspiration pneumonia and positional asphyxia risk can be reduced by laying the patient down in the recovery position. People are most likely to vomit as they become unconscious, and as they wake up. It is important to keep the victim awake and moving; the victim must not be left alone due to the risk of death through vomiting. Frequently the victim will be in a good mood but this does not mean the victim is not in danger. GHB overdose is a medical emergency and immediate assessment in an emergency department is needed.\nConvulsions from GHB can be treated with the benzodiazepines diazepam or lorazepam. Even though these benzodiazepines are also CNS depressants, they primarily modulate GABAA receptors whereas GHB is primarily a GABAB receptor agonist, and so do not worsen CNS depression as much as might be expected.\nBecause of the faster and more complete absorption of GBL relative to GHB, its dose-response curve is steeper, and overdoses of GBL tend to be more dangerous and problematic than overdoses involving only GHB or 1,4-B. Any GHB/GBL overdose is a medical emergency and should be cared for by appropriately trained personnel.\nA newer synthetic drug, SCH-50911, which acts as a selective GABAB antagonist, quickly reverses GHB overdose in mice. However, this treatment has yet to be tried in humans, and it is unlikely that it will be researched for this purpose in humans due to the illegal nature of clinical trials of GHB and the lack of medical indemnity coverage inherent in using an untested treatment for a life-threatening overdose.\nDetection of use.\nGHB may be quantitated in blood or plasma to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients, to provide evidence in an impaired driving, or to assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Blood or plasma GHB concentrations are usually in a range of 50\u2013250\u00a0mg/L in persons receiving the drug therapeutically (during general anesthesia), 30\u2013100\u00a0mg/L in those arrested for impaired driving, 50\u2013500\u00a0mg/L in acutely intoxicated patients and 100\u20131000\u00a0mg/L in victims of fatal overdosage. Urine is often the preferred specimen for routine drug abuse monitoring purposes. Both \u03b3-butyrolactone (GBL) and 1,4-butanediol are converted to GHB in the body.\nIn January 2016, it was announced scientists had developed a way to detect GHB, among other things, in saliva.\nEndogenous production.\nCells produce GHB by reduction of succinic semialdehyde via succinic semialdehyde reductase (SSR). This enzyme appears to be induced by cAMP levels, meaning substances that elevate cAMP, such as forskolin and vinpocetine, may increase GHB synthesis and release. Conversely, endogeneous GHB production in those taking valproic acid will be inhibited via inhibition of the conversion from succinic acid semialdehyde to GHB. People with the disorder known as succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, also known as \u03b3-hydroxybutyric aciduria, have elevated levels of GHB in their urine, blood plasma and cerebrospinal fluid.\nThe precise function of GHB in the body is not clear. It is known, however, that the brain expresses a large number of receptors that are activated by GHB. These receptors are excitatory, however, and therefore not responsible for the sedative effects of GHB; they have been shown to elevate the principal excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamate. The benzamide antipsychotics\u2014amisulpride, nemonapride, etc.\u2014have been shown to bind to these GHB-activated receptors in vivo. Other antipsychotics were tested and were not found to have an affinity for this receptor.\nGHB is a precursor to GABA, glutamate, and glycine in certain brain areas.\nIn spite of its demonstrated neurotoxicity, (see relevant section, above), GHB has neuroprotective properties, and has been found to protect cells from hypoxia.\nNatural fermentation by-product.\nGHB is also produced as a result of fermentation and so is found in small quantities in some beers and wines, in particular fruit wines. The amount found in wine is pharmacologically insignificant and not sufficient to produce psychoactive effects.\nPharmacology.\nGHB is very similar to the important inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA, with an amino group of GABA being replaced by a hydroxy group. If taken orally, GABA does not effectively cross the blood\u2013brain barrier while GHB does.\nGHB has at least two distinct binding sites in the central nervous system. It acts as an agonist at the excitatory GHB receptor and as a weak agonist at the inhibitory GABAB receptor. GHB is a naturally occurring substance that acts in a similar fashion to some neurotransmitters in the mammalian brain. GHB is probably synthesized from GABA in GABAergic neurons, and released when the neurons fire.\nGHB has been found to activate oxytocinergic neurons in the supraoptic nucleus.\nGHB induces the accumulation of either a derivative of tryptophan or tryptophan itself in the extracellular space, possibly by increasing tryptophan transport across the blood\u2013brain barrier. The blood content of certain neutral amino-acids, including tryptophan, is also increased by peripheral GHB administration. GHB-induced stimulation of tissue serotonin turnover may be due to an increase in tryptophan transport to the brain and in its uptake by serotonergic cells. As the serotonergic system may be involved in the regulation of sleep, mood, and anxiety, the stimulation of this system by high doses of GHB may be involved in certain neuropharmacological events induced by GHB administration.\nHowever, at therapeutic doses, GHB reaches much higher concentrations in the brain and activates GABAB receptors, which are primarily responsible for its sedative effects. GHB's sedative effects are blocked by GABAB antagonists.\nThe role of the GHB receptor in the behavioural effects induced by GHB is more complex. GHB receptors are densely expressed in many areas of the brain, including the cortex and hippocampus, and these are the receptors that GHB displays the highest affinity for. There has been somewhat limited research into the GHB receptor; however, there is evidence that activation of the GHB receptor in some brain areas results in the release of glutamate, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter. Drugs that selectively activate the GHB receptor cause absence seizures in high doses, as do GHB and GABAB agonists.\nActivation of both the GHB receptor and GABAB is responsible for the addictive profile of GHB. GHB's effect on dopamine release is biphasic. Low concentrations stimulate dopamine release via the GHB receptor. Higher concentrations inhibit dopamine release via GABAB receptors as do other GABAB agonists such as baclofen and phenibut. After an initial phase of inhibition, dopamine release is then increased via the GHB receptor. Both the inhibition and increase of dopamine release by GHB are inhibited by opioid antagonists such as naloxone and naltrexone. Dynorphin may play a role in the inhibition of dopamine release via kappa opioid receptors.\nThis explains the paradoxical mix of sedative and stimulatory properties of GHB, as well as the so-called \"rebound\" effect, experienced by individuals using GHB as a sleeping agent, wherein they awake suddenly after several hours of GHB-induced deep sleep. That is to say that, over time, the concentration of GHB in the system decreases below the threshold for significant GABAB receptor activation and activates predominantly the GHB receptor, leading to wakefulness.\nRecently, analogs of GHB, such as 4-hydroxy-4-methylpentanoic acid (UMB68) have been synthesised and tested on animals, in order to gain a better understanding of GHB's mode of action. Analogues of GHB such as 3-methyl-GHB, 4-methyl-GHB, and 4-phenyl-GHB have been shown to produce similar effects to GHB in some animal studies, but these compounds are even less well researched than GHB itself. Of these analogues, only 4-methyl-GHB (\u03b3-hydroxyvaleric acid, GHV) and a prodrug form \u03b3-valerolactone (GVL) have been reported as drugs of abuse in humans, and on the available evidence seem to be less potent but more toxic than GHB, with a particular tendency to cause nausea and vomiting.\nOther prodrug ester forms of GHB have also rarely been encountered by law enforcement, including 1,4-butanediol diacetate (BDDA/DABD), methyl-4-acetoxybutanoate (MAB), and ethyl-4-acetoxybutanoate (EAB), but these are, in general, covered by analogue laws in jurisdictions where GHB is illegal, and little is known about them beyond their delayed onset and longer duration of action. The intermediate compound \u03b3-hydroxybutyraldehyde (GHBAL) is also a prodrug for GHB; however, as with all aliphatic aldehydes this compound is caustic and is strong-smelling and foul-tasting; actual use of this compound as an intoxicant is likely to be unpleasant and result in severe nausea and vomiting.\nOnly a minor portion (1\u20135%) of the administered GHB dose is excreted unchanged in the urine. Studies have shown that the maximum concentration of GHB in urine appears within 1 hour and rapidly declines thereafter. The vast majority (95\u201398%) undergoes extensive metabolism in the liver. GHB is broken down through a series of enzymatic pathways. The primary route involves conversion to succinic semialdehyde (SSA) by either GHB dehydrogenase (ADH) or GHB transhydrogenase. SSA is further oxidized by succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) to succinic acid, which enters the Krebs cycle and is ultimately converted into carbon dioxide and water.\nBoth of the metabolic breakdown pathways shown for GHB can run in either direction, depending on the concentrations of the substances involved, so the body can make its own GHB either from GABA or from succinic semialdehyde. Under normal physiological conditions, the concentration of GHB in the body is rather low, and the pathways would run in the reverse direction to what is shown here to produce endogenous GHB. However, when GHB is consumed for recreational or health promotion purposes, its concentration in the body is much higher than normal, which changes the enzyme kinetics so that these pathways operate to metabolise GHB rather than producing it.\nHistory.\nAlexander Zaytsev worked on this chemical family and published work on it in 1874. The first extended research into GHB and its use in humans was conducted in the early 1960s by Henri Laborit to use in studying the neurotransmitter GABA. It was studied in a range of uses including obstetric surgery and during childbirth and as an anxiolytic; there were anecdotal reports of it having antidepressant and aphrodisiac effects as well. It was also studied as an intravenous anesthetic agent and was marketed for that purpose starting in 1964 in Europe but it was not widely adopted as it caused seizures; as of 2006 that use was still authorized in France and Italy but not widely used. It was also studied to treat alcohol addiction; while the evidence for this use is weak; however, sodium oxybate is marketed for this use in Italy.\nGHB and sodium oxybate were also studied for use in narcolepsy from the 1960s onwards.\nIn May 1990 GHB was introduced as a dietary supplement and was marketed to body builders, for help with weight control and as a sleep aid, and as a \"replacement\" for l-tryptophan, which was removed from the market in November 1989 when batches contaminated with trace impurities were found to cause eosinophilia\u2013myalgia syndrome, although eosinophilia\u2013myalgia syndrome is also tied to tryptophan overload. In 2001 tryptophan supplement sales were allowed to resume, and in 2005 the FDA ban on tryptophan supplement importation was lifted. By November 1989 57 cases of illness caused by the GHB supplements had been reported to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, with people having taken up to three teaspoons of GHB; there were no deaths but nine people needed care in an intensive care unit. The FDA issued a warning in November 1990 that sale of GHB was illegal. GHB continued to be manufactured and sold illegally and it and analogs were adopted as a club drug and came to be used as a date rape drug, and the DEA made seizures and the FDA reissued warnings several times throughout the 1990s.\nAt the same time, research on the use of GHB in the form of sodium oxybate had formalized, as a company called Orphan Medical had filed an investigational new drug application and was running clinical trials with the intention of gaining regulatory approval for use to treat narcolepsy.\nA popular children's toy, Bindeez (also known as Aqua Dots, in the United States), produced by Melbourne company Moose, was banned in Australia in early November 2007 when it was discovered that 1,4-butanediol (1,4-B), which is metabolized into GHB, had been substituted for the non-toxic plasticiser 1,5-pentanediol in the bead manufacturing process. Three young children were hospitalized as a result of ingesting a large number of the beads, and the toy was recalled.\nLegal status.\nIn the United States, GHB was placed on Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act in March 2000. However, used in sodium oxybate under an IND or NDA from the US FDA, it is considered a Schedule III substance but with Schedule I trafficking penalties.\nIn March 2001, the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs placed GHB in Schedule IV of the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances.\nIn the United Kingdom, GHB was made a class C drug in June 2003. In October 2013, the ACMD recommended upgrading it from schedule IV to schedule II in line with UN recommendations. Their report concluded that the minimal use of Xyrem in the UK meant that prescribers would be minimally inconvenienced by the rescheduling. This advice was followed and GHB was moved to schedule 2 on 7 January 2015. In April 2022 GHB was changed from class C to class B.\nIn Hong Kong, GHB is regulated under Schedule 1 of Hong Kong's Chapter 134 \"Dangerous Drugs Ordinance\". It can only be used legally by health professionals and for university research purposes. The substance can be given by pharmacists under a prescription. Anyone who supplies the substance without prescription can be fined HK$10,000. The penalty for trafficking or manufacturing the substance is a HK$150,000 fine and life imprisonment. Possession of the substance for consumption without license from the Department of Health is illegal with a HK$100,000 fine or five years of jail time.\nIn Canada, GHB has been a Schedule I controlled substance since 6 November 2012 (the same schedule that contains heroin and cocaine). Prior to that date, it was a Schedule III controlled substance (the same schedule that contains amphetamines and LSD).\nIn New Zealand and Australia, GHB, 1,4-B, and GBL are all Class B illegal drugs, along with any possible esters, ethers, and aldehydes. GABA itself is also listed as an illegal drug in these jurisdictions, which seems unusual given its failure to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier, but there was a perception among legislators that all known analogues should be covered as far as this was possible. Attempts to circumvent the illegal status of GHB have led to the sale of derivatives such as 4-methyl-GHB (\u03b3-hydroxyvaleric acid, GHV) and its prodrug form \u03b3-valerolactone (GVL), but these are also covered under the law by virtue of their being \"substantially similar\" to GHB or GBL, so importation, sale, possession and use of these compounds is also considered to be illegal.\nIn Chile, GHB is a controlled drug under the law (psychotropic substances and narcotics).\nIn Norway and in Switzerland, GHB is considered a narcotic and is only available by prescription under the trade name Xyrem (Union Chimique Belge S.A.).\nSodium oxybate is also used therapeutically in Italy under the brand name Alcover for treatment of alcohol withdrawal and dependence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12963", "revid": "50877149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12963", "title": "Giordano Bruno", "text": "Italian Dominican friar, philosopher and mathematician (1548\u20131600)\nGiordano Bruno ( , ; ; born Filippo Bruno; January or February 1548 \u2013 17 February 1600) was an Italian philosopher, poet, alchemist, astronomer, cosmological theorist, and esotericist. He is known for his cosmological theories, which conceptually extended to include the then-novel Copernican model. He practised Hermeticism and gave a mystical stance to exploring the universe. He proposed that the stars were distant suns surrounded by their own planets (exoplanets), and he raised the possibility that these planets might foster life of their own, a cosmological position known as cosmic pluralism. He also insisted that the universe is infinite and could have no centre.\nBruno was tried for heresy by the Roman Inquisition on charges of denial of several core Catholic doctrines, including eternal damnation, the Trinity, the deity of Christ, the virginity of Mary, and transubstantiation. Bruno's pantheism was not taken lightly by the church, nor was his teaching of metempsychosis regarding the reincarnation of the soul. The Inquisition found him guilty, and he was burned at the stake in Rome's Campo de' Fiori in 1600. After his death, he gained considerable fame, being particularly celebrated by 19th- and early 20th-century commentators who regarded him as a martyr for science. Some historians are of the opinion his heresy trial was not a response to his cosmological views but rather a response to his religious and afterlife views, while others find the main reason for Bruno's death was indeed his cosmological views. Bruno's case is still considered a landmark in the history of free thought and the emerging sciences.\nIn addition to cosmology, Bruno also wrote extensively on the art of memory, a loosely organised group of mnemonic techniques and principles. Historian Frances Yates argues that Bruno was deeply influenced by the presocratic Empedocles, Neoplatonism, Renaissance Hermeticism, and Book of Genesis\u2013like legends surrounding the Hellenistic conception of Hermes Trismegistus. Other studies of Bruno have focused on his qualitative approach to mathematics and his application of the spatial concepts of geometry to language.\nLife.\nEarly years, 1548\u20131576.\nBorn Filippo Bruno in Nola (a \"comune\" in the modern-day province of Naples, in the Southern Italian region of Campania, then part of the Kingdom of Naples) in 1548, he was the son of Giovanni Bruno (1517 \u2013 c. 1592), a soldier, and Fraulissa Savolino (1520\u2013?). In his youth, he was sent to Naples to be educated. He was tutored privately at the Augustinian monastery there, and attended public lectures at the Studium Generale. At the age of 17, he entered the Dominican Order at the monastery of San Domenico Maggiore in Naples, taking the name Giordano, after Giordano Crispo, his metaphysics tutor. He continued his studies there, completing his novitiate, and ordained a priest in 1572 at age 24. During his time in Naples, he became known for his skill with the art of memory and on one occasion travelled to Rome to demonstrate his mnemonic system before Pope Pius V and Cardinal Rebiba. In his later years, Bruno claimed that the Pope accepted his dedication to him of the lost work \"On The Ark of Noah\" at this time.\nWhile Bruno was distinguished for outstanding ability, his taste for free thinking and forbidden books soon caused him difficulties. Given the controversy he caused in later life, it is surprising that he was able to remain within the monastic system for eleven years. In his testimony to Venetian inquisitors during his trial many years later, he says that proceedings were twice taken against him for having cast away images of the saints, retaining only a crucifix, and for having recommended controversial texts to a novice. Such behavior could perhaps be overlooked, but Bruno's situation became much more serious when he was reported to have defended the Arian heresy, and when a copy of the banned writings of Erasmus, annotated by him, was discovered hidden in the monastery latrine. When he learned that an indictment was being prepared against him in Naples he fled, shedding his religious habit, at least for a time.\nFirst years of wandering, 1576\u20131583.\nBruno first went to the Genoese port of Noli, then to Savona, Turin and finally to Venice, where he published his lost work \"On the Signs of the Times\" with the permission (so he claimed at his trial) of the Dominican Remigio Nannini Fiorentino. From Venice, he went to Padua, where he met fellow Dominicans who convinced him to wear his religious habit again. From Padua, he went to Bergamo and then across the Alps to Chamb\u00e9ry and Lyon. His movements after this time are obscure.\nIn 1579, Bruno arrived in Geneva. During his Venetian trial, he told inquisitors that while in Geneva, he told the Marchese de Vico of Naples, who was notable for helping Italian refugees in Geneva, \"I did not intend to adopt the religion of the city. I desired to stay there only that I might live at liberty and in security.\" Bruno had a pair of breeches made for himself, and the Marchese and others apparently made Bruno a gift of a sword, hat, cape and other necessities for dressing himself; in such clothing, Bruno could no longer be recognised as a priest. Things apparently went well for Bruno for a time, as he entered his name in the Rector's Book of the University of Geneva in May 1579. But in keeping with his personality, he could not long remain silent. In August, he published an attack on the work of Antoine de La Faye, a distinguished professor. Bruno and the printer, Jean Bergeon, were promptly arrested. Rather than apologising, Bruno insisted on continuing to defend his publication. He was refused the right to take sacrament. Though this right was soon restored, he left Geneva.\nHe went to France, arriving first in Lyon, and thereafter settling for a time (1580\u20131581) in Toulouse, where he took his doctorate in theology and was elected by students to lecture in philosophy. He also attempted at this time to return to Catholicism, but was denied absolution by the Jesuit priest he approached. When religious strife broke out in the summer of 1581, he moved to Paris. There he held a cycle of thirty lectures on theological topics and also began to gain fame for his prodigious memory. His talents attracted the benevolent attention of the king Henry III; Bruno subsequently reported: \"I got me such a name that King Henry III summoned me one day to discover from me if the memory which I possessed was natural or acquired by magic art. I satisfied him that it did not come from sorcery but from organised knowledge; and, following this, I got a book on memory printed, entitled \"The Shadows of Ideas\", which I dedicated to His Majesty. Forthwith he gave me an Extraordinary Lectureship with a salary.\"\nIn Paris, Bruno enjoyed the protection of his powerful French patrons. During this period, he published several works on mnemonics, including \"De umbris idearum\" (\"On the Shadows of Ideas\", 1582), \"Ars memoriae\u200a\" (\"The Art of Memory\", 1582), and \"Cantus Circaeus\u200a\" (\"Circe's Song\", 1582; described at ). All of these were based on his mnemonic models of organised knowledge and experience, as opposed to the simplistic logic-based mnemonic techniques of Petrus Ramus then popular. Bruno also published a comedy summarising some of his philosophical positions, titled \"Il Candelaio\" (\"The Candlemaker\", 1582). In the 16th century, dedications were, as a rule, approved beforehand, and hence were a way of placing a work under the protection of an individual. Given that Bruno dedicated various works to the likes of King Henry III, Sir Philip Sidney, Michel de Castelnau (French Ambassador to England), and possibly Pope Pius V, it is apparent that this wanderer had risen sharply in status and moved in powerful circles.\nEngland, 1583\u20131585.\nIn April 1583, Bruno went to England with letters of recommendation from Henry III as a guest of the French ambassador, Michel de Castelnau. Bruno lived at the French embassy with the lexicographer John Florio. There he became acquainted with the poet Philip Sidney (to whom he dedicated two books) and other members of the Hermetic circle around John Dee, though there is no evidence that Bruno ever met Dee himself. He also lectured at Oxford, and unsuccessfully sought a teaching position there. His views were controversial, notably with John Underhill, Rector of Lincoln College and subsequently bishop of Oxford, and George Abbot, who later became Archbishop of Canterbury. Abbot mocked Bruno for supporting \"the opinion of Copernicus that the earth did go round, and the heavens did stand still; whereas in truth it was his own head which rather did run round, and his brains did not stand still\", and found Bruno had both plagiarized and misrepresented Ficino's work, leading Bruno to return to the continent.\nNevertheless, his stay in England was fruitful. During that time Bruno completed and published some of his most important works, the six \"Italian Dialogues\", including the cosmological tracts \"La cena de le ceneri\" (\"The Ash Wednesday Supper\", 1584), \"De la causa, principio et uno\" (\"On Cause, Principle and Unity\", 1584), \"De l'infinito, universo et mondi\" (\"On the Infinite, Universe and Worlds\", 1584) as well as \"Lo spaccio de la bestia trionfante\" (\"The Expulsion of the Triumphant Beast\", 1584) and \"De gli eroici furori\" (\"On the Heroic Frenzies\", 1585). Some of these were printed by John Charlewood. Some of the works that Bruno published in London, notably \"The Ash Wednesday Supper\", appear to have given offence. Once again, Bruno's controversial views and tactless language lost him the support of his friends. John Bossy has advanced the theory that, while staying in the French Embassy in London, Bruno was also spying on Catholic conspirators, under the pseudonym \"Henry Fagot\", for Sir Francis Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's Secretary of State.\nBruno is sometimes cited as being the first to propose that the universe is infinite, which he did during his time in England, but an English scientist, Thomas Digges, put forth this idea in a published work in 1576, some eight years earlier than Bruno. An infinite universe and the possibility of alien life had also been earlier suggested by German Catholic Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa in \"On Learned Ignorance\" published in 1440 and Bruno attributed his understanding of multiple worlds to this earlier scholar, who he called \"the divine Cusanus\".\nLast years of wandering, 1585\u20131592.\nIn October 1585, Castelnau was recalled to France, and Bruno went with him. In Paris, Bruno found a tense political situation. Moreover, his 120 theses against Aristotelian natural science soon put him in ill favour. In 1586, following a violent quarrel over these theses, he left France for Germany.\nIn Germany, he failed to obtain a teaching position at Marburg, but was granted permission to teach at Wittenberg, where he lectured on Aristotle for two years. However, with a change of intellectual climate there, he was no longer welcome, and went in 1588 to Prague, where he obtained 300 taler from Rudolf II, but no teaching position. He went on to serve briefly as a professor in Helmstedt, but had to flee again in 1590 when he was excommunicated by the Lutherans.\nDuring this period, he produced several Latin works, dictated to his friend and secretary Girolamo Besler, including \"De Magia\" (\"On Magic\"), \"Theses De Magia\" (\"Theses on Magic\") and \"De Vinculis in Genere\" (\"A General Account of Bonding\"). All these were apparently transcribed or recorded by Besler (or Bisler) between 1589 and 1590. He also published \"De Imaginum, Signorum, Et Idearum Compositione\" (\"On the Composition of Images, Signs and Ideas\", 1591).\nIn 1591 he was in Frankfurt, where he received an invitation from the Venetian patrician Giovanni Mocenigo, who wished to be instructed in the art of memory, and also heard of a vacant chair in mathematics at the University of Padua. At the time, the Inquisition seemed to be losing some of its strictness, and because the Republic of Venice was the most liberal state in the Italian Peninsula, Bruno was lulled into making the fatal mistake of returning to Italy.\nHe went first to Padua, where he taught briefly, and applied unsuccessfully for the chair of mathematics, which was given instead to Galileo Galilei one year later. Bruno accepted Mocenigo's invitation and moved to Venice in March 1592. For about two months, he served as an in-house tutor to Mocenigo, to whom he let slip some of his heterodox ideas. Mocenigo denounced him to the Venetian Inquisition, which had Bruno arrested on 22 May 1592. Among the numerous charges of blasphemy and heresy brought against him in Venice, based on Mocenigo's denunciation, was his belief in the plurality of worlds, as well as accusations of personal misconduct. Bruno defended himself skillfully, stressing the philosophical character of some of his positions, denying others and admitting that he had had doubts on some matters of dogma. The Roman Inquisition, however, asked for his transfer to Rome. After several months of argument, the Venetian authorities reluctantly consented, and Bruno was sent to Rome in January 1593.\nImprisonment, trial and execution, 1593\u20131600.\nDuring the seven years of his trial in Rome, Bruno was held in confinement, lastly in the Tower of Nona. Some important documents about the trial are lost, but others have been preserved, among them a summary of the proceedings that was rediscovered in 1940. The numerous charges against Bruno, based on some of his books as well as on witness accounts, included blasphemy, immoral conduct, and heresy in matters of dogmatic theology, and involved some of the basic doctrines of his philosophy and cosmology. Luigi Firpo speculates the charges made against Bruno by the Roman Inquisition were:\nBruno defended himself as he had in Venice, insisting that he accepted the Church's dogmatic teachings, but trying to preserve the basis of his cosmological views. In particular, he held firm to his belief in the plurality of worlds, although he was admonished to abandon it. His trial was overseen by the Inquisitor Cardinal Bellarmine, who demanded a full recantation, which Bruno eventually refused. On 20 January 1600, Pope Clement VIII declared Bruno a heretic, and the Inquisition issued a sentence of death. According to the correspondence of Gaspar Schopp of Breslau, he is said to have made a threatening gesture towards his judges and to have replied: \"Maiori forsan cum timore sententiam in me fertis quam ego accipiam\" (\"Perhaps you pronounce this sentence against me with greater fear than I receive it\").\nHe was turned over to the secular authorities. On 17 February 1600, in the Campo de' Fiori (a central Roman market square), naked, with his \"tongue imprisoned because of his wicked words\", he was burned alive at the stake. His ashes were thrown into the Tiber river.\nAll of Bruno's works were placed on the \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\" in 1603. The inquisition cardinals who judged Giordano Bruno were Cardinal Bellarmino (Bellarmine), Cardinal Madruzzo (Madruzzi), Camillo Cardinal Borghese (later Pope Paul V), Domenico Cardinal Pinelli, Pompeio Cardinal Arrigoni, Cardinal Sfondrati, Pedro Cardinal De Deza Manuel and Cardinal Santorio (Archbishop of Santa Severina, Cardinal-Bishop of Palestrina).\nThe measures taken to prevent Bruno from continuing to speak have resulted in his becoming a symbol for free thought and free speech in present-day Rome, where an annual memorial service takes place close to the spot where he was executed.\nPhysical appearance.\nThe earliest likeness of Bruno is an engraving published in 1715 and cited by Salvestrini as \"the only known portrait of Bruno\". Salvestrini suggests that it is a re-engraving made from a now lost original. This engraving has provided the source for later images.\nThe records of Bruno's imprisonment by the Venetian Inquisition in May 1592 describe him as a man \"of average height, with a hazel-coloured beard and the appearance of being about forty years of age\". Alternately, a passage in a work by George Abbot indicates that Bruno was of diminutive stature: \"When that Italian Didapper, who intituled himself Philotheus Iordanus Brunus Nolanus, magis elaboratae Theologiae Doctor, &amp;c. with a name longer than his body...\".\nCosmology.\nContemporary cosmological beliefs.\nIn the first half of the 15th century, Nicholas of Cusa challenged the then widely accepted philosophies of Aristotelianism, envisioning instead an infinite universe whose centre was everywhere and circumference nowhere, and moreover teeming with countless stars. He also predicted that neither were the rotational orbits circular nor were their movements uniform.\nIn the second half of the 16th century, the theories of Copernicus (1473\u20131543) began to diffuse through Europe. Copernicus conserved the idea of planets fixed to solid spheres, but considered the apparent motion of the stars to be an illusion caused by the rotation of the Earth on its axis; he also preserved the notion of an immobile centre, but it was the Sun rather than the Earth. Copernicus also argued that the Earth was a planet orbiting the Sun once every year. However, he maintained the Ptolemaic hypothesis that the orbits of the planets were composed of perfect circles\u2014deferents and epicycles\u2014and that the stars were fixed on a stationary outer sphere.\nDespite the widespread publication of Copernicus' work \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\", during Bruno's time most educated Catholics subscribed to the Aristotelian geocentric view that the Earth was the center of the universe, and that all heavenly bodies revolved around it. The ultimate limit of the universe was the \"primum mobile\", whose diurnal rotation was conferred upon it by a transcendental God, not part of the universe (although, as the kingdom of heaven, adjacent to it), a motionless prime mover and first cause. The fixed stars were part of this celestial sphere, all at the same fixed distance from the immobile Earth at the centre of the sphere. Ptolemy had numbered these at 1,022, grouped into 48 constellations. The planets were each fixed to a transparent sphere.\nFew astronomers of Bruno's time accepted Copernicus's heliocentric model. Among those who did were the Germans Michael Maestlin (1550\u20131631), Christoph Rothmann, Johannes Kepler (1571\u20131630); the Englishman Thomas Digges (c. 1546\u20131595), author of \"A Perfit Description of the Caelestial Orbes\"; and the Italian Galileo Galilei (1564\u20131642).\nCosmological claims.\nIn 1584, Bruno published two important philosophical dialogues (\"La Cena de le Ceneri\" and \"De l'infinito universo et mondi\") in which he argued against the planetary spheres (Christoph Rothmann did the same in 1586 as did Tycho Brahe in 1587) and affirmed the Copernican principle.\nIn particular, to support the Copernican view and oppose the objection according to which the motion of the Earth would be perceived by means of the motion of winds, clouds etc., in \"La Cena de le Ceneri\" Bruno anticipates some of the arguments of Galilei on the relativity principle. Note that he also uses the example now known as Galileo's ship.\nTheophilus \u2013 [...] air through which the clouds and winds move are parts of the Earth, [...] to mean under the name of Earth the whole machinery and the entire animated part, which consists of dissimilar parts; so that the rivers, the rocks, the seas, the whole vaporous and turbulent air, which is enclosed within the highest mountains, should belong to the Earth as its members, just as the air [does] in the lungs and in other cavities of animals by which they breathe, widen their arteries, and other similar effects necessary for life are performed. The clouds, too, move through accidents in the body of the Earth and are in its bowels as are the waters. [...] With the Earth move [...] all things that are on the Earth. If, therefore, from a point outside the Earth something were thrown upon the Earth, it would lose, because of the latter's motion, its straightness as would be seen on the ship [...] moving along a river, if someone on point C of the riverbank were to throw a stone along a straight line, and would see the stone miss its target by the amount of the velocity of the ship's motion. But if someone were placed high on the mast of that ship, move as it may however fast, he would not miss his target at all, so that the stone or some other heavy thing thrown downward would not come along a straight line from the point E which is at the top of the mast, or cage, to the point D which is at the bottom of the mast, or at some point in the bowels and body of the ship. Thus, if from the point D to the point E someone who is inside the ship would throw a stone straight up, it would return to the bottom along the same line however far the ship moved, provided it was not subject to any pitch and roll.\"\nBruno's infinite universe was filled with a substance\u2014a \"pure air\", aether, or \"spiritus\"\u2014that offered no resistance to the heavenly bodies which, in Bruno's view, rather than being fixed, moved under their own impetus (momentum). Most dramatically, he completely abandoned the idea of a hierarchical universe.\nThe universe is then one, infinite, immobile... It is not capable of comprehension and therefore is endless and limitless, and to that extent infinite and indeterminable, and consequently immobile.\nBruno's cosmology distinguishes between \"suns\" which produce their own light and heat, and have other bodies moving around them; and \"earths\" which move around suns and receive light and heat from them. Bruno suggested that some, if not all, of the objects classically known as fixed stars are in fact suns. According to astrophysicist Steven Soter, he was the first person to grasp that \"stars are other suns with their own planets\".\nBruno wrote that other worlds \"have no less virtue nor a nature different from that of our Earth\" and, like Earth, \"contain animals and inhabitants\".\nDuring the late 16th century and throughout the 17th century, Bruno's ideas were held up for ridicule, debate, or inspiration. Margaret Cavendish, for example, wrote an entire series of poems against \"atoms\" and \"infinite worlds\" in \"Poems and Fancies\" in 1664. Bruno's true, if partial, vindication would have to wait for the implications and impact of Newtonian cosmology.\nBruno's overall contribution to the birth of modern science is still controversial. Some scholars follow Frances Yates in stressing the importance of Bruno's ideas about the universe being infinite and lacking a geocentric structure as a crucial crossing point between the old and the new. Others see in Bruno's idea of multiple worlds instantiating the infinite possibilities of a pristine, indivisible One, a forerunner of Everett's many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics.\nWhile many academics note Bruno's theological position as pantheism, several have described it as pandeism, and some also as panentheism. Physicist and philosopher Max Bernhard Weinstein in his \"Welt- und Lebensanschauungen, Hervorgegangen aus Religion, Philosophie und Naturerkenntnis\" (\"World and Life Views, Emerging From Religion, Philosophy and Nature\"), wrote that the theological model of pandeism was strongly expressed in the teachings of Bruno, especially with respect to the vision of a deity for which \"the concept of God is not separated from that of the universe\". However, Otto Kern takes exception to what he considers Weinstein's overbroad assertions that Bruno, as well as other historical philosophers such as John Scotus Eriugena, Nicholas of Cusa, Mendelssohn, and Lessing, were pandeists or leaned towards pandeism. \"Discover\" editor Corey S. Powell also described Bruno's cosmology as pandeistic, writing that it was \"a tool for advancing an animist or Pandeist theology\", and this assessment of Bruno as a pandeist was agreed with by science writer Michael Newton Keas, and \"The Daily Beast\" writer David Sessions.\nRetrospective views.\nLate Vatican position.\nThe Vatican has published a few official statements about Bruno's trial and execution. In 1942, Cardinal Giovanni Mercati, who discovered a number of lost documents relating to Bruno's trial, stated that the Church was perfectly justified in condemning him. On the 400th anniversary of Bruno's death, in 2000, Cardinal Angelo Sodano declared Bruno's death to be a \"sad episode\" but, despite his regret, he defended Bruno's prosecutors, maintaining that the Inquisitors \"had the desire to serve freedom and promote the common good and did everything possible to save his life\". In the same year, Pope John Paul II made a general apology for \"the use of violence that some have committed in the service of truth\".\nA martyr of science.\nSome authors have characterised Bruno as a \"martyr of science\", suggesting parallels with the Galileo affair which began around 1610. \"It should not be supposed,\" writes A. M. Paterson of Bruno and his \"heliocentric solar system\", that he \"reached his conclusions via some mystical revelation\u00a0... His work is an essential part of the scientific and philosophical developments that he initiated.\" Paterson echoes Hegel in writing that Bruno \"ushers in a modern theory of knowledge that understands all natural things in the universe to be known by the human mind through the mind's dialectical structure\".\nIngegno writes that Bruno embraced the philosophy of Lucretius, \"aimed at liberating man from the fear of death and the gods\". Characters in Bruno's \"Cause, Principle and Unity\" desire \"to improve speculative science and knowledge of natural things,\" and to achieve a philosophy \"which brings about the perfection of the human intellect most easily and eminently, and most closely corresponds to the truth of nature\".\nOther scholars oppose such views, and claim Bruno's martyrdom to science to be exaggerated or outright false. For Yates, while \"nineteenth century liberals\" were thrown \"into ecstasies\" over Bruno's Copernicanism, \"Bruno pushes Copernicus' scientific work back into a prescientific stage, back into Hermeticism, interpreting the Copernican diagram as a hieroglyph of divine mysteries.\"\nAccording to historian Mordechai Feingold, \"Both admirers and critics of Giordano Bruno basically agree that he was pompous and arrogant, highly valuing his opinions and showing little patience with anyone who even mildly disagreed with him.\" Discussing Bruno's experience of rejection when he visited Oxford University, Feingold suggests that \"it might have been Bruno's manner, his language and his self-assertiveness, rather than his ideas\" that caused offence.\nTheological heresy.\nIn his \"Lectures on the History of Philosophy\", Hegel writes that Bruno's life represented \"a bold rejection of all Catholic beliefs resting on mere authority\".\nAlfonso Ingegno states that Bruno's philosophy \"challenges the developments of the Reformation, calls into question the truth-value of the whole of Christianity, and claims that Christ perpetrated a deceit on mankind\u00a0... Bruno suggests that we can now recognize the universal law which controls the perpetual becoming of all things in an infinite universe.\" A. M. Paterson says that, while we no longer have a copy of the official papal condemnation of Bruno, his heresies included \"the doctrine of the infinite universe and the innumerable worlds\" and his beliefs \"on the movement of the earth\".\nMichael White notes that the Inquisition may have pursued Bruno early in his life on the basis of his opposition to Aristotle, interest in Arianism, reading of Erasmus, and possession of banned texts. White considers that Bruno's later heresy was \"multifaceted\" and may have rested on his conception of infinite worlds. \"This was perhaps the most dangerous notion of all\u00a0... If other worlds existed with intelligent beings living there, did they, too, have their visitations? The idea was quite unthinkable.\"\nFrances Yates rejects what she describes as the \"legend that Bruno was prosecuted as a philosophical thinker, was burned for his daring views on innumerable worlds or on the movement of the earth.\" Yates, however, writes that \"the Church was\u00a0... perfectly within its rights if it included philosophical points in its condemnation of Bruno's heresies\" because \"the philosophical points were quite inseparable from the heresies\".\nAccording to the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", \"in 1600 there was no official Catholic position on the Copernican system, and it was certainly not a heresy. When [...] Bruno [...] was burned at the stake as a heretic, it had nothing to do with his writings in support of Copernican cosmology.\"\nThe website of the Vatican Apostolic Archive, discussing a summary of legal proceedings against Bruno in Rome, states:\nIn the same rooms where Giordano Bruno was questioned, for the same important reasons of the relationship between science and faith, at the dawning of the new astronomy and at the decline of Aristotle's philosophy, sixteen years later, Cardinal Bellarmino, who then contested Bruno's heretical theses, summoned Galileo Galilei, who also faced a famous inquisitorial trial, which, luckily for him, ended with a simple abjuration.\nGalileo ultimately recanted his views and agreed to house arrest and was spared from being burned at the stake, while Bruno held his positions until death. The concepts of exoplanets, the idea that the shape of the universe goes on infinitely, and the Solar System holding no cosmic importance or center, would later become major concepts in the field of cosmology, as well as philosophy.\nCultural legacy.\nIn art.\nFollowing the 1870 Capture of Rome by the newly created Kingdom of Italy and the end of the Church's temporal power over the city, the erection of a monument to Bruno on the site of his execution became feasible. The monument was sharply opposed by the clerical party, but was finally erected by the Rome Municipality and inaugurated in 1889. The statue depicts a robed and hooded monk in mid-stride, a book held in his right hand against his left thigh. The inscription below reads:\nIX GIVGNO MDCCCLXXXIX\nA BRVNO\nIL SECOLO DA LVI DIVINATO\nQVI\nDOVE IL ROGO ARSE\n9 June 1889\nTo Bruno\nFrom the age he divined\nHere\nWhere the pyre burned\nA statue of a stretched human figure standing on its head, designed by Alexander Polzin and depicting Bruno's death at the stake, was placed in Potsdamer Platz station in Berlin on 2 March 2008.\nRetrospective iconography of Bruno shows him with a Dominican cowl but not tonsured. Edward Gosselin has suggested that it is likely Bruno kept his tonsure at least until 1579, and it is possible that he wore it again thereafter.\nAn idealised animated version of Bruno appears in the first episode of the 2014 television series \"\". In this depiction, Bruno is shown with a more modern look, without tonsure and wearing clerical robes and without his hood. \"Cosmos\" presents Bruno as an impoverished philosopher who was ultimately executed due to his refusal to recant his belief in other worlds, a portrayal that was criticised by some as simplistic or historically inaccurate. Corey S. Powell, of \"Discover\" magazine, says of Bruno, \"A major reason he moved around so much is that he was argumentative, sarcastic, and drawn to controversy\u00a0... He was a brilliant, complicated, difficult man.\nIn poetry.\nPoems that refer to Bruno include:\nIn fiction.\nBruno and his theory of \"the coincidence of contraries\" (\"coincidentia oppositorum\") play an important role in James Joyce's 1939 novel \"Finnegans Wake\". Joyce wrote in a letter to his patroness, Harriet Shaw Weaver, \"His philosophy is a kind of dualism \u2013 every power in nature must evolve an opposite in order to realise itself and opposition brings reunion\". Amongst his numerous allusions to Bruno in his novel, including his trial and torture, Joyce plays upon Bruno's notion of \"coincidentia oppositorum\" through applying his name to word puns such as \"Browne and Nolan\" (the name of Dublin printers) and '\"brownesberrow in nolandsland\".\nIn 1973 the biographical drama \"Giordano Bruno\" was released, an Italian/French movie directed by Giuliano Montaldo, starring Gian Maria Volont\u00e9 as Bruno.\nBruno is a major character in the four-novel Aegypt sequence (1987\u20132007) by John Crowley. Historical episodes from Bruno's life are fictionalised in the novels, and his philosophical ideas are key to the novels\u2019 themes.\n\"The Last Confession\" (2000) by Morris West is an unfinished, posthumously published fictional autobiography of Bruno, ostensibly written shortly before Bruno's execution.\nIn the 2008 novel \"Children of God\" by Mary Doria Russell, several characters travel on an interstellar spaceship named \"Giordano Bruno\".\nBruno features as the hero of the \"Giordano Bruno\" series (2010\u20132023) of historical crime novels by S. J. Parris (a pseudonym of Stephanie Merritt).\nIn music.\nHans Werner Henze set his large scale cantata for orchestra, choir and four soloists, \"Novae de infinito laudes\" to Italian texts by Bruno, recorded in 1972 at the Salzburg Festival reissued on CD Orfeo C609 031B.\nThe Italian composer Francesco Filidei wrote an opera, based on a libretto by Stefano Busellato, titled \"Giordano Bruno\". The premiere took place on 12 September 2015 at the Casa da M\u00fasica in Porto, Portugal.\nThe 2016 song \"Roman Sky\" by heavy metal band Avenged Sevenfold focuses on the death of Bruno.\nBruno is the central character in Roger Doyle's \"Heresy \u2013 an electronic opera\" (2017).\nIn television.\nChumlee tracking down a first edition copy of a book by Bruno in Rome is a part of a season 17 episode of the American TV series \"Pawn Stars\".\nThe \"Doctor Who\" serial \"The Ribos Operation\" (1978) features a character named \"Binro the Heretic\", who was ostracised by his people for claiming the stars were not ice crystals, but other suns. The BBC has explicitly drawn a connection between the two.\nLegacy.\nGiordano Bruno Foundation.\nThe Giordano Bruno Foundation (German: Giordano-Bruno-Stiftung) is a non-profit foundation based in Germany that pursues the \"Support of Evolutionary Humanism\". It was founded by entrepreneur Herbert Steffen in 2004. The Giordano Bruno Foundation is critical of religious fundamentalism and nationalism.\nGiordano Bruno Memorial Award.\nThe SETI League makes an annual award honouring the memory of Giordano Bruno to a deserving person or persons who have made a significant contribution to the practice of SETI (the search for extraterrestrial intelligence). The award was proposed by sociologist Donald Tarter in 1995 on the 395th anniversary of Bruno's death. The trophy presented is called a Bruno.\nAstronomical objects named after Bruno.\nThe 22\u00a0km impact crater Giordano Bruno on the far side of the Moon is named in his honor, as are the main belt Asteroids 5148 Giordano and 13223 Cenaceneri; the latter is named after his philosophical dialogue \"La Cena de le Ceneri\" (\"The Ash Wednesday Supper\") (see above).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12964", "revid": "51049165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12964", "title": "Geddy Lee", "text": "Canadian musician (born 1953)\nGeddy Lee Weinrib (; born Gary Lee Weinrib, July 29, 1953) is a Canadian musician, best known as the lead vocalist, bassist, and keyboardist for the rock band Rush. Lee joined the band in September 1968 at the request of his childhood friend Alex Lifeson, replacing original bassist and frontman Jeff Jones. Along with Lifeson, Lee is one of the only two members to appear on every Rush album, and he remained in the band until its hiatus, which lasted from 2015 to 2025. Lee's solo effort, \"My Favourite Headache\", was released in 2000.\nLee's style, technique, and skill on the bass have inspired many rock musicians such as Cliff Burton of Metallica; Steve Harris of Iron Maiden; John Myung of Dream Theater; Les Claypool of Primus; Steve Di Giorgio of Sadus, Death and Testament; and Tim Commerford of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave. Along with his Rush bandmates \u2013 guitarist Alex Lifeson and drummer Neil Peart \u2013 Lee was made an Officer of the Order of Canada on May 9, 1996. The trio was the first rock band to receive this honor. In 2013, the group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame after 14 years of eligibility. In 2006, Lee was ranked 13th by \"Hit Parader\" on their list of the 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Vocalists of All Time. In 2020, Rolling Stone ranked Lee 24th on their list of the 50 greatest bassists of all time\nEarly life.\nHe was born Gary Lee Weinrib on July 29, 1953, in Willowdale, Toronto, to Morris Weinrib (born Moshe Meir Weinrib; 1920\u20131965) from Ostrowiec \u015awi\u0119tokrzyski, Poland; and Mary \"Manya\" Rubinstein (born Malka Rubinstein; 1925\u20132021), who was also from Poland: born in Warsaw and later raised in . His parents were Jewish Holocaust survivors from Poland who had survived the ghetto in Starachowice (where they met), followed by their imprisonments at Auschwitz and later Dachau and Bergen-Belsen concentration camps during the Holocaust and World War II. They were in their teens when they were initially imprisoned at Auschwitz. \"It was kind of surreal pre-teen shit\", says Lee, describing how his father bribed guards to bring shoes to his mother. After a period, his mother was transferred to Bergen-Belsen and his father to Dachau. When the war ended four years later, and the Allies liberated the camps, Morris set out in search of Manya and found her at a Bergen-Belsen displaced persons camp. They married there and eventually immigrated to Canada.\nWhen Lee started school, his name was incorrectly registered. As a result, Lee grew up thinking his middle name was \"Lorne\". As a teenager, he saw a copy of his birth certificate and discovered that his middle name was \"Lee\".\nLee's father died young, which forced Lee's mother to work to support their three children by running the Newmarket, Ontario, variety store that her husband had owned and managed. Lee has suggested that his father's death was probably a factor in his becoming a musician: \"It was a terrible blow that I lost him, but the course of my life changed because my mother couldn't control us.\" He has said that losing his father at such an early age made him aware of how \"quickly life can disappear\", which inspired him from then on to get the most out of his life and music.\nLee turned his basement into practice space for a band he formed with high school friends. After the band began earning income from small performances at high school shows or other events, he decided to drop out of high school and play rock and roll professionally. His mother was devastated when he gave her the news. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All the shit I put her through, on top of the fact that she just lost her husband. I felt like I had to make sure that it was worth it. I wanted to show her that I was a professional, that I was working hard, and wasn't just a fuckin' lunatic.\n\"Jweekly\" featured Lee's reflections on his mother's experiences as a refugee and on his own Jewish heritage. Lee's name, \"Geddy\", was derived from his mother's Polish-accented pronunciation of his given first name, \"Gary\". This was picked up by his friends in school, leading Lee to adopt it as his stage name (excising his surname, leaving his middle name as his surname) and later his legal name, Geddy Lee Weinrib10:58 (replacing his first name).\nAfter Rush had become a widely recognized rock group, Lee told the group's drummer and lyricist, Neil Peart, about his mother's early life. Peart then wrote the lyrics to \"Red Sector A\", which was inspired by her ordeal. The song, for which Lee wrote the music, was released on the band's 1984 album \"Grace Under Pressure\". The lyrics include the following verse:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMusic career.\nEarly years.\nLee began playing music in school when he was 10 or 11 and received his first acoustic guitar at 14. In school, he first played drums, trumpet and clarinet. However, learning to play instruments in school was not satisfying to Lee, and he took basic piano lessons independently. His interest increased dramatically after listening to some of the popular rock groups at the time. Early influences included Jack Bruce of Cream, John Entwistle of The Who, Jeff Beck, and Procol Harum. \"I was mainly interested in early British progressive rock\", said Lee. \"That's how I learned to play bass, emulating Jack Bruce and people like that.\" Bruce's style of music was also noticed by Lee, who liked that \"his sound was distinctive \u2013 it wasn't boring.\" Lee has also been influenced by Paul McCartney, Chris Squire, and James Jamerson.\nIn 1969, Rush began playing professionally in coffeehouses, high school dances and at various outdoor recreational events. By 1971, they were now playing primarily original songs in small clubs and bars, including Toronto's Gasworks and Abbey Road Pub. Lee describes the group during these early years as being \"weekend warriors\". They were holding down jobs during the weekdays and playing music on weekends: \"We longed to break out of the boring surrounding of the suburbs and the endless similarities . . . the shopping plazas and all that stuff...the music was a vehicle for us to speak out.\" He claims that in the beginning, they were simply \"a straightforward rock band.\"\nShort of money, they began opening concerts at venues such as Toronto's Victory Burlesque Theatre for the glam rock band New York Dolls. By 1972, Rush began performing full-length concerts, mainly consisting of original songs, in cities including Toronto and Detroit. As they gained more recognition, they began performing as an opening act for groups such as Aerosmith, Kiss, and Blue \u00d6yster Cult.\nRising popularity.\nAfter several early albums and increasing popularity, Rush's status as a rock group soared over the following five years as they consistently toured worldwide and produced successful albums, including \"2112\" (1976), \"A Farewell to Kings\" (1977), \"Hemispheres\" (1978), \"Permanent Waves\" (1980), and \"Moving Pictures\" (1981). Lee began adding synthesizers in 1977, with the release of \"A Farewell to Kings\". Keyboard critic Greg Armbruster says the additional sounds from synthesizers expanded the group's \"textural capabilities\" and allowed the trio to produce an orchestrated and more complex progressive rock music style. It also gave Lee the ability to play bass simultaneously, as he could control the synthesizer with foot pedals. In 1981, he won \"Keyboard\" magazine's poll as \"Best New Talent.\" By the 1984 album \"Grace Under Pressure\", Lee was surrounding himself with stacks of keyboards on stage.\nBy the 1980s, Rush had become one of the \"biggest rock bands on the planet\", selling out arena seats when touring. Lee was known for his dynamic stage movements. According to music critic Tom Mulhern, writing in 1980, \"it's dazzling to see so much sheer energy expended without a nervous breakdown.\" By 1996, their Test for Echo Tour began performing without an opening act, their shows lasting nearly three hours; this tradition continued until Peart's retirement from touring in 2015 which hastened the band's demise. Lee and Lifeson reunited as Rush in October 2025, with Anika Nilles filling in for Peart.\n\"My Favourite Headache\".\n\"My Favourite Headache\", Lee's solo album, was released on November 14, 2000, while Rush was on a hiatus following the deaths of Neil Peart's daughter and wife. Musicians associated with the project include friend and Rush collaborator Ben Mink and drummer Matt Cameron of Soundgarden and Pearl Jam.\nIn April 2025, Geddy Lee released a 12\" single titled \"The Lost Demos\", consisting of re-recordings of two previously unpublished demos from \"My Favourite Headache\". On the week of its release, the United Kingdom \"The Lost Demos\" reached 30th on the Official Physical Singles Chart and Official Vinyl Singles Chart, and the A-side, \"Gone\", reached 62nd on the UK singles chart.\nSide projects.\nThe bulk of Lee's work in music has been with Rush (see Rush discography). However, Lee has also contributed to a body of work outside of his involvement with the band through guest appearances and album production. In 1980, Lee was brought in to produce Toronto-based band Wireless who had previously opened up for Rush and were on the verge of breaking up. With Lee at the helm, the group recorded their third and final album, \"No Static\", released on Rush's label, Anthem Records.\nIn 1981, Lee was the featured guest for the hit song \"Take Off\" and its included comedic commentary with Bob and Doug McKenzie (played by Rick Moranis and Dave Thomas, respectively) for the McKenzie Brothers' comedy album \"Great White North\", which was released on Rush's Anthem label. While Rush has had great success selling albums, \"Take Off\" is the highest-charting single on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 of Lee's career.\nIn 1982, Lee produced the first (and only) album from Toronto's new wave band Boys Brigade. On the 1985 album \"We Are the World\", by humanitarian consortium USA for Africa, Lee recorded guest vocals for the song \"Tears Are Not Enough\". Lee sang \"O Canada\", the Canadian national anthem, at Baltimore's Camden Yards for the 1993 Major League Baseball All-Star Game.\nAnother version of \"O Canada\", with a rock arrangement, was recorded by Lee and Lifeson for the 1999 film soundtrack \"\".\nLee also plays bass on Canadian rock band I Mother Earth's track \"Good for Sule\", which is featured on the group's 1999 album \"Blue Green Orange\".\nAlong with his bandmates, Lee was a guest musician on the Max Webster song \"Battle Scar\", from the 1980 album \"Universal Juveniles\".\nLee appeared in Broken Social Scene's music video for their 2006 single \"Fire Eye'd Boy\", judging the band while performing various musical tasks. In 2006, Lee joined Lifeson's supergroup, the Big Dirty Band, to provide songs accompanying \"\".\nIn 2017, Lee performed in place of late bassist Chris Squire with Yes during the band's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction, playing bass for the song \"Roundabout.\"\nIn 2018, Lee published \"Geddy Lee's Big Beautiful Book of Bass\", which highlights his collection of over 200 basses along with interviews with some of the leading bass players and bass technicians.\nIn 2020, Lee provided guest vocals to an all-star Canadian rendition of the late Bill Withers song \"Lean on Me\" during the TV special \"Stronger Together, Tous Ensemble\", a Canadian benefit performance simulcast by every major television network in Canada as a benefit for Food Banks Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, Rolling Stone ranked him as the 24th-greatest bassist of all time.\nIn September 2021, Barenaked Ladies frontman Ed Robertson revealed that he was working on a \"secret project\" with Lee, which turned out to be callouts for a subsequent Rush pinball machine.\nIn 2022, he appeared as a guest star playing Thomas Sawyer on the acclaimed long-running CBC period drama Murdoch Mysteries.\nIn November 2023, Lee published an autobiography titled \"My Effin' Life\". The book was promoted with a 19-date tour of the UK and North America.\nOn December 5, 2023, Paramount+ released a video series, \"Geddy Lee Asks: Are Bass Players Human Too?\" Four episodes were aired on Les Claypool, Robert Trujillo, Melissa Auf der Maur, and Krist Novoselic. Each episode features Lee visiting with and talking to the guest bassist.\nArtistry.\nStyle.\nLike Cream, Rush followed the model of a \"power trio\", with Lee playing bass and singing. Lee's vocals produced a distinctive, resonant \"countertenor\". Lee possessed a three-octave vocal range spanning from baritone through tenor, alto, and mezzo-soprano pitch ranges; however, his voice has lowered with age. Lee's playing style is widely regarded for his use of high treble and very hard playing of the strings and for utilizing the bass as a lead instrument, often contrapuntal to Lifeson's guitar. In the 1970s and early 1980s, Lee mostly used a Rickenbacker 4001 bass, with a very noticeable grit in his tone. According to Lee, during the band's \"synth era\" in the mid-1980s, Lee used Steinberger and later Wal basses, with the latter having more of a \"jazzy\" tone. From 1993's \"Counterparts\" onward, Lee began using the Fender Jazz Bass almost exclusively, returning to his trademark high treble sound. Lee had first used the Jazz Bass to record \" Moving Pictures\" on songs such as \"Tom Sawyer.\"\nLegacy and influence.\nMusic industry writer Christopher Buttner, who interviewed Lee in 1996, described him as a prodigy and \"role model\" for what every musician wants to be, noting his proficiency on stage. Buttner cited Lee's ability to vary time signatures, play multiple keyboards, use bass pedal controllers and control sequencers, all while singing lead vocals into as many as three microphones. Buttner adds that few musicians of any instrument \"can juggle half of what Geddy can do without literally falling on their ass.\" As a result, notes Tom Mulhern, Lee's instrumentation was the \"pulse\" of the group and created a \"one-man rhythm section\", which complemented guitarist Alex Lifeson and percussionist Neil Peart. Bass instructor Allan Slutsky, or \"Dr Licks\", credits Lee's \"biting, high-end bass lines and creative synthesizer work\" for helping the group become \"one of the most innovative\" of all the groups that play arena rock. By 1989, \"Guitar Player\" magazine had designated Lee the \"Best Rock Bass\" player from their reader's poll for the previous five years.\nGreg Prato of AllMusic wrote that \"few hard rock bassists have been as influential as Rush's Geddy Lee.\" Bass players who have cited Lee as an influence include Cliff Burton of Metallica, Steve Harris of Iron Maiden, John Myung of Dream Theater, Les Claypool of Primus, and Steve Di Giorgio of Sadus, Death and Testament.\nCollections.\nLee is a collector, and has collected baseball ephemera, vintage bass guitars, and wines, with a collection of 5,000 bottles. As a child he collected stamps and vinyl records. He went on to collect first edition books as well as bass guitars. Lee is also an avid watch collector.\nBaseball.\nLee is also a longtime baseball fan. His favourite team while growing up was the Detroit Tigers, and he later became a fan of the Toronto Blue Jays after they were established. In the 1980s, Lee began reading the works of Bill James, particularly \"The Bill James Baseball Abstracts\", which led to an interest in sabermetrics and participation in a fantasy baseball keeper league. He collects baseball memorabilia, once donating part of his collection to the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, and threw the ceremonial first pitch to inaugurate the 2013 Toronto Blue Jays season. Lee sang the Canadian national anthem before the 1993 MLB All-Star Game. In 2016, Lee planned to produce an independent film about baseball in Italy. Lee is regularly seen in his seat behind home plate at the Toronto Blue Jays stadium Rogers Centre with his scorecard. When the team was forced to move to Buffalo during the 2020 season, a cardboard cutout of Lee was placed in a seat behind home plate.\nGuitars and basses.\nLee also collects guitars and basses. He has a collection of over 250 vintage basses. He owns a 1961 Fender Precision Bass previously owned by John Entwistle of The Who. He also owns two 1964 Fender Jazz Basses in the rare Dakota Red color.\nIn 2019, Lee sent several of his guitars to Mecum Auctions, including a 1959 Les Paul Standard, a 1960 Gibson ES-345, a 1955 Fender Stratocaster, a 1960 Gibson ES-335, a 1965 Gibson ES-335 and a 1967 Gibson Flying V.\nEquipment used.\nBasses.\nIn the early days of Rush, Lee used a Fender Precision Bass, which eventually had its body modified and refinished to a blue \"teardrop\"-shape. Inspired by the distinctive sound of Yes bassist Chris Squire, Lee then acquired a black Rickenbacker 4001 bass, which remained his main instrument from the 1970s up until the early 1980s.\nIn 1998, Fender released the Geddy Lee Jazz Bass, available in Black and 3-Color Sunburst (as of 2009). This signature model is a recreation of Lee's favourite bass, a 1972 Fender Jazz that he bought in a pawn shop in Kalamazoo, Michigan in 1978. In 2015, Fender released a revised USA model of his signature bass, with most of the changes reflecting those Lee had made to his own instrument over the years.\nLee has been a longtime user of RotoSound strings. He uses Swing Bass RS66LD (.45-.105) on a majority of his basses, but used Funkmaster FM66 (.30-.90) on his Wal basses from 1985 to 1992.\nBass amplification.\nFor Rush's 2010 tour, Lee used two Orange AD200 bass heads together with two OBC410 4x10 bass cabinets.\nKeyboards and synthesizers.\nOver the years, Lee has used synthesizers from Oberheim (Oberheim Eight Voice, OB-1, OB-X, OB-Xa), PPG (Wave 2.2 and 2.3), Roland (Jupiter 8, D-50, XV-5080, and Fantom X7), Moog (Minimoog, Taurus pedals, Little Phatty), and Yamaha (DX7, KX76).\nLive performances: special equipment.\nRecreating unique sounds.\nNewer advances in synthesizer and sampler technology have allowed Lee to store familiar sounds from his old synthesizers alongside new ones in combination synthesizer/samplers, such as the Roland XV-5080. For live shows in 2002 and 2004, Lee and his keyboard technician used the playback capabilities of the XV-5080 to generate virtually all of Rush's keyboard sounds to date and additional complex sound passages that previously required several machines at once to produce.\nTo trigger these sounds in real-time, Lee uses MIDI controllers, placed at the locations on the stage where he has a microphone stand. Lee uses two types of MIDI controllers: one type resembles a traditional synthesizer keyboard on a stand (Yamaha KX76). The second type is a large foot-pedal keyboard placed on the stage floor (Korg MPK-130, Roland PK-5). Combined, they enable Lee to use his free hands and feet to trigger sounds in electronic equipment that has been placed off-stage. With this technology Lee and his bandmates can present their arrangements in a live setting with the level of complexity and fidelity that fans have come to expect and without the need to resort to the use of backing tracks or employing an additional band member. During the \"Clockwork Angels Tour\", a notable exception was when a string ensemble played string parts, originally arranged and conducted by David Campbell on \"Clockwork Angels\".\nUnique stage equipment.\nIn 1996, Lee stopped using traditional bass amplifiers on stage, opting to have the bass guitar signals input directly to the touring front-of-house console to improve control and sound definition. He began using Tech 21 SansAmp units after experimenting with one in the studio intended for Alex Lifeson's guitar and eventually received signature models from the company, most notably the GED-2112 rackmount.\nFaced with the dilemma of what to do with the empty space left behind by the lack of large amplifier cabinets, Lee chose to decorate his side of the stage with unusual items. The Snakes &amp; Arrows Tour prominently featured three Henhouse brand rotisserie chicken ovens on stage complete with an attendant in a chef's hat and apron to \"tend\" the chickens during shows.\nPersonal life.\nLee married Nancy Young in 1976. They have a son and a daughter. He takes annual trips to France, where he indulges in cheese and wine. In 2011, a charitable foundation he supports, Grapes for Humanity, created the Geddy Lee Scholarship for winemaking students at Niagara College. Lee has described himself as a Jewish atheist, explaining to an interviewer, \"I consider myself a Jew as a race, but not so much as a religion. I'm not down with religion at all. I'm a Jewish atheist, if that's possible.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12965", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12965", "title": "Gianfrancesco Poggio Bracciolini", "text": ""}
{"id": "12967", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12967", "title": "Geologic time scale", "text": "System that relates geologic strata to time\nThe geologic time scale or geological time scale (GTS) is a representation of time based on the rock record of Earth. It is a system of chronological dating that uses chronostratigraphy (the process of relating strata to time) and geochronology (a scientific branch of geology that aims to determine the age of rocks). It is used primarily by Earth scientists (including geologists, paleontologists, geophysicists, geochemists, and paleoclimatologists) to describe the timing and relationships of events in geologic history. The time scale has been developed through the study of rock layers and the observation of their relationships and identifying features such as lithologies, paleomagnetic properties, and fossils. The definition of standardised international units of geological time is the responsibility of the International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS), a constituent body of the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS), whose primary objective is to precisely define global chronostratigraphic units of the International Chronostratigraphic Chart (ICC) that are used to define divisions of geological time. The chronostratigraphic divisions are in turn used to define geochronologic units.\nPrinciples.\nThe geologic time scale is a way of representing deep time based on events that have occurred through Earth's history, a time span of about 4.54\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.05\u00a0billion years. It chronologically organises strata, and subsequently time, by observing fundamental changes in stratigraphy that correspond to major geological or paleontological events. For example, the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, marks the lower boundary of the Paleogene System/Period and thus the boundary between the Cretaceous and Paleogene systems/periods. For divisions prior to the Cryogenian, arbitrary numeric boundary definitions (Global Standard Stratigraphic Ages, GSSAs) are used to divide geologic time. Proposals have been made to better reconcile these divisions with the rock record.\nHistorically, regional geologic time scales were used due to the litho- and biostratigraphic differences around the world in time equivalent rocks. The ICS has long worked to reconcile conflicting terminology by standardising globally significant and identifiable stratigraphic horizons that can be used to define the lower boundaries of chronostratigraphic units. Defining chronostratigraphic units in such a manner allows for the use of global, standardised nomenclature. The International Chronostratigraphic Chart represents this ongoing effort.\nSeveral key principles are used to determine the relative relationships of rocks and thus their chronostratigraphic position.\nThe law of superposition that states that in undeformed stratigraphic sequences the oldest strata will lie at the bottom of the sequence, while newer material stacks upon the surface. In practice, this means a younger rock will lie on top of an older rock unless there is evidence to suggest otherwise.\nThe principle of original horizontality that states layers of sediments will originally be deposited horizontally under the action of gravity. However, it is now known that not all sedimentary layers are deposited purely horizontally, but this principle is still a useful concept.\nThe principle of lateral continuity that states layers of sediments extend laterally in all directions until either thinning out or being cut off by a different rock layer, i.e. they are laterally continuous. Layers do not extend indefinitely; their limits are controlled by the amount and type of sediment in a sedimentary basin, and the geometry of that basin.\nThe principle of cross-cutting relationships that states a rock that cuts across another rock must be younger than the rock it cuts across.\nThe law of included fragments that states small fragments of one type of rock that are embedded in a second type of rock must have formed first, and were included when the second rock was forming.\nThe relationships of unconformities which are geologic features representing a gap in the geologic record. Unconformities are formed during periods of erosion or non-deposition, indicating non-continuous sediment deposition. Observing the type and relationships of unconformities in strata allows geologist to understand the relative timing of the strata.\nThe principle of faunal succession (where applicable) that states rock strata contain distinctive sets of fossils that succeed each other vertically in a specific and reliable order. This allows for a correlation of strata even when the horizon between them is not continuous.\nDivisions of geologic time.\nThe geologic time scale is divided into chronostratigraphic units and their corresponding geochronologic units.\nThe subdivisions Early and Late are used as the geochronologic equivalents of the chronostratigraphic Lower and Upper, e.g., Early Triassic Period (geochronologic unit) is used in place of Lower Triassic System (chronostratigraphic unit).\nRocks representing a given chronostratigraphic unit are that chronostratigraphic unit, and the time they were laid down in is the geochronologic unit, e.g., the rocks that represent the Silurian System are the Silurian System and they were deposited during the Silurian Period. This definition means the numeric age of a geochronologic unit can be changed (and is more often subject to change) when refined by geochronometry while the equivalent chronostratigraphic unit (the revision of which is less frequent) remains unchanged. For example, in early 2022, the boundary between the Ediacaran and Cambrian periods (geochronologic units) was revised from 541 Ma to 538.8 Ma but the rock definition of the boundary (GSSP) at the base of the Cambrian, and thus the boundary between the Ediacaran and Cambrian systems (chronostratigraphic units) has not been changed; rather, the absolute age has merely been refined.\nTerminology.\nChronostratigraphy is the element of stratigraphy that deals with the relation between rock bodies and the relative measurement of geological time. It is the process where distinct strata between defined stratigraphic horizons are assigned to represent a relative interval of geologic time.\nA chronostratigraphic unit is a body of rock, layered or unlayered, that is defined between specified stratigraphic horizons which represent specified intervals of geologic time. They include all rocks representative of a specific interval of geologic time, and only this time span. Eonothem, erathem, system, series, subseries, stage, and substage are the hierarchical chronostratigraphic units.\nA geochronologic unit is a subdivision of geologic time. It is a numeric representation of an intangible property (time). These units are arranged in a hierarchy: eon, era, period, epoch, subepoch, age, and subage. \nGeochronology is the scientific branch of geology that aims to determine the age of rocks, fossils, and sediments either through absolute (e.g., radiometric dating) or relative means (e.g., stratigraphic position, paleomagnetism, stable isotope ratios). \nGeochronometry is the field of geochronology that numerically quantifies geologic time. \nA Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) is an internationally agreed-upon reference point on a stratigraphic section that defines the lower boundaries of stages on the geologic time scale. (Recently this has been used to define the base of a system)\nA Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) is a numeric-only, chronologic reference point used to define the base of geochronologic units prior to the Cryogenian. These points are arbitrarily defined. They are used where GSSPs have not yet been established. Research is ongoing to define GSSPs for the base of all units that are currently defined by GSSAs.\nThe standard international units of the geologic time scale are published by the International Commission on Stratigraphy on the International Chronostratigraphic Chart. However, regional terms are still in use in some areas. The numeric values on the International Chronostratigrahpic Chart are represented by the unit Ma (megaannum, for 'million years'). For example, Ma, the lower boundary of the Jurassic Period, is defined as 201,400,000 years old with an uncertainty of 200,000 years. Other SI prefix units commonly used by geologists are Ga (gigaannum, billion years), and ka (kiloannum, thousand years), with the latter often represented in calibrated units (before present).\nNaming of geologic time.\nThe names of geologic time units are defined for chronostratigraphic units with the corresponding geochronologic unit sharing the same name with a change to the suffix (e.g. Phanerozoic Eonothem becomes the Phanerozoic Eon). Names of erathems in the Phanerozoic were chosen to reflect major changes in the history of life on Earth: Paleozoic (old life), Mesozoic (middle life), and Cenozoic (new life). Names of systems are diverse in origin, with some indicating chronologic position (e.g., Paleogene), while others are named for lithology (e.g., Cretaceous), geography (e.g., Permian), or are tribal (e.g., Ordovician) in origin. Most currently recognised series and subseries are named for their position within a system/series (early/middle/late); however, the International Commission on Stratigraphy advocates for all new series and subseries to be named for a geographic feature in the vicinity of its stratotype or type locality. The name of stages should also be derived from a geographic feature in the locality of its stratotype or type locality.\nInformally, the time before the Cambrian is often referred to as the Precambrian or pre-Cambrian (Supereon).\nHistory of the geologic time scale.\nEarly history.\nThe most modern geological time scale was not formulated until 1911 by Arthur Holmes (1890 \u2013 1965), who drew inspiration from James Hutton (1726\u20131797), a Scottish Geologist who presented the idea of uniformitarianism or the theory that changes to the Earth's crust resulted from continuous and uniform processes. The broader concept of the relation between rocks and time can be traced back to (at least) the philosophers of Ancient Greece from 1200 BC to 600 AD. Xenophanes of Colophon (c. 570\u2013487\u00a0BCE) observed rock beds with fossils of seashells located above the sea-level, viewed them as once living organisms, and used this to imply an unstable relationship in which the sea had at times transgressed over the land and at other times had regressed. This view was shared by a few of Xenophanes's scholars and those that followed, including Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC) who (with additional observations) reasoned that the positions of land and sea had changed over long periods of time. The concept of deep time was also recognized by Chinese naturalist Shen Kuo (1031\u20131095) and Islamic scientist-philosophers, notably the Brothers of Purity, who wrote on the processes of stratification over the passage of time in their treatises. Their work likely inspired that of the 11th-century Persian polymath Avicenna (Ibn S\u00een\u00e2, 980\u20131037) who wrote in \"The Book of Healing\" (1027) on the concept of stratification and superposition, pre-dating Nicolas Steno by more than six centuries. Avicenna also recognized fossils as \"petrifications of the bodies of plants and animals\", with the 13th-century Dominican bishop Albertus Magnus (c. 1200\u20131280), who drew from Aristotle's natural philosophy, extending this into a theory of a petrifying fluid. These works appeared to have little influence on scholars in Medieval Europe who looked to the Bible to explain the origins of fossils and sea-level changes, often attributing these to the 'Deluge', including Ristoro d'Arezzo in 1282. It was not until the Italian Renaissance when Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519) would reinvigorate the relationships between stratification, relative sea-level change, and time, denouncing attribution of fossils to the 'Deluge':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of the stupidity and ignorance of those who imagine that these creatures were carried to such places distant from the sea by the Deluge...Why do we find so many fragments and whole shells between the different layers of stone unless they had been upon the shore and had been covered over by earth newly thrown up by the sea which then became petrified? And if the above-mentioned Deluge had carried them to these places from the sea, you would find the shells at the edge of one layer of rock only, not at the edge of many where may be counted the winters of the years during which the sea multiplied the layers of sand and mud brought down by the neighboring rivers and spread them over its shores. And if you wish to say that there must have been many deluges in order to produce these layers and the shells among them it would then become necessary for you to affirm that such a deluge took place every year.\nThese views of da Vinci remained unpublished, and thus lacked influence at the time; however, questions of fossils and their significance were pursued and, while views against Genesis were not readily accepted and dissent from religious doctrine was in some places unwise, scholars such as Girolamo Fracastoro shared da Vinci's views, and found the attribution of fossils to the 'Deluge' absurd. Although many theories surrounding philosophy and concepts of rocks were developed in earlier years, \"the first serious attempts to formulate a geological time scale that could be applied anywhere on Earth were made in the late 18th century.\" Later, in the 19th century, academics further developed theories on stratification. William Smith, often referred to as the \"Father of Geology\" developed theories through observations rather than drawing from the scholars that came before him. Smith's work was primarily based on his detailed study of rock layers and fossils during his time and he created \"the first map to depict so many rock formations over such a large area\". After studying rock layers and the fossils they contained, Smith concluded that each layer of rock contained distinct material that could be used to identify and correlate rock layers across different regions of the world. Smith developed the concept of faunal succession or the idea that fossils can serve as a marker for the age of the strata they are found in and published his ideas in his 1816 book, \"Strata identified by organized fossils.\"\nEstablishment of primary principles.\nNiels Stensen, more commonly known as Nicolas Steno (1638\u20131686), is credited with establishing four of the guiding principles of stratigraphy. In \"De solido intra solidum naturaliter contento dissertationis prodromus\" Steno states:\nRespectively, these are the principles of superposition, original horizontality, lateral continuity, and cross-cutting relationships. From this Steno reasoned that strata were laid down in succession and inferred relative time (in Steno's belief, time from Creation). While Steno's principles were simple and attracted much attention, applying them proved challenging. These basic principles, albeit with improved and more nuanced interpretations, still form the foundational principles of determining the correlation of strata relative to geologic time.\nOver the course of the 18th-century geologists realised that:\nFormulation of a modern geologic time scale.\nThe apparent, earliest formal division of the geologic record with respect to time was introduced during the era of Biblical models by Thomas Burnet who applied a two-fold terminology to mountains by identifying \"\"montes primarii\" for rock formed at the time of the 'Deluge', and younger \"monticulos secundarios\" formed later from the debris of the \"primarii\"\". Anton Moro (1687\u20131784) also used primary and secondary divisions for rock units but his mechanism was volcanic. In this early version of the Plutonism theory, the interior of Earth was seen as hot, and this drove the creation of primary igneous and metamorphic rocks and secondary rocks formed contorted and fossiliferous sediments. These primary and secondary divisions were expanded on by Giovanni Targioni Tozzetti (1712\u20131783) and Giovanni Arduino (1713\u20131795) to include tertiary and quaternary divisions. These divisions were used to describe both the time during which the rocks were laid down, and the collection of rocks themselves (i.e., it was correct to say Tertiary rocks, and Tertiary Period). Only the Quaternary division is retained in the modern geologic time scale, while the Tertiary division was in use until the early 21st century. The Neptunism and Plutonism theories would compete into the early 19th century with a key driver for resolution of this debate being the work of James Hutton (1726\u20131797), in particular his \"Theory of the Earth\", first presented before the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1785. Hutton's theory would later become known as uniformitarianism, popularised by John Playfair (1748\u20131819) and later Charles Lyell (1797\u20131875) in his \"Principles of Geology\". Their theories strongly contested the 6,000 year age of the Earth as suggested determined by James Ussher via Biblical chronology that was accepted at the time by western religion. Instead, using geological evidence, they contested Earth to be much older, cementing the concept of deep time.\nDuring the early 19th century William Smith, Georges Cuvier, Jean d'Omalius d'Halloy, and Alexandre Brongniart pioneered the systematic division of rocks by stratigraphy and fossil assemblages. These geologists began to use the local names given to rock units in a wider sense, correlating strata across national and continental boundaries based on their similarity to each other. Many of the names below erathem/era rank in use on the modern ICC/GTS were determined during the early to mid-19th century.\nThe advent of geochronometry.\nDuring the 19th century, the debate regarding Earth's age was renewed, with geologists estimating ages based on denudation rates and sedimentary thicknesses or ocean chemistry, and physicists determining ages for the cooling of the Earth or the Sun using basic thermodynamics or orbital physics. These estimations varied from 15,000 million years to 0.075 million years depending on method and author, but the estimations of Lord Kelvin and Clarence King were held in high regard at the time due to their pre-eminence in physics and geology. All of these early geochronometric determinations would later prove to be incorrect.\nThe discovery of radioactive decay by Henri Becquerel, Marie Curie, and Pierre Curie laid the ground work for radiometric dating, but the knowledge and tools required for accurate determination of radiometric ages would not be in place until the mid-1950s. Early attempts at determining ages of uranium minerals and rocks by Ernest Rutherford, Bertram Boltwood, Robert Strutt, and Arthur Holmes, would culminate in what are considered the first international geological time scales by Holmes in 1911 and 1913. The discovery of isotopes in 1913 by Frederick Soddy, and the developments in mass spectrometry pioneered by Francis William Aston, Arthur Jeffrey Dempster, and Alfred O. C. Nier during the early to mid-20th century would finally allow for the accurate determination of radiometric ages, with Holmes publishing several revisions to his \"geological time-scale\" with his final version in 1960.\nModern international geological time scale.\nThe establishment of the IUGS in 1961 and acceptance of the Commission on Stratigraphy (applied in 1965) to become a member commission of IUGS led to the founding of the ICS. One of the primary objectives of the ICS is \"the establishment, publication and revision of the ICS International Chronostratigraphic Chart which is the standard, reference global Geological Time Scale to include the ratified Commission decisions\".\nFollowing on from Holmes, several \"A Geological Time Scale\" books were published in 1982, 1989, 2004, 2008, 2012, 2016, and 2020. However, since 2013, the ICS has taken responsibility for producing and distributing the ICC citing the commercial nature, independent creation, and lack of oversight by the ICS on the prior published GTS versions (GTS books prior to 2013) although these versions were published in close association with the ICS. Subsequent \"Geologic Time Scale\" books (2016 and 2020) are commercial publications with no oversight from the ICS, and do not entirely conform to the chart produced by the ICS. The ICS produced GTS charts are versioned (year/month) beginning at v2013/01. At least one new version is published each year incorporating any changes ratified by the ICS since the prior version.\nThe following five timelines show the geologic time scale to scale. The first shows the entire time from the formation of Earth to the present, but this gives little space for the most recent eon. The second timeline shows an expanded view of the most recent eon. In a similar way, the most recent era is expanded in the third timeline, the most recent period is expanded in the fourth timeline, and the most recent epoch is expanded in the fifth timeline.\nMajor proposed revisions to the ICC.\nProposed Anthropocene Series/Epoch.\nFirst suggested in 2000, the \"Anthropocene\" is a proposed epoch/series for the most recent time in Earth's history. While still informal, it is a widely used term to denote the present geologic time interval, in which many conditions and processes on Earth are profoundly altered by human impact. The definition of the Anthropocene as a geologic time period rather than a geologic event remains controversial and difficult.\nIn May 2019 the [[Anthropocene Working Group]] voted in favour of submitting a formal proposal to the ICS for the establishment of the Anthropocene Series/Epoch. The formal proposal was completed and submitted to the Subcommission on Quaternary Stratigraphy in late 2023 for a section in [[Crawford Lake (Halton Region)|Crawford Lake]], [[Ontario]], with heightened Plutonium levels corresponding to 1952 CE. This proposal was rejected as a formal geologic epoch in early 2024, to be left instead as an \"invaluable descriptor of human impact on the Earth system\"\nProposals for revisions to pre-Cryogenian timeline.\nShields et al. 2021.\nThe ICS Subcommission for Cryogenian Stratigraphy has outlined a template to improve the pre-Cryogenian geologic time scale based on the rock record to bring it in line with the post-Tonian geologic time scale. This work assessed the geologic history of the currently defined eons and eras of the Precambrian, and the proposals in the \"Geological Time Scale\" books \"2004,\" \"2012,\" and \"2020.\" Their recommend revisions of the pre-Cryogenian geologic time scale were as below (changes from the current scale [v2023/09] are italicised). This suggestion was unanimously rejected by the International Subcommission for Precambrian Stratigraphy, based on scientific weaknesses.\nProposed pre-Cambrian timeline (Shield et al. 2021, ICS working group on pre-Cryogenian chronostratigraphy), shown to scale:\nICC pre-Cambrian timeline (v2024/12, current as of \u00a02025[ [update]]), shown to scale:\nVan Kranendonk et al. 2012 (GTS2012).\nThe book, \"Geologic Time Scale 2012,\" was the last commercial publication of an international chronostratigraphic chart that was closely associated with the ICS and the Subcommission on Precambrian Stratigraphy. It included a proposal to substantially revise the pre-Cryogenian time scale to reflect important events such as the [[Formation and evolution of the Solar System|formation of the Solar System]] and the [[Great Oxidation Event]], among others, while at the same time maintaining most of the previous chronostratigraphic nomenclature for the pertinent time span. As of April\u00a02022[ [update]] these proposed changes have not been accepted by the ICS. The proposed changes (changes from the current scale [v2023/09]) are italicised:\nProposed pre-Cambrian timeline (GTS2012), shown to scale:\nICC pre-Cambrian timeline (v2024/12, current as of \u00a02025[ [update]]), shown to scale:\nTable of geologic time.\nThe following table summarises the major events and characteristics of the divisions making up the geologic time scale of Earth. This table is arranged with the most recent geologic periods at the top, and the oldest at the bottom. The height of each table entry does not correspond to the duration of each subdivision of time. As such, this table is not to scale and does not accurately represent the relative time-spans of each geochronologic unit. While the [[Phanerozoic]] Eon looks longer than the rest, it merely spans ~538.8 Ma (~11.8% of Earth's history), whilst the previous three eons collectively span ~4,028.2 Ma (~88.2% of Earth's history). This bias toward the most recent eon is in part due to the relative lack of information about events that occurred during the first three eons compared to the current eon (the Phanerozoic). The use of subseries/subepochs has been ratified by the ICS.\nWhile some regional terms are still in use, the table of geologic time conforms to the [[nomenclature]], ages, and colour codes set forth by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in the official International Chronostratigraphic Chart. The International Commission on Stratigraphy also provide an online interactive version of this chart. The interactive version is based on a service delivering a machine-readable [[Resource Description Framework]]/[[Web Ontology Language]] representation of the time scale, which is available through the [[Commission for the Management and Application of Geoscience Information]] [[GeoSciML]] project as a service and at a [[SPARQL]] end-point.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExtraterrestrial geologic time scales.\nSome other [[Planet#Solar System|planets]] and [[Natural satellite|satellites]] in the [[Solar System]] have sufficiently rigid structures to have preserved records of their own histories, for example, [[Geology of Venus|Venus]], [[Geology of Mars|Mars]] and the Earth's [[Moon]]. Dominantly fluid planets, such as the [[giant planet]]s, do not comparably preserve their history. Apart from the [[Late Heavy Bombardment]], events on other planets probably had little direct influence on the Earth, and events on Earth had correspondingly little effect on those planets. Construction of a time scale that links the planets is, therefore, of only limited relevance to the Earth's time scale, except in a Solar System context. The existence, timing, and terrestrial effects of the Late Heavy Bombardment are still a matter of debate.\nLunar (selenological) time scale.\nThe [[Geology of the Moon|geologic history]] of Earth's Moon has been divided into a time scale based on [[Geomorphology|geomorphological]] markers, namely [[impact crater]]ing, [[volcanism]], and [[erosion]]. This process of dividing the Moon's history in this manner means that the time scale boundaries do not imply fundamental changes in geological processes, unlike Earth's geologic time scale. Five geologic systems/periods ([[Pre-Nectarian]], [[Nectarian]], [[Imbrian]], [[Eratosthenian]], [[Copernican period|Copernican]]), with the Imbrian divided into two series/epochs (Early and Late) were defined in the latest Lunar geologic time scale. The Moon is unique in the Solar System in that it is the only other body from which humans have rock samples with a known geological context.\nMartian geologic time scale.\nThe [[geological history of Mars]] has been divided into two alternate time scales. The first time scale for Mars was developed by studying the impact crater densities on the Martian surface. Through this method four periods have been defined, the Pre-Noachian (~4,500\u20134,100 Ma), Noachian (~4,100\u20133,700 Ma), Hesperian (~3,700\u20133,000 Ma), and Amazonian (~3,000 Ma to present).\nEpochs:\nA second time scale based on mineral alteration observed by the OMEGA [[spectrometer]] on board the [[Mars Express]]. Using this method, three periods were defined, the Phyllocian (~4,500\u20134,000 Ma), Theiikian (~4,000\u20133,500 Ma), and Siderikian (~3,500 Ma to present).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n[[Category:Geologic time scales| ]]\n[[Category:Geology timelines|+]]\n[[Category:Natural history]]\n[[Category:Evolution-related timelines]]\n[[Category:Geochronology]]\n[[Category:Articles which contain graphical timelines]]\n[[Category:International Commission on Stratigraphy geologic time scale of Earth]]"}
{"id": "12970", "revid": "50576733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12970", "title": "Gambler's fallacy", "text": "Mistaken belief that more frequent chance events will lead to less frequent chance events\nThe gambler's fallacy, also known as the Monte Carlo fallacy or the fallacy of the maturity of chances, is the belief that, if an event (whose occurrences are independent and identically distributed) has occurred less frequently than expected, it is more likely to happen again in the future (or vice versa). The fallacy is commonly associated with gambling, where it may be believed, for example, that the next dice roll is more likely to be six than is usually the case because there have recently been fewer than the expected number of sixes.\nThe term \"Monte Carlo fallacy\" originates from an example of the phenomenon, in which the roulette wheel spun black 26 times in succession at the Monte Carlo Casino in 1913.\nExamples.\nCoin toss.\nThe gambler's fallacy can be illustrated by considering the repeated toss of a fair coin. The outcomes in different tosses are statistically independent and the probability of getting heads on a single toss is (one in two). The probability of getting two heads in two tosses is (one in four) and the probability of getting three heads in three tosses is (one in eight). In general, if \"Ai\" is the event where toss \"i\" of a fair coin comes up heads, then:\nformula_1.\nIf after tossing four heads in a row, the next coin toss also came up heads, it would complete a run of five successive heads. Since the probability of a run of five successive heads is (one in thirty-two), a person might believe that the next flip would be more likely to come up tails rather than heads again. This is incorrect and is an example of the gambler's fallacy. The event \"5 heads in a row\" and the event \"first 4 heads, then a tails\" are equally likely, each having probability . Since the first four tosses turn up heads, the probability that the next toss is a head is:\nformula_2.\nWhile a run of five heads has a probability of = 0.03125 (a little over 3%), the misunderstanding lies in not realizing that this is the case \"only before the first coin is tossed\". After the first four tosses in this example, the results are no longer unknown, so their probabilities are at that point equal to 1 (100%). The probability of a run of coin tosses of any length continuing for one more toss is always 0.5. The reasoning that a fifth toss is more likely to be tails because the previous four tosses were heads, with a run of luck in the past influencing the odds in the future, forms the basis of the fallacy.\nWhy the probability is for a fair coin.\nIf a fair coin is flipped 21 times, the probability of 21 heads is 1 in 2,097,152. The probability of flipping a head after having already flipped 20 heads in a row is . Assuming a fair coin:\nThe probability of getting 20 heads then 1 tail, and the probability of getting 20 heads then another head are both 1 in 2,097,152. When flipping a fair coin 21 times, the outcome is equally likely to be 21 heads as 20 heads and then 1 tail. These two outcomes are equally as likely as any of the other combinations that can be obtained from 21 flips of a coin. All of the 21-flip combinations will have probabilities equal to 0.521, or 1 in 2,097,152. Assuming that a change in the probability will occur as a result of the outcome of prior flips is incorrect because every outcome of a 21-flip sequence is as likely as the other outcomes. In accordance with Bayes' theorem, the likely outcome of each flip is the probability of the fair coin, which is .\nOther examples.\nThe fallacy leads to the incorrect notion that previous failures will create an increased probability of success on subsequent attempts. For a fair 16-sided die, the probability of each outcome occurring is (6.25%). If a win is defined as rolling a 1, the probability of a 1 occurring at least once in 16 rolls is:\nformula_3\nThe probability of a loss on the first roll is (93.75%). According to the fallacy, the player should have a higher chance of winning after one loss has occurred. The probability of at least one win is now:\nformula_4\nBy losing one toss, the player's probability of winning drops by two percentage points. With 5 losses and 11 rolls remaining, the probability of winning drops to around 0.5 (50%). The probability of at least one win does not increase after a series of losses; indeed, the probability of success \"actually decreases\", because there are fewer trials left in which to win. The probability of winning will eventually be equal to the probability of winning a single toss, which is (6.25%) and occurs when only one toss is left.\nReverse position.\nAfter a consistent tendency towards tails, a gambler may also decide that tails has become a more likely outcome. This is a rational and Bayesian conclusion, bearing in mind the possibility that the coin may not be fair; it is not a fallacy. Believing the odds to favor tails, the gambler sees no reason to change to heads. However, it is a fallacy that a sequence of trials carries a memory of past results which tend to favor or disfavor future outcomes.\nThe inverse gambler's fallacy described by Ian Hacking is a situation where a gambler entering a room and seeing a person rolling a double six on a pair of dice may erroneously conclude that the person must have been rolling the dice for quite a while, as they would be unlikely to get a double six on their first attempt.\nRetrospective gambler's fallacy.\nResearchers have examined whether a similar bias exists for inferences about unknown past events based upon known subsequent events, calling this the \"retrospective gambler's fallacy\".\nAn example of a retrospective gambler's fallacy would be to observe multiple successive \"heads\" on a coin toss and conclude from this that the previously unknown flip was \"tails\". Real world examples of retrospective gambler's fallacy have been argued to exist in events such as the origin of the Universe. In his book \"Universes\", John Leslie argues that \"the presence of vastly many universes very different in their characters might be our best explanation for why at least one universe has a life-permitting character\". Daniel M. Oppenheimer and Beno\u00eet Monin argue that \"In other words, the 'best explanation' for a low-probability event is that it is only one in a multiple of trials, which is the core intuition of the reverse gambler's fallacy.\" Philosophical arguments are ongoing about whether such arguments are or are not a fallacy, arguing that the occurrence of our universe says nothing about the existence of other universes or trials of universes. Three studies involving Stanford University students tested the existence of a retrospective gamblers' fallacy. All three studies concluded that people have a gamblers' fallacy retrospectively as well as to future events. The authors of all three studies concluded their findings have significant \"methodological implications\" but may also have \"important theoretical implications\" that need investigation and research, saying \"[a] thorough understanding of such reasoning processes requires that we not only examine how they influence our predictions of the future, but also our perceptions of the past.\"\nChildbirth.\nIn 1796, Pierre-Simon Laplace described in \"A Philosophical Essay on Probabilities\" the ways in which men calculated their probability of having sons: \"I have seen men, ardently desirous of having a son, who could learn only with anxiety of the births of boys in the month when they expected to become fathers. Imagining that the ratio of these births to those of girls ought to be the same at the end of each month, they judged that the boys already born would render more probable the births next of girls.\" The expectant fathers feared that if more sons were born in the surrounding community, then they themselves would be more likely to have a daughter. This essay by Laplace is regarded as one of the earliest descriptions of the fallacy. Likewise, after having multiple children of the same sex, some parents may erroneously believe that they are due to have a child of the opposite sex.\nMonte Carlo Casino.\nAn example of the gambler's fallacy occurred in a game of roulette at the Monte Carlo Casino on August 18, 1913, when the ball fell in black 26 times in a row. This was an extremely unlikely occurrence: for any given sequence of 26 spins, the probability of either red or black occurring 26 times in a row on a single zero roulette wheel is 2\u00d7()26 or around 1 in 68.4 million, assuming the mechanism is unbiased. Gamblers lost millions of francs betting against black, reasoning incorrectly that the streak was causing an imbalance in the randomness of the wheel, and that it had to be followed by a long streak of red.\nNon-examples.\nNon-independent events.\nThe gambler's fallacy does not apply when the probability of different events is not independent. In such cases, the probability of future events can change based on the outcome of past events, such as the statistical permutation of events. An example is when cards are drawn from a deck without replacement. If an ace is drawn from a deck and not reinserted, the next card drawn is less likely to be an ace and more likely to be of another rank. The probability of drawing another ace, assuming that it was the first card drawn and that there are no jokers, has decreased from (7.69%) to (5.88%), while the probability for each other rank has increased from (7.69%) to (7.84%). This effect allows card counting systems to work in games such as blackjack.\nBias.\nIn most illustrations of the gambler's fallacy and the reverse gambler's fallacy, the trial (e.g. flipping a coin) is assumed to be fair. In practice, this assumption may not hold. For example, if a coin is flipped 21 times, the probability of 21 heads with a fair coin is 1 in 2,097,152. Since this probability is so small, if it happens, it may well be that the coin is somehow biased towards landing on heads, or that it is being controlled by hidden magnets, or similar. In this case, the smart bet is \"heads\" because Bayesian inference from the empirical evidence \u2014 21 heads in a row \u2014 suggests that the coin is likely to be biased toward heads. Bayesian inference can be used to show that when the long-run proportion of different outcomes is unknown but exchangeable (meaning that the random process from which the outcomes are generated may be biased but is equally likely to be biased in any direction) and that previous observations demonstrate the likely direction of the bias, the outcome which has occurred the most in the observed data is the most likely to occur again.\nFor example, if the \"a priori\" probability of a biased coin is say 1%, and assuming that such a biased coin would come down heads say 60% of the time, then after 21 heads the probability of a biased coin has increased to about 32%.\nThe opening scene of the play \"Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead\" by Tom Stoppard discusses these issues as one man continually flips heads and the other considers various possible explanations.\nChanging probabilities.\nIf external factors are allowed to change the probability of the events, the gambler's fallacy may not hold. For example, a change in the game rules might favour one player over the other, improving their win percentage. Similarly, an inexperienced player's success may decrease after opposing teams learn about and play against their weaknesses. This is another example of bias.\nPsychology.\nOrigins.\nThe gambler's fallacy arises out of a belief in a law of small numbers, leading to the erroneous belief that small samples must be representative of the larger population. According to the fallacy, streaks must eventually even out in order to be representative. Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman first proposed that the gambler's fallacy is a cognitive bias produced by a psychological heuristic called the representativeness heuristic, which states that people evaluate the probability of a certain event by assessing how similar it is to events they have experienced before, and how similar the events surrounding those two processes are. According to this view, \"after observing a long run of red on the roulette wheel, for example, most people erroneously believe that black will result in a more representative sequence than the occurrence of an additional red\", so people expect that a short run of random outcomes should share properties of a longer run, specifically in that deviations from average should balance out. When people are asked to make up a random-looking sequence of coin tosses, they tend to make sequences where the proportion of heads to tails stays closer to 0.5 in any short segment than would be predicted by chance, a phenomenon known as insensitivity to sample size. Kahneman and Tversky interpret this to mean that people believe short sequences of random events should be representative of longer ones. The representativeness heuristic is also cited behind the related phenomenon of the clustering illusion, according to which people see streaks of random events as being non-random when such streaks are actually much more likely to occur in small samples than people expect.\nThe gambler's fallacy can also be attributed to the mistaken belief that gambling, or even chance itself, is a fair process that can correct itself in the event of streaks, known as the just-world fallacy. Other researchers believe that belief in the fallacy may be the result of a mistaken belief in an internal locus of control. When a person believes that gambling outcomes are the result of their own skill, they may be more susceptible to the gambler's fallacy because they reject the idea that chance could overcome skill or talent.\nVariations.\nSome researchers believe that it is possible to define two types of gambler's fallacy: type\u00a0one and type\u00a0two. Type\u00a0one is the classic gambler's fallacy, where individuals believe that a particular outcome is due after a long streak of another outcome. Type\u00a0two gambler's fallacy, as defined by Gideon Keren and Charles Lewis, occurs when a gambler underestimates how many observations are needed to detect a favorable outcome, such as watching a roulette wheel for a length of time and then betting on the numbers that appear most often. For events with a high degree of randomness, detecting a bias that will lead to a favorable outcome takes an impractically large amount of time and is very difficult, if not impossible, to do. The two types differ in that type\u00a0one wrongly assumes that gambling conditions are fair and perfect, while type\u00a0two assumes that the conditions are biased, and that this bias can be detected after a certain amount of time.\nAnother variety, known as the retrospective gambler's fallacy, occurs when individuals judge that a seemingly rare event must come from a longer sequence than a more common event does. The belief that an imaginary sequence of die rolls is more than three times as long when a set of three sixes is observed as opposed to when there are only two sixes. This effect can be observed in isolated instances, or even sequentially. Another example would involve hearing that a teenager has unprotected sex and becomes pregnant on a given night, and concluding that she has been engaging in unprotected sex for longer than if we hear she had unprotected sex but did not become pregnant, when the probability of becoming pregnant as a result of each intercourse is independent of the amount of prior intercourse.\nRelationship to hot-hand fallacy.\nAnother psychological perspective states that gambler's fallacy can be seen as the counterpart to basketball's hot-hand fallacy, in which people tend to predict the same outcome as the previous event - known as positive recency - resulting in a belief that a high scorer will continue to score. In the gambler's fallacy, people predict the opposite outcome of the previous event - negative recency - believing that since the roulette wheel has landed on black on the previous six occasions, it is due to land on red the next. Ayton and Fischer have theorized that people display positive recency for the hot-hand fallacy because the fallacy deals with human performance, and that people do not believe that an inanimate object can become \"hot.\" Human performance is not perceived as random, and people are more likely to continue streaks when they believe that the process generating the results is nonrandom. When a person exhibits the gambler's fallacy, they are more likely to exhibit the hot-hand fallacy as well, suggesting that one construct is responsible for the two fallacies.\nThe difference between the two fallacies is also found in economic decision-making. A study by Huber, Kirchler, and Stockl in 2010 examined how the hot hand and the gambler's fallacy are exhibited in the financial market. The researchers gave their participants a choice: they could either bet on the outcome of a series of coin tosses, use an expert opinion to sway their decision, or choose a risk-free alternative instead for a smaller financial reward. Participants turned to the expert opinion to make their decision 24% of the time based on their past experience of success, which exemplifies the hot-hand. If the expert was correct, 78% of the participants chose the expert's opinion again, as opposed to 57% doing so when the expert was wrong. The participants also exhibited the gambler's fallacy, with their selection of either heads or tails decreasing after noticing a streak of either outcome. This experiment helped bolster Ayton and Fischer's theory that people put more faith in human performance than they do in seemingly random processes.\nNeurophysiology.\nWhile the representativeness heuristic and other cognitive biases are the most commonly cited cause of the gambler's fallacy, research suggests that there may also be a neurological component. Functional magnetic resonance imaging has shown that after losing a bet or gamble, known as riskloss, the frontoparietal network of the brain is activated, resulting in more risk-taking behavior. In contrast, there is decreased activity in the amygdala, caudate, and ventral striatum after a riskloss. Activation in the amygdala is negatively correlated with gambler's fallacy, so that the more activity exhibited in the amygdala, the less likely an individual is to fall prey to the gambler's fallacy. These results suggest that gambler's fallacy relies more on the prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for executive, goal-directed processes, and less on the brain areas that control affective decision-making.\nThe desire to continue gambling or betting is controlled by the striatum, which supports a choice-outcome contingency learning method. The striatum processes the errors in prediction and the behavior changes accordingly. After a win, the positive behavior is reinforced and after a loss, the behavior is conditioned to be avoided. In individuals exhibiting the gambler's fallacy, this choice-outcome contingency method is impaired, and they continue to make risks after a series of losses.\nPossible solutions.\nThe gambler's fallacy is a deep-seated cognitive bias and can be very hard to overcome. Educating individuals about the nature of randomness has not always proven effective in reducing or eliminating any manifestation of the fallacy. Participants in a study by Beach and Swensson in 1967 were shown a shuffled deck of index cards with shapes on them, and were instructed to guess which shape would come next in a sequence. The experimental group of participants was informed about the nature and existence of the gambler's fallacy, and were explicitly instructed not to rely on run dependency to make their guesses. The control group was not given this information. The response styles of the two groups were similar, indicating that the experimental group still based their choices on the length of the run sequence. This led to the conclusion that instructing individuals about randomness is not sufficient in lessening the gambler's fallacy.\nAn individual's susceptibility to the gambler's fallacy may decrease with age. A study by Fischbein and Schnarch in 1997 administered a questionnaire to five groups: students in grades 5, 7, 9, 11, and college students specializing in teaching mathematics. None of the participants had received any prior education regarding probability. The question asked was: \"Ronni flipped a coin three times and in all cases heads came up. Ronni intends to flip the coin again. What is the chance of getting heads the fourth time?\" The results indicated that as the students got older, the less likely they were to answer with \"smaller than the chance of getting tails\", which would indicate a negative recency effect. 35% of the 5th graders, 35% of the 7th graders, and 20% of the 9th graders exhibited the negative recency effect. Only 10% of the 11th graders answered this way, and none of the college students did. Fischbein and Schnarch theorized that an individual's tendency to rely on the representativeness heuristic and other cognitive biases can be overcome with age.\nAnother possible solution comes from Roney and Trick, Gestalt psychologists who suggest that the fallacy may be eliminated as a result of grouping. When a future event such as a coin toss is described as part of a sequence, no matter how arbitrarily, a person will automatically consider the event as it relates to the past events, resulting in the gambler's fallacy. When a person considers every event as independent, the fallacy can be greatly reduced.\nRoney and Trick told participants in their experiment that they were betting on either two blocks of six coin tosses, or on two blocks of seven coin tosses. The fourth, fifth, and sixth tosses all had the same outcome, either three heads or three tails. The seventh toss was grouped with either the end of one block, or the beginning of the next block. Participants exhibited the strongest gambler's fallacy when the seventh trial was part of the first block, directly after the sequence of three heads or tails. The researchers pointed out that the participants that did not show the gambler's fallacy showed less confidence in their bets and bet fewer times than the participants who picked with the gambler's fallacy. When the seventh trial was grouped with the second block, and was perceived as not being part of a streak, the gambler's fallacy did not occur.\nRoney and Trick argued that instead of teaching individuals about the nature of randomness, the fallacy could be avoided by training people to treat each event as if it is a beginning and not a continuation of previous events. They suggested that this would prevent people from gambling when they are losing, in the mistaken hope that their chances of winning are due to increase based on an interaction with previous events.\nUsers.\nTypes of users.\nWithin a real-world setting, numerous studies have uncovered that for various decision makers placed in high stakes scenarios, it is likely they will reflect some degree of strong negative autocorrelation in their judgement.\nAsylum judges.\nIn a study aimed at discovering if the negative autocorrelation that exists with the gambler's fallacy existed in the decision made by U.S. asylum judges, results showed that after two successive asylum grants, a judge would be 5.5% less likely to approve a third grant.\nBaseball umpires.\nIn the game of baseball, decisions are made every minute. One particular decision made by umpires which is often subject to scrutiny is the 'strike zone' decision. Whenever a batter does not swing, the umpire must decide if the ball was within a fair region for the batter, known as the strike zone. If outside of this zone, the ball does not count towards outing the batter. In a study of over 12,000 games, results showed that umpires are 1.3% less likely to call a strike if the previous two balls were also strikes.\nLoan officers.\nIn the decision making of loan officers, it can be argued that monetary incentives are a key factor in biased decision making, rendering it harder to examine the gambler's fallacy effect. However, research shows that loan officers who are not incentivised by monetary gain are 8% less likely to approve a loan if they approved one for the previous client.\nLottery players.\nLottery play and jackpots entice gamblers around the globe, with the biggest decision for hopeful winners being what numbers to pick. While most people will have their own strategy, evidence shows that after a number is selected as a winner in the current draw, the same number will experience a significant drop in selections in the following lottery. A popular study by Charles Clotfelter and Philip Cook investigated this effect in 1991, where they concluded bettors would cease to select numbers immediately after they were selected, ultimately recovering selection popularity within three months. Soon after, a 1994 study was constructed by Dek Terrell to test the findings of Clotfelter and Cook. The key change in Terrell's study was the examination of a pari-mutuel lottery in which, a number selected with lower total wagers placed on it will result in a higher pay-out. While this examination did conclude that players in both types of lotteries exhibited behaviour in-line with the gambler's fallacy theory, those who took part in pari-mutuel betting seemed to be less influenced.\nThe effect of the gambler's fallacy can be observed as numbers are chosen far less frequently soon after they are selected as winners, recovering slowly over a two-month period. For example, on the 11th of April 1988, 41 players selected 244 as the winning combination. Three days later only 24 individuals selected 244, a 41.5% decrease. This is the gambler's fallacy in motion, as lottery players believe that the occurrence of a winning combination in previous days will decrease its likelihood of occurring today.\nVideo game players.\nSeveral video games feature the use of loot boxes, a collection of in-game items awarded on opening with random contents set by rarity metrics, as a monetization scheme. Since around 2018, loot boxes have come under scrutiny from governments and advocates on the basis they are akin to gambling, particularly for games aimed at youth. Some games use a special \"pity-timer\" mechanism, that if the player has opened several loot boxes in a row without obtaining a high-rarity item, subsequent loot boxes will improve the odds of a higher-rate item drop. This is considered to feed into the gambler's fallacy since it reinforces the idea that a player will eventually obtain a high-rarity item (a win) after only receiving common items from a string of previous loot boxes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12972", "revid": "12033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12972", "title": "Gun cotton", "text": ""}
{"id": "12974", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12974", "title": "Gilbert Plains", "text": "Community in Manitoba, Canada\nGilbert Plains is an unincorporated urban community in the Gilbert Plains Municipality, Manitoba, Canada, that was classified as a town prior to January 1, 2015.\nIt is situated on the Valley River, in the Parkland Region between Riding Mountain National Park and Duck Mountain Provincial Park.\nGilbert Plains was featured during season 3 of the CBC program \"Still Standing\". The episode originally aired on September 5, 2017.\nHistory.\nIncorporated in 1906, the original townsite was some miles to the south. The community was named for Gilbert Ross, a M\u00e9tis man who was living in the region when the first European settler, Glenlyon Campbell, arrived.\nOn 1 January 2015, the Town of Gilbert Plains relinquished its town status when it amalgamated with the Rural Municipality of Gilbert Plains to form the Gilbert Plains Municipality.\nDemographics.\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Gilbert Plains had a population of 773 living in 356 of its 407 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 785. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nMedia.\nA local newspaper, \"The Exponent\", serviced both Gilbert Plains and its neighboring town, Grandview. \"The Exponent\" closed on 24 February 2017, after 117 years of operation.\nA weekly non-profit newspaper, \"The Plain View,\" published its first issue on 5 June 2018, and has been running ever since. It serves both Gilbert Plains and Grandview.\nTransportation.\nThe community is located on Highway 5 and the CN railway line between Dauphin and Grandview, approximately northwest of Winnipeg. Gilbert Plains railway station receives Via Rail service. The community previously had an airport.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12975", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12975", "title": "Gasparo Contarini", "text": "Italian diplomat, cardinal and Bishop of Belluno\nGasparo Contarini (16 October 1483 \u2013 24 August 1542) was an Italian diplomat, cardinal, and Bishop of Belluno. He advocated for dialogue with Protestants during the Reformation. Born in Venice, he served as the Republic's ambassador to Charles V during its war with him. He was the first to explain the time discrepancy in the Magellan\u2013Elcano circumnavigation due to Earth's rotation. He participated in diplomatic efforts and reconciliations, and became a cardinal, even though he was initially a layman. Contarini was a leader in the reform movement within the Roman Catholic Church. He played a role in the papal approval of the Society of Jesus (Jesuits). He was also involved in attempts to restore religious unity in Germany.\nContarini's work, \"De magistratibus et republica venetorum\", praised the Venetian government system for its harmony, fairness, and stability. He described the electoral process, particularly the lottery system for choosing officials, emphasizing fairness and equality. Contarini's depiction of the Doge, Venice's leader, highlighted the balance between symbolic monarchy and the power of civic institutions. He portrayed the Doge as both a regal figure and a representative of the city's republican governance. Contarini's writings aimed to glorify the republican nature of Venice while showcasing its ceremonial and symbolic elements.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Venice, the eldest son of Alvise Contarini, of the ancient noble House of Contarini, and his wife Polissena Malpiero. After a thorough scientific and philosophical training at the University of Padua, he began his career in the service of his native city. From September 1520 to August 1525 he was the Republic's ambassador to Charles V, with whom Venice was soon at war, instructed to defend the Republic's alliance with Francis I of France. Though he participated at the Diet of Worms, April 1521, he never saw or spoke with Martin Luther. He accompanied Charles in the Netherlands and Spain.\nContarini was in Spain when the Magellan\u2013Elcano circumnavigation returned in 1522, bringing with them a cargo of spices from the East as well as a scientific curiosity. Although the sailors had carefully recorded every day of the three-year journey since they left Seville, the ship's log was one day earlier than the actual date when they returned to Seville. Contarini was the first European to give a correct explanation of this phenomenon. Since the ship had sailed westward around the world, in the same direction as the apparent motion of the sun in the sky, the sailors had experienced one fewer sunrise than a stationary observer.\nHe participated at the Congress of Ferrara in 1526 as the Republic's representative; at the Congress the League of Cognac was formed against the Emperor, allying France with Venice and several states of Italy. Later, after the Sack of Rome (1527), he assisted in reconciling the emperor with Clement VII, whose release he had obtained, and with the Republic of Bologna. Upon his return to Venice, he was made a senator and a member of the Great Council.\nSpirituality.\nAccording to historian Constance Furey, Contarini \"was representative of a European-wide phenomenon associated with names such as Erasmus, Thomas More and Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples, people who combined an Erasmian critique of the established church and ritualism with an interest in biblical scholarship as a means of cultivating internal piety,\" each with no thought of leaving the Catholic church.\nIn a letter to encourage a missed friend who had become a hermit, Contarini late recounted an event in 1511 where, following Confession with a wise and holy monk, he had a peace-giving epiphany that reliance on penances and heroic asceticism was not necessary for salvation, instead of simple faith, hope and charity: Christ's passion was \"more than sufficient.\" This has been likened by some historians as a similar event to Luther's \"tower experience\" and some historians even ascribe Lutheran views to Contarini, however the parallels are disputed by other historians.\nCardinalate.\nIn 1535, Paul III unexpectedly made the secular diplomat a cardinal in order to bind an able man of evangelical disposition to the Roman interests. Contarini accepted, but in his new position did not exhibit his former independence. At the time he was promoted to cardinal, May 21, 1535, he was still a layman. However, already in October 1536 he was appointed Bishop of Belluno. One of the fruits of his diplomatic activity is his \"De magistratibus et republica Venetorum\".\nAs Cardinal, Contarini figured among the most prominent of the \"Spirituali\", the leaders of the movement for reform within the Roman church. In April 1536 Paul III appointed a commission to devise ways for a reformation, with Contarini presiding. Paul III received favorably Contarini's \"Consilium de Emendanda Ecclesia\", which was circulated among the cardinalate, but it remained a dead letter. Contarini in a letter to his friend Cardinal Reginald Pole (dated 11 November 1538) says that his hopes had been wakened anew by the pope's attitude. He and his friends, who formed the Catholic evangelical movement of the Spirituali, thought that all would have been done when the abuses in church life had been put away. What Contarini had to do with it is shown by his letters to the pope in which he complained of the schism in the church, of simony and flattery in the papal court, and the dangers of a papal \"fiat\" monarchy, its least grateful passages. Paul's successor Paul IV, once a member on the same 1536 commission and fellow \"spirituali\", put it on the new \"Index Librorum Prohibitorum\".\nIn 1541 Cardinal Contarini was papal legate at the Conference of Regensburg, the diet and religious debate marking the culmination of attempts to restore religious unity in Germany by means of conferences. There everything was unfavorable; the Catholic states were bitter, the Evangelicals were distant. Contarini's instructions though apparently free were in fact full of papal reservations. But the papal party had gladly sent him, thinking that through him a union in doctrine could be brought about, while the interest of Rome could be attended to later. Though the princes stood aloof, the theologians and the emperor were for peace, so the main articles were put forth in a formula, Evangelical in thought and Catholic in expression. The papal legate had revised the Catholic proposal and assented to the formula agreed upon. All gave their approval, even Johann Eck, though he later regretted it.\nContarini's theological advisor was Tommaso Badia; his own position is shown in a treatise on justification, composed at Regensburg, which in essential points is Evangelical, differing only in the omission of the negative side and in being interwoven with the teaching of Aquinas. Meanwhile, the papal policy had changed, and Contarini chose to follow this. He advised the emperor, after the conference had broken up, not to renew it, but to submit everything to the pope.\nIgnatius Loyola acknowledged that Cardinal Contarini was largely responsible for the papal approbation of the Society of Jesus, on September 27, 1540. Meanwhile, Rome had drifted further into reaction, and Contarini died while legate at Bologna, at a time when the Inquisition had driven many of his friends and fellows in conviction into exile.\nThe Commonwealth and Government of Venice.\nContarini's book \"De magistratibus et republica venetorum\" (Paris, 1543) is an important source for the study of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Venice's unique system of government. It was published in an English translation in 1599. This magisterial work, written during his time as an ambassador to Charles V, extols the various institutions of the Venetian state in a manner designed to emphasize harmony, fairness and serenity. Historians have demonstrated that this text represents Contarini's idealization of Venetian reality. Probably written for a foreign, courtly audience, this work functions as the source for the everlasting propagation of the \"myth of Venice\" as a stable, unchanging and prosperous society.\nHis depiction of how members of the council were elected to the senate, for example, aimed to emphasise the way the electoral system prevented factionalism from occurring, instead making sure that \u201cpublic benefits are largely extended among the citizens\u201d rather than narrowly amongst \u201cone family\u201d . An elaborate lottery is described as giving the maximum amount of chance in appointing patricians to particular offices, and care is taken to point out if two of one family are standing for similar posts. Fairness is further emphasised in Contarini's constant references to the equality the members of the council enjoyed. They \u201csit down where it pleases them, for there is no place appointed to any\u201d, and they \u201cwith oath promise to do their utmost diligence, that the laws may be observed\u201d . He creates an image of disparate individuals, with factions broken up by the guiding hand of the law, working to ensure those in positions of importance are fairly chosen from their number and without the capacity to serve the interests of a smaller group.\nContarini's depiction of the Doge lucidly demonstrates the way in which this figure embodies both the conscious illusion of a resplendent monarchical ruler and an equally conscious demonstration of a regime that wishes to portray itself as ruled by many limiting the powers of one. This calculated duality means that Contarini's doge, which the second book of De magistratibus is almost entirely devoted to discussing, represents the closest point in his text to what actually occurred, because the Doge served as a literal embodiment of the idealisation of the reality of Venetian politics. For Contarini, this duality almost defines the greatness of the Venetian constitution. The Doge is the \u201cheart\u201d, under which \u201call are comprised\u201d . Contarini places him in the centre of his body metaphor, making him synecdochical for the city and the people that reside within it. This means he is to ensure that the disparate, competing interests of the city beat in time with one another, creating in the process the \u201cperfection of civil agreement\u201d. His job as a conductor, rather than a ruler, means therefore that the role takes on the aspect of representative of the entire city. Contarini's description of his vestments, privileges and rituals can therefore be compared to Marin Sanudo\u2019s description of the physical spaces of Venice in his essay \"In Praise of Venice\". Both are designed to extol the virtues of the entire city by describing representative parts. This is apparent in the way both authors treat the chapel of St. Mark. Patron saints were hugely important in terms of civic self-identification in renaissance Italy . Contarini emphasizes this, saying that he is \u201cwith exceeding honour solemnized of the Venetians\u201d . His description of the Doge's close relationship with the saint, through the \u201csolemn pomp\u201d with which he attends mass at the saint's chapel, attaches him to the aforementioned \u201cexceeding honour\u201d, in a similar fashion to the way in which Sanudo glorifies Venice as a whole by constantly referring to the beauty and worth of St. Mark's square and chapel as part of his panoramic praise of the city.\nAt the same time, however, Contarini's overall purpose is, of course, the glorification of the republican nature of his city. Therefore, he cannot avoid referring to \u201cthe other side\u201d of the Doge's figure when discussing his \u201croyal appearing show\u201d . Things like the \u201ckingly ornaments\u201d which were \u201calways purple garments or cloth of gold\u201d, both very ostentatious assertions of wealth and power, were to ensure he was \u201crecompensed\u201d for his \u201climitation of authority\u201d . Contarini thus openly concludes that the Doge is a combination of myth and reality, saying that \u201cin everything you may see the show of a king, but his authority is nothing\u201d . Indeed, as Edward Muir points out, \u201cby the sixteenth century virtually every word, gesture and act that the doge made in public was subject to legal and ceremonial regulation\u201d . He could not buy expensive jewels, own property outside Venice or the Veneto, display his insignia outside the Ducal Palace, decorate his apartment as he wanted, receive people in his ducal dress, send official letters, or have close ties with guilds, amongst a great many other restrictions. Legally, therefore, power in Venice came from the numerous councils, not the figurehead. The Doge thus becomes a brazen republican statement. Venice drew attention to a princely, magnificently adorned figurehead, only to direct most executive power to councils of her citizens.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12976", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12976", "title": "Gastroenterology", "text": "Branch of medicine focused on the digestive system and its disorders\nGastroenterology (from the Greek gast\u1e17r- \"belly\", -\u00e9nteron \"intestine\", and -log\u00eda \"study of\") is the branch of medicine focused on the digestive system and its disorders. The digestive system consists of the gastrointestinal tract, sometimes referred to as the \"GI tract,\" which includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine and large intestine as well as the accessory organs of digestion which include the pancreas, gallbladder, and liver.\nThe digestive system functions to move material through the GI tract via peristalsis, break down that material via digestion, absorb nutrients for use throughout the body, and remove waste from the body via defecation. Physicians who specialize in the medical specialty of gastroenterology are called gastroenterologists or sometimes \"GI doctors\".\nSome of the most common conditions managed by gastroenterologists include gastroesophageal reflux disease, gastrointestinal bleeding, irritable bowel syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) which includes Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, peptic ulcer disease, gallbladder and biliary tract disease, hepatitis, pancreatitis, colitis, colon polyps and cancer, nutritional problems, and many more.\nHistory.\nCiting from Egyptian papyri, John F. Nunn identified significant knowledge of gastrointestinal diseases among practicing physicians during the periods of the pharaohs. Irynakhty, of the tenth dynasty, c. 2125 B.C., was a court physician specializing in gastroenterology, sleeping, and proctology.\nAmong ancient Greeks, Hippocrates attributed digestion to concoction. Galen's concept of the stomach having four \"faculties\" was widely accepted up to modernity in the seventeenth century.\nDisease classification.\n1. International Classification of Diseases (ICD 2007)/WHO classification:\n2. MeSH subject Heading:\n3. National Library of Medicine Catalogue (NLM classification 2006):\nProcedures.\nColonoscopy.\nA procedure using a long thin tube with a camera passed through the anus to visualize the rectum and the entire length of the colon. It is performed to screen for colon polyps and Colorectal cancer, or to evaluate symptoms such as rectal bleeding, dark stools, changes in bowel habits, abdominal pain, and unexplained weight loss. During the procedure, the patient is usually sedated and the colon is examined for polyps, bleeding, or abnormal tissue; a biopsy or polyp removal may be performed. The procedure typically takes 30\u201360 minutes, followed by a brief observation period. Complications can include bloating, cramping, reaction to anesthesia, bleeding, and perforation of the colon.\nSigmoidoscopy.\nA procedure similar to a colonoscopy using a long thin tube with a camera (scope) passed through the anus but only intended to visualize the rectum and the last part of the colon closest to the rectum. All aspects of the procedure are the same as for a colonoscopy with the exception that this procedure only lasts ten to twenty minutes and is done without sedation. This usually allows for the patient to return to normal activities immediately after the procedure is finished.\nEsophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD).\nA flexible endoscope is passed through the mouth to examine the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum. EGD is used to evaluate symptoms such as persistent heartburn, difficulty swallowing, upper-GI bleeding (e.g., vomiting blood or black stools), unexplained anemia or weight loss, and abnormal imaging or lab results. The procedure allows direct visualization, biopsy for histology, and therapies including banding of esophageal varices and dilation of strictures. Most examinations take about 15\u201330 minutes. Common transient effects are bloating and a sore throat; uncommon risks include reactions to sedation, bleeding, and perforation of the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum.\nEndoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).\nA procedure using a long thin tube with a camera passed into the first part of the small intestine to locate, diagnose, and treat disorders of the bile and pancreatic ducts. These ducts can be narrowed or blocked by gallstones, infection, inflammation, pancreatic pseudocysts, or tumors, causing symptoms such as back pain or jaundice and laboratory findings such as elevated bilirubin. Under fluoroscopic guidance, contrast is injected into the ducts to visualize the anatomy; treatments can include sphincterotomy, stone extraction, dilation of strictures, stent placement, and tissue biopsy. Complications may include pancreatitis, infection (e.g., Ascending cholangitis), bleeding, reaction to anesthesia, and perforation of the duodenum or ducts.\nUltrasound and Bowel Ultrasound.\nUltrasound has become a standard tool in many medical settings. Its widespread availability, affordability, safety, and lack of radiation have established it as a common initial diagnostic method. In gastroenterology, ultrasound is highly accurate in diagnosing various conditions (e.g., Appendicitis, Diverticulitis). Furthermore, bowel ultrasound is crucial for identifying and managing Inflammatory bowel disease and their complications, including the early detection of Crohn's disease recurrence after surgery, as highlighted in the ECCO\u2013ESGAR guidelines. Modern ultrasound techniques like contrast-enhanced ultrasound offer real-time functional and vascular information, improving diagnostic capabilities. Additionally, operative abdominal ultrasound is increasingly important in minimally invasive interventions, including guided biopsies, drainage, and thermal ablation of liver lesions. \nNevertheless, the accuracy of ultrasound is operator-dependent, and inadequate training can lead to diagnostic errors. The European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology (EFSUMB) has established guidelines to define professional standards and the minimum training needed for ultrasound examinations. These guidelines outline three levels of expertise based on anatomical knowledge, the ability to assess diseases using ultrasound, and the volume of exams performed (at least 300 per year for level 1).\nA recent study indicated that the majority of young Italian gastroenterologists (&lt;40 y.o.) (58.9%) acquired their ultrasound skills during their gastroenterology training. Throughout their training, participants performed a median of 320 abdominal ultrasound examinations and 240 bowel ultrasound examinations.\nDisorders.\nEsophagus.\nGastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).\nA condition that is a result of stomach contents consistently coming back up into the esophagus causing troublesome symptoms or complications. Symptoms are considered troublesome based on how disruptive they are to a patient's daily life and well-being. This definition was standardized by the Montreal Consensus in 2006. Symptoms include a painful feeling in the middle of the chest and feeling stomach contents coming back up into the mouth. Other symptoms include chest pain, nausea, difficulty swallowing, painful swallowing, coughing, and hoarseness. Risk factors include obesity, pregnancy, smoking, hiatal hernia, certain medications, and certain foods. Diagnosis is usually based on symptoms and medical history, with further testing only after treatment has been ineffective. Further diagnosis can be achieved by measuring how much acid enters the esophagus or looking into the esophagus with a scope. Treatment and management options include lifestyle modifications, medications, and surgery if there is no improvement with other interventions. Lifestyle modifications include not lying down for three hours after eating, lying down on the left side, elevating head while laying by elevating head of the bed or using extra pillows, losing weight, stopping smoking, and avoiding coffee, mint, alcohol, chocolate, fatty foods, acidic foods, and spicy foods. Medications include antacids, proton pump inhibitors, H2 receptor blockers. Surgery is usually a Nissen fundoplication and is performed by a surgeon. Complications of longstanding GERD can include inflammation of the esophagus that may cause bleeding or ulcer formation, narrowing of the esophagus leading to swallowing issues, a change in the lining of the esophagus that can increase the chances of developing cancer (Barrett's esophagus), chronic cough, asthma, inflammation of the larynx leading to hoarseness, and wearing away of tooth enamel leading to dental issues.\nBarrett's esophagus.\nA condition in which the lining of the esophagus changes to look more like the lining of the intestine and increases the risk of developing esophageal cancer. There are no specific symptoms although symptoms of GERD may be present for years prior as it is associated with a 10\u201315% risk of Barrett's esophagus. Risk factors include chronic GERD for more than 5 years, being age 50 or older, being non-Hispanic white, being male, having a family history of this disorder, belly fat, and a history of smoking. Diagnosis can be made by looking into the esophagus with a scope and possibly taking a biopsy of the lining of the esophagus. Treatment includes managing GERD, destroying abnormal parts of the esophagus, removing abnormal tissue in the esophagus, and removing part of the esophagus as performed by a general surgeon. Further management could include periodic surveillance with repeat scopes at certain intervals determined by the physician, likely not more frequently than every three to five years. Complications from this disorder can result in a type of cancer called esophageal adenocarcinoma.\nEducation and training.\nUnited States.\nGastroenterology is a subspecialty of internal medicine and therefore requires three years of internal medicine residency training followed by three additional years in a dedicated gastroenterology fellowship. This training is certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) and the American Osteopathic Board of Internal Medicine (AOBIM) and must be completed at a program accredited by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME). Other national societies that oversee training include the American College of Gastroenterology (ACG), the American Gastroenterological Association (AGA), and the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ASGE).\nScope of practice.\nGastroenterologists see patients both in the clinic and the hospital setting. They can order diagnostic tests, prescribe medications, and perform a number of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures including colonoscopy, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), endoscopic ultrasound (EUS), and liver biopsy.\nIn Gastroenterology, as in other specialties, telehealth has led to a reshaping of healthcare systems by introducing new ways of providing care, facilitating access to services throughout the entire Countries.\nSubspecialties.\nSome gastroenterology trainees will complete a \"fourth-year\" (although this is often their seventh year of graduate medical education) in transplant hepatology, advanced interventional endoscopy, inflammatory bowel disease, motility, or other topics.\nAdvanced endoscopy, sometimes called interventional or surgical endoscopy, is a sub-specialty of gastroenterology that focuses on advanced endoscopic techniques for the treatment of pancreatic, hepatobiliary, and gastrointestinal disease. Interventional gastroenterologists typically undergo an additional year of rigorous training in advanced endoscopic techniques including endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic ultrasound-guided diagnostic and interventional procedures, and advanced resection techniques including endoscopic mucosal resection and endoscopic submucosal dissection. Additionally, the performance of endoscopic bariatric procedures is also performed by some advanced endoscopists.\nHepatology, or hepatobiliary medicine, encompasses the study of the liver, pancreas, and biliary tree, and is traditionally considered a sub-specialty of gastroenterology, while proctology encompasses disorders of the anus, rectum, and colon and is considered a sub-specialty of general surgery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12978", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12978", "title": "Graphics program", "text": ""}
{"id": "12979", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12979", "title": "GULAG", "text": ""}
{"id": "12980", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12980", "title": "Gulag", "text": "Soviet forced penal labour camp system\nThe Gulag was a system of forced labor camps in the Soviet Union. The word \"Gulag\" originally referred only to the division of the Soviet secret police that was in charge of running the forced labor camps from the 1930s to the early 1950s during Joseph Stalin's rule, but in English literature the term is popularly used for the system of forced labor throughout the Soviet era. The abbreviation GULAG (\u0413\u0423\u041b\u0410\u0413) stands for \"Gl\u00e1vnoye upravl\u00e9niye isprav\u00edtel'no-trudov\u00fdkh lager\u00e9y \" (\u0413\u043b\u0430\u0301\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u0443\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043b\u0435\u0301\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u0438\u0441\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0301\u0442\u0435\u043b\u044c\u043d\u043e-\u0442\u0440\u0443\u0434\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0301\u0445 \u043b\u0430\u0433\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0301\u0439 or \"Main Directorate of Correctional Labour Camps\"), but the full official name of the agency changed several times.\nThe Gulag is recognized as a major instrument of political repression in the Soviet Union. The camps housed both ordinary criminals and political prisoners, a large number of whom were convicted by simplified procedures, such as NKVD troikas or other instruments of extrajudicial punishment. The agency was established in 1930 and initially was administered by the OGPU (1923\u20131934), later known as the NKVD (1934\u20131946) and the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) in the final years. \nThe internment system grew rapidly, reaching a population of 100,000 in the 1920s. By the end of 1940, the population of the Gulag camps amounted to 1.5\u00a0million. The emergent consensus among scholars is that of the 14\u00a0million prisoners who passed through the Gulag camps and the 4\u00a0million prisoners who passed through the Gulag colonies from 1930 to 1953, roughly 1.5 to 1.7 million prisoners perished there or died soon after they were released. Some journalists and writers who question the reliability of such data heavily rely on memoir sources that come to higher estimations. Archival researchers have found \"no plan of destruction\" of the Gulag population and no statement of official intent to kill them, and prisoner releases vastly exceeded the number of deaths in the Gulag. This policy can partially be attributed to the common practice of releasing prisoners who were suffering from incurable diseases as well as prisoners who were near death.\nAlmost immediately after the death of Stalin, the Soviet establishment started to dismantle the Gulag system. A mass general amnesty was granted in the immediate aftermath of Stalin's death, but it was only offered to non-political prisoners and political prisoners who had been sentenced to a maximum of five years in prison. Shortly thereafter, Nikita Khrushchev was elected First Secretary, initiating the processes of de-Stalinization and the Khrushchev Thaw, triggering a mass release and rehabilitation of political prisoners. Six years later, on January 25, 1960, the Gulag system was officially abolished when the remains of its administration were dissolved by Khrushchev. The legal practice of sentencing convicts to penal labor continues to exist in the Russian Federation, but its capacity is greatly reduced.\nAleksandr Solzhenitsyn, winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, who survived eight years of Gulag incarceration, gave the term its international repute with the publication of \"The Gulag Archipelago\" in 1973. The author likened the scattered camps to \"a chain of islands\", and as an eyewitness, he described the Gulag as a system where people were worked to death. In March 1940, there were 53 Gulag camp directorates (simply referred to as \"camps\") and 423 labor colonies in the Soviet Union. Many mining and industrial towns and cities in northern Russia, eastern Russia and Kazakhstan\u2014such as Karaganda, Norilsk, Vorkuta and Magadan\u2014originated as blocks of camps built by prisoners and subsequently run by ex-prisoners.\nEtymology.\nGULAG (\u0413\u0423\u041b\u0410\u0413) stands for \"\u0413\u043b\u0430\u0301\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u0443\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043b\u0435\u0301\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u0438\u0441\u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0301\u0442\u0435\u043b\u044c\u043d\u043e-\u0442\u0440\u0443\u0434\u043e\u0432\u044b\u0301\u0445 \u043b\u0430\u0433\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0301\u0439\" (Main Directorate of Correctional Labour Camps). It was renamed several times, e.g., to Main Directorate of Correctional Labor Colonies (), which names can be seen in the documents describing the subordination of various camps. The term was not often used in Russian, either officially or colloquially; the predominant terms were \"the camps\" (\u043b\u0430\u0433\u0435\u0440\u044f, \"lagerya\") and \"the zone\" (\u0437\u043e\u043d\u0430, \"zona\"), usually singular, for the labor camp system and for the individual camps. The official term \"correctional labour camp\" was suggested for official use by the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in the session of July 27, 1929.\nAlthough the term was originally used in reference to a government agency, in English and many other languages the acronym acquired the qualities of a common noun, denoting \"the Soviet system of prison-based, unfree labor\".\nEven more broadly, \"Gulag\" has come to mean the Soviet repressive system itself, the set of procedures that prisoners once called the \"meat-grinder\": the arrests, the interrogations, the transport in unheated cattle cars, the forced labor, the destruction of families, the years spent in exile, the early and unnecessary deaths.\nWestern authors use the term \"Gulag\" to denote all the prisons and internment camps in the Soviet Union. The term's contemporary usage is at times notably not directly related to the USSR, such as in the expression \"North Korea's Gulag\" for camps operational today.\nOverview.\nSome historians estimate that 14 million people were imprisoned in the Gulag labor camps from 1929 to 1953 (the estimates for the period from 1918 to 1929 are more difficult to calculate). Other calculations, by historian Orlando Figes, refer to 25 million prisoners of the Gulag in 1928\u20131953. A further 6\u20137 million were deported and exiled to remote areas of the USSR, and 4\u20135 million passed through labor colonies, plus 3.5 million who were already in, or had been sent to, labor settlements.\nAccording to some estimates, the total population of the camps varied from 510,307 in 1934 to 1,727,970 in 1953. According to other estimates, at the beginning of 1953 the total number of prisoners in prison camps was more than 2.4 million, of which more than 465,000 were political prisoners. Between 1934 and 1953, 20% to 40% of the Gulag population in each given year were released.\nThe institutional analysis of the Soviet concentration system is complicated by the formal distinction between GULAG and GUPVI. GUPVI (\u0413\u0423\u041f\u0412\u0418) was the Main Administration for Affairs of Prisoners of War and Internees (, ), a department of NKVD (later MVD) in charge of handling of foreign civilian internees and prisoners of war in the Soviet Union during and in the aftermath of World War II (1939\u20131953). In many ways the GUPVI system was similar to GULAG.\nIts major function was the organization of foreign forced labor in the Soviet Union. The top management of GUPVI came from the GULAG system. The major memoir noted distinction from GULAG was the absence of convicted criminals in the GUPVI camps. Otherwise the conditions in both camp systems were similar: hard labor, poor nutrition and living conditions, and high mortality rate.\nFor the Soviet political prisoners like Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, all foreign civilian detainees and foreign POWs were imprisoned in the Gulag; the surviving foreign civilians and POWs considered themselves prisoners in the Gulag. According to the estimates, in total, during the whole period of the existence of the GUPVI, there were over 500 POW camps (within the Soviet Union and abroad), which imprisoned over 4,000,000 POWs. Most Gulag inmates were not political prisoners, although significant numbers of political prisoners could be found in the camps at any one time.\nPetty crimes and jokes about the Soviet government and officials were punishable by imprisonment. About half of political prisoners in the Gulag camps were imprisoned \"by administrative means\", i.e., without trial at courts; official data suggest that there were over 2.6 million sentences to imprisonment on cases investigated by the secret police throughout 1921\u201353. Maximum sentences varied depending on the type of crime and changed over time. From 1953, the maximum sentence for petty theft was six months, having previously been one year and seven years. Theft of state property carried a sentence of 7 to 25 years. In 1958, the maximum sentence for any crime was reduced from 25 to 15 years.\nIn 1960, the MVD ceased to function as the Soviet-wide administration of the camps in favour of individual republic MVD branches. The centralised detention administrations temporarily ceased functioning.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe tsar and the Russian Empire both used forced exile and forced labour as forms of judicial punishment. Katorga, a category of punishment which was reserved for those who were convicted of the most serious crimes, had many of the features which were associated with labor-camp imprisonment: confinement, simplified facilities (as opposed to the facilities which existed in prisons), and forced labor, usually involving hard, unskilled or semi-skilled work. According to historian Anne Applebaum, katorga was not a common sentence; approximately 6,000 katorga convicts were serving sentences in 1906, with up to 28,600 by 1916. Under the Imperial Russian penal system, those who were convicted of less serious crimes were sent to corrective prisons and they were also made to work.\nForced exile to Siberia had been in use for a wide range of offenses since the 17th century, and it was a common punishment for political dissidents and revolutionaries. In the 19th century, the members of the failed Decembrist revolt and Polish nobles who resisted Russian rule were sent into exile. Fyodor Dostoevsky was sentenced to die for reading banned literature in 1849, but the sentence was commuted to banishment to Siberia. Members of various socialist revolutionary groups, including Bolsheviks such as Sergo Ordzhonikidze, Vladimir Lenin, Leon Trotsky, and Joseph Stalin were also sent into exile. Convicts who were serving labor sentences and exiles were sent to the underpopulated areas of Siberia and the Russian Far East\u2014regions that lacked towns or food sources as well as organized transportation systems. Despite the isolated conditions, some prisoners successfully escaped to populated areas. Stalin escaped three of the four times after he was sent into exile. \nSince these times, Siberia gained its fearful connotation as a place of punishment, a reputation which was further enhanced by the Soviet Gulag system. The Bolsheviks' own experiences with exile and forced labor provided them with a model which they could base their own system on, including the importance of strict enforcement. From 1920 to 1950, the leaders of the Communist Party and the Soviet state considered repression a tool that they should use to secure the normal functioning of the Soviet state system and preserve and strengthen their positions within their social base, the working class (when the Bolsheviks took power, peasants represented 80% of the population).\nIn the midst of the Russian Civil War, Lenin and the Bolsheviks established a \"special\" prison camp system, separate from its traditional prison system and under the control of the Cheka. These camps, as Lenin envisioned them, had a distinctly political purpose. These early camps of the Gulag system were introduced in order to isolate and eliminate class-alien, socially dangerous, disruptive, suspicious, and other disloyal elements, whose deeds and thoughts were not contributing to the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat.\nForced labor as a \"method of reeducation\" was applied in the Solovki prison camp as early as the 1920s, based on Trotsky's experiments with forced labor camps for Czech war prisoners from 1918 and his proposals to introduce \"compulsory labor service\" voiced in \"Terrorism and Communism\". These concentration camps were not identical to the Stalinist or Nazi concentration camps but were introduced to isolate war prisoners given the extreme historical situation following World War I.\nVarious categories of prisoners were defined: petty criminals, POWs of the Russian Civil War, officials accused of corruption, sabotage and embezzlement, political enemies, dissidents and other people deemed dangerous for the state. In the first decade of Soviet rule, the judicial and penal systems were neither unified nor coordinated, and there was a distinction between criminal prisoners and political or \"special\" prisoners.\nThe \"traditional\" judicial and prison system, which dealt with criminal prisoners, were first overseen by The People's Commissariat of Justice until 1922, after which they were overseen by the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, also known as the NKVD. The Cheka and its successor organizations, the GPU or State Political Directorate and the OGPU, oversaw political prisoners and the \"special\" camps to which they were sent. In April 1929, the judicial distinctions between criminal and political prisoners were eliminated, and control of the entire Soviet penal system turned over to the OGPU. In 1928, there were 30,000 individuals interned; the authorities were opposed to compelled labor. In 1927, the official in charge of prison administration wrote:\nThe exploitation of prison labour, the system of squeezing \"golden sweat\" from them, the organisation of production in places of confinement, which while profitable from a commercial point of view is fundamentally lacking in corrective significance \u2013 these are entirely inadmissible in Soviet places of confinement.\nThe legal base and the guidance for the creation of the system of \"corrective labor camps\" (, ), the backbone of what is commonly referred to as the \"Gulag\", was a secret decree from the Sovnarkom of July 11, 1929, about the use of penal labor that duplicated the corresponding appendix to the minutes of the Politburo meeting of June 27, 1929.\nOne of the Gulag system founders was Naftaly Frenkel. In 1923, he was arrested for illegally crossing borders and smuggling. He was sentenced to 10 years' hard labor at Solovki, which later came to be known as the \"first camp of the Gulag\". While serving his sentence he wrote a letter to the camp administration detailing a number of \"productivity improvement\" proposals including the infamous system of labor exploitation whereby the inmates' food rations were to be linked to their rate of production, a proposal known as nourishment scale (\u0448\u043a\u0430\u043b\u0430 \u043f\u0438\u0442\u0430\u043d\u0438\u044f). This notorious you-eat-as-you-work system would often kill weaker prisoners in weeks and caused countless casualties. The letter caught the attention of a number of high communist officials including Genrikh Yagoda, and Frenkel soon went from being an inmate to becoming a camp commander and an important Gulag official. His proposals saw widespread adoption in the Gulag system.\nAfter having appeared as an instrument and place for isolating counter-revolutionary and criminal elements, the Gulag, because of its principle of \"correction by forced labor\", quickly became, in fact, an independent branch of the national economy secured on the cheap labor force presented by prisoners. Hence it is followed by one more important reason for the constancy of the repressive policy, namely the state's interest in unremitting rates of receiving a cheap labor force that was forcibly used, mainly in the extreme conditions of the east and north. The Gulag possessed both punitive and economic functions.\nFormation and expansion during Stalin's rule.\nThe Gulag was an administrative body that watched over the camps; eventually, its name would retrospectively be used as a name for these camps. After Lenin's death in 1924, Stalin was able to take control of the government, and he began to form the gulag system. On June 27, 1929, the Politburo created a system of self-supporting camps that would eventually replace the existing prisons around the country. Prisoners who received a prison sentence which exceeded three years were required to remain in these prisons. Prisoners who received a prison sentence which was shorter than three years were required to remain in the prison system that was still under the purview of the NKVD.\nThe purpose of these new camps was to colonise the remote and inhospitable environments throughout the Soviet Union. These changes took place around the time when Stalin started to institute collectivization and rapid industrial development. Collectivisation resulted in a large-scale purge of peasants and so-called kulaks. In contrast to other Soviet peasants, the kulaks were supposedly wealthy, and as a result, the state classified them as capitalists, and by extension it also classified them as enemies of socialism. The term would also become associated with anyone who opposed or even seemed disssatisfied with the Soviet government. By late 1929, Stalin launched a program which was known as \"dekulakization\". Stalin demanded the complete elimination of the kulak class, resulting in the imprisonment and execution of Soviet peasants. In just four months, 60,000 people were sent to the camps and 154,000 other people were exiled. However, this was only the beginning of the \"dekulakisation\" process. In 1931 alone, 1,803,392 people were exiled.\nAlthough these massive relocation processes were successful in transferring a large potential free forced labor work force to places where it was needed, that is about all it was successful in doing. All of the \"special settlers\", as the Soviet government referred to them, lived on starvation level rations, and as a result, many people starved to death in the camps, and anyone who was healthy enough to escape tried to do just that. This situation forced the government to give rations to a group of people which it was hardly getting any use out of, and as a result, it was just costing the Soviet government money. The OGPU quickly discovered the problem, and in response, it began to reform the \"dekulakisation\" process. In an attempt to prevent mass escapes from the colony, the OGPU started to recruit prisoners who lived inside it, and it also set up ambushes around popular escape routes. The OGPU also attempted to raise the living conditions in these camps in order to discourage people from actively trying to escape from them, and kulaks were told that they would regain their rights in five years. Even these revisions ultimately failed to resolve the problem, and as a result, the \"dekulakisation\" process was a failure because it did not lead to the creation of a steady forced labor force for the government.\nThe Gulag was officially established on April 25, 1930, as the GULAG by the OGPU order 130/63 in accordance with the Sovnarkom order 22 p.\u00a0248 dated April 7, 1930. It was renamed as the GULAG in November of that year. The hypothesis that economic considerations were responsible for mass arrests during the period of Stalinism has been refuted on the grounds of former Soviet archives that have become accessible since the 1990s, although some archival sources also tend to support an economic hypothesis. The 1931\u201332 archives indicate the Gulag had approximately 200,000 prisoners in the camps; while in 1935, approximately 800,000 were in camps and 300,000 in colonies. Gulag population reached a peak value (1.5 million) in 1941, gradually decreased during the war and then started to grow again, achieving a maximum by 1953. Besides Gulag camps, a significant amount of prisoners, which confined prisoners serving short sentence terms.\nIn the early 1930s, a tightening of the Soviet penal policy caused a significant growth of the prison camp population. During the Great Purge of 1937\u201338, mass arrests caused another increase in inmate numbers. Hundreds of thousands were arrested and sentenced to long prison terms on the grounds of one of the multiple passages of the notorious Article 58 of the Criminal Codes of the Union republics, which defined punishment for various forms of \"counterrevolutionary activities\". Under NKVD Order No. 00447, tens of thousands of Gulag inmates were executed in 1937\u201338 for \"continuing counterrevolutionary activities\".\nBetween 1934 and 1941, the number of prisoners with higher education increased more than eight times, and the number of prisoners with high education increased five times. It resulted in their increased share in the overall composition of the camp prisoners. Among the camp prisoners, the number and share of the intelligentsia was growing at the quickest pace. Distrust, hostility, and even hatred for the intelligentsia was a common characteristic of the Soviet leaders. Information regarding the imprisonment trends and consequences for the intelligentsia derive from the extrapolations of Viktor Zemskov from a collection of prison camp population movements data.\nDuring World War II.\nPolitical role.\nOn the eve of World War II, Soviet archives indicate a combined camp and colony population upwards of 1.6 million in 1939, according to V. P. Kozlov. Applebaum and Steven Rosefielde estimate that 1.2 to 1.5 million people were in Gulag system's prison camps and colonies when the war started. After the German invasion of Poland that marked the start of World War II in Europe, the Soviet Union invaded and annexed eastern parts of the Second Polish Republic. In 1940, the Soviet Union occupied Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Bessarabia (now the Republic of Moldova) and Bukovina. According to some estimates, hundreds of thousands of Polish citizens and inhabitants of the other annexed lands, regardless of their ethnic origin, were arrested and sent to the Gulag camps. However, according to the official data, the total number of sentences for political and anti-state (espionage, terrorism) crimes in the USSR in 1939\u201341 was 211,106.\nApproximately 300,000 Polish prisoners of war were captured by the USSR during and after the \"Polish Defensive War\". Almost all of the captured officers and a large number of ordinary soldiers were then murdered (see Katyn massacre) or sent to Gulag. Of the 10,000\u201312,000 Poles sent to Kolyma in 1940\u201341, most prisoners of war, only 583 men survived, released in 1942 to join the Polish Armed Forces in the East. Out of Polish General W\u0142adys\u0142aw Anders' 80,000 evacuees from the Soviet Union gathered in Great Britain, only 310 volunteered to return to Soviet-controlled Poland in 1947.\nDuring the Great Patriotic War, Gulag populations declined sharply because of a steep rise in mortality in 1942\u201343. In the winter of 1941, a quarter of the Gulag's population died of starvation. 516,841 prisoners died in prison camps in 1941\u201343, from a combination of their harsh working conditions and the famine caused by the German invasion. This period accounts for about half of all Gulag deaths, according to Russian statistics. In 1943, the term \"katorga works\" () was reintroduced. They were initially intended for Nazi collaborators, but then other categories of political prisoners (for example, members of deported peoples who fled from exile) were also sentenced to \"katorga works\". Prisoners sentenced to \"katorga works\" were sent to Gulag prison camps with the most harsh regime, and many of them perished.\nEconomic role.\nUp until World War II, the Gulag system expanded dramatically to create a Soviet \"camp economy\". Right before the war, forced labor provided 46.5% of the nation's nickel, 76% of its tin, 40% of its cobalt, 40.5% of its chrome-iron ore, 60% of its gold, and 25.3% of its timber. And in preparation for war, the NKVD put up many more factories and built highways and railroads.\nThe Gulag quickly switched to the production of arms and supplies for the army after fighting began. At first, transportation remained a priority. In 1940, the NKVD focused most of its energy on railroad construction. This would prove extremely important when the German advance into the Soviet Union started in 1941. In addition, factories converted to produce ammunition, uniforms, and other supplies. Moreover, the NKVD gathered skilled workers and specialists from throughout the Gulag into 380 special colonies which produced tanks, aircraft, armaments, and ammunition.\nDespite its low capital costs, the camp economy suffered from serious flaws. Actual productivity almost never matched estimates: the estimates proved far too optimistic. Scarcity of machinery and tools plagued the camps, and the tools that the camps did have quickly broke. The Eastern Siberian Trust of the Chief Administration of Camps for Highway Construction destroyed 94 trucks in just three years. But the greatest problem was that forced labor was less efficient than free labor. In fact, prisoners in the Gulag were, on average, half as productive as free laborers in the USSR at the time, which may be partially explained by malnutrition. To make up for this disparity, the NKVD worked prisoners harder than ever. To meet rising demand, prisoners worked longer and longer hours, and on lower food-rations than ever before. A camp administrator said in a meeting: \"There are cases when a prisoner is given only four or five hours out of twenty-four for rest, which significantly lowers his productivity.\" In the words of a former Gulag prisoner: \"By the spring of 1942, the camp ceased to function. It was difficult to find people who were even able to gather firewood or bury the dead.\"\nThe scarcity of food stemmed in part from the general strain on the entire Soviet Union but also the lack of central aid to the Gulag during the war. The central government focused all its attention on the military and left the camps to their own devices. In 1942, the Gulag set up the Supply Administration to find their own food and industrial goods. During this time, not only did food become scarce, but the NKVD limited rations in an attempt to motivate the prisoners to work harder for more food, a policy that lasted until 1948.\nIn addition to food shortages, the Gulag suffered from labor scarcity at the beginning of the war. The Great Terror of 1936\u20131938 had provided a large supply of free labor, but by the start of World War II the purges had slowed down. In order to complete all of their projects, camp administrators moved prisoners from project to project. To improve the situation, laws were implemented in mid-1940 that allowed giving short camp sentences (4 months to one year) to those convicted of petty theft, hooliganism, or labor-discipline infractions. By January 1941, the Gulag workforce had increased by approximately 300,000 prisoners. But in 1942, serious food shortages began, and camp populations dropped again. The camps lost still more prisoners to the war effort as the Soviet Union went into a total war footing in June 1941. Many laborers received early releases so that they could be drafted and sent to the front.\nEven as the pool of workers shrank, demand for output continued to grow rapidly. As a result, the Soviet government pushed the Gulag to \"do more with less\". With fewer able-bodied workers and few supplies from outside the camp system, camp administrators had to find a way to maintain production. The solution they found was to push the remaining prisoners still harder. The NKVD employed a system of setting unrealistically high production goals, straining resources in an attempt to encourage higher productivity. As the Axis armies pushed into Soviet territory from June 1941 on, labor resources became further strained, and many of the camps had to evacuate out of western Russia.\nFrom the beginning of the war to halfway through 1944, 40 camps were set up, and 69 were disbanded. During evacuations, machinery received priority, leaving prisoners to reach safety on foot. The speed of Operation Barbarossa's advance prevented the evacuation of all prisoners in good time, and the NKVD massacred many to prevent them from falling into German hands. While this practice denied the Germans a source of free labor, it also further restricted the Gulag's capacity to keep up with the Red Army's demands. When the tide of the war turned, however, and the Soviets started pushing the Axis invaders back, fresh batches of laborers replenished the camps. As the Red Army recaptured territories from the Germans, an influx of Soviet ex-POWs greatly increased the Gulag population.\nAfter World War II.\nAfter World War II, the number of inmates in prison camps and colonies sharply rose again, reaching approximately 2.5 million people by the early 1950s (about 1.7 million of whom were in camps). When the war ended, as many as two million former Russian citizens were forcefully repatriated into the USSR. On February 11, 1945, at the conclusion of the Yalta Conference, the United States and United Kingdom signed a Repatriation Agreement with the Soviet Union. One interpretation of this agreement resulted in the forcible repatriation of all Soviets. British and United States civilian authorities ordered their military forces in Europe to deport to the Soviet Union up to two million former residents of the Soviet Union, including persons who had left the Russian Empire and established different citizenship years before. The forced repatriation operations took place from 1945 to 1947.\nMultiple sources state that Soviet POWs, on their return to the Soviet Union, were treated as traitors (see Order No. 270). According to some sources, over 1.5 million surviving Red Army soldiers imprisoned by the Germans were sent to the Gulag. However, that is a confusion with two other types of camps. During and after World War II, freed POWs went to special \"filtration\" camps. Of these, by 1944, more than 90 percent were cleared, and about 8 percent were arrested or condemned to penal battalions. In 1944, they were sent directly to reserve military formations to be cleared by the NKVD. In 1945 about 100 filtration camps were set for repatriated \"Ostarbeiter\", POWs, and other displaced persons, which processed more than 4,000,000 people. By 1946, the major part of the population of these camps were cleared by NKVD and either sent home or conscripted (see table for details). 226,127 out of 1,539,475 POWs were transferred to the NKVD, i.e. the Gulag.\nAfter Nazi Germany's defeat, ten NKVD-run \"special camps\" subordinate to the Gulag were set up in the Soviet occupation zone in Germany. These \"special camps\" were former Stalags, prisons, or Nazi concentration camps such as Sachsenhausen (special camp number 7) and Buchenwald (special camp number 2). According to German government estimates \"65,000 people died in those Soviet-run camps or in transportation to them.\" According to German researchers, Sachsenhausen, where 12,500 Soviet era victims have been uncovered, should be seen as an integral part of the Gulag system.\nYet the major reason for the post-war increase in the number of prisoners was the tightening of legislation on property offences in summer 1947 (at this time there was a famine in some parts of the Soviet Union, claiming about 1 million lives), which resulted in hundreds of thousands of convictions to lengthy prison terms, sometimes on the basis of cases of petty theft or embezzlement. At the beginning of 1953, the total number of prisoners in prison camps was more than 2.4 million of which more than 465,000 were political prisoners.\nIn 1948, the system of \"special camps\" was established exclusively for a \"special contingent\" of political prisoners, convicted according to the more severe sub-articles of Article 58 (Enemies of people): treason, espionage, terrorism, etc., for various real political opponents, such as Trotskyites, \"nationalists\" (Ukrainian nationalism), white \u00e9migr\u00e9, as well as for fabricated ones. The state continued to maintain the extensive camp system for a while after Stalin's death in March 1953, although the period saw the grip of the camp authorities weaken, and a number of conflicts and uprisings occur (\"see\" Bitch Wars; Kengir uprising; Vorkuta uprising).\nThe amnesty of 1953 was limited to non-political prisoners and for political prisoners sentenced to not more than 5 years, therefore mostly those convicted for common crimes were then freed. The release of political prisoners started in 1954 and became widespread, and also coupled with mass rehabilitations, after Nikita Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalinism in his Secret Speech at the 20th Congress of the CPSU in February 1956.\nThe \"Gulag\" institution was closed by the MVD order Number 20 on January 25, 1960, but forced labor colonies for political and criminal prisoners continued to exist. Political prisoners continued to be kept in one of the most famous camps Perm-36 until 1987 when it was closed. The Russian penal system, despite reforms and a reduction in prison population, informally or formally continues many practices endemic to the \"Gulag\" system, including forced labor, inmates policing inmates, and prisoner intimidation. In the late 2000s, some human rights activists accused authorities of gradual removal of Gulag remembrance from places such as Perm-36 and Solovki prison camp.\nAccording to Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At its height the Gulag consisted of many hundreds of camps, with the average camp holding 2,000\u201310,000 prisoners. Most of these camps were \"corrective labour colonies\" in which prisoners felled timber, laboured on general construction projects (such as the building of canals and railroads), or worked in mines. Most prisoners laboured under the threat of starvation or execution if they refused. It is estimated that the combination of very long working hours, harsh climatic and other working conditions, inadequate food, and summary executions killed tens of thousands of prisoners each year. Western scholarly estimates of the total number of deaths in the Gulag in the period from 1918 to 1956 ranged from 1.2 to 1.7 million.\nDeath toll.\nPrior to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, estimates of Gulag victims ranged from 2.3 to 17.6 million. Mortality in Gulag camps in 1934\u201340 was 4\u20136 times higher than average in the Soviet Union. Post-1991 research by historians accessing archival materials brought this range down considerably. A 1993 study of archival Soviet data estimates 1,053,829 people died in the Gulag from 1934 to 1953.\nIt was common practice to release prisoners who were either suffering from incurable diseases or near death, so a combined statistics on mortality \"in the camps\" and mortality \"caused by the camps\" was higher. The tentative historical consensus is that, of the 18 million people who passed through the Gulag from 1930 to 1953, between 1.6 million and 1.76 million perished as a result of their detention, and about half of all deaths occurred between 1941 and 1943 following the German invasion. Timothy Snyder writes that \"with the exception of the war years, a very large majority of people who entered the Gulag left alive\". If prisoner deaths from labor colonies and special settlements are included, the death toll rises to 2,749,163, according to J. Otto Pohl's incomplete data.\nIn her 2018 study, Golfo Alexopoulos attempts to challenge this consensus figure by encompassing those whose life was shortened by the extreme conditions. Alexopoulos concludes that a systematic practice of the Gulag was to release sick prisoners on the verge of death; and that all prisoners who received the health classification \"invalid\", \"light physical labor\", \"light individualised labor\", or \"physically defective\" encompassed at least one third of all inmates who passed through the Gulag died or had their lives shortened due to detention in the Gulag in captivity or shortly after release. The mortality estimated in this way yields the figure of 6 million deaths. Historian Orlando Figes and Russian writer Vadim Erlikman have posited similar estimates. The estimate of Alexopoulos, however, has obvious methodological difficulties and is supported by misinterpreted evidence, such as presuming that hundreds of thousands of prisoners \"directed to other places of detention\" in 1948 was a euphemism for releasing prisoners on the verge of death into labor colonies, when it was really referring to internal transport in the Gulag rather than release.\nIn a University of Oxford doctoral dissertation, in 2020, the problem of medical release (\"aktirovka\") and of mortality among \"certified invalids\" (\"aktirovannye\") was considered in detail by Mikhail Nakonechnyi. He concludes that the number of terminally ill people discharged early on medical grounds from the Gulag was about 1 million. Mikhail adds 800,000\u2013850,000 excess deaths to the death toll directly caused by the results of Gulag incarceration, which brings the death toll to 2.5 million people.\nMortality rate.\nIn 2009, Steven Rosefielde stated more complete archival data increases camp deaths by 19.4 percent to 1,258,537, \"the best archivally-based estimate of Gulag excess deaths at present is 1.6 million from 1929 to 1953.\" Dan Healey in 2018 also stated the same thing \"New studies using declassified Gulag archives have provisionally established a consensus on mortality and \"inhumanity.\" The tentative consensus says that once secret records of the Gulag administration in Moscow show a lower death toll than expected from memoir sources, generally between 1.5 and 1.7 million (out of 18 million who passed through) between 1930 and 1953.\"\nCertificates of death in the Gulag system for the period from 1930 to 1956 \nConditions.\nLiving and working conditions in the camps varied significantly across time and place, depending, among other things, on the impact of broader events (World War II, countrywide famines and shortages, waves of terror, sudden influx or release of large numbers of prisoners) and the type of crime committed. Instead of being used for economic gain, political prisoners were typically given the worst work or were dumped into the less productive parts of the Gulag. For example Victor Herman, in his memoirs, compares the Burepolom and the Nuksha 2 camps, which were both near Vyatka.\nIn Burepolom there were roughly 3,000 prisoners, all non-political, in the central compound. They could walk around at will, were lightly guarded, had unlocked barracks with mattresses and pillows, and watched western movies. However Nuksha 2, which housed serious criminals and political prisoners, featured guard towers with machine guns and locked barracks. In some camps prisoners were only permitted to send one letter a year and were not allowed to have photos of loved ones.\nSome prisoners were released early if they displayed good performance. There were several productive activities for prisoners in the camps. For example, in early 1935, a course in livestock raising was held for prisoners at a state farm; those who took it had their workday reduced to four hours. During that year the professional theater group in the camp complex gave 230 performances of plays and concerts to over 115,000 spectators. Camp newspapers also existed.\nAndrei Vyshinsky, chief procurator of the Soviet Union, wrote a memorandum to NKVD chief Nikolai Yezhov in 1938, during the Great Purge, which stated:\nAmong the prisoners there are some so ragged and lice-ridden that they pose a sanitary danger to the rest. These prisoners have deteriorated to the point of losing any resemblance to human beings. Lacking food...they collect orts [refuse] and, according to some prisoners, eat rats and dogs.\nAccording to prisoner Yevgenia Ginzburg, Gulag inmates could tell when Yezhov was no longer in charge as one day the conditions relaxed. A few days later Beria's name appeared in official prison notices.\nIn general, the central administrative bodies showed a discernible interest in maintaining the labor force of prisoners in a condition allowing the fulfilment of construction and production plans handed down from above. Besides a wide array of punishments for prisoners refusing to work (which, in practice, were sometimes applied to prisoners that were too enfeebled to meet production quota), they instituted a number of positive incentives intended to boost productivity. These included monetary bonuses (since the early 1930s) and wage payments (from 1950 onward), cuts of individual sentences, general early-release schemes for norm fulfilment and overfulfilment (until 1939, again in selected camps from 1946 onward), preferential treatment, sentence reduction and privileges for the most productive workers (shock workers or Stakhanovites in Soviet parlance).\nInmates were used as camp guards and could purchase camp newspapers as well as bonds. Robert W. Thurston writes that this was \"at least an indication that they were still regarded as participants in society to some degree.\" Sports teams, particularly football teams, were set up by the prison authorities.\nBoris Sulim, a former prisoner who had worked in the Omsuchkan camp, close to Magadan, when he was a teenager stated:\nI was 18 years old and Magadan seemed a very romantic place to me. I got 880 rubles a month and a 3000 ruble installation grant, which was a hell of a lot of money for a kid like me. I was able to give my mother some of it. They even gave me membership in the Komsomol. There was a mining and ore-processing plant which sent out parties to dig for tin. I worked at the radio station which kept contact with the parties. [...] If the inmates were good and disciplined they had almost the same rights as the free workers. They were trusted and they even went to the movies. As for the reason they were in the camps, well, I never poked my nose into details. We all thought the people were there because they were guilty.\nImmediately after the German attack on the Soviet Union in June 1941 the conditions in camps worsened drastically: quotas were increased, rations cut, and medical supplies came close to none, all of which led to a sharp increase in mortality. The situation slowly improved in the final period and after the end of the war.\nConsidering the overall conditions and their influence on inmates, it is important to distinguish three major strata of Gulag inmates:\n1932-33 famine.\nThe Soviet famine of 1932\u20131933 swept across many different regions of the Soviet Union. During this time, it is estimated that around six to seven million people starved to death. On August 7, 1932, a new decree drafted by Stalin (Law of Spikelets) specified a minimum sentence of ten years or execution for theft from collective farms or of cooperative property. Over the next few months, prosecutions rose fourfold. A large share of cases prosecuted under the law were for the theft of small quantities of grain worth less than fifty rubles. The law was later relaxed on May 8, 1933. Overall, during the first half of 1933, prisons saw more new incoming inmates than the three previous years combined.\nPrisoners in the camps faced harsh working conditions. One Soviet report stated that, in early 1933, up to 15% of the prison population in Soviet Uzbekistan died monthly. During this time, prisoners were getting around worth of food a day. Many inmates attempted to flee, causing an upsurge in coercive and violent measures. Camps were directed \"not to spare bullets\".\nSocial conditions.\nThe convicts in such camps were actively involved in all kinds of labor with one of them being logging. The working territory of logging presented by itself a square and was surrounded by forest clearing. Thus, all attempts to exit or escape from it were well observed from the four towers set at each of its corners.\nLocals who captured a runaway were given rewards. It is also said that camps in colder areas were less concerned with finding escaped prisoners as they would die anyhow from the severely cold winters. In such cases prisoners who did escape without getting shot were often found dead kilometres away from the camp.\nGeography.\nIn the early days of Gulag, the locations for the camps were chosen primarily for the isolated conditions involved. Remote monasteries in particular were frequently reused as sites for new camps. The site on the Solovetsky Islands in the White Sea is one of the earliest and also most noteworthy, taking root soon after the Revolution in 1918. The colloquial name for the islands, \"Solovki\", entered the vernacular as a synonym for the labor camp in general. It was presented to the world as an example of the new Soviet method for \"re-education of class enemies\" and reintegrating them through labor into Soviet society. Initially the inmates, largely Russian intelligentsia, enjoyed relative freedom within the natural confinement of the islands.\nLocal newspapers and magazines were published. Even some scientific research was carried out, e.g., a local botanical garden was maintained but unfortunately later lost completely. Eventually, Solovki turned into an ordinary Gulag camp. Some historians maintain that it was a pilot camp of this type. In 1929, Maxim Gorky visited the camp and published an apology for it. The report of Gorky's trip to Solovki was included in the cycle of impressions titled \"Po Soiuzu Sovetov\", Part V, subtitled \"Solovki.\" In the report, Gorky wrote that \"camps such as 'Solovki' were absolutely necessary.\"\nWith the new emphasis on Gulag as the means of concentrating cheap labor, new camps were then constructed throughout the Soviet sphere of influence, wherever the economic task at hand dictated their existence, or was designed specifically to avail itself of them, such as the White Sea\u2013Baltic Canal or the Baikal\u2013Amur Mainline, including facilities in big cities \u2014 parts of the famous Moscow Metro and the Moscow State University new campus were built by forced labor. Many more projects during the rapid industrialisation of the 1930s, war-time and post-war periods were fulfilled on the backs of convicts. The activity of Gulag camps spanned a wide cross-section of Soviet industry. Gorky organized in 1933 a trip of 120 writers and artists to the White Sea\u2013Baltic Canal, 36 of them wrote a propaganda book about the construction published in 1934 and destroyed in 1937.\nThe majority of Gulag camps were positioned in extremely remote areas of northeastern Siberia (the best known clusters are \"Sevvostlag\" (\"The North-East Camps\") along Kolyma river and \"Norillag\" near Norilsk) and in the southeastern parts of the Soviet Union, mainly in the steppes of Kazakhstan (\"Luglag\", \"Steplag\", \"Peschanlag\"). A detailed map was made by the Memorial Foundation.\nThese were vast and sparsely inhabited regions with no roads or sources of food, but rich in minerals and other natural resources, such as timber. The construction of the roads was assigned to the inmates of specialised railway camps. Camps were generally spread throughout the entire Soviet Union, including the European parts of Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine. \nThere were several camps outside the Soviet Union, in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Mongolia, which were under the direct control of the Gulag.\nThroughout the history of the Soviet Union, there were at least 476 separate camp administrations. The Russian researcher Galina Ivanova stated that,\nto date, Russian historians have discovered and described 476 camps that existed at different times on the territory of the USSR. It is well known that practically every one of them had several branches, many of which were quite large. In addition to the large numbers of camps, there were no less than 2,000 colonies. It would be virtually impossible to reflect the entire mass of Gulag facilities on a map that would also account for the various times of their existence.\nSince many of these existed only for short periods, the number of camp administrations at any given point was lower. It peaked in the early 1950s when there were more than 100 camp administrations across the Soviet Union. Most camp administrations oversaw several single camp units, some as many as dozens or even hundreds. The infamous complexes were those at Kolyma, Norilsk, and Vorkuta, all in arctic or subarctic regions. However, prisoner mortality in Norilsk in most periods was actually lower than across the camp system as a whole.\nPersonnel.\nCommand Category 1 (head of the Gulag) was a Commissar of State Security of the 2nd class; Command Category 2 (deputy head of the Gulag) was a Commissar of State Security of the 3rd class. They wore the uniform and insignia of the NKVD. When the Gulag was transferred to the NKGB in 1943, the Gulag personnel began to use NKGB ranks and distinctions.\nHistoriography.\nOrigins and functions of the Gulag.\nAccording to historian Stephen Barnes, the origins and functions of the Gulag can be looked at in four major ways:\nHannah Arendt argues that as part of a totalitarian system of government, the camps of the Gulag system were experiments in \"total domination.\" In her view, the goal of a totalitarian system was not merely to establish limits on liberty, but rather to abolish liberty entirely in service of its ideology. She argues that the Gulag system was not merely political repression because the system survived and grew long after Stalin had wiped out all serious political resistance. Although the various camps were initially filled with criminals and political prisoners, eventually they were filled with prisoners who were arrested irrespective of anything relating to them as individuals, but rather only on the basis of their membership in some ever shifting category of imagined threats to the state.\nShe also argues that the function of the Gulag system was not truly economic. Although the Soviet government deemed them all \"forced labor\" camps, this in fact highlighted that the work in the camps was deliberately pointless, since all Russian workers could be subject to forced labor. The only real economic purpose they typically served was financing the cost of their own supervision. Otherwise the work performed was generally useless, either by design or made that way through extremely poor planning and execution; some workers even preferred more difficult work if it was actually productive. She differentiated between \"authentic\" forced-labor camps, concentration camps, and \"annihilation camps\".\nIn authentic labor camps, inmates worked in \"relative freedom and are sentenced for limited periods.\" Concentration camps had extremely high mortality rates and but were still \"essentially organized for labor purposes.\" Annihilation camps were those where the inmates were \"systematically wiped out through starvation and neglect.\" She criticizes other commentators' conclusion that the purpose of the camps was a supply of cheap labor. According to her, the Soviets were able to liquidate the camp system without serious economic consequences, showing that the camps were not an important source of labor and were overall economically irrelevant.\nArendt argues that together with the systematized, arbitrary cruelty inside the camps, this served the purpose of total domination by eliminating the idea that the arrestees had any political or legal rights. Morality was destroyed by maximizing cruelty and by organizing the camps internally to make the inmates and guards complicit. The terror resulting from the operation of the Gulag system caused people outside of the camps to cut all ties with anyone who was arrested or purged and to avoid forming ties with others for fear of being associated with anyone who was targeted. As a result, the camps were essential as the nucleus of a system that destroyed individuality and dissolved all social bonds. Thereby, the system attempted to eliminate any capacity for resistance or self-directed action in the greater population.\nArchival documents.\nStatistical reports made by the OGPU\u2013NKVD\u2013MGB\u2013MVD between the 1930s and 1950s are kept in the State Archive of the Russian Federation formerly called Central State Archive of the October Revolution (CSAOR). These documents were highly classified and inaccessible. Amid glasnost and democratization in the late 1980s, Viktor Zemskov and other Russian researchers managed to gain access to the documents and published the highly classified statistical data collected by the OGPU-NKVD-MGB-MVD and related to the number of the Gulag prisoners, special settlers, etc. In 1995, Zemskov wrote that foreign scientists have begun to be admitted to the restricted-access collection of these documents in the State Archive of the Russian Federation since 1992. However, only one historian, namely Zemskov, was admitted to these archives, and later the archives were again \"closed\", according to Leonid Lopatnikov. Pressure from the Putin administration has exacerbated the difficulties of Gulag researchers.\nWhile considering the issue of reliability of the primary data provided by corrective labor institutions, it is necessary to take into account the following two circumstances. On the one hand, their administration was not interested to understate the number of prisoners in its reports, because it would have automatically led to a decrease in the food supply plan for camps, prisons, and corrective labor colonies. The decrement in food would have been accompanied by an increase in mortality that would have led to wrecking of the vast production program of the Gulag. On the other hand, overstatement of data of the number of prisoners also did not comply with departmental interests, because it was fraught with the same (i.e., impossible) increase in production tasks set by planning bodies. In those days, people were highly responsible for non-fulfilment of plan. It seems that a resultant of these objective departmental interests was a sufficient degree of reliability of the reports.\nBetween 1990 and 1992, the first precise statistical data on the Gulag based on the Gulag archives were published by Viktor Zemskov. These had been generally accepted by leading Western scholars, despite the fact that a number of inconsistencies were found in this statistics. Not all the conclusions drawn by Zemskov based on his data have been generally accepted. Thus, Sergei Maksudov alleged that although literary sources, for example the books of Lev Razgon or Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, did not envisage the total number of the camps very well and markedly exaggerated their size. On the other hand, Viktor Zemskov, who published many documents by the NKVD and KGB, was far from understanding of the Gulag essence and the nature of socio-political processes in the country. He added that without distinguishing the degree of accuracy and reliability of certain figures, without making a critical analysis of sources, without comparing new data with already known information, Zemskov absolutizes the published materials by presenting them as the ultimate truth. As a result, Maksudov charges that Zemskov's attempts to make generalized statements with reference to a particular document, as a rule, do not hold water.\nIn response, Zemskov wrote that the charge that he allegedly did not compare new data with already known information could not be called fair. In his words, the trouble with most western writers is that they do not benefit from such comparisons. Zemskov added that when he tried not to overuse the juxtaposition of new information with \"old\" one, it was only because of a sense of delicacy, not to once again psychologically traumatize the researchers whose works used incorrect figures, as it turned out after the publication of the statistics by the OGPU-NKVD-MGB-MVD.\nAccording to French historian Nicolas Werth, the mountains of the materials of the Gulag archives, which are stored in funds of the State Archive of the Russian Federation and were being constantly exposed during the last fifteen years, represent only a very small part of bureaucratic prose of immense size left over after the decades of \"creativity\" by the \"dull and reptile\" organization managing the Gulag. In many cases, local camp archives, which had been stored in sheds, barracks, or other rapidly disintegrating buildings, simply disappeared in the same way as most of the camp buildings did.\nIn 2004 and 2005, some archival documents were published in the edition \"Istoriya Stalinskogo Gulaga. Konets 1920-kh \u2014 Pervaya Polovina 1950-kh Godov. Sobranie Dokumentov v 7 Tomakh\" (\"The History of Stalin's Gulag. From the Late 1920s to the First Half of the 1950s. Collection of Documents in Seven Volumes\"), wherein each of its seven volumes covered a particular issue indicated in the title of the volume:\nThe edition contains the brief introductions by the two \"patriarchs of the Gulag science\", Robert Conquest and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, and 1,431 documents, the overwhelming majority of which were obtained from funds of the State Archive of the Russian Federation.\nPopulation estimates.\nDuring the decades before the dissolution of the USSR, the debates about the population size of Gulag failed to arrive at generally accepted figures; wide-ranging estimates have been offered, and the bias toward higher or lower side was sometimes ascribed to political views of the particular author. Some of those earlier estimates (both high and low) are shown in the table below.\nThe glasnost political reforms in the late 1980s and the subsequent dissolution of the USSR, led to the release of a large amount of formerly classified archival documents including new demographic and NKVD data. Analysis of the official Gulag statistics by Western scholars immediately demonstrated that, despite their inconsistency, they do not support previously published higher estimates. Importantly, the released documents made possible to clarify terminology used to describe different categories of forced labor population, because the use of the terms \"forced labor\", \"GULAG\", \"camps\" interchangeably by early researchers led to significant confusion and resulted in significant inconsistencies in the earlier estimates.\nArchival studies revealed several components of the NKVD penal system in the Stalinist USSR: prisons, labor camps, labor colonies, as well as various \"settlements\" (exile) and of non-custodial forced labor. Although most of them fit the definition of forced labor, only labor camps, and labor colonies were associated with punitive forced labor in detention. Forced labor camps (\"Gulag camps\") were hard regime camps, whose inmates were serving more than three-year terms. As a rule, they were situated in remote parts of the USSR, and labor conditions were extremely hard there. They formed a core of the Gulag system. The inmates of \"corrective labor colonies\" served shorter terms; these colonies were located in less remote parts of the USSR, and they were run by local NKVD administration.\nPreliminary analysis of the Gulag camps and colonies statistics (see the chart on the right) demonstrated that the population reached the maximum before the World War II, then dropped sharply, partially due to massive releases, partially due to wartime high mortality, and then was gradually increasing until the end of Stalin era, reaching the global maximum in 1953, when the combined population of Gulag camps and labor colonies amounted to 2,625,000.\nThe results of these archival studies convinced many scholars, including Robert Conquest or Stephen Wheatcroft to reconsider their earlier estimates of the size of the Gulag population, although the 'high numbers' of arrested and deaths are not radically different from earlier estimates. Although such scholars as Rosefielde or Vishnevsky point at several inconsistencies in archival data with Rosefielde pointing out the archival figure of 1,196,369 for the population of the Gulag and labor colonies combined on December 31, 1936, is less than half the 2.75 million labor camp population given to the Census Board by the NKVD for the 1937 census, it is generally believed that these data provide more reliable and detailed information that the indirect data and literary sources available for the scholars during the Cold War era. Although Conquest cited Beria's report to the Politburo of the labor camp numbers at the end of 1938 stating there were almost 7 million prisoners in the labor camps, more than three times the archival figure for 1938 and an official report to Stalin by the Soviet minister of State Security in 1952 stating there were 12 million prisoners in the labor camps.\nThese data allowed scholars to conclude that during the period of 1928\u201353, about 14 million prisoners passed through the system of Gulag \"labor camps\" and 4\u20135 million passed through the \"labor colonies\". Thus, these figures reflect the number of convicted persons, and do not take into account the fact that a significant part of Gulag inmates had been convicted more than one time, so the actual number of convicted is somewhat overstated by these statistics. From other hand, during some periods of Gulag history the official figures of Gulag population reflected the camps' capacity, not the actual number of inmates, so the actual figures were 15% higher in, e.g. 1946.\nThe USSR implemented a number of labor disciplinary measures, due to the lack of productivity of its labour force in the early 1930s. 1.8 million workers were sentenced to 6 months in forced labor with a quarter of their original pay, 3.3 million faced sanctions, and 60k were imprisoned for absentees in 1940 alone. The conditions of Soviet workers worsened in WW2 as 1.3 million were punished in 1942, and 1 million each were punished in subsequent 1943 and 1944 with the reduction of 25% of food rations. Further more, 460 thousand were imprisoned throughout these years.\nImpact.\nCulture.\nThe Gulag spanned nearly four decades of Soviet and East European history and affected millions of individuals. Its cultural impact was enormous. The Gulag has become a major influence on contemporary Russian thinking, and an important part of modern Russian folklore. Many songs by the authors-performers known as the \"bards\", most notably Vladimir Vysotsky and Alexander Galich, neither of whom served time in the camps, describe life inside the Gulag and glorified the life of \"zeks\". Words and phrases which originated in the labor camps became part of the Russian/Soviet vernacular in the 1960s and 1970s. The memoirs of Alexander Dolgun, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, Varlam Shalamov and Yevgenia Ginzburg, among others, became a symbol of defiance in Soviet society. These writings harshly chastised the Soviet people for their tolerance and apathy regarding the Gulag, but at the same time provided a testament to the courage and resolve of those who were imprisoned.\nAnother cultural phenomenon in the Soviet Union linked with the Gulag was the forced migration of many artists and other people of culture to Siberia. This resulted in a Renaissance of sorts in places like Magadan, where, for example, the quality of theatre production was comparable to Moscow's and Eddie Rosner played jazz.\nLiterature.\nMany eyewitness accounts of Gulag prisoners have been published:\nColonization.\nSoviet show that the goals of the Gulag included colonization of sparsely populated remote areas and exploiting its resources using forced labor. In 1929, OGPU was given the task to colonize these areas. To this end, the notion of \"free settlement\" was introduced. On April 12, 1930 Genrikh Yagoda wrote to the OGPU Commission:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen well-behaved persons had served the majority of their terms, they could be released for \"free settlement\" (\u0432\u043e\u043b\u044c\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u043f\u043e\u0441\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435, \"volnoye poseleniye\") outside the confinement of the camp. They were known as \"free settlers\" (; not to be confused with the term , \"exile settlers\"). In addition, for persons who served full term, but who were denied the free choice of place of residence, it was recommended to assign them for \"free settlement\" and give them land in the general vicinity of the place of confinement. The Gulag inherited this approach from the katorga system. It is estimated that of the 40,000 people collecting state pensions in Vorkuta, 32,000 are trapped former Gulag inmates, or their descendants.\nEconomics.\nAccording to a 2024 study, areas near Gulag camps that held a larger share of educated elites among its prisoner population have subsequently been characterized by greater economic growth. According to the authors, it demonstrates long-run persistence of human capital across generations.\nLife after a term was served.\nPersons who served a term in a camp or prison were restricted from taking a wide range of jobs. Concealment of a previous imprisonment was a triable offence. Persons who served terms as \"politicals\" were nuisances for \"First Departments\" (, outlets of the secret police at all enterprises and institutions), because former \"politicals\" had to be monitored. Many people who were released from camps were restricted from settling in larger cities.\nMemorials.\nBoth Moscow and St. Petersburg have memorials to the victims of the Gulag made of boulders from the Solovki camp. Moscow's memorial is on Lubyanka Square, the site of the headquarters of the NKVD. People gather at these memorials every year on the Day of Victims of the Repression (October 30).\nGulag survivor Anton Antonov-Ovseyenko was the first director of the State Gulag Museum in Moscow. In 2015, another museum dedicated to the Gulag was opened in Moscow.\nIn November 2024, the Gulag History Museum in Moscow was ordered to close due to \"fire safety\" violations amid the Putin regime\u2019s crackdown on dissent.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12983", "revid": "478773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12983", "title": "Garnishee order", "text": ""}
{"id": "12984", "revid": "46512407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12984", "title": "Geiger counter", "text": "Instrument used for measuring ionizing radiation\nGeiger counter (, ; also known as a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller counter or G-M counter) is an electronic instrument for detecting and measuring ionizing radiation with the use of a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube. It is widely used in applications such as radiation dosimetry, radiological protection, experimental physics and the nuclear industry.\nIt detects ionizing radiation such as alpha particles, beta particles, and gamma rays using the ionization effect produced in a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube, which gives its name to the instrument.\nIn wide and prominent use as a hand-held radiation survey instrument, Geiger counter is perhaps one of the world's best-known radiation detection instruments. As such, the phrase \"Geiger counter\" is often used generically to refer to any form of dosimeter (or, \"radiation-measuring device\"), but scientifically, a Geiger counter is only one specific type of dosimeter.\nThe original detection principle was realized in 1908 at the University of Manchester, but it was not until the development of the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube in 1928 that the Geiger counter could be produced as a practical instrument. Since then, it has been very popular due to its robust sensing element and relatively low cost. However, there are limitations in measuring high radiation rates and the energy of incident radiation.\nGeiger counter is one of the first examples of data sonification.\nPrinciple of operation.\nA Geiger counter consists of a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube (the sensing element which detects the radiation) and the processing electronics, which display the result.\nThe Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube is filled with an inert gas such as helium, neon, or argon at low pressure, to which a high voltage is applied. The tube briefly conducts electrical charge when high energy particles or gamma radiation make the gas conductive by ionization. The ionization is considerably amplified within the tube by the Townsend discharge effect to produce an easily measured detection pulse, which is fed to the processing and display electronics. This large pulse from the tube makes the Geiger counter relatively cheap to manufacture, as the subsequent electronics are greatly simplified. The electronics also generate the high voltage, typically 400\u2013900 volts, that has to be applied to the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube to enable its operation. This voltage must be carefully selected, as too high a voltage will allow for continuous discharge, damaging the instrument and invalidating the results. Conversely, too low a voltage will result in an electric field that is too weak to generate a current pulse. The correct voltage is usually specified by the manufacturer. To help quickly terminate each discharge in the tube a small amount of halogen gas or organic material known as a quenching mixture is added to the fill gas.\nReadout.\nThere are two types of detected radiation readout: counts and radiation dose.\nThe readout can be analog or digital, and modern instruments offer serial communications with a host computer or network.\nThere is usually an option to produce audible clicks representing the number of ionization events detected. This is the distinctive sound associated with handheld or portable Geiger counters. The purpose of this is to allow the user to concentrate on manipulation of the instrument while retaining auditory feedback on the radiation rate.\nLimitations.\nThere are two main limitations of the Geiger counter:\nTypes and applications.\nThe intended detection application of a Geiger counter dictates the tube design used. Consequently, there are a great many designs, but they can be generally categorized as \"end-window\", windowless \"thin-walled\", \"thick-walled\", and sometimes hybrids of these types.\nParticle detection.\nThe first historical uses of the Geiger principle were to detect \u03b1- and \u03b2-particles, and the instrument is still used for this purpose today. For \u03b1-particles and low energy \u03b2-particles, the \"end-window\" type of a Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube has to be used, as these particles have a limited range and are easily stopped by a solid material. Therefore, the tube requires a window which is thin enough to allow as many as possible of these particles through to the fill gas. The window is usually made of mica with a density of about 1.5\u20132.0\u00a0mg/cm2.\n\u03b1-particles have the shortest range, and to detect these the window should ideally be within 10\u00a0mm of the radiation source due to \u03b1-particle attenuation. However, the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube produces a pulse output which is the same magnitude for all detected radiation, so a Geiger counter with an end window tube cannot distinguish between \u03b1- and \u03b2-particles. A skilled operator can use varying distance from a radiation source to differentiate between \u03b1- and high energy \u03b2-particles.\nThe \"pancake\" Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube is a variant of the end-window probe, but designed with a larger detection area to make checking quicker. However, the pressure of the atmosphere against the low pressure of the fill gas limits the window size due to the limited strength of the window membrane.\nSome \u03b2-particles can also be detected by a thin-walled \"windowless\" Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube, which has no end-window, but allows high energy \u03b2-particles to pass through the tube walls. Although the tube walls have a greater stopping power than a thin end-window, they still allow these more energetic particles to reach the fill gas.\nEnd-window Geiger counters are still used as a general purpose, portable, radioactive contamination measurement and detection instrument, owing to their relatively low cost, robustness and relatively high detection efficiency; particularly with high energy \u03b2-particles. However, for discrimination between \u03b1- and \u03b2-particles or provision of particle energy information, scintillation counters or proportional counters should be used. Those instrument types are manufactured with much larger detector areas, which means that checking for surface contamination is quicker than with a Geiger counter.\nGamma and X-ray detection.\nGeiger counters are widely used to detect gamma radiation and X-rays, collectively known as photons, and for this the windowless tube is used. However, detection efficiency is low compared to alpha and beta particles.\nThe article on the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube carries a more detailed account of the techniques used to detect photon radiation. For high energy photons, the tube relies on the interaction of the radiation with the tube wall, usually a material with a high atomic number such as stainless steel of 1\u20132\u00a0mm thickness, to produce free electrons within the tube wall, due to the photoelectric effect. If these migrate out of the tube wall, they enter and ionize the fill gas.\nThis effect increases the detection efficiency because the low-pressure gas in the tube has poorer interaction with higher energy photons than a steel tube. However, as photon energies decrease to low levels, there is greater gas interaction, and the contribution of direct gas interaction increases. At very low energies (less than 25 keV), direct gas ionisation dominates, and a steel tube attenuates the incident photons. Consequently, at these energies, a typical tube design is a long tube with a thin wall which has a larger gas volume, to give an increased chance of direct interaction of a particle with the fill gas.\nAbove these low energy levels, there is a considerable variance in response to different photon energies of the same intensity, and a steel-walled tube employs what is known as \"energy compensation\" in the form of filter rings around the naked tube, which attempts to compensate for these variations over a large energy range. A steel-walled Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube is about 1% efficient over a wide range of energies.\nNeutron detection.\nA variation of the Geiger tube can be used to exclusively measure radiation dosage from neutrons rather than from gammas by the process of neutron capture. The tube, which can contain the fill gas boron trifluoride or helium-3, is surrounded by a plastic moderator that reduces neutron energies prior to capture. When a capture occurs in the fill gas, the energy released is registered in the detector.\nGamma measurement\u2014personnel protection and process control.\nWhile \"Geiger counter\" is practically synonymous with the hand-held variety, the Geiger principle is in wide use in installed \"area gamma\" alarms for personnel protection, as well as in process measurement and interlock applications. The processing electronics of such installations have a higher degree of sophistication and reliability than those of hand-held meters.\nPhysical design.\nFor hand-held units there are two fundamental physical configurations: the \"integral\" unit with both detector and electronics in the same unit, and the \"two-piece\" design which has a separate detector probe and an electronics module connected by a short cable.\nIn the 1930s a mica window was added to the cylindrical design allowing low-penetration radiation to pass through with ease.\nThe integral unit allows single-handed operation, so the operator can use the other hand for personal security in challenging monitoring positions, but the two piece design allows easier manipulation of the detector, and is commonly used for alpha and beta surface contamination monitoring where careful manipulation of the probe is required or the weight of the electronics module would make operation unwieldy. A number of different sized detectors are available to suit particular situations, such as placing the probe in small apertures or confined spaces.\nGamma and X-Ray detectors generally use an \"integral\" design so the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube is conveniently within the electronics enclosure. This can easily be achieved because the casing usually has little attenuation, and is employed in ambient gamma measurements where distance from the source of radiation is not a significant factor. However, to facilitate more localised measurements such as \"surface dose\", the position of the tube in the enclosure is sometimes indicated by targets on the enclosure so an accurate measurement can be made with the tube at the correct orientation and a known distance from the surface.\nThere is a particular type of gamma instrument known as a \"hot spot\" detector which has the detector tube on the end of a long pole or flexible conduit. These are used to measure high radiation gamma locations whilst protecting the operator by means of distance shielding.\nParticle detection of alpha and beta can be used in both integral and two-piece designs. A pancake probe (for alpha/beta) is generally used to increase the area of detection in two-piece instruments whilst being relatively light weight. In integral instruments using an end window tube there is a window in the body of the casing to prevent shielding of particles. There are also hybrid instruments which have a separate probe for particle detection and a gamma detection tube within the electronics module. The detectors are switchable by the operator, depending the radiation type that is being measured.\nGuidance on application use.\nIn the United Kingdom the National Radiological Protection Board issued a user guidance note on selecting the best portable instrument type for the radiation measurement application concerned. This covers all radiation protection instrument technologies and includes a guide to the use of G-M detectors.\nHistory.\nIn 1908 Hans Geiger, under the supervision of Ernest Rutherford at the Victoria University of Manchester (now the University of Manchester), developed an experimental technique for detecting alpha particles that would later be used to develop the Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube in 1928. This early counter was only capable of detecting alpha particles and was part of a larger experimental apparatus. The fundamental ionization mechanism used was discovered by John Sealy Townsend between 1897 and 1901, and is known as the Townsend discharge, which is the ionization of molecules by ion impact.\nIt was not until 1928 that Geiger and Walther M\u00fcller (a PhD student of Geiger) developed the sealed Geiger\u2013M\u00fcller tube which used basic ionization principles previously used experimentally. Small and rugged, not only could it detect alpha and beta radiation as prior models had done, but also gamma radiation. Now a practical radiation instrument could be produced relatively cheaply, and so the Geiger counter was born. As the tube output required little electronic processing, a distinct advantage in the thermionic valve era due to minimal valve count and low power consumption, the instrument achieved great popularity as a portable radiation detector.\nModern versions of the Geiger counter use halogen quench gases, a technique invented in 1947 by Sidney H. Liebson. Halogen compounds have superseded the organic quench gases because of their much longer life and lower operating voltages; typically 400-900 volts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "12985", "revid": "42895809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12985", "title": "General Synod", "text": "Title of the governing body of some church organizations\nThe General Synod is the title of the governing body of some church organizations. \nAnglican Communion.\nThe General Synod of the Church of England, which was established in 1970 replacing the Church Assembly, is the legislative body of the Church of England.\nThe equivalent In the Episcopal Church in the United States is the General Convention.\nSeveral other churches in the Anglican Communion also have General Synods:\nOther churches.\nThe United Church of Christ, based in the United States, also calls its main governing body a General Synod. It meets every two years and consists of over 600 delegates from various congregations and conferences.\nThe Missionary Baptist Conference of the USA calls their main governing body a General Synod. It meets annually to set the theological and missional direction for the denomi-network. \nThe Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church (ARP) has the General Synod as its highest church court. The ARP General Synod meets yearly and in recent years has, almost without exception, been held at the Bonclarken in North Carolina. The delegates to the General Synod consists of the elder representatives elected from each church's session and all ministers from all presbyteries that comprise the Church (excluding ministers and elders from the independent ARP Synods of Mexico and Pakistan).\nThe Evangelical Church of Augsburg and Helvetic Confession in Austria and the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany each call their main legislative bodies . The legislative body In the Evangelical Church in Prussia was called between 1846 and 1953.\nThe governing body of the Reformed Church in America, a Calvinist denomination in the United States and Canada, is known as the General Synod.\n, the governing body of the Church of Norway, is normally translated as General Synod. It convenes once a year, and consists of 85 representatives, of whom seven or eight are sent from each of the dioceses.\nThe Batak Christian Protestant Church (BPCP), or \"Huria Kristen Batak Protestan\" (abbreviated HKBP), held a twice-a-year General Synod (Sinode Godang), to discuss about matters in HKBP, and to elect the new \"Ephorus\" (or Board) for the HKBP. The first General Synod of HKBP was held in 1922.\nOther uses.\nIn North America, the Evangelical Lutheran General Synod of the United States of North America, often referred to as the General Synod, was a Lutheran church body that existed from 1820 to 1918."}
{"id": "12987", "revid": "45451381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12987", "title": "Gerrymandering", "text": "Form of political manipulation\nGerrymandering, ( , originally ) defined in the contexts of representative electoral systems, is the political manipulation of electoral district boundaries to advantage a party, group, or socioeconomic class within the constituency.\nThe manipulation may involve \"cracking\" (diluting the voting power of the opposing party's supporters across many districts) or \"packing\" (concentrating the opposing party's voting power in one district to reduce their voting power in other districts). Gerrymandering can also be used to protect incumbents. Wayne Dawkins, a professor at Morgan State University, describes it as politicians picking their voters instead of voters picking their politicians.\nThe term \"gerrymandering\" is a portmanteau of a salamander and Elbridge Gerry, Vice President of the United States until his death, who, as governor of Massachusetts in 1812, signed a bill that created a partisan district in the Boston area that was compared to the shape of a mythological salamander. The term has negative connotations, and gerrymandering is almost always considered a corruption of the democratic process. The word \"gerrymander\" () can be used both as a verb for the process and as a noun for a resulting district.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"gerrymander\" (originally written \"Gerry-mander\"; a portmanteau of the name \"Gerry\" and the animal \"salamander\") was used for the first time in the \"Boston Gazette\" on 26 March 1812 in Boston, Massachusetts, United States. This word was created in reaction to a redrawing of Massachusetts Senate election districts under Governor Elbridge Gerry, later Vice President of the United States. Gerry, who personally disapproved of the practice, signed a bill that redistricted Massachusetts for the benefit of the Democratic-Republican Party. When mapped, one of the contorted districts in the Boston area was said to resemble a mythological salamander. Appearing with the term, and helping spread and sustain its popularity, was a political cartoon depicting a strange animal with claws, wings, and a dragon-like head that supposedly resembled the oddly shaped district.\nThe cartoon was most likely drawn by Elkanah Tisdale, an early-19th-century painter, designer, and engraver who lived in Boston at the time. Tisdale had the engraving skills to cut the woodblocks to print the original cartoon. These woodblocks survive and are preserved in the Library of Congress. The creator of the term \"gerrymander\", however, may never be definitively established. Historians widely believe that the Federalist newspaper editors Nathan Hale and Benjamin and John Russell coined the term, but no definitive evidence shows who created or uttered the word for the first time.\nThe redistricting was a notable success for Gerry's Democratic-Republican Party. In the 1812 election, both the Massachusetts House and governorship were comfortably won by Federalists, losing Gerry his job, but the redistricted state senate remained firmly in Democratic-Republican hands.\nThe word \"gerrymander\" was reprinted numerous times in Federalist newspapers in Massachusetts, New England, and nationwide for the rest of 1812. This suggests an organized activity by the Federalists to disparage Gerry in particular and the growing Democratic-Republican Party in general. \"Gerrymandering\" soon began to be used to describe cases of district shape-manipulation for partisan gain in other states. According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary,\" the word's acceptance was marked by its publication in a dictionary (1848) and in an encyclopedia (1868). Since the eponymous \"Gerry\" is pronounced with a hard g as in \"get\", the word \"gerrymander\" was originally pronounced , but pronunciation as , with a soft g as in \"gentle,\" has become dominant. Residents of Marblehead, Massachusetts, Gerry's hometown, continue to use the original pronunciation.\nFrom time to time, other names have been suffixed with \"-\u200dmander\" to tie a particular effort to a particular politician or group. Examples are the 1852 \"Henry-mandering\", \"Jerrymander\" (referring to California Governor Jerry Brown), \"Perrymander\" (a reference to Texas Governor Rick Perry), \"Tullymander\" (after the Irish politician James Tully), and \"Bjelkemander\" (referencing Australian politician Joh Bjelke-Petersen).\nTactics.\nGerrymandering's primary goals are to maximize the effect of supporters' votes and minimize the effect of opponents' votes. A partisan gerrymander's main purpose is to influence not only the districting statute, but also the entire corpus of legislative decisions enacted in its path. These can be accomplished in a number of ways:\nThese tactics are typically combined in some form, creating a few \"forfeit\" seats for packed voters of one type to secure more seats and greater representation for voters of another type. This results in candidates of one party (the one responsible for the gerrymandering) winning by small majorities in most of the districts, and another party winning by a large majority in only a few. Any party that endeavors to make a district more favorable to voting for it based on the physical boundary is gerrymandering.\nEffects.\nGerrymandering is effective because of the wasted vote effect. Wasted votes are votes that did not contribute to electing a candidate, either because they were in excess of the number needed for victory or because the candidate lost. By moving geographic boundaries, the incumbent party packs opposition voters into a few districts they will already win, wasting the extra votes. Other districts are more tightly constructed, with the opposition party allowed a bare minority count, thereby wasting all the minority votes for the losing candidate. These districts constitute the majority of districts and are drawn to produce a result favoring the incumbent party.\nA quantitative measure of the effect of gerrymandering is the efficiency gap, computed from the difference in the wasted votes for two different political parties summed over all the districts. Citing in part an efficiency gap of 11.7 to 13.0%, a U.S. District Court in 2016 ruled against the 2011 drawing of Wisconsin legislative districts. In the 2012 election for the state legislature, that gap in wasted votes meant that one party had 48.6% of the two-party votes, but won 61% of the 99 districts.\nThe wasted vote effect is strongest when a party wins by narrow margins across multiple districts, but gerrymandering narrow margins can be risky when voters are less predictable. To minimize the risk of demographic or political shifts swinging a district to the opposition, politicians can create more packed districts, leading to more comfortable margins in unpacked ones.\nEffect on electoral competition.\nSome political science research suggests that contrary to common belief, gerrymandering does not decrease electoral competition and can even increase it. Some say that, rather than packing the voters of their party into uncompetitive districts, party leaders tend to prefer to spread their party's voters into multiple districts so that their party can win more races. (See scenario (c) in the box.) This may lead to increased competition. Instead of gerrymandering, some researchers find that other factors, such as partisan polarization and the incumbency advantage, have driven the recent decreases in electoral competition. Similarly, a 2009 study found that \"congressional polarization is primarily a function of the differences in how Democrats and Republicans represent the same districts rather than a function of which districts each party represents or the distribution of constituency preferences.\"\nOne state in which gerrymandering has arguably had an adverse effect on electoral competition is California. In 2000, a bipartisan redistricting effort redrew congressional district lines in ways that all but guaranteed incumbent victories; as a result, California had only one congressional seat change hands between 2000 and 2010. In response to this obvious gerrymandering, a 2010 referendum in California gave the power to redraw congressional district lines to the California Citizens Redistricting Commission, which had been created to draw California State Senate and Assembly districts by a 2008 referendum. In stark contrast to the redistricting efforts that followed the 2000 census, the redistricting commission has created a number of the most competitive congressional districts in the country.\nIncreased incumbent advantage and campaign costs.\nThe effect of gerrymandering for incumbents is particularly advantageous, as they are far more likely to be re-elected under conditions of gerrymandering. For example, in 2002, according to political scientists Norman Ornstein and Thomas Mann, only four challengers were able to defeat incumbent members of the U.S. Congress, the lowest number in modern American history. Incumbents are likely to be of the majority party orchestrating a gerrymander, and are usually easily renominated in subsequent elections, including incumbents among the minority.\nMann, a senior fellow of governance studies at the Brookings Institution, has also noted, \"Redistricting is a deeply political process, with incumbents actively seeking to minimize the risk to themselves (via bipartisan gerrymanders) or to gain additional seats for their party (via partisan gerrymanders)\". The bipartisan gerrymandering Mann mentions refers to the fact that legislators often draw distorted legislative districts even when doing so does not give their party an advantage.\nGerrymandering of state legislative districts can effectively guarantee an incumbent's victory by \"shoring up\" a district with higher levels of partisan support, without disproportionately benefiting a particular political party. This can be highly problematic from a governance perspective, because forming districts to ensure high levels of partisanship often leads to higher levels of partisanship in legislative bodies. If a substantial number of districts are designed to be polarized, then those districts' representation will also likely act in a heavily partisan manner, which can create and perpetuate partisan gridlock.\nGerrymandering can thus have a deleterious effect on the principle of democratic accountability. With uncompetitive seats/districts reducing the fear that incumbent politicians may lose office, they have less incentive to represent their constituents' interests, even when those interests conform to majority support for an issue across the electorate as a whole. Incumbent politicians may look out more for their party's interests than for those of their constituents.\nGerrymandering can affect campaign costs for district elections. If districts become increasingly stretched out, candidates may incur higher costs for transportation and campaign advertising across a district. The incumbent's advantage in campaign fundraising is another benefit of having a gerrymandered seat.\nLess descriptive representation.\nGerrymandering also has significant effects on the representation voters receive in gerrymandered districts. Because gerrymandering can be designed to increase the number of wasted votes among the electorate, the relative representation of particular groups can be drastically altered from their actual share of the voting population. This effect can significantly prevent a gerrymandered system from achieving proportional and descriptive representation, as the winners of elections are increasingly determined by who is drawing the districts, rather than the voters' preferences.\nGerrymandering may be advocated to improve representation within the legislature among otherwise underrepresented minority groups by packing them into a single district. This can be controversial, as it may lead to those groups' remaining marginalized in the government as they become confined to a single district. Candidates outside that district no longer need to represent them to win elections.\nAs an example, much of the redistricting conducted in the U.S. in the early 1990s involved the intentional creation of additional \"majority-minority\" districts where racial minorities such as African Americans were packed into the majority. This \"maximization policy\" drew support from both the Republican Party (which had limited support among African Americans and could concentrate its power elsewhere) and by minority representatives elected as Democrats from these constituencies, who then had safe seats. \nIn Michigan, redistricting was conducted by a Republican legislature in 2011. Federal congressional districts were designed so that cities such as Battle Creek, Grand Rapids, Jackson, Kalamazoo, Lansing, and East Lansing were separated into districts with large conservative-leaning hinterlands that diluted the Democratic votes in those cities in Congressional elections.\nThe 2012 election provides a number of examples of how partisan gerrymandering can adversely affect the descriptive function of states' congressional delegations. In Pennsylvania, for example, Democratic candidates for the House of Representatives received 83,000 more votes than Republican candidates, yet the Republican-controlled redistricting process in 2010 resulted in Democrats losing to their Republican counterparts in 13 of Pennsylvania's 18 districts.\nIn the seven states where Republicans had complete control over the redistricting process, Republican House candidates received 16.7 million votes and Democratic House candidates received 16.4 million. The redistricting resulted in Republican victories in 73 out of the 107 affected seats; in those seven states, Republicans received 50.4% of the votes but won in over 68% of the congressional districts. According to Sam Wang, founder of the Princeton Election Consortium, this example and others illustrate how gerrymandering is a form of disenfranchisement.\nIncumbent gerrymandering.\nGerrymandering can also be done to help incumbents as a whole, effectively making every district a packed one and greatly reducing the potential for competitive elections. This is particularly likely to occur when the minority party has significant obstruction power: unable to enact a partisan gerrymander, the legislature instead agrees to ensure its own reelection.\nIn an unusual occurrence in 2000, for example, the two dominant parties in California cooperatively redrew both state and federal legislative districts to preserve the status quo, insulating the incumbents from unpredictable voting. This move proved completely effective, as no state or federal legislative office changed party in the 2004 election, although 53 congressional, 20 state senate, and 80 state assembly seats were potentially at risk.\nIn 2006, the term \"70/30 district\" came to signify the equitable split of two evenly split (i.e. 50/50) districts. The resulting districts gave each party a guaranteed seat and retained their respective power base.\nSince the first handshake deal in 1981, whereby Republicans informally controlled the state senate redistricting process and Democrats informally controlled the state assembly redistricting process, New York has experienced some of the nation's least competitive legislative elections. One study by the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University Law School found that over one 10-year period, as many members of the state legislature died in office as were defeated in elections. More than 99% of the incumbents contesting a primary or general election won their races.\nPrison-based gerrymandering.\nPrison-based gerrymandering occurs when prisoners are counted as residents of a district, increasing its population with nonvoters when assigning political apportionment. This phenomenon violates the principle of one person, one vote because, although many prisoners come from (and return to) urban communities, they are counted as \"residents\" of the rural districts that contain large prisons, allowing districts to be drawn that would otherwise have too few eligible voters to legally exist. Others contend that prisoners should not be counted as residents of their original districts when they do not reside there and are not legally eligible to vote.\nUS states Michigan, Colorado, Virginia, and Tennessee have all passed laws that restrict prison-based gerrymandering. In 2014, Massachusetts passed a resolution that asked the Census Bureau to stop counting incarcerated people as residents in the district where they are incarcerated. Pennsylvania also voted to redraw districts in a way that avoids prison-based gerrymandering.\nChanges to achieve competitive elections.\nDue to the perceived issues associated with gerrymandering and its effect on competitive elections and democratic accountability, numerous countries have enacted reforms making the practice more difficult or less effective. Countries such as the U.K., Australia, Canada, and most of those in Europe have transferred responsibility for defining constituency boundaries to neutral or cross-party bodies. In Spain, they have been constitutionally fixed since 1978. In the U.S., such reforms are controversial and face particularly strong opposition from groups that benefit from gerrymandering. In a more neutral system, they might lose considerable influence.\nProportional representation.\nParty-list proportional representation makes gerrymandering obsolete by erasing district lines and empowering voters to rank a list of candidates any party puts forth. This method is used in Austria, Brazil, Sweden, and Switzerland. During the 2020s, representative Don Beyer has put forward the Fair Representation Act to eliminate gerrymandering by instituting proportional representation in the United States.\nRedistricting by neutral or cross-party agency.\nThe most commonly advocated electoral reform proposal targeted at gerrymandering is to change the redistricting process. Under these proposals, an independent and presumably objective commission is created specifically for redistricting, rather than having the legislature do it.\nThis is the system used in the U.K., where independent boundary commissions determine the boundaries for constituencies in the House of Commons and the devolved legislatures, subject to ratification by the body in question (almost always granted without debate). A similar situation exists in Australia, where the independent Australian Electoral Commission and its state-based counterparts determine electoral boundaries for federal, state, and local jurisdictions.\nTo help ensure neutrality, members of a redistricting agency may be appointed from relatively apolitical sources, such as retired judges or longstanding members of the civil service, possibly with requirements for adequate representation among competing political parties. Additionally, members of the board can be denied information that might aid in gerrymandering, such as the demographic makeup or voting patterns of the population.\nAs a further constraint, consensus requirements can be imposed to ensure that the resulting district map reflects a wider perception of fairness, such as a requirement for a supermajority approval of the commission for any district proposal, but consensus requirements can lead to deadlock, as occurred in Missouri following the 2000 census. There, the equally numbered partisan appointees were unable to reach consensus in a reasonable time, so the courts had to determine district lines.\nIn the U.S. state of Iowa, the nonpartisan Legislative Services Bureau (LSB, akin to the U.S. Congressional Research Service) determines electoral district boundaries. Aside from satisfying federally mandated contiguity and population equality criteria, the LSB mandates unity of counties and cities. Consideration of political factors such as location of incumbents, previous boundary locations, and political party proportions is specifically forbidden. Since Iowa's counties are chiefly regularly shaped polygons, the LSB process has led to districts that follow county lines.\nIn 2005, the U.S. state of Ohio had a ballot measure to create an independent commission whose first priority was competitive districts, a sort of \"reverse gerrymander\". A complex mathematical formula was to be used to determine the competitiveness of a district. The measure failed voter approval chiefly due to voter concerns that communities of interest would be broken up.\nIn 2017, Representative John Delaney submitted the Open Our Democracy Act of 2017 to the U.S. House of Representatives as a means to implement nonpartisan redistricting and other objectives. It ultimately did not pass.\nRedistricting by partisan competition.\nMany redistricting reforms seek to remove partisanship to ensure fairness in the redistricting process. The I-cut-you-choose method achieves fairness by putting the two major parties in direct competition. I-cut-you-choose is a fair division method to divide resources amongst two parties, regardless of which party cuts first. This method typically relies on assumptions of contiguity of districts, but ignores all other constraints such as keeping communities of interest together. This method has been applied to nominal redistricting problems, but it generally has less public interest than other types of redistricting reforms. The I-cut-you-choose concept was popularized by the board game \"Berrymandering\". Problems with this method arise when minor parties are shut out of the process, which will reinforce the two-party system. Additionally, while this method is provably fair to the two parties creating the districts, it is not necessarily fair to the communities they represent.\nTransparency regulations.\nWhen a single political party controls both legislative houses of a state during redistricting, both Democrats and Republicans have displayed a marked propensity for couching the process in secrecy; in May 2010, for example, the Republican National Committee held a redistricting training session in Ohio where the theme was \"Keep it Secret, Keep it Safe\". A 2012 investigation by The Center for Public Integrity reviewed every state's redistricting processes for both transparency and potential for public input, and ultimately assigned 24 states grades of either D or F.\nIn response to these types of problems, redistricting transparency legislation has been introduced to US Congress a number of times in recent years, including the Redistricting Transparency Acts of 2010, 2011, and 2013. Such policy proposals aim to increase the transparency and responsiveness of the redistricting systems in the US. The merit of increasing transparency in redistricting processes is based largely on the premise that lawmakers would be less inclined to draw gerrymandered districts if they were forced to defend such districts in a public forum.\nChanging the voting system.\nAs gerrymandering relies on the wasted-vote effect, the use of a different voting system with fewer wasted votes can help reduce gerrymandering. In particular, the use of multimember districts alongside voting systems establishing proportional representation such as party-list proportional representation or single transferable voting can reduce wasted votes and gerrymandering. Semiproportional voting systems such as single nontransferable vote or cumulative voting are relatively simple and similar to \"first past the post\" and can also reduce the proportion of wasted votes and thus potential gerrymandering. Electoral reformers have advocated all three as replacement systems.\nElectoral systems with various forms of proportional representation are now found in nearly all European countries, resulting in multi-party systems (with many parties represented in the parliaments) with higher voter attendance in the elections, fewer wasted votes, and a wider variety of political opinions represented.\nElectoral systems with election of just one winner in each district (i.e., \"winner-takes-all\" electoral systems) and no proportional distribution of extra mandates to smaller parties tend to create two-party systems. This effect, labeled \"Duverger's law\" by political scientists, was described by Maurice Duverger.\nUsing fixed districts.\nAnother way to avoid gerrymandering is simply to stop redistricting altogether and use existing political boundaries such as state, county, or provincial lines. While this prevents future gerrymandering, any existing advantage may become deeply ingrained. The United States Senate, for instance, has more competitive elections than the House of Representatives due to the use of existing state borders rather than gerrymandered districts \u2013Senators are elected by their entire state whereas Representatives are elected in legislatively drawn districts.\nThe use of fixed districts creates an additional problem, however, in that fixed districts do not take into account changes in population. Individual voters can come to have very different degrees of influence on the legislative process. This malapportionment can greatly affect representation after long periods of time or large population movements. In the United Kingdom during the Industrial Revolution, several constituencies that had been fixed since they gained representation in the Parliament of England became so small that they could be won with only a handful of voters (\"rotten boroughs\"). Similarly, in the U.S. the Alabama Legislature refused to redistrict for more than 60 years, despite major changes in population patterns. By 1960 less than a quarter of the state's population controlled the majority of seats in the legislature. This practice of using fixed districts for state legislatures was effectively banned in the United States after the \"Reynolds v. Sims\" Supreme Court decision in 1964, establishing a rule of one man, one vote.\nIncreasing the number of representatives.\nThe basic idea of increasing the number of \u201cseats\u201d is nowhere widely popular. But the effectiveness of gerrymandering is essentially a confession of insufficient \u201crepresentation.\u201d \nObjective rules to create districts.\nAnother means to reduce gerrymandering is to create objective, precise criteria with which any district map must comply. Courts in the United States, for instance, have ruled that congressional districts must be contiguous in order to be constitutional. This, however, is not a particularly effective constraint, as very narrow strips of land with few or no voters in them may be used to connect separate regions for inclusion in one district, as is the case in Texas's 35th congressional district.\nDepending on the distribution of voters for a particular party, metrics that maximize compactness can be opposed to metrics that minimize the efficiency gap. For example, in the United States, voters registered with the Democratic Party tend to be concentrated in cities, potentially resulting in a large number of \"wasted\" votes if compact districts are drawn around city populations. Neither of these metrics take into consideration other possible goals, such as proportional representation based on other demographic characteristics (such as race, ethnicity, gender, or income), maximizing competitiveness of elections (the greatest number of districts where party affiliation is 50/50), avoiding splits of existing government units (like cities and counties), and ensuring representation of major interest groups (like farmers or voters in a specific transportation corridor), though any of these could be incorporated into a more complicated metric.\nMinimum district to convex polygon ratio.\nOne method is to define a minimum district to convex polygon ratio. To use this method, every proposed district is circumscribed by the smallest possible convex polygon (its convex hull; think of stretching a rubberband around the outline of the district). Then, the area of the district is divided by the area of the polygon; or, if at the edge of the state, by the portion of the area of the polygon within state boundaries.\nThe advantages of this method are that it allows a certain amount of human intervention to take place (thus solving the Colorado problem of splitline districting); it allows the borders of the district to follow existing jagged subdivisions, such as neighborhoods or voting districts (something isoperimetric rules would discourage); and it allows concave coastline districts, such as the Florida gulf coast area. It would mostly eliminate bent districts, but still permit long, straight ones. However, since human intervention is still allowed, the gerrymandering issues of packing and cracking would still occur, just to a lesser extent.\nShortest splitline algorithm.\nThe Center for Range Voting has proposed a way to draw districts by a simple algorithm. The algorithm uses only the shape of the state, the number N of districts wanted, and the population distribution as inputs. The algorithm (slightly simplified) is:\nThis district-drawing algorithm has the advantages of simplicity, ultra-low cost, a single possible result (thus no possibility of human interference), lack of intentional bias, and it produces simple boundaries that do not meander needlessly. It has the disadvantage of ignoring geographic features such as rivers, cliffs, and highways and cultural features such as tribal boundaries. This landscape oversight causes it to produce districts different from those a human would produce. Ignoring geographic features can induce very simple boundaries.\nWhile most districts produced by the method will be fairly compact and either roughly rectangular or triangular, some of the resulting districts can still be long and narrow strips (or triangles) of land.\nLike most automatic redistricting rules, the shortest splitline algorithm will fail to create majority-minority districts, for both ethnic and political minorities, if the minority populations are not very compact. This might reduce minority representation.\nAnother criticism of the system is that splitline districts sometimes divide and diffuse the voters in a large metropolitan area. This condition is most likely to occur when one of the first splitlines cuts through the metropolitan area. It is often considered a drawback of the system because residents of the same agglomeration are assumed to be a community of common interest. This is most evident in the splitline allocation of Colorado.\nHowever, in cases when the splitline divides a large metropolitan area, it is usually because that large area has enough population for multiple districts. In cases which the large area only has the population for one district, then the splitline usually results in the urban area being in one district with the other district being rural.\nAs of July 2007, shortest-splitline redistricting pictures, based on the results of the 2000 census, are available for all 50 states.\nMinimum isoperimetric quotient.\nIt is possible to define a specific minimum isoperimetric quotient, proportional to the ratio between the area and the square of the perimeter of any given congressional voting district. Although technologies presently exist to define districts in this manner, there are no rules in place mandating their use, and no national movement to implement such a policy. One problem with the simplest version of this rule is that it would prevent incorporation of jagged natural boundaries, such as rivers or mountains; when such boundaries are required, such as at the edge of a state, certain districts may not be able to meet the required minima. One way of avoiding this problem is to allow districts which share a border with a state border to replace that border with a polygon or semi-circle enclosing the state boundary as a kind of virtual boundary definition, but using the actual perimeter of the district whenever this occurs inside the state boundaries. Enforcing a minimum isoperimetric quotient would encourage districts with a high ratio between area and perimeter.\nEfficiency gap calculation.\nThe efficiency gap is a simply-calculable measure that can show the effects of gerrymandering. It measures wasted votes for each party: the sum of votes cast in losing districts (losses due to cracking) and excess votes cast in winning districts (losses due to packing). The difference in these wasted votes are divided by total votes cast, and the resulting percentage is the efficiency gap.\nIn 2017, Boris Alexeev and Dustin Mixon proved that \"sometimes, a small efficiency gap is only possible with bizarrely shaped districts\". This means that it is mathematically impossible to always devise boundaries which would simultaneously meet certain Polsby\u2013Popper and efficiency gap targets,\nSeats\u2013votes curve.\nThe seats\u2013votes curve can help evaluate gerrymandering.\nGerrymandering in different voting systems.\nFirst-past-the-post.\nGerrymandering is most likely to emerge in majoritarian systems, where the country is divided into several voting districts and the candidate with the most votes wins the district. If the ruling party is in charge of drawing the district lines, it can abuse the fact that in a majoritarian system all votes that do not go to the winning candidate are essentially irrelevant to the composition of a new government. Even though gerrymandering can be used in other voting systems, it has the most significant impact on voting outcomes in first-past-the-post systems. Partisan redrawing of district lines is particularly harmful to democratic principles in majoritarian two-party systems. In general, two party systems tend to be more polarized than proportional systems. Possible consequences of gerrymandering in such a system can be an amplification of polarization in politics and a lack of representation of minorities, as a large part of the constituency is not represented in policy making. However, not every state using a first-past-the-post system is being confronted with the negative impacts of gerrymandering. Some countries, such as Canada and the UK, authorize non-partisan organizations to set constituency boundaries in attempt to prevent gerrymandering.\nProportional systems.\nThe introduction of a proportional system is often proposed as the most effective solution to partisan gerrymandering. In such systems, the entire constituency is being represented proportionally to their votes. Even though voting districts can be part of a proportional system, the redrawing of district lines would not benefit a party, as those districts are mainly of organizational value, except where the district magnitude is small or a system which favors larger parties, such as d'Hondt, is used. For example, instead of having three districts, a single large district would exist where the top three candidates in the election would all represent the district. It would be harder to gerrymander a district where there are multiple winners from that district.\nMixed systems.\nIn mixed systems that use proportional and majoritarian voting principles, the usage of gerrymandering is a constitutional obstacle that states have to deal with. In mixed systems, the advantage a political actor can potentially gain from redrawing district lines is much less than in majoritarian systems. In addition, voting districts are mostly being used to avoid that elected parliamentarians are getting too detached from their constituency. The principle that determines the representation in parliament is usually the proportional aspect of the voting system. Seats in parliament are being allocated to each party in accordance to the proportion of their overall votes. In most mixed systems, winning a voting district merely means that a candidate is guaranteed a seat in parliament but does not expand a party's share in the overall seats. Gerrymandering can still be used to manipulate the outcome in voting districts. In most democracies with a mixed system, non-partisan institutions are in charge of drawing district lines and gerrymandering is a less common phenomenon.\nUse of databases and computer technology.\nThe introduction of modern computers alongside the development of elaborate voter databases and special districting software has made gerrymandering a far more precise science. Using such databases, political parties can obtain detailed information about every household including political party registration, previous campaign donations, and the number of times residents voted in previous elections and combine it with other predictors of voting behavior such as age, income, race, or education level. With this data, gerrymandering politicians can predict the voting behavior of each potential district with an astonishing degree of precision, leaving little chance for creating an accidentally competitive district.\nOn the other hand, the introduction of modern computers would allow the United States Census Bureau to calculate more equal populations in every voting district that are based only on districts being the most compact and equal populations. This could be done easily using their Block Centers based on the Global Positioning System rather than street addresses. With this data, gerrymandering politicians will not be in charge, thus allowing competitive districts again.\nOnline web apps such as Dave's Redistricting have allowed users to simulate redistricting states into legislative districts as they wish. According to Bradlee, the software was designed to \"put power in people's hands,\" and so that they \"can see how the process works, so it's a little less mysterious than it was 10 years ago.\"\nMarkov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) can measure the extent to which redistricting plans favor a particular party or group in election, and can support automated redistricting simulators.\nDifference from malapportionment.\nGerrymandering in its original sense should not be confused with malapportionment, whereby the number of eligible voters per elected representative can vary widely. In Australia, however, the term was widely used to refer to malapportionment. Moreover, the \"-mander\" suffix was applied to particular malapportionments, such as the Playmander in South Australia.\nSometimes political representatives use both gerrymandering and malapportionment to try to maintain power. One of the earliest examples of malapportionment, rotten boroughs, was practiced in England from the 13th century until the 1832 reform act. A striking modern example of malapportionment is the U.S. senate, where states receive equal representation despite widely varying populations.\nHistorical examples by country.\nSeveral western democracies, notably Israel, the Netherlands and Slovakia employ an electoral system with only one (nationwide) voting district for election of national representatives. This precludes gerrymandering. Other European countries such as Austria, the Czech Republic or Sweden, among many others, have electoral districts with fixed boundaries (usually one district for each administrative division). The number of representatives for each district can change after a census due to population shifts, but their boundaries do not change. This also effectively eliminates gerrymandering.\nAdditionally, many countries where the president is directly elected by the citizens (e.g. France, Poland, among others) use only one electoral district for their presidential election with the winner of the popular vote winning the position, despite using multiple districts to elect representatives.\nAustralia.\nNational.\nGerrymandering has not typically been considered a problem in the national Australian electoral system largely because drawing of electoral boundaries has typically been done by non-partisan electoral commissions. There have been historical cases of malapportionment, whereby the distribution of electors to electorates was not in proportion to the population in several states. though most of these have been eliminated over time.\nIn 1996, the High Court of Australia in \"McGinty v Western Australia\" confirmed the constitutional legality of electoral systems where different constituencies were differently weighted from others in the same system; in particular, the case approved Western Australia's system, described below.\nSouth Australia.\nSir Thomas Playford was Premier of the state of South Australia from 1938 to 1965 as a result of a system of malapportionment, which became known as the Playmander.\nQueensland.\nIn the state of Queensland, malapportionment combined with a gerrymander under Country Party Premier Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen (knighted by Queen Elizabeth II at his own request) became nicknamed the Bjelkemander in the 1970s and 1980s.\nThe malapportionment had been originally designed to favor rural areas in the 1930s-1950s by a Labor government who drew their support from agricultural and mine workers in rural areas. This helped Labor to stay in government from 1932 to 1957. As demographics and political views shifted over time, this system came to favor the Country Party instead.\nThe Country Party led by Frank Nicklin came to power in 1957, deciding to keep the malapportionment that favored them. In 1968, Joh Bjelke-Petersen became leader of the Country Party and Premier. In the 1970s, he further expanded the malapportionment and gerrymandering which then became known as the \"Bjelkemander\". Under the system, electoral boundaries were drawn so that rural electorates had as few as half as many voters as metropolitan ones and regions with high levels of support for the Labor Party were concentrated into fewer electorates, allowing Bjelke-Petersen's government to remain in power for despite attracting substantially less than 50% of the vote. One district had non-contiguous parts.\nIn the 1986 election, for example, the National Party received 39.64% of the first preference vote and won 49 seats (in the 89 seat Parliament) whilst the Labor Opposition received 41.35% but won only 30 seats. Bjelke-Petersen also used the system to disadvantage Liberal Party (traditionally allied with the Country Party) voters in urban areas, allowing Bjelke-Petersen's Country Party to rule alone, shunning the Liberals.\nBjelke-Petersen also used Queensland Police brutality to quell protests, and Queensland under his government was frequently described as a police state. In 1987 he was eventually forced to resign in disgrace after the Fitzgerald Inquiry revealed wide-ranging corruption in his cabinet and the Queensland Police, resulting in the prosecution and jailing of Country Party members. Before resigning, Bjelke-Petersen asked the Governor of Queensland to sack his own cabinet, in an unsuccessful attempt to cling to power. Labor won the next election, and have remained the dominant party in Queensland since then. The Country Party and Liberal Party eventually merged in Queensland to become the Liberal-National Party, while the Country Party in other states was renamed as the National Party.\nWestern Australia.\nThe Western Australian Legislative Council was long gerrymandered via a malapportionment that clearly favored the rural conservative National Party, with the state split into electoral regions with significant differences in voter numbers. After the Labor Party won a landslide victory in both houses in the 2021 Western Australian state election, they abolished the electoral region system, replacing it with a single statewide constituency electing 37 members via optional preferential voting that creates a one-vote, one-value system.\nCity of Sydney Council.\nIn 2014 the conservative Liberal Party NSW State Government gerrymandered the local City of Sydney council elections as part of their continued attempts to remove Clover Moore from elected positions. Moore had already been removed as a state government representative by laws banning serving simultaneously as a state representative and a local council member, and their attempt to remove her from the Council saw the State Government introduce a law giving all businesses in the area two votes and requiring the council to constantly update the electoral roll and inform each business of its eligibility to vote. Moore called the laws an \"undemocratic gerrymander\" and election analyst Antony Green said the changes were \"clearly an attempt to disadvantage Clover Moore\". The laws were specific to the City of Sydney council and not rolled out across the rest of the state councils. The attempt failed, and Moore retained her position as Lord Mayor of Sydney through multiple further elections.\nBahamas.\nThe 1962 Bahamian general election was likely influenced by gerrymandering. The election was the first to allow universal suffrage. The Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) received 44% of the vote, while the United Bahamian Party (UBP) won only 36% of the vote. The other 20% was for third parties and independents. Despite receiving a majority of the votes, the PLP won only 8 of the 33 seats in the House of Assembly, while the UBP won 18 seats.\nCanada.\nGerrymandering used to be prominent in Canadian politics, but is no longer prominent, after independent electoral boundary redistribution commissions were established in all provinces. Early in Canadian history, both the federal and provincial levels used gerrymandering to try to maximize partisan power. When Alberta and Saskatchewan were admitted to Confederation in 1905, their original district boundaries were set forth in the respective Alberta and Saskatchewan Acts. Federal Liberal cabinet members devised the boundaries to ensure the election of provincial Liberal governments. British Columbia used a combination of single-member and dual-member constituencies to solidify the power of the center-right British Columbia Social Credit Party until 1991.\nSince responsibility for drawing federal and provincial electoral boundaries was handed over to independent agencies, the problem has largely been eliminated at those levels of government. Manitoba was the first province to authorize a non-partisan group to define constituency boundaries in the 1950s. In 1964, the federal government delegated the drawing of boundaries for federal electoral districts to the non-partisan agency Elections Canada which answers to Parliament rather than the government of the day.\nAs a result, gerrymandering is not generally a major issue in Canada except at the civic level. Although city wards are recommended by independent agencies, city councils occasionally overrule them. That is much more likely if the city is not homogenous and different neighborhoods have sharply different opinions about city policy direction.\nIn 2006, a controversy arose in Prince Edward Island over the provincial government's decision to throw out an electoral map drawn by an independent commission. Instead, they created two new maps. The government adopted the second of them, which was designed by the caucus of the governing Progressive Conservative Party of Prince Edward Island. Opposition parties and the media attacked Premier Pat Binns for what they saw as gerrymandering of districts. Among other things, the government adopted a map that ensured that every current Member of the Legislative Assembly from the premier's party had a district to run in for re-election, but in the original map, several had been redistricted. However, in the 2007 provincial election only seven of 20 incumbent Members of the Legislative Assembly were re-elected (seven did not run for re-election), and the government was defeated.\nChile.\nThe military government which ruled Chile from 1973 to 1990 was ousted in a national plebiscite in October 1988. Opponents of General Augusto Pinochet voted NO to remove him from power and to trigger democratic elections, while supporters (mostly from the right-wing) voted YES to keep him in office for another eight years.\nFive months prior to the plebiscite, the regime published a law regulating future elections and referendums, but the configuration of electoral districts and the manner in which National Congress seats would be awarded were only added to the law seven months after the referendum.\nFor the Chamber of Deputies (lower house), 60 districts were drawn by grouping (mostly) neighboring communes (the smallest administrative subdivision in the country) within the same region (the largest). It was established that two deputies would be elected per district, with the most voted coalition needing to outpoll its closest rival by a margin of more than 2-to-1 to take both seats. The results of the 1988 plebiscite show that neither the \"NO\" side nor the \"YES\" side outpolled the other by said margin in any of the newly established districts. They also showed that the vote/seat ratio was lower in districts which supported the \"YES\" side and higher in those where the \"NO\" was strongest. In spite of this, at the 1989 parliamentary election, the center-left opposition was able to capture both seats (the so-called \"doblaje\") in twelve out of 60 districts, winning control of 60% of the Chamber.\nSenate constituencies were created by grouping all lower-chamber districts in a region, or by dividing a region into two constituencies of contiguous lower-chamber districts. The 1980 Constitution allocated a number of seats to appointed senators, making it harder for one side to change the Constitution by itself. The opposition won 22 senate seats in the 1989 election, taking both seats in three out of 19 constituencies, controlling 58% of the elected Senate, but only 47% of the full Senate. The unelected senators were eliminated in the 2005 constitutional reforms, but the electoral map has remained largely untouched (two new regions were created in 2007, one of which altered the composition of two senatorial constituencies; the first election to be affected by this minor change took place in 2013).\nCroatia.\nDuring the process of declaration and recognition of independence of Croatia the administrative divisions of the country was reorganized into 20 newly established counties and the city of Zagreb. All of the counties had Croat ethnic majority and were in part established as a gerrymandering effort to delegitimize Republic of Serbian Krajina secession as well as any regionalist requests in the historic provinces of Istria and Dalmatia while at the same time strengthening dominant-party's control over the Chamber of Counties. Following the end of the Croatian War of Independence and during the UNTAES administration in Eastern Slavonia Serb political leader Vojislav Stanimirovi\u0107 accused Croatian authorities of intentional division of the Serb community in the region into Osijek-Baranja and Vukovar-Srijem County with an aim to dilute their political initiatives.\nCroatian Parliament electoral districts were also described as a form of gerrymandering preventing genuine political competition with each district selecting the same number of MPs while districts' population varied over the legally permitted \u00b15 percent. In 2010 Constitutional Court of Croatia stated in a report that population discrepancies among electoral districts is higher than \u00b15 percent and that districts' borders should be redrawn to address the concern. 2021 Croatian census indicated even further differences in population with the difference in needed number of votes in the smallest (Electoral district IV) and the largest (Electoral district VII) district for a single parliamentary mandate being 10,5 thousands votes. In October 2022 President of the Constitutional Court of Croatia Miroslav \u0160eparovi\u0107 warned that this situation may jeopardize constitutionality of the following elections in Croatia.\nEl Salvador.\nOn 30 December 2022, Salvadoran president Nayib Bukele tweeted that he believed that the country's 262 municipalities should be reduced to 50. Opposition politicians accused him of attempting to gerrymander the municipalities and consolidate his power ahead of the 2024 legislative election. On 20 February 2023, Legislative Assembly President Ernesto Castro announced that the Nuevas Ideas (NI) political party was formally evaluating a proposal to reduce the number of municipalities as suggested by Bukele.\nFrance.\nFrance is one of the few countries to let legislatures redraw the map with no check. In practice, the Parliament of France sets up an executive commission. Districts called \"arrondissements\" were used in the Third Republic and under the Fifth Republic they are called \"circonscriptions\". During the Third Republic, some reforms of arrondissements, which were also used for administrative purposes, were largely suspected to have been arranged to favor the kingmaker in the National Assembly, the Radical Party.\nThe dissolution of Seine and Seine-et-Oise d\u00e9partements by de Gaulle was seen as a case of gerrymandering to counter communist influence around Paris.\nIn the modern regime, there were three designs: in 1958 (regime change), 1987 (by Charles Pasqua) and 2010 (by Alain Marleix), three times by conservative governments. Pasqua's drawing was known to have been particularly good at gerrymandering, resulting in 80% of the seats with 58% of the vote in 1993, and forcing Socialists in the 1997 snap election to enact multiple pacts with smaller parties in order to win again, this time as a coalition. In 2010, the Sarkozy government created 12 districts for expats.\nThe Constitutional council was called twice by the opposition to decide about gerrymandering, but it never considered partisan disproportions. However, it forced the Marleix committee to respect an 80\u2013120% population ratio, ending a tradition dating back to the Revolution in which \"d\u00e9partements\", however small in population, would send at least two MPs.\nThe constituencies in New Caledonia are accused of being adjusted to ensure a loyalist win. The 1st constituency combines the Loyalty Islands (a separatist province) with the capital Noumea, while the 2nd constituency combines the rural separatist-dominated North Province with most of the South Province. There had been no separatist deputy from the 1986 to the 2024 election with the victory of Emmanuel Tjibaou.\nIn the 1998 regional election, the Savoyan League won one seat but it could not run for re-election in 2004 because they now had to propose lists in every departments of Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes.\nGermany.\nSince Germany utilizes a proportional representation system, gerrymandering is rarely a problem. There was, however, one situation in which gerrymandering could affect an election. In Germany for a party to win any seat, it had to win at least 5% of the vote or three constituencies. This latter rule was applied for the last time in the 2021 federal election, in which the Left entered the Bundestag despite winning less than 5% of the vote.\nIn 2000 the electoral constituencies were redrawn and the PDS, which entered the Bundestag in the elections of 1994 and 1998 with this rule, accused the SPD, who were in power at the time of redrawing the constituencies, of gerrymandering them by breaking up districts in East Berlin, a PDS stronghold, and combining them with West Berlin. In the 2002 federal election the PDS lost their third constituency and entered the Bundestag with only two seats. Had they won a third direct seat, they would have qualified for an additional 25 seats.\nAnother scenario in which gerrymandering could affect German federal election was when a party won more constituencies than their overall share of the popular vote\u2014those extra seats, called \"\u00dcberhangmandate\". In the Bundestag election of 2009, Angela Merkel's CDU/CSU gained 24 such extra seats, while no other party gained any; this skewed the result so much that the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany issued two rulings declaring the existing election laws invalid and requiring the Bundestag to pass a new law limiting such extra seats to no more than 15. In 2013, Germany's Federal Constitutional Court ruled on the constitutionality of \u00dcberhangmandate. Each other party would receive seats as well to remedy the disproportion, thereby making it impossible to have disproportionate election results. As this could potentially lead to ever increasing size of the Bundestag, in 2023 a reform was passed ending both extra seats and a party being able to gain seats without winning more than 5% of the vote.\nGreece.\nGerrymandering has been rather common in Greek history since organized parties with national ballots only appeared after the 1926 Constitution. The only case before that was the creation of the Piraeus electoral district in 1906, in order to give the Theotokis party a safe district.\nA notable case of gerrymandering in Greece was in the 1956 legislative election. While in previous elections the districts were based on the prefecture level (\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2), for 1956 the country was split in districts of varying sizes, some being the size of prefectures, some the size of sub-prefectures (\u03b5\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03af\u03b1) and others somewhere in between. In small districts the winning party would take all seats, in intermediate size, it would take most and there was proportional representation in the largest districts. The districts were created in such a way that small districts were those that traditionally voted for the right while large districts were those that voted against the right.\nThis system has become known as the three-phase (\u03c4\u03c1\u03b9\u03c6\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc) system or the baklava system (because, as baklava is split into full pieces and corner pieces, the country was also split into disproportionate pieces). The opposition, being composed of the center and the left, formed a coalition with the sole intent of changing the electoral law and then calling new elections. Even though the centrist and leftist opposition won the popular vote (1,620,007 votes against 1,594,992), the right-wing ERE won the majority of seats (165 to 135) and was to lead the country for the next two years.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, functional constituencies are demarcated by the government and defined in statutes, making them prone to gerrymandering. The functional constituency for the information technology sector was particular criticized for gerrymandering and voteplanting.\nThere are also gerrymandering concerns in the constituencies of district councils.\nHungary.\nIn 2011, Fidesz politician J\u00e1nos L\u00e1z\u00e1r has proposed a redesign to Hungarian voting districts; considering the territorial results of previous elections, this redesign would favor right-wing politics according to the opposition. Since then, the law has been passed by the Fidesz-majority National Assembly. By the political think tanks and media close to the opposition, it took twice as many votes to gain a seat in some election districts as in some others. However, their findings are controversial. Gerrymandering was seen in the 2018 election results.\nIreland.\nUntil the 1980s D\u00e1il boundaries in Ireland were drawn not by an independent commission but by government ministers. Successive arrangements by governments of all political characters have been attacked as gerrymandering. Ireland uses the single transferable vote, and as well as the actual boundaries drawn, the main tool of gerrymandering has been the number of seats per constituency used, with three-seat constituencies normally benefiting the strongest parties in an area, whereas four-seat constituencies normally help smaller parties.\nIn 1947 the rapid rise of new party Clann na Poblachta threatened the position of the governing party Fianna F\u00e1il. The government of \u00c9amon de Valera introduced the Electoral (Amendment) Act 1947, which increased the size of the D\u00e1il from 138 to 147 and increased the number of three-seat constituencies from fifteen to twenty-two. The result was described by the journalist and historian Tim Pat Coogan as \"a blatant attempt at gerrymander which no Six-County Unionist could have bettered.\" The following February the 1948 general election was held and Clann na Poblachta secured ten seats instead of the nineteen they would have received proportional to their vote.\nIn the mid-1970s, the Minister for Local Government, James Tully, attempted to arrange the constituencies to ensure that the governing Fine Gael\u2013Labour Party National Coalition would win a parliamentary majority. The Electoral (Amendment) Act 1974 was planned as a major reversal of previous gerrymandering by Fianna F\u00e1il (then in opposition). Tully ensured that there were as many three-seat constituencies as possible where the governing parties were strong, in the expectation that the governing parties would each win a seat in many constituencies, relegating Fianna F\u00e1il to one out of three.\nIn areas where the governing parties were weak, four-seat constituencies were used so that the governing parties had a strong chance of still winning two. The election results created substantial change, as there was a larger than expected collapse in the vote. Fianna F\u00e1il won a landslide victory in the 1977 Irish general election, two out of three seats in many cases, relegating the National Coalition parties to fight for the last seat. Consequently, the term \"Tullymandering\" was used to describe the phenomenon of a failed attempt at gerrymandering.\nIndia.\nGerrymandering in India is loosely claimed by many political analysts, however there is no conclusive evidence whether the exercise has benefited a particular political party or not. The last nationwide delimitation was done in 2009 and two successive elections threw two different results giving mandate to both the political parties one after another.\nItaly.\nA hypothesis of gerrymandering was theorized by constituencies drawn by the electoral act of 2017, so-called Rosatellum.\nKuwait.\nFrom 1981 to 2005, Kuwait was divided into 25 electoral districts in order to over-represent the government's supporters (the 'tribes'). In July 2005, a new law for electoral reforms was approved which prevented electoral gerrymandering by cutting the number of electoral districts from 25 to 5. \nThe government of Kuwait found that 5 electoral districts resulted in a powerful parliament with the majority representing the opposition. A new law was crafted by the government of Kuwait and signed by the Amir to gerrymander the districts to 10 allowing the government's supporters to regain the majority.\nLithuania.\nFor the 2024 Lithuanian parliamentary election, the electoral districts were redrawn. 10 elderships of the Vilnius District Municipality which has a large Polish minority were merged with elderships of Vilnius to form the new Southern Vilnius district thus extending the total count of districts in Vilnius from 13 to 14. The LLRA\u2013K\u0160S criticized the decision to rather choose Polish-dominated towns like Juod\u0161iliai and Val\u010di\u016bnai over Lithuanian-dominated towns like Rie\u0161\u0117 and Avi\u017eieniai to merge with Vilnius.\nRie\u0161\u0117 and Avi\u017eieniai remain in the Rie\u0161\u0117 district (previously known as Nemen\u010din\u0117 district) even though its predecessor was considered \"way too large\".\nMalaysia.\nThe practice of gerrymandering has been around in the country since its independence in 1957. The ruling coalition at that time, \"Barisan Nasional\" (BN; English: \"National Front\"), has been accused of controlling the election commission by revising the boundaries of constituencies. For example, during the 13th General Election in 2013, Barisan Nasional won 60% of the seats in the Malaysian Parliament despite only receiving 47% of the popular vote. Malapportionment has also been used at least since 1974, when it was observed that in one state alone (Perak), the parliamentary constituency with the most voters had more than ten times as many voters as the one with the fewest voters. These practices finally failed BN in the 14th General Election on 9 May 2018, when the opposing \"Pakatan Harapan\" (PH; English: \"Alliance of Hope\") won despite perceived efforts of gerrymandering and malapportionment from the incumbent.\nMalta.\nThe Labour Party that won in 1981, even though the Nationalist Party got the most votes, did so because of its gerrymandering. A 1987 constitutional amendment awarding compensatory seats to make the final seat tally closer reflect actual vote share prevented that situation from reoccurring.\nNepal.\nAfter the restoration of democracy in 1990, Nepali politics has well exercised the practice of gerrymandering with the view to take advantage in the election. It was often practiced by Nepali Congress, which remained in power in most of the time. Learning from this, the reshaping of constituency was done for constituent assembly and the opposition now wins elections.\nIn 2015, the government rewrote the Constitution of Nepal, which included a rewriting of electoral boundaries. Parties in the southern region of Terai believe the new boundaries discriminated against marginalized groups, like the Madhesis, Tharus, and Janajatis, and that the boundaries \"packed\" the groups. Protesting occurred in Terai and other areas in southern Nepal, raising concern from across the country.\nPhilippines.\nCongressional districts in the Philippines were originally based on an ordinance from the 1987 Constitution, which was created by the Constitutional Commission, which was ultimately based on legislative districts as they were drawn in 1907. The same constitution gave Congress of the Philippines the power to legislate new districts, either through a national redistricting bill or piecemeal redistricting per province or city. Congress has never passed a national redistricting bill since the approval of the 1987 constitution, while it has incrementally created 34 new districts, out of the 200 originally created in 1987.\nThis allows Congress to create new districts once a place reaches 250,000 inhabitants, the minimum required for its creation. With this, local dynasties, through congressmen, can exert influence in the district-making process by creating bills carving new districts from old ones. In time, as the population of the Philippines increases, these districts, or groups of it, will be the basis of carving new provinces out of existing ones.\nAn example was in Camarines Sur, where two districts were divided into three districts which allegedly favors the Andaya and the Arroyo families; it caused Rolando Andaya and Dato Arroyo, who would have otherwise run against each other, run in separate districts, with one district allegedly not even surpassing the 250,000-population minimum. The Supreme Court later ruled that the 250,000 population minimum does not apply to an additional district in a province. The resulting splits would later be the cause of another gerrymander, where the province would be split into a new province called Nueva Camarines; the bill was defeated in the Senate in 2013.\nSingapore.\nIn recent decades, critics have accused the ruling People's Action Party (PAP) of unfair electoral practices to maintain significant majorities in the Parliament of Singapore. Among the complaints are that the government uses gerrymandering. The Elections Department was established as part of the executive branch under the Prime Minister of Singapore, rather than as an independent body. Critics have accused it of giving the ruling party the power to decide polling districts and polling sites through electoral engineering, based on poll results in previous elections.\nMembers of opposition parties claim that the Group Representation Constituency system is \"synonymous to gerrymandering\", pointing out examples of Cheng San GRC and Eunos GRC which were dissolved by the Elections Department with voters redistributed to other constituencies after opposition parties gained ground in elections.\nSouth Africa.\nThe landmark 1948 general election was influenced by provisions of the Constitution granting rural areas more constituencies in Parliament than urban areas. Thus the white-supremacist National Party won a plurality against the more moderate United Party despite receiving fewer votes and implemented apartheid.\nSpain.\nUntil the establishment of the Second Spanish Republic in 1931, Spain used both single-member and multi-member constituencies in general elections. Multi-member constituencies were only used in some big cities. Some gerrymandering examples included the districts of Vilademuls or Torroella de Montgr\u00ed in Catalonia. These districts were created in order to prevent the Federal Democratic Republican Party from winning a seat in Figueres or La Bisbal and to secure a seat for the dynastic parties. Since 1931, the constituency boundaries have matched the provincial boundaries.\nAfter the Francoist dictatorship, during the transition to democracy, these fixed provincial constituencies were reestablished in Section 68.2 of the current 1978 Spanish Constitution, so gerrymandering is impossible in general elections. There are not \"winner-takes-all\" elections in Spain except for the tiny territories of Ceuta and Melilla (which only have one representative each); everywhere else the number of representatives assigned to a constituency is proportional to its population and calculated according to a national law, so tampering with under- or over-representation is difficult too.\nEuropean, some regional and municipal elections are held under single, at-large multi-member constituencies with proportional representation and gerrymandering is not possible either.\nIn fact, there is not even a direct translation of the term \"gerrymandering\" into Spanish and first-generation Hispanic and Latino Americans have struggled with such an unfamiliar concept in the Spanish-speaking world.\nSri Lanka.\nSri Lanka's new Local Government elections process has been the talking point of gerrymandering since its inception. Even though that talk was more about the ward-level, it is also seen in some local council areas too.\nSudan.\nIn the election of 2010, there were numerous examples of gerrymandering throughout the entire country of Sudan. A report from the Rift Valley Institute uncovered violations of Sudan's electoral law, where constituencies were created that were well below and above the required limit. According to Sudan's National Elections Act of 2008, no constituency can have a population that is 15% greater or less than the average constituency size. The Rift Valley Report uncovered a number of constituencies that are in violation of this rule. Examples include constituencies in Jonglei, Warrap, South Darfur, and several other states.\nTurkey.\nTurkey has used gerrymandering in the city of Istanbul in the 2009 municipal elections. Just before the election Istanbul was divided into new districts. Large low income neighborhoods were bundled with the rich neighborhoods to enable the AKP to win the municipal elections.\nUnited Kingdom.\nNorthern Ireland.\nParliamentary elections.\nPrior to the establishment of Home Rule in Northern Ireland, the UK government had installed the single transferable vote (STV) system in Ireland to secure fair elections in terms of proportional representation in its Parliaments. After two elections under that system, in 1929 Stormont changed the electoral system to be the same as the rest of the United Kingdom: a single-member first past the post system. The only exception was for the election of four Stormont MPs to represent the Queen's University of Belfast. Some believe that the boundaries were gerrymandered to under-represent Nationalists. Other geographers and historians, for instance Professor John H. Whyte, disagree. They have argued that the electoral boundaries for the Parliament of Northern Ireland were not gerrymandered to a greater level than that produced by any single-winner election system, and that the actual number of Nationalist MPs barely changed under the revised system (it went from 12 to 11 and later went back up to 12).\nUnited States.\nThe United States, among the first countries with an elected representative government, was the source of the term \"gerrymander\" as stated above.\nThe practice of gerrymandering the borders of new states continued past the American Civil War and into the late 19th century. The Republican Party used its control of Congress to secure the admission of more states in territories friendly to their party\u2014the admission of Dakota Territory as two states instead of one being a notable example. By the rules for representation in the Electoral College, each new state carried at least three electoral votes regardless of its population.\nIn 2018, Utah voters approved Proposition 4, known as the Better Boundaries Initiative, which created an independent redistricting commission and established standards intended to reduce partisan gerrymandering. In 2020, the Utah Legislature passed Senate Bill 200 (SB 200), weakening the commission\u2019s authority by making its recommendations advisory rather than binding.\nFollowing the 2020 census, the Legislature adopted new congressional district maps in 2021. Critics alleged that the map \u201ccracked\u201d Salt Lake County, a Democratic-leaning population center, among all four U.S. House districts, ensuring consistent Republican advantages. Advocacy groups\u2014including the League of Women Voters of Utah and Mormon Women for Ethical Government\u2014filed lawsuits arguing that the Legislature\u2019s actions violated Proposition 4 and diluted voters\u2019 rights.\nIn July 2024, the Utah Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the Legislature\u2019s alterations to Proposition 4 must meet a compelling state interest and be narrowly tailored, setting a high bar for changes to voter-approved initiatives. In August 2025, Third District Court Judge Dianna M. Gibson invalidated SB 200 and the 2021 congressional map, holding them unconstitutional under Utah\u2019s constitution. The court ordered the Legislature to adopt a new map compliant with Proposition 4 by September 24, 2025, for use in the 2026 elections.\nThe ruling may make at least one congressional seat more competitive and has broader implications for the balance of power between the Utah Legislature and voter initiatives regarding redistricting reform.\nAll redistricting in the United States has been contentious because it has been controlled by political parties vying for power. As a consequence of the decennial census required by the United States Constitution, districts for members of the House of Representatives typically need to be redrawn whenever the number of members in a state changes. In many states, state legislatures redraw boundaries for state legislative districts at the same time.\nState legislatures have used gerrymandering along racial lines both to decrease and increase minority representation in state governments and congressional delegations. In Ohio, a conversation between Republican officials was recorded that demonstrated that redistricting was being done to aid their political candidates. Furthermore, the discussions assessed the race of voters as a factor in redistricting, on the premise that African-Americans tend to back Democratic Party candidates. Republicans removed approximately 13,000 African-American voters from the district of Jim Raussen, a Republican candidate for the House of Representatives, in an apparent attempt to tip the scales in what was once a competitive district for Democratic candidates.\nRather than allowing more political influence, some states have shifted redistricting authority from politicians and given it to non-partisan redistricting commissions. The states of Washington, Arizona, and California have created standing committees for redistricting following the 2010 census. It has been argued however that in California's case, gerrymandering still continued despite this change. Rhode Island and New Jersey have developed \"ad hoc\" committees, but developed the past two decennial reapportionments tied to new census data. Florida's amendments 5 and 6, meanwhile, established rules for the creation of districts but did not mandate an independent commission.\nMichigan voters in 2018 approved a proposal to create an independent commission to draw new congressional maps following the 2020 United States census, thereby removing the responsibility from the state legislature. Additionally, Ohio voters in 2018 modified their existing redistricting statutes to have a commission draw new maps. However, the ability of the state legislature to draw congressional maps remained, and this proposes the risk of gerrymandering. Other states that have implemented commissions in the 2018 midterm cycle include Colorado.\nInternational election observers from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, who were invited to observe and report on the 2004 national elections, expressed criticism of the U.S. congressional redistricting process and made a recommendation that the procedures be reviewed to ensure genuine competitiveness of Congressional election contests.\nIn June 2019, the United States Supreme Court ruled 5\u20134 in \"Lamone v. Benisek\" and \"Rucho v. Common Cause\" that federal courts lacked jurisdiction to hear challenges over partisan gerrymandering.\nIn July 2025, states in the United States began considering mid-decade redistricting proposals. Following the 2024 elections, control of the U.S. House of Representatives was narrowly divided, prompting both major political parties to pursue strategies to maximize their representation ahead of the 2026 midterm elections.\nIn some states, bipartisan gerrymandering is the norm. State legislators from both parties sometimes agree to draw congressional district boundaries in a way that ensures the re-election of most or all incumbent representatives from both parties.\nRacial gerrymandering.\nWith the civil rights movement and passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, federal enforcement and protections of suffrage for all citizens were enacted. Gerrymandering for the purpose of reducing the political influence of a racial or ethnic minority group was prohibited. After the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was passed, some states created \"majority-minority\" districts to enhance minority voting strength. This practice, also called \"affirmative gerrymandering\", was supposed to redress historic discrimination and ensure that ethnic minorities would gain some seats and representation in government.\nVenezuela.\nPrior to the 26 September 2010 legislative elections, gerrymandering took place via an addendum to the electoral law by the National Assembly of Venezuela. In the subsequent election, Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's political party, the United Socialist Party of Venezuela drew 48% of the votes overall, while the opposition parties (the Democratic Unity Roundtable and the Fatherland for All parties) collectively drew 52% of the votes. However, due to the re-allocation of electoral legislative districts prior to the election, Ch\u00e1vez's United Socialist Party of Venezuela was awarded over 60% of the spots in the National Assembly (98 deputies), while 67 deputies were elected for the two opposition parties combined.\nInformation gerrymandering.\nIn a 2019 paper for \"Nature\" titled \u201cInformation gerrymandering and undemocratic decisions,\u201d scientists Carl T. Bergstrom and Joseph B. Bak-Coleman coined the term \"information gerrymandering,\" after conducting a study in how information flow between individuals in social networks can be \"gerrymandered\" to alter elections by skewing an individual's view of how their peers will vote.\nRelated terms.\nIn a play on words, the use of race-conscious procedures in jury selection has been termed \"jurymandering\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12988", "revid": "36761478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12988", "title": "Gin", "text": "Distilled alcoholic drink flavoured with juniper\nGin () is a distilled alcoholic drink flavoured with juniper berries and other botanical ingredients.\nGin originated as a medicinal liquor made by monks and alchemists across Europe. The modern gin was modified in Flanders and the Netherlands to provide aqua vita from distillates of grapes and grains, becoming an object of commerce in the spirits industry. Gin became popular in England after the introduction of jenever, a Dutch and Belgian liquor. Although this development had been taking place since the early 17th century, gin became widespread after the 1688 Glorious Revolution led by William of Orange and subsequent import restrictions on French brandy. Gin emerged as the national alcoholic drink of England during the Gin Craze of 1695\u20131735.\nGin is produced from a wide range of herbal ingredients in a number of distinct styles and brands. After juniper, gin tends to be flavoured with herbs, spices, floral or fruit flavours, or often a combination. It is commonly mixed with tonic water in a gin and tonic. Gin is also used as a base spirit to produce flavoured, gin-based liqueurs, for example sloe gin, traditionally produced by the addition of fruit, flavourings and sugar.\nProduction.\nThe ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin used to make gin is distilled from any carbohydrate-containing raw material, usually cereal or molasses. Gin gets its characteristic flavour from being flavoured with spices, primarily juniper berries and coriander.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"gin\" is a shortened form of the older English word \"genever\", related to the French word and the Dutch word . All ultimately derive from , the Latin for juniper.\nHistory.\nOrigin: 13th-century mentions.\nThe earliest known written reference to jenever appears in the 13th-century encyclopaedic work (Bruges), with the earliest printed recipe for jenever dating from 16th-century work (Antwerp).\nThe monks used it to distill sharp, fiery, alcoholic tonics, one of which was distilled from wine infused with juniper berries. They were making medicines, hence the juniper. As a medicinal herb, juniper had been an essential part of doctors' kits for centuries; plague doctors stuffed the beaks of their plague masks with juniper to supposedly protect them from the Black Death. Across Europe, apothecaries handed out juniper tonic wines for coughs, colds, pains, strains, ruptures and cramps. These were a popular cure-all, though some thought these tonic wines to be a little too popular, and consumed for enjoyment rather than medicinal purposes.\n17th century.\nThe physician Franciscus Sylvius has been falsely credited with the invention of gin in the mid-17th century, as the existence of jenever is confirmed in Philip Massinger's play \"The Duke of Milan\" (1623), when Sylvius would have been about nine years old. Also, the Dutch States' ordinance on brandy already levied\ntaxes on distilled anise, gin or fennel water sold as alcoholic drinks, in 1606, eight years before Sylvius was born. It is further claimed that English soldiers who provided support in Antwerp against the Spanish in 1585, during the Eighty Years' War, were already drinking jenever for its calming effects before battle, from which the term \"Dutch courage\" is believed to have originated.\nBy the mid-17th century, numerous small Dutch and Flemish distillers had popularized the re-distillation of malted barley spirit or malt wine with juniper, as well as anise, caraway, coriander, etc., which were sold in pharmacies and used to treat such medical problems as kidney ailments, lumbago, stomach ailments, gallstones, and gout. Gin emerged in England in varying forms by the early 17th century, and at the time of the Stuart Restoration, enjoyed a brief resurgence. Gin became vastly more popular as an alternative to brandy, when William III and Mary II became co-sovereigns of England, Scotland and Ireland after leading the Glorious Revolution. Particularly in crude, inferior forms, it was more likely to be flavoured with turpentine. Historian Angela McShane has described it as a \"Protestant drink\" as its rise was brought about by a Protestant king, fuelling his armies fighting the Catholic Irish and French.\n18th century.\nGin drinking in England rose significantly after the government allowed unlicensed gin production, and at the same time imposed a heavy duty on all imported spirits such as French brandy. This created a larger market for poor-quality barley that was unfit for brewing beer, and in 1695\u20131735 thousands of gin shops sprang up throughout England, a period known as the Gin Craze. Because of the low price of gin compared with other drinks available at the time and in the same location, gin began to be consumed regularly by the poor. Of the 15,000 drinking establishments in London, not including coffee shops and drinking chocolate shops, over half were gin shops. Beer maintained a healthy reputation as it was often safer to drink the brewed ale than unclean plain water. Gin, though, was blamed for various social problems, and it may have been a factor in the higher death rates which stabilized London's previously growing population. The reputation of the two drinks was illustrated by William Hogarth in his engravings \"Beer Street and Gin Lane\" (1751), described by the BBC as \"arguably the most potent anti-drug poster ever conceived\". The negative reputation of gin survives in the English language in terms like \"gin mills\" or the American phrase \"gin joints\" to describe disreputable bars, or \"gin-soaked\" to refer to drunks. The epithet \"mother's ruin\" is a common British name for gin, the origin of which is debated.\nThe Gin Act 1736 imposed high taxes on retailers and led to riots in the streets. The prohibitive duty was gradually reduced and finally abolished in 1742. The Gin Act 1751 was more successful, but it forced distillers to sell only to licensed retailers and brought gin shops under the jurisdiction of local magistrates. Gin in the 18th century was produced in pot stills, and thus had a maltier profile than modern London gin.\nIn London in the early 18th century, much gin was distilled legally in residential houses (there were estimated to be 1,500 residential stills in 1726) and was often flavoured with turpentine to generate resinous woody notes in addition to the juniper. As late as 1913, \"Webster's Dictionary\" states without further comment, \"'common gin' is usually flavoured with turpentine\".\nAnother common variation was to distill in the presence of sulphuric acid. Although the acid itself does not distil, it imparts the additional aroma of diethyl ether to the resulting gin. Sulphuric acid subtracts one water molecule from two ethanol molecules to create diethyl ether, which also forms an azeotrope with ethanol, and therefore distils with it. The result is a sweeter spirit, and one that may have possessed additional analgesic or even intoxicating effects&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nDutch or Belgian gin, also known as \"jenever\" or \"genever\", evolved from malt wine spirits, and is a distinctly different drink from later styles of gin. Schiedam, a city in the province of South Holland, is famous for its \"jenever\"-producing history. The same for Hasselt in the Belgian province of Limburg. The \"oude\" (old) style of \"jenever\" remained very popular throughout the 19th century, where it was referred to as \"Holland\" or \"Geneva\" gin in popular, American, pre-Prohibition bartender guides.\nThe 18th century gave rise to a style of gin referred to as \"Old Tom gin\", which is a softer, sweeter style of gin, often containing sugar. Old Tom gin faded in popularity by the early 20th century.\n19th\u201320th centuries.\nThe invention and development of the column still (1826 and 1831) made the distillation of neutral spirits practical, thus enabling the creation of the \"London dry\" style that evolved later in the 19th century.\nIn tropical British colonies gin was used to mask the bitter flavour of quinine, which was the only effective anti-malarial compound. Quinine was dissolved in carbonated water to form tonic water; the resulting cocktail is gin and tonic, although modern tonic water contains only a trace of quinine as a flavouring. Gin is a common base spirit for many mixed drinks, including the martini. Secretly produced \"bathtub gin\" was available in the speakeasies and \"blind pigs\" of Prohibition-era America as a result of the relatively simple production.\nSloe gin is traditionally described as a liqueur made by infusing sloes (the fruit of the blackthorn) in gin, although modern versions are almost always compounded from neutral spirits and flavourings. Similar infusions are possible with other fruits, such as damsons. Another popular gin-based liqueur with a longstanding history is Pimm's No.1 Cup (25% alcohol by volume (ABV)), which is a fruit cup flavoured with citrus and spices.\nThe National Jenever Museums are located in Hasselt in Belgium, and Schiedam in the Netherlands.\n21st century.\nSince 2013, gin has been in a period of ascendancy worldwide, with many new brands and producers entering the category leading to a period of strong growth, innovation and change. More recently gin-based liqueurs have been popularized, reaching a market outside that of traditional gin drinkers, including fruit-flavoured and usually coloured \"Pink gin\", rhubarb gin, Spiced gin, violet gin, blood orange gin and sloe gin. Surging popularity and unchecked competition has led to consumer's conflation of gin with gin liqueurs and many products are straddling, pushing or breaking the boundaries of established definitions in a period of genesis for the industry.\nLegal definition.\nGeographical indication.\nSome legal classifications (protected denomination of origin) define gin as only originating from specific geographical areas without any further restrictions (e.g. Plymouth gin (PGI now lapsed), Ostfriesischer Korngenever, Slovensk\u00e1 borovi\u010dka, Kra\u0161ki Brinjevec, etc.), while other common descriptors refer to classic styles that are culturally recognized, but not legally defined (e.g. Old Tom gin). Sloe gin is also worth mentioning, as although technically a gin-based liqueur, it is unique in that the EU spirit drink regulations stipulate the colloquial term \"sloe gin\" can legally be used without the \"liqueur\" suffix when certain production criteria are met.\nCanada.\nAccording to the Canadian Food and Drug Regulation, gin is produced through redistillation of alcohol from juniper berries or a mixture of more than one such redistilled food products. The Canadian Food and Drug Regulation recognizes gin with three different definitions (Genever, Gin, London or Dry gin) that loosely approximate the US definitions. Whereas a more detailed regulation is provided for Holland gin or genever, no distinction is made between compounded gin and distilled gin. Either compounded or distilled gin can be labelled as Dry Gin or London Dry Gin if it does not contain any sweetening agents. For Genever and Gin, they shall not contain more than two percent sweetening agents.\nEuropean Union.\nAlthough many different styles of gin have evolved, it is legally differentiated into four categories in the European Union, as follows.\nJuniper-flavoured spirit drink.\nJuniper-flavoured spirit drinks include the earliest class of gin, which is produced by pot distilling a fermented grain mash to moderate strength, e.g., 68% ABV, and then redistilling it with botanicals to extract the aromatic compounds. It must be bottled at a minimum of 30% ABV. Juniper-flavoured spirit-drinks may also be sold under the names Wacholder or Ginebra.\nGin.\nGin is a juniper-flavoured spirit made not via the redistillation of botanicals, but by simply adding approved natural flavouring substances to a neutral spirit of agricultural origin. The predominant flavour must be juniper. Minimum bottled strength is 37.5% ABV.\nDistilled gin.\nDistilled gin is produced exclusively by redistilling ethanol of agricultural origin with an initial strength of 96% ABV (the azeotrope of water and ethanol), in the presence of juniper berries and of other natural botanicals, provided that the juniper taste is predominant. Gin obtained simply by adding essences or flavourings to ethanol of agricultural origin is not distilled gin. Minimum bottled strength is 37.5% ABV.\nLondon gin.\nLondon gin is obtained exclusively from ethanol of agricultural origin with a maximum methanol content of per hectolitre of 100% ABV equivalent, whose flavour is introduced exclusively through the re-distillation in traditional stills of ethanol in the presence of all the natural plant materials used, the resultant distillate of which is at least 70% ABV. London gin may not contain added sweetening exceeding of sugars per litre of the final product, nor colourants, nor any added ingredients other than water. The predominant flavour must be juniper. The term \"London gin\" may be supplemented by the term \"dry\". Minimum bottled strength is 37.5% ABV.\nAlthough London gin is the strictest of distilled gin categories, it is not a geographical designation.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States of America, \"gin\" is defined as an alcoholic beverage of no less than 40% ABV (80 proof) that possesses the characteristic flavour of juniper berries. Gin produced only through the redistillation of botanicals can be further distinguished and marketed as \"distilled gin\".\nProduction.\nMethods.\nGin can be broadly differentiated into three basic styles reflecting modernization in its distillation and flavouring techniques:\nPot distilled gin represents the earliest style of gin, and is traditionally produced by pot distilling a fermented grain mash (malt wine) from barley or other grains, then redistilling it with flavouring botanicals to extract the aromatic compounds. A \"double gin\" can be produced by redistilling the first gin again with more botanicals. Due to the use of pot stills, the alcohol content of the distillate is relatively low; around 68% ABV for a single distilled gin or 76% ABV for a double gin. This type of gin is often aged in tanks or wooden casks, and retains a heavier, malty flavour that gives it a marked resemblance to whisky. \"Korenwijn\" (grain wine) and the \"oude\" (old) style of \"Geneva gin\" or \"Holland gin\" represent the most prominent gins of this class.\nColumn distilled gin evolved following the invention of the Coffey still, and is produced by first distilling high proof (e.g. 96% ABV) neutral spirits from a fermented mash or wash using a refluxing still such as a column still. The fermentable base for this spirit may be derived from grain, sugar beets, grapes, potatoes, sugar cane, plain sugar, or any other material of agricultural origin. The highly concentrated spirit is then redistilled with juniper berries and other botanicals in a pot still. Most often, the botanicals are suspended in a \"gin basket\" positioned within the head of the still, which allows the hot alcoholic vapours to extract flavouring components from the botanical charge. This method yields a gin lighter in flavour than the older pot still method, and results in either a \"distilled gin\" or \"London dry gin\", depending largely upon how the spirit is finished. The evolution of hybrid (or computer-controlled) stills to control the amount of flavour or reflux has resulted in smoother spirits produced by smaller distilleries around the world.\nCompound gin is made by compounding (blending) neutral spirits with essences, other natural flavourings, or ingredients left to infuse in neutral spirit without redistillation.\nFlavouring.\nBotanical ingredients used to flavour gin include various spices, roots and fruits. The most common ingredient, besides the required juniper, is coriander, which adds a warm, spicy citrus-like flavour. Common spice botanicals include cinnamon, cassia, cardamom, pepper (black or sichuan), and nutmeg. Root botanicals, which add their own flavour but also aid in combining and fixing more volatile flavours together, include angelica root, orris root, and liquorice root. Citrus peels are the most common fruit botanicals and are used for their flavoursome oils which impart fresh citrus flavours, but also a gentle heat; the most commonly used are lemon, orange, and grapefruit. Many distillers will add other exotic and mundane botanicals to impart a unique flavour and unique selling proposition; these include saffron, baobab, frankincense, clove, ginger, pine needles and cone, grains of paradise, dragon eye (longan), and many more.\nChemical research has begun to identify the various chemicals that are extracted in the distillation process and contribute to gin's flavouring. For example, juniper monoterpenes come from juniper berries. Citric and berry flavours come from chemicals such as limonene and gamma-terpinene linalool found in limes, blueberries and hops amongst others. Floral notes come from compounds such as geraniol and eugenol. Spice-like flavours come from chemicals such as sabinene, delta-3-carene, and para-cymene.\nIn 2018, more than half the growth in the UK gin category was contributed by flavoured gin.\nSimilar spirits.\nA similar drink, also made with juniper berries and called Borovi\u010dka, is produced in the Slovak Republic.\nConsumption.\nClassic gin cocktails.\nA well known gin cocktail is the martini, traditionally made with gin and dry vermouth. Several other notable gin-based drinks include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable brands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12990", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12990", "title": "Gall\u2013Peters projection", "text": "Cylindrical equal-area map projection\nThe Gall\u2013Peters projection is a rectangular, equal-area map projection. Like all equal-area projections, it distorts most shapes. It is a cylindrical equal-area projection with latitudes 45\u00b0 north and south as the regions on the map that have no distortion. The projection is named after James Gall and Arno Peters.\nGall described the projection in 1855 at a science convention and published a paper on it in 1885. Peters brought the projection to a wider audience beginning in the early 1970s through his \"Peters World Map\". The name \"Gall\u2013Peters projection\" was first used by Arthur H. Robinson in a pamphlet put out by the American Cartographic Association in 1986.\nThe Gall\u2013Peters projection achieved notoriety in the late 20th century as the centerpiece of a controversy about the political implications of map design.\nDescription.\nFormula.\nThe projection is conventionally defined as:\nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03bb\" is the longitude from the central meridian in degrees, \"formula_2\" is the latitude, and \"R\" is the radius of the globe used as the model of the earth for projection. For longitude given in radians, remove the factors.\nSimplified formula.\nStripping out unit conversion and uniform scaling, the formulae may be written:\nformula_3\nwhere \"formula_4\" is the longitude from the central meridian (in radians), \"formula_2\" is the latitude, and \"R\" is the radius of the globe used as the model of the earth for projection. Hence the sphere is mapped onto the vertical cylinder, and the cylinder is stretched to double its length. The stretch factor, 2 in this case, is what distinguishes the variations of cylindric equal-area projection.\nRelation to cylindric equal-area projections.\nThe various specializations of the cylindric equal-area projection differ only in the ratio of the vertical to horizontal axis. This ratio determines the \"standard parallel\" of the projection, which is the parallel at which there is no distortion and along which distances match the stated scale. The standard parallels of the Gall\u2013Peters are 45\u00b0\u00a0N and 45\u00b0\u00a0S. Several other specializations of the equal-area cylindric have been described, promoted, or otherwise named.\nOrigins and naming.\nThe Gall\u2013Peters projection was first described in 1855 by the Scottish clergyman James Gall, who presented it along with two other projections at the Glasgow meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science (the BA). He gave it the name \"orthographic\" and formally published his work in 1885 in the \"Scottish Geographical Magazine\". The projection is suggestive of the orthographic projection in that distances between parallels of the Gall\u2013Peters are a constant multiple of the distances between the parallels of the orthographic. That constant is \u221a2.\nIn 1967, the German filmmaker Arno Peters independently devised a similar projection, which he presented in 1973 as the \"Peters world map\". Peters's original description of his projection contained a geometric error that, taken literally, implies standard parallels of 46\u00b002\u2032\u00a0N/S. However the text accompanying the description made it clear that he had intended the standard parallels to be 45\u00b0\u00a0N/S, making his projection identical to Gall's orthographic. In any case, the difference is negligible in a world map.\nThe name \"Gall\u2013Peters projection\" seems to have been used first by Arthur H. Robinson in a pamphlet put out by the American Cartographic Association in 1986. Before 1973 it had been known, when referred to at all, as the \"Gall orthographic\" or \"Gall's orthographic\". Most Peters supporters refer to it as the \"Peters projection\". During the years of controversy, the cartographic articles tended to use one name or the other, while acknowledging both names. In recent years \"Gall\u2013Peters\" seems to dominate.\nPeters world map controversy.\nThe Gall\u2013Peters projection initially passed unnoticed when presented by Gall in 1855. It achieved more widespread attention after Arno Peters reintroduced it in 1973. He promoted it as a superior alternative to the commonly used Mercator projection, on the basis that the Mercator projection greatly distorts the relative sizes of regions on a map. In particular, he criticized that the Mercator projection causes wealthy Europe and North America to appear very large relative to poorer Africa and South America. These arguments swayed many socially concerned groups to adopt the Gall\u2013Peters projection, including the National Council of Churches and the magazine \"New Internationalist\".\nHis campaign was bolstered by the inaccurate claim that the Gall\u2013Peters projection was the only \"area-correct\" map. In actuality, some of the oldest projections are equal-area (such as the sinusoidal projection), and hundreds have been described. He also inaccurately claimed that it possessed \"absolute angle conformality\", had \"no extreme distortions of form\", and was \"totally distance-factual\". Peters framed his criticisms of the Mercator projection with criticisms of the broader cartographic community. In particular, Peters wrote in \"The New Cartography\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs Peters's promotions gained popularity, the cartographic community reacted with hostility to his criticisms, as well as to the inaccuracy and lack of novelty of his claims. They called attention to the long list of cartographers who, over the preceding century, had formally expressed frustration with publishers' overuse of the Mercator and advocated for alternatives. In addition, several scholars criticized the particularly large distortions present in the Gall\u2013Peters projection, and remarked on the irony of its undistorted presentation of the mid latitudes, including Peters's native Germany, at the expense of the low latitudes, which host more of the technologically underdeveloped nations.\nThe increasing publicity of Peters's claims in 1986 motivated the American Cartographic Association (now Cartography and Geographic Information Society) to produce a series of booklets (including \"Which Map Is Best\") designed to educate the public about map projections and distortion in maps. In 1989 and 1990, after some internal debate, seven North American geographic organizations adopted a resolution rejecting all rectangular world maps, a category that includes both the Mercator and the Gall\u2013Peters projections, though the North American Cartographic Information Society notably declined to endorse it.\nThe two camps never made any real attempts toward reconciliation. The Peters camp largely ignored the protests of the cartographers, and did not acknowledge Gall's prior work until the controversy had largely run its course, late in Peters's life. While he likely devised the projection independently, his unscholarly conduct and refusal to engage the cartographic community undoubtedly contributed to the polarization and impasse.\nIn the ensuing decades, J. Brian Harley credited the Peters phenomenon with demonstrating the social implications of map projections.\nAdoption.\nMaps based on the projection are promoted by UNESCO, and they are also widely used by British schools. The U.S. state of Massachusetts and Boston Public Schools began phasing in these maps in March 2017, becoming the first public school district and state in the United States to adopt Gall\u2013Peters maps as their standard. Until its dissolution in 2020, Amherst-based ODT Maps Inc. was the exclusive North American publisher of Peters and Hobo\u2013Dyer projection maps. On April 16, 2024, Nebraska Governor Jim Pillen signed a law that requires public schools to display maps based on the Gall\u2013Peters projection, a similar cylindrical equal-area projection, or the AuthaGraph projection beginning in the 2024\u20132025 school year.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "12991", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12991", "title": "Gram Parsons", "text": "American singer-songwriter (1946\u20131973)\nIngram Cecil Connor III (November 5, 1946 \u2013 September 19, 1973), known professionally as Gram Parsons, was an American musician. He recorded with the International Submarine Band, the Byrds, and the Flying Burrito Brothers, popularizing what he called \"Cosmic American Music\", a hybrid of country, rhythm and blues, soul, folk, and rock. He has been credited with helping to found the country rock and alt-country genres and received a ranking of No.\u00a087 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time.\nEarly life and education.\nIngram Cecil Connor III was born on November 5, 1946, in Winter Haven, Florida, to Ingram Cecil Connor II, aka \"Coon Dog\", and Avis Snively Connor. He had one sibling, a sister named \u201cLittle Avis\u201d. Connor II was a World War II flying ace, decorated with the Air Medal, who worked at his father-in-law's company and was a local Boy Scout official. Both parents were alcoholics and both suffered from depression; Cecil II shot and killed himself on December 23, 1958. Avis then married Robert Parsons, whose surname was adopted by Gram and his sister. Avis and Robert would have one child, Parsons\u2019 half-sister Diane.\nAvis was the daughter of citrus fruit magnate John A. Snively, who held extensive properties in Winter Haven, Florida and Waycross, Georgia, where the Connors normally lived. Parsons attended The Bolles School in Jacksonville before transferring to the public Winter Haven High School; after failing his junior year there, he returned to Bolles. On his graduation day, June 5, 1965, his mother died of complications from alcoholism. Robert Parsons had been having an affair with Diane\u2019s nanny; they married shortly after Avis\u2019 death. Gram went on to Harvard, which he attended for one semester. At age 21, he began to receive his annual trust fund income of $30,000.\nCareer.\nParsons developed strong musical interests early in life, particularly after seeing Elvis Presley perform in concert in Waycross, on February 22, 1956. Five years later, he was playing in rock and roll cover bands such as the Pacers and the Legends, headlining in Winter Haven/Polk County clubs owned by his stepfather. By age 16, he had graduated to folk music, and in 1963 he teamed up with his first professional outfit, the Shilohs. Heavily influenced by The Kingston Trio and The Journeymen, the band played hootenannies, coffee houses and high school auditoriums; as Parsons was still enrolled in prep school, he performed with the group only in select engagements. Forays into New York City included a performance at Florida's exhibition in the 1964 New York World's Fair and regular appearances at the Caf\u00e9 Rafio on Bleecker Street in Greenwich Village in the summer of 1964. Although John Phillips (an acquaintance of Shiloh George Wrigley) arranged an exploratory meeting with Albert Grossman, the impresario balked at booking the group for a Christmas engagement at The Bitter End when he discovered that the Shilohs were high school students. Following a recording session at the radio station of Bob Jones University, the group reached a creative impasse amid the emergence of folk rock and dissolved in the spring of 1965.\nThe International Submarine Band (1966\u20131967).\nIn 1966, he and other musicians from the Boston folk scene formed a group called the International Submarine Band. In 1967, after briefly residing in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx, they moved to Los Angeles. Following several lineup changes, the band signed with Lee Hazlewood's LHI Records, where they spent late 1967 recording \"Safe at Home\". The album contains one of Parsons' best-known songs, \"Luxury Liner\", and an early version of \"Do You Know How It Feels,\" which he revised later in his career. \"Safe at Home\" would remain unreleased until mid-1968, by which time the International Submarine Band had broken up.\nThe International Submarine Band appeared in the Peter Fonda film \"The Trip\" (1967) as a performing band in one of the clubs. Their song \"Lazy Days\" was offered for the film's soundtrack, but the soundtrack was done by Mike Bloomfield's Electric Flag. In 1967, Peter Fonda recorded a version of Parsons' song \"November Nights\" titled \"November Night\". The song was released as a single in March 1967, with Donovan's \"Catch the Wind\" on the B side.\nThe Byrds (1968).\nBy 1968, Parsons came to the attention of The Byrds' bassist, Chris Hillman, via business manager Larry Spector, who was looking for a new band member following the departures of David Crosby and Michael Clarke. In February 1968, Parsons passed an audition for the band, being initially recruited as a jazz pianist but soon adding rhythm guitar and vocals.\nAlthough Parsons was an equal contributor to the band, he was not regarded as a full member by the band's label, Columbia Records. Consequently, when the Byrds' recording contract was renewed on February 29, 1968, it was signed only by original members Roger McGuinn and Chris Hillman. Parsons, like fellow new recruit Kevin Kelley, was hired as a sideman and received a salary from McGuinn and Hillman. In later years, this led Hillman to state, \"Gram was hired. He was not a member of the Byrds, ever. He was on salary; that was the only way we could get him to turn up.\" Parsons and Kelley were given equal billing alongside McGuinn and Hillman on the \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\" album, and in press coverage.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Being with The Byrds confused me a little. I couldn't find my place. I didn't have enough say-so. I really wasn't one of The Byrds. I was originally hired because they wanted a keyboard player. But I had experience being a frontman and that came out immediately. And [Roger McGuinn] being a very perceptive fellow saw that it would help the act, and he started sticking me out front.\"\n\u2014Gram Parsons reflecting on his time with the Byrds\n\"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\" was conceived by McGuinn as a double-album history of American popular music. It was to begin with bluegrass, then move through country and western, jazz, rhythm and blues, and rock music, before ending with electronic music. However, as recording plans were made, Parsons persuaded the other members to leave Los Angeles and record the album in Nashville. McGuinn's concept was jettisoned in favor of a country project, which included Parsons' songs \"One Hundred Years from Now\" and \"Hickory Wind\", and songs by Bob Dylan, Woody Guthrie and Merle Haggard.\nRecording sessions for \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\" commenced at Columbia Records' recording studios in the Music Row area of Nashville on March 9, 1968. Mid-way through, the sessions moved to Columbia Studios, Hollywood and were completed on May 27, 1968. However, Parsons was still under contract to LHI Records and Hazlewood threatened legal action over Parsons' appearance on the album. As a result, McGuinn replaced three of Parsons' lead vocals with his own; in 1973, in an interview with Cameron Crowe, Parsons said that McGuinn \"erased it and did the vocals himself and fucked it up.\" Parsons remained as lead vocalist on the songs \"You're Still on My Mind\", \"Life in Prison\", and \"Hickory Wind\".\nWhile in England with the Byrds in the summer of 1968, Parsons left the band over a planned concert tour of South Africa and his opposition to apartheid. During this period Parsons became acquainted with Mick Jagger and Keith Richards of The Rolling Stones. After leaving the band, Parsons stayed at Richards' house and the pair developed a close friendship, with Parsons reintroducing the guitarist to country music.\nThe Flying Burrito Brothers (1969\u20131970).\nReturning to Los Angeles, Parsons sought out Chris Hillman, and the two formed The Flying Burrito Brothers with bassist Chris Ethridge and pedal steel player Sneaky Pete Kleinow. Their 1969 album \"The Gilded Palace of Sin\" marked the culmination of Parsons' post-1966 musical vision: a modernized variant of the Bakersfield sound that was popularized by Buck Owens amalgamated with strands of soul and psychedelic rock. The band appeared on the album cover wearing Nudie suits emblazoned with hippie symbols, including marijuana, Tuinal, and Seconal-inspired patches. Along with the Parsons-Hillman originals \"Christine's Tune\" and \"Sin City\" were versions of the soul music classics \"The Dark End of the Street\" and \"Do Right Woman, Do Right Man\", the latter featuring David Crosby on high harmony. The original songs were the result of a productive songwriting partnership between Parsons and Hillman, who were sharing a bachelor pad in the San Fernando Valley. The pronounced gospel-soul influence on this album likely evolved from the ecumenical tastes of bassist Chris Ethridge, who co-wrote \"Hot Burrito No. 1/I'm Your Toy\" and \"Hot Burrito No. 2\" with Parsons.\nOriginal drummer Eddie Hoh was unable to perform adequate takes due to a substance abuse problem. He was dismissed after two songs and the band used session drummers, including former International Submarine Band drummer Jon Corneal and Popeye Phillips. Before commencing live performances, the group settled on original Byrds drummer Michael Clarke.\n\"The Gilded Palace of Sin\" was commercially unsuccessful. Critic Robert Christgau called it \"an ominous, obsessive, tongue-in-cheek country-rock synthesis, absorbing rural and urban, traditional and contemporary, at point of impact.\" Parsons suffered from fear of flying and the band toured via train. The band members lost most of their money in a perpetual poker game and their concerts were met with bewilderment. Parsons was taking psilocybin and cocaine, so his performances were erratic. The most successful appearance was in Philadelphia, where the group opened for the reconstituted Byrds. Midway through their set, Parsons joined the headline act and fronted his former group on renditions of \"Hickory Wind\" and \"You Don't Miss Your Water\".\nAfter returning to Los Angeles, the group recorded \"The Train Song\", written during an increasingly infrequent songwriting session on the train and produced by 1950s R&amp;B legends Larry Williams and Johnny \"Guitar\" Watson. Despite a request from the Burritos that the remnants of their publicity budget be diverted to the promotion of the single, it also flopped. During this period, Ethridge departed, saying that he did not share Parsons' and Hillman's affinity for country music. He was replaced by lead guitarist Bernie Leadon, while Hillman reverted to bass.\nBy this time, Parsons's drug use had increased to the point where new songs were rare, and much of his time was spent partying with the Rolling Stones, who were in America finishing \"Let It Bleed\". As the Stones prepared to play the nation's largest venues, the Burritos played to dwindling nightclub audiences. But they were booked as one of the acts at the Altamont Music Festival. They played a short set, including \"Bony Moronie\" and \"Six Days on the Road\", which was included in the event's documentary \"Gimme Shelter\".\nWith mounting debt incurred, A&amp;M hoped to recoup some of its losses by marketing the Burritos as a straight country group. Manager Jim Dickson instigated a session where the band recorded honky tonk staples and contemporary pop covers in a countrified vein, but this was scrapped in favor of a second album of originals on an extremely reduced budget.\nFaced with a dearth of new material, most of the album was hastily written in the studio by Leadon, Hillman, and Parsons, with two \"Gilded Palace of Sin\" outtakes thrown into the mix. The resulting album, \"Burrito Deluxe\", was released in April 1970. Although it is considered less inspired than its predecessor, it is notable for the song \"Older Guys\" and for the band's take on \"Wild Horses\".\nLike its predecessor, \"Burrito Deluxe\" under-performed commercially but also failed to carry the critical cachet of the debut. Disenchanted, Parsons left the Burritos in mutual agreement with Hillman; under Hillman, the group recorded one more album before dissolving in 1971.\nSolo career and touring with Emmylou Harris (1970\u20131973).\nIn early 1970, Parsons signed a solo deal with A&amp;M Records and moved in with producer Terry Melcher. The two shared a penchant for cocaine and heroin, and the sessions were largely unproductive, with Parsons eventually losing interest in the project. The master tapes were lost; it is unclear who took them.\nParsons accompanied the Rolling Stones on its 1971 U.K. tour in the hope of being signed to the newly formed Rolling Stones Records. He lived at Richards' French villa Nellc\u00f4te during the recording of \"Exile on Main Street\", though he contributed little to the process. His drug use and constant quarrelling with his girlfriend, Gretchen Burrell, led to a request to leave by Richards' girlfriend, Anita Pallenberg. Parsons attempted to rekindle his relationship with the band on its 1972 American tour, to no avail.\nParsons returned to the US for a one-off concert with the Burritos. In Washington, D.C., he met Emmylou Harris and asked her to join him in Los Angeles to record his first solo album. It came as a surprise to many when Parsons was signed to Reprise Records by Mo Ostin in mid-1972. The ensuing \"GP\" (1973) featured several members of Elvis Presley's TCB Band. It included six new songs from Parsons alongside several country covers, including Tompall Glaser's \"Streets of Baltimore\" and George Jones' \"That's All It Took\". \nParsons, now featuring Harris as his duet partner, toured across the U.S. as Gram Parsons and the Fallen Angels in February\u2013March 1973. Unable to afford the TCB Band, the group featured guitarists Jock Bartley and Larry Coryell, Neil Flanz on pedal steel, bassist Kyle Tullis, and drummer N.D. Smart. The touring party also included Parsons' new wife, Gretchen Parsons, who was envious of Harris and her young daughter. Coordinating the spectacle as road manager was Phil Kaufman, who had served time with Charles Manson on Terminal Island but who ensured that the performer stayed clear of drugs and limited his alcohol intake during shows. At first, the band was under-rehearsed and played poorly; however, they improved with steady gigging and received rapturous responses at several counter-cultural venues, including Armadillo World Headquarters in Austin, Max's Kansas City in New York City, and Liberty Hall in Houston, where Neil Young and Linda Ronstadt sat in for a filmed performance. Nevertheless, the tour failed to galvanize sales of \"GP\", which never charted in the \"Billboard\" 200.\nFor his next and final album, 1974's posthumously released \"Grievous Angel\", Parsons used Harris and members of the TCB Band. The record received more enthusiastic reviews than \"GP\". Although Parsons only contributed two new songs to the album (\"In My Hour of Darkness\" and \"Return of the Grievous Angel\"), he was reportedly enthusiastic with his new sound and seemed to have finally adopted a diligent mindset to his musical career, limiting his intake of alcohol and opiates during most of the sessions. \"Grievous Angel\" peaked at number 195 on the \"Billboard\" chart.\nBefore recording, Parsons and Harris played a preliminary four-show mini-tour as the headline act in a June 1973 Warner Bros. Records country rock package with the New Kentucky Colonels and Country Gazette. A shared backing band included Clarence White, Pete Kleinow and Chris Ethridge. On July 15, 1973, White was killed by a drunk driver in Palmdale, California, while loading equipment in his car for a concert with the New Kentucky Colonels. At White's funeral, Parsons and Bernie Leadon performed a rendition of \"Farther Along\"; that evening, Parsons reportedly informed Phil Kaufman of his final wish: to be cremated in Joshua Tree National Monument.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1971, Parsons married Gretchen Burrell (nee Gretchen Lisl Berrill) at his stepfather's New Orleans estate.&lt;ref name=\"californiabirthindex/4567413\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"tcmdb/0%7C208758\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \nParsons and Burrell went to England, where they visited their friend Ric Grech. With the help of Grech and his friend Hank Wangford, Parsons stopped using heroin.\nIn the summer of 1973, Parsons' Topanga Canyon home burned to the ground, the result of a stray cigarette. Nearly all of his possessions were destroyed with the exception of a guitar and a prized Jaguar. The fire proved to be the last straw in the relationship between Burrell and Parsons, who moved into a spare room in Kaufman's house. Parsons rekindled his relationship with Margaret Fisher, a high school sweetheart from Waycross.\nParsons had one child, born to Nancy Ross in 1967, Polly Parsons.&lt;ref name=\"latimes/2004-jul-08-wk-pop8\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nDeath.\nGram Parsons died from a drug and alcohol overdose on September 19, 1973.\nIn the late 1960s, Parsons began to vacation at Joshua Tree National Monument in southeastern California, where he used psychedelics and said he experienced UFO sightings. After splitting from Burrell, Parsons often spent his weekends there, with Margaret Fisher and Phil Kaufman. Scheduled to resume touring in October 1973, Parsons decided to go on another recuperative excursion on September 17. Accompanying him were Fisher, his assistant Michael Martin, and Martin's girlfriend Dale McElroy.\nOn both nights of their stay, Parsons retreated to the desert, consuming large amounts of alcohol and barbiturates, while the rest of the group visited bars in nearby Yucca Valley. On September 18, Martin drove back to Los Angeles to resupply the group with marijuana. That night, Parsons challenged Fisher and McElroy to drink with him; Fisher did not drink and McElroy was recovering from illness. Parsons said that he would drink for the three of them and drank six double tequilas. The three then went to the Joshua Tree Inn, where Parsons purchased morphine from an unknown woman; after being injected by her in Room No. 1, he overdosed. Fisher gave Parsons an ice cube suppository, and then a cold shower and moved him to Room No. 8. She put him to bed and went out to buy coffee in the hope of reviving him, leaving McElroy to stand guard. As his breathing became irregular and then ceased, McElroy attempted resuscitation. After all attempts failed, they called an ambulance. Parsons was declared dead on arrival at Yucca Valley Hospital at 12:15\u00a0a.m. on September 19, 1973. The official cause of death was an overdose of morphine and alcohol. Kaufman drove Fisher and McElroy back to Los Angeles and then dispersed the rest of Parsons' drugs in the desert.\nAlthough Parsons had said he wanted his body cremated at Joshua Tree and his ashes spread over the formation Cap Rock, Parsons' stepfather organized a private ceremony in New Orleans and left the body in the care of a funeral home. But, to fulfill Parsons' wishes, Kaufman and a friend stole both a hearse and his body and drove it to Joshua Tree. At Cap Rock Parking Lot, they poured gasoline into the open coffin and lit it, creating an enormous fireball. They were arrested and eventually fined $750.00, for stealing the coffin. What remained of Parsons' body was buried in Garden of Memories Cemetery in Metairie, Louisiana.\nThe story brings Parsons fans out to a large rock flake known to rock climbers as 'The Gram Parsons Memorial Hand Traverse'. At some point, someone added a slab that marked Parsons' cremation to the memorial rock; that slab was removed by the U.S. National Park Service and is now at the Joshua Tree Inn. Joshua Tree park guides are given the option to tell the story of Parsons' cremation during tours, but there is no mention of the act in official maps or brochures.\nLegacy.\nStephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic describes Parsons as \"enormously influential\" for both country and rock, \"blending the two genres to the point that they became indistinguishable from each other...his influence could still be heard well into the next millennium.\" In his 2005 essay on Parsons for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's \"100 Greatest Artist\" list, Keith Richards notes that Parsons' recorded music output was \"pretty minimal\" but says that Parsons' \"effect on country music is enormous...and this is why we're talking about him now.\"\nEmmylou Harris continued to champion Parsons' work, covering a number of his songs, including \"Hickory Wind\", \"Wheels\", \"Sin City\", \"Luxury Liner\", and \"Hot Burrito No.\u00a02\". Harris's songs \"Boulder to Birmingham\", from her 1975 album \"Pieces of the Sky\", and \"The Road\", from her 2011 album \"Hard Bargain\", are tributes to Parsons. Her 1985 album \"The Ballad of Sally Rose\" includes many allusions to Parsons in its narrative. The song \"My Man\", written by Bernie Leadon and performed by the Eagles on their album \"On the Border\", is a tribute to Gram Parsons.\nThe 1973 album \"Crazy Eyes\" by Poco pays homage to Parsons, as Richie Furay composed the title track in honor of him, and sings one of Parsons' own compositions, \"Brass Buttons.\" The album was released four days before Parsons died.\nBetween 1996 and 2006, a festival called \"Gram Fest\", aka \"The Cosmic Americana Music Festival\" was held annually at Joshua Tree. The Gram Parsons Guitar Pull and Tribute Festival, in Waycross, Georgia, was founded in 1997 and continues today.\nIn 2003 the Americana Music Awards awarded Parsons with the President's Award, which was accepted by his daughter.\nThe 2003 film \"Grand Theft Parsons\" stars Johnny Knoxville as Phil Kaufman and chronicles a farcical version of the theft of Parsons' corpse. In 2006, Gandulf Hennig released the documentary \"Gram Parsons: Fallen Angel\".\nIn 2004, Parsons' daughter Polly produced two tribute concerts titled \"Return to Sin City: A Tribute to Gram Parsons\". Artists included Keith Richards, James Burton, Lucinda Williams, Norah Jones, Dwight Yoakam, John Doe, Steve Earle, Jim Lauderdale, Kathleen Edwards, Jay Farrar, Jim James, Raul Malo, Susan Marshall, and the Sin City All Stars. The concert produced a DVD and 100% of the concerts was donated through the Gram Parsons Foundation to the Musician's Assistance Program (now MusiCares), which aids musicians in crisis.\nDespite his influence, Parsons has yet to be inducted into either the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame or the Country Music Hall of Fame. The Gram Parsons Petition Project (later named Gram Parsons InterNational) was begun in May 2008 in support of a drive to induct Parsons into the Country Music Hall of Fame. On September 19, 2008, the 35th anniversary of Parsons' death, it was presented to the Country Music Association (CMA) with the official Nomination Proposal.\nIn November 2009, the musical theatre production \"Grievous Angel: The Legend of Gram Parsons\" premiered, starring Anders Drerup as Gram Parsons and Kelly Prescott as Emmylou Harris. Directed by Michael Bate and co-written by Bate and David McDonald, the production was inspired by a March 1973 interview that Bate conducted with Parsons, which became Parsons' last recorded conversation.\nIn 2012, Swedish folk duo First Aid Kit released the single \"Emmylou\" from the album \"The Lion's Roar\". The song's chorus is a lyrical acknowledgment of the Gram Parsons and Emmylou Harris singing partnership.\nIn the fall of 2012 Florida festival promoter and musician Randy Judy presented his bio-musical \"Farther Along \u2013 The Music and Life of Gram Parsons\" at Magnoliafest at the Spirit of the Suwannee Music Park.\nTribute bands include Cleveland's New Soft Shoe and, out of St. Paul, The Gilded Palace Sinners.&lt;ref name=\"minnesotamonthly/november-picks\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"twincities/2016/tribute-shows-void\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 2022, Dave Prinz, co-founder of Amoeba Music, rediscovered Gram Parsons' \"Last Roundup\" tapes featuring Emmylou Harris with Gram Parsons and the Fallen Angels. Prinz initiated a campaign to fund the release independently, in partnership with Polly Parsons. The campaign launched on November 17, 2022, and was fully backed. Gram Parsons &amp; The Fallen Angels' \"The Last Roundup: Live from The Bijou Caf\u00e9 in Philadelphia 3/16/73\" was released on limited-edition vinyl on Friday, November 24, 2023, and was considered one of the hits of Record Store Day 2023.\nIn 2021, Zak Bagans and his crew on the hit TV show Ghost Adventures, with a special guest, investigated the Joshua Tree Inn to bring both closure and peace to the Parsons family.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArticles\nMetadata\nMerchandise"}
{"id": "12992", "revid": "18010125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12992", "title": "Go-fast boat", "text": "Type of boat\nA go-fast boat is a small, fast powerboat designed with a long narrow platform and a planing hull. Depending on definitions used, it is either a speedboat (synonymously) or a certain type of speedboat.\nDuring the United States alcohol prohibition era, these boats were used in \"rum-running\", transferring illegal liquor from larger vessels waiting outside US territorial waters to the mainland. Their high speed enabled them to avoid interception by the law enforcement. The present conception of such boats is based largely on designs by Donald Aronow for offshore powerboat racing in the 1960s. During this period, these boats were also used by drug smugglers to transfer drugs across the Caribbean to the United States.\nName.\nGo-fast boats are also called cigarette boats or cigar boats\u2014references to their hull shape, to the items that they are (archetypally) used to smuggle (see \"Illicit cigarette trade\" and \"Cuban cigar\"), or both.\nThe term \"cigarette boat\" is especially popular because it is a brand name for a line of go-fast boats that popularized and largely defined the class in the 1960s, made by Don Aronow's Cigarette Racing Team. \"Cigar boat\" is often preferred because it avoids confusion with that brand.\nAlthough modern go-fast boats postdate the fleet that was used for rum-running during the Great Depression, some of those boats were small and extremely fast, a theme that is shared with later smuggling (such as drug smuggling); thus, go-fast boats are sometimes informally (jocularly) called rum-runners.\nConstruction.\nA typical go-fast is laid-up using a combination of fibreglass, kevlar and carbon fibre, using a deep \"V\" style offshore racing hull ranging from long, narrow in beam, and equipped with two or more powerful engines, often totalling more than . The boats can typically travel at speeds over in calm waters, over in choppy waters, and maintain in the average Caribbean seas. They are heavy enough to cut through higher waves, although slower.\nUse.\nReflecting their racing heritage, accommodations on these five-or-fewer-passenger boats are minimal. A small low cabin under the foredeck is typical, much smaller than a typical motor yacht of similar size. In addition to racing, most buyers buy these boats for their sleek design, power, performance, and mystique.\nIllegal use.\nThese boats are difficult to detect by radar except on flat calm seas or at close range. The United States Coast Guard and the DEA found them to be stealthy, fast, seaworthy, and very difficult to intercept using conventional craft. Due to this, Coast Guards have developed their own high-speed craft and use helicopters equipped with anti-materiel rifles used to disable engines of fleeing boats. The US Coast Guard go-fast boat is a rigid-hulled inflatable boat (RHIB) equipped with radar and powerful engines. The RHIB is armed with several types of non-lethal weapons and an M240 GPMG.\nMedia portrayal.\nIn the 2006 film \"Miami Vice\", go-fast boats are used to smuggle drugs for cartels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12993", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12993", "title": "Global positioning system", "text": ""}
{"id": "12994", "revid": "28516722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12994", "title": "Glasgow City Chambers", "text": "Municipal building in Glasgow, Scotland\n}} Buchanan Street\n}}The City Chambers or Municipal Buildings in Glasgow, Scotland, has functioned as the headquarters of Glasgow City Council since 1996, and of preceding forms of municipal government in the city since 1889. It is located on the eastern side of the city's George Square. It is a Category A listed building.\nHistory.\nThe need for a new city chambers had been apparent since the 18th century, with the old Glasgow Tolbooth at Glasgow Cross becoming insufficient for the purposes of civic government in a growing town with greater political responsibilities. In 1814, the tolbooth was sold \u2013 with the exception of the steeple, which still remains \u2013 and the council chambers moved to the public buildings in the Saltmarket, near Glasgow Green. A subsequent move took the city council to the city and county buildings between Wilson Street and Ingram Street in 1844. In the early 1880s, City Architect John Carrick was asked to identify a suitable site for a purpose-built City Council Chambers. Carrick identified the east side of George Square, which was then bought.\nFollowing a design competition, the building was designed by the Scottish architect William Young in the Victorian style and construction started in 1882. The building was inaugurated by Queen Victoria in August 1888 and the first council meeting held within the chambers took place in October 1889. An extension connected by pairs of archways across John Street was completed in 1912 and Exchange House in George Street was completed in the mid-1980s.\nThe new City Chambers initially housed Glasgow Town Council from 1888 to 1895, when that body was replaced by Glasgow Corporation. It remained the corporation's headquarters until it was replaced by Glasgow District Council under the wider Strathclyde Regional Council in May 1975. It then remained the Glasgow District Council headquarters until the abolition of the Strathclyde Region led to the formation of Glasgow City Council in April 1996.\nArchitecture.\nExterior.\nThe building is in the Beaux arts style, an interpretation of Renaissance Classicism incorporating Italianate styles with a vast range of ornate decoration, used to express the wealth and industrial export-led economic prosperity of the Second City of the Empire. The exterior sculpture, by James Alexander Ewing, included the central Jubilee Pediment as its centrepiece. Although originally intended to feature a figure symbolising Glasgow 'with the Clyde at her feet sending her manufactures to all the world', the Pediment was redesigned to celebrate Queen Victoria's Golden Jubilee. It depicts Victoria enthroned, surrounded by emblematic figures of Scotland, England, Ireland and Wales, alongside the colonies of the British Empire (mostly British India). Ewing also designed the apex sculptures of Truth, Riches, and Honour, and the statues of The Four Seasons on the Chamber's tower. The central apex figure of Truth is popularly known as Glasgow's Statue of Liberty, because of its close resemblance to the similarly posed, but very much larger, statue in New York harbour.\nInterior.\nThe entrance hall of the Chambers displays a mosaic of the city's coat of arms on the floor, which dates from the 1950s when the city's coat of arms was last modified. The arms reflect legends about Glasgow's patron saint, Saint Mungo, and include four emblems \u2013 the bird, tree, bell, and fish \u2013 as remembered in the following verse:\n\"Here's the Bird that never flew\"\n\"Here's the Tree that never grew\"\n\"Here's the Bell that never rang\"\n\"Here's the Fish that never swam\"\nThe ornate banqueting hall, which is long by wide and high, is decorated with huge murals by the Glasgow Boys. The decoration was co-ordinated by architect William Leiper. The room hosted Nelson Mandela and Sir Alex Ferguson when they received the Freedom of the City in 1993 and 1999, respectively. In March 2015, it hosted the medal ceremony for Bob Fulton, Robert Somerville and John Keenan, three retired Rolls-Royce factory workers, honoured for their boycott against the Chilean Air Force during the dictatorship of General Pinochet of Chile. The ceremony is part of the documentary Nae Pasaran. The Council Chamber is clad in Spanish mahogany panelling and its windows are made of Venetian stained glass.\nIn popular culture.\nThe building was used as a stand in for the British Embassy in Moscow in the film \"An Englishman Abroad\" in 1983, and as the Vatican in \"Heavenly Pursuits\" in 1986. It was also used for the film \"The House of Mirth\" in 2000 and featured more recently in the television series \"Outlander\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12995", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12995", "title": "Gone with the Wind (novel)", "text": "1936 novel by Margaret Mitchell\nGone with the Wind is a novel by American writer Margaret Mitchell, first published in 1936. The story is set in Clayton County and Atlanta, both in Georgia, during the American Civil War and Reconstruction Era. It depicts the struggles of young Scarlett O'Hara, the spoiled oldest daughter of a well-to-do plantation owner, who must use every means at her disposal to claw her way out of poverty following Sherman's destructive \"March to the Sea\". This historical novel features a coming-of-age story, with the title taken from the poem by Ernest Dowson.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" was popular with American readers from the outset and was the top American fiction bestseller in 1936 and 1937. As of 2014, a Harris poll found it to be the second favorite book of American readers, just behind the Bible. More than 30 million copies have been printed worldwide.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" is a controversial reference point for subsequent writers of the South, both black and white. Scholars at American universities refer to, interpret, and study it in their writings. The novel has been absorbed into American popular culture.\nMitchell received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for the book in 1937. It was adapted into the 1939 film of the same name, which is considered to be one of the greatest movies ever made and also received the Academy Award for Best Picture during the 12th annual Academy Awards ceremony. \"Gone with the Wind\" is the only novel by Mitchell published during her lifetime.\nPlot.\nPart I.\nIt is April 15, 1861, the eve of a rebellion in which seven southern states declare their secession from the United States (known as \"the Union\") over a desire to continue the institution of slavery, which was the economic engine of the South. In one of those states, Georgia, the family of wealthy Irish immigrant Gerald O'Hara owns a plantation (called \"Tara\").\nThe oldest of the three O'Hara daughters, 16-year-old Scarlett is dismayed to learn that the man she secretly loves, her county neighbor Ashley Wilkes, is set to announce his engagement to his cousin Melanie Hamilton. The next day, the Wilkeses throw an all-day party at their estate (known as \"Twelve Oaks\") where Scarlett notices someone leering at her. He turns out to be Rhett Butler, who has a reputation for seducing young women. Throughout the day, Scarlett attempts to turn Ashley's head by flirting with every man present, including Melanie's brother Charles Hamilton. In the afternoon, Scarlett gets Ashley alone and confesses her love for him, convinced he will return it. However, he says only that he cares for her as a friend and intends to marry Melanie. Stung, Scarlett insults Ashley and accuses him of being too cowardly to submit to his real feelings for her. As Ashley departs, Rhett reveals he has overheard their whole exchange. Scarlett feels humiliated.\nLater, war is declared, and the men are going to enlist. Feeling petty and vengeful, Scarlett accepts Charles's marriage proposal. They marry, and two weeks later, Charles goes to war, where he dies of measles two months later. Scarlett gives birth to his child, Wade Hampton Hamilton. As a widow, she is bound to dye her dresses black, wear a veil in public, and avoid conversations with young men. Scarlett secretly mourns the loss of her youth, not the husband she barely knew.\nPart II.\nScarlett's mother, mistaking Scarlett's depression for grief, suggests that living with Melanie might lift her spirits. Melanie is living in Atlanta with her Aunt Sarah Jane, who is called by her childhood nickname \"Pittypat\". After moving there, Scarlett's spirit is revived by the excitement of living in a growing city. She busies herself with hospital work and sewing circles for the Confederate Army. However, her heart is not in it\u00a0\u2013 she does it primarily to avoid being gossiped about by the other women of Atlanta society. Additionally, she believes her efforts may aid Ashley, with whom she is still in love.\nScarlett is mortified when she runs into Rhett while staffing a sales stall at a public dance benefiting the troops. Rhett believes the war is a lost cause but is becoming rich as a blockade runner for profit. He sees through Scarlett's \"lady in mourning\" disguise and recognizes her longing to dance with the other young people, so he bids a lot of gold to win the honor of leading the first dance and chooses her as his partner. Scarlett scandalizes everyone by dancing joyfully while still dressed in widow's mourning. Her reputation is saved by Melanie, who is now her sister-in-law and highly respected in Atlanta; she argues that Scarlett is supporting the Confederate cause. Scarlett continues to act recklessly, flirting and dating while still in widow's clothes, always protected by Melanie's endorsement. She spends much of her time with Rhett, whose sexual attraction to Scarlett is ever-present. At one point, he enrages her with a silky proposition that she become his mistress. Still, she appreciates Rhett for his money, his sophistication, and their shared irritation with the hypocrisy of Atlanta society.\nAt Christmas (1863), Ashley is granted a furlough from the army and goes to Atlanta. Scarlett struggles to restrain her feelings for him. She remains convinced that he is secretly in love with her and is still married to Melanie out of duty. Scarlett is heartbroken when Melanie becomes pregnant with Ashley's child.\nPart III.\nThe war is going badly for the Confederacy. By September 1864, Atlanta is besieged from three sides. The city becomes desperate as hundreds of wounded Confederate soldiers pour in. Melanie goes into labor with only the inexperienced Scarlett and a young enslaved woman called Prissy to assist, as all the trained doctors are attending to the soldiers. The tattered Confederate States Army sets flame to Atlanta before they abandon it to the Union Army. Amidst the chaos, Melanie gives birth to a boy, Beau.\nScarlett tracks down Rhett and begs him to take her, Wade, Melanie, Beau, and Prissy to Tara. Rhett laughs at this idea, explaining that the Yankees have likely burned Tara. Still, he steals an emaciated horse and a wagon and begins driving them out of Atlanta. At the city's edge, Rhett has a change of heart and abandons Scarlett to join the army in their final, doomed push. Scarlett drives the wagon to Tara, which has avoided being burned like many of her neighbors' homes. However, the situation is bleak: Scarlett's mother is dead, her father has lost his mind with grief, her sisters are sick with typhoid fever, the enslaved field workers have left, the Yankees have burned all the cotton, and there is no food.\nA long struggle for survival begins, with Scarlett working in the fields. There are several hungry people and animals, along with an ever-present threat from Yankees who steal or burn what little they can find. At one point, Scarlett kills a Yankee soldier who attempts to invade her home and buries his body in the garden. A long post-war succession of Confederate soldiers returning home stop at Tara to find food and rest. Eventually, Ashley returns from the war with his idealistic view of the world shattered. Finding themselves alone one day, he and Scarlett share a kiss. Unable to trust himself with her nearby, Ashley says he will take his family and move away. Scarlett says she can not let them leave when they have nowhere to go and promises not to throw herself at him again.\nPart IV.\nLife at Tara begins to recover, but exorbitant taxes are levied on the plantation. Scarlett knows only one man with enough money to help her\u00a0\u2013 Rhett. She puts on her only pretty dress (made from the velvet curtains at Tara) and finds him in a jailhouse in Atlanta. He is being held on a murder charge and is likely to hang. Although she nearly wins him over with a southern belle routine, he declines to help after realizing her sweetness is an act meant to use his money. Leaving the jailhouse in a snit, Scarlett meets Frank Kennedy, a middle-aged storeowner betrothed to her sister, Suellen. Realizing that Frank also has money and that Suellen will turn her back on Tara once she is married, Scarlett hatches a plot to marry Frank. She lies to Frank that Suellen has changed her mind about marrying him. Dazed, Frank succumbs to Scarlett's charms and marries her two weeks later. Wanting to keep his wife happy, Frank gives Scarlett the money to pay the taxes.\nWhile Frank has a cold and is pampered by Aunt Pittypat, Scarlett reviews the accounts at Frank's store and finds that many owe him money. Terrified of the possibility of more taxes and irritated with Frank's poor business sense, she takes control of the store; her business practices emasculate Frank and leave many Atlantans resentful of her. With a loan from Rhett, she also buys and runs a small sawmill, which is viewed as even more scandalous conduct. To Frank's relief and Scarlett's dismay, she gets pregnant, which temporarily curtails her business activities. She convinces Ashley to come to Atlanta and manage her mill while still in love with him. At Melanie's urging, Ashley reluctantly accepts. Melanie becomes the center of Atlanta society, and Scarlett gives birth to baby Ella Lorena.\nGeorgia is under martial law, and life has become more frightening. For protection, Scarlett keeps Frank's pistol tucked in the upholstery of his buggy. Her lone trips to and from the mill take her past a shanty town where criminals live. While on her way home one evening, she is accosted by two men who try to rob her. However, she escapes with the help of Big Sam, a black former foreman from Tara. Attempting to avenge his wife, Frank and the Ku Klux Klan raid the shanty town, where Frank is shot dead in the fracas. Rhett puts on a charade to keep the raiders from being arrested. He enters the Wilkeses' home with Hugh Elsing and Ashley, singing and pretending to be drunk. Yankee officers outside question Rhett, who says he and the other men had been at Belle Watling's brothel that evening, a story Belle later confirms to the officers. The men are indebted to Rhett, and his reputation among them improves. Meanwhile, the men's wives\u00a0\u2013 except Melanie\u00a0\u2013 are livid at owing their husbands' lives to the town madam. At Frank's funeral, Rhett asks Scarlett to marry him. She refuses at first, but after a bit of repartee, he kisses her passionately, and in the heat of the moment, she accepts. One year later, Scarlett and Rhett announce their engagement, which becomes the talk of the town.\nPart V.\nMr. and Mrs. Butler honeymoon in New Orleans, spending lavishly. Returning to Atlanta, they build a gaudy mansion on Peachtree Street. Rhett happily pays for the house to be built to Scarlett's specifications but describes it as an \"architectural horror\". Shortly after moving into the house, the sardonic jabs between them become quarrels. Scarlett wonders why Rhett married her and then, \"with real hate in her eyes\", tells Rhett she will have a baby, which she does not want. Wade is seven years old in 1869 when his half-sister Eugenie Victoria is born. She has blue eyes, and Melanie nicknames her \"Bonnie Blue\" in reference to the Bonnie Blue Flag of the Confederacy. After feeling well again, Scarlett makes a trip to the mill and talks to Ashley. In their conversation, she comes away believing Ashley still loves her and is jealous of Rhett. She returns home and tells Rhett she does not want more children. From then on, they sleep separately, and when Bonnie is two years old, she sleeps in a little bed beside Rhett. Rhett turns his attention entirely toward Bonnie, pampering her and working to ensure her a good reputation when she enters society.\nMeanwhile, Melanie plans a surprise birthday party for Ashley. Scarlett goes to the mill to stall him until the celebration \u2013 a rare opportunity to be alone together. The two reminisce about the old days and how far their lives have departed from what they imagined for themselves. They share an innocent embrace but are spotted in the moment by Ashley's sister, India. Before the party has even begun, a rumor of an affair between Ashley and Scarlett explodes across Atlanta, eventually reaching Rhett and Melanie. Melanie refuses to accept any criticism of Scarlett, and India is expelled from the Wilkes home. That night at home, Rhett, drunker than Scarlett has ever seen him and acting more violent than ever, encourages Scarlett to drink with him. However, she declines with deliberate rudeness. Rhett pins her to the wall and tells her they could have been happy together if she could have let go of Ashley. He then takes her in his arms and carries her to her bedroom, where they engage in intercourse. Several days later, a chagrined Rhett leaves town with Bonnie and Prissy for three months. Scarlett is uncertain about her feelings surrounding Rhett, for whom she feels a mixture of desire and revulsion. She then learns she is pregnant with her fourth child.\nWhen Rhett returns, he comments on Scarlett's paleness, and she reveals her pregnancy. Rhett sarcastically asks if the father is Ashley; Scarlett calls him a cad and says that no woman would want his baby, to which he replies, \"Cheer up, maybe you'll have a miscarriage.\" She lunges at him but misses and tumbles down the stairs. She is seriously ill for the first time in her life, having lost the baby and broken her ribs. Rhett is remorseful and fears Scarlett will die. Sobbing and drunk, he seeks consolation from Melanie and confesses he acted out of jealousy. Scarlett goes to Tara with Wade and Ella to regain her strength and vitality. She returns healthy to Atlanta and sells the mills to Ashley. Bonnie is four years old in 1873, and Atlanta society is charmed by Rhett's transformation into a doting father. Rhett buys Bonnie a Shetland pony, teaching her to ride sidesaddle and paying a trainer to teach the pony to jump. One day, Bonnie makes her father raise the bar to one-and-a-half feet. During the jump, she falls and dies of a broken neck.\nIn the months following Bonnie's death, Rhett is often drunk and disheveled, while Scarlett, though equally bereaved, is more presentable. Melanie conceives a second child but loses the baby and soon dies due to complications. As she comforts the widowed Ashley, Scarlett realizes she stopped loving him long ago and perhaps never did. She is shocked to realize that she has always loved Rhett, and he has loved her in return. She returns home, brimming with her new love and determined to begin anew with him. She discovers him sitting in the library. In the wake of Melanie's death, Rhett has decided he wants to rediscover the calm Southern dignity he once knew in his youth and is leaving Atlanta to find it. Scarlett tries to persuade Rhett to either stay or take her with him, but he explains that while he once loved Scarlett, the years of hurt and neglect have killed that love. He says he may \"come back often enough to keep gossip down\" (since they have decided not to get a divorce), but in reply to Scarlett's plea of \"What shall I do?\" he replies, \"My dear, I don't give a damn\", and walks upstairs. Amid her grief, Scarlett consoles herself with the knowledge that she still has Tara. She plans to return there with the certainty that she can recover and win Rhett back because \"tomorrow is another day\".\nCharacters.\nSecondary characters.\nTara.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI made Tara up, just as I made up every character in the book. But nobody will believe me.\n\u2014Margaret Mitchell\nBiographical background and publication.\nBorn in 1900 in Atlanta, Margaret (Peggy) Mitchell was a Southerner and writer throughout her life. She grew up hearing stories about the American Civil War and the Reconstruction from her Irish-American grandmother, Annie Fitzgerald Stephens, who had endured its suffering while living on the family plantation, Rural Home. Her forceful and intellectual mother, Maybelle Stephens Mitchell, was a suffragist who fought for the rights of women to vote.\nAs a young woman, Mitchell found love with an army lieutenant. He was killed in World War I, and she would carry his memory for the remainder of her life. After studying at Smith College for a year, during which time her mother died from the 1918 pandemic flu, Mitchell returned to Atlanta. She married, but her husband was an abusive bootlegger. She took a job writing feature articles for the \"Atlanta Journal\" at a time when Atlanta debutantes of her class did not work. After divorcing her first husband, she married again to a man who shared her interest in writing and literature, John Marsh. He had been the best man at her first wedding.\nMargaret Mitchell began writing \"Gone with the Wind\" in 1926 to pass the time while recovering from a slow-healing injury from an auto crash. In April 1935, Harold Latham of Macmillan, an editor looking for new fiction, read her manuscript and saw that it could be a best-seller. After Latham agreed to publish the book, Mitchell worked for another six months checking the historical references and rewriting the opening chapter several times. Mitchell and her husband, John Marsh, a copy editor by trade, edited the final version of the novel. Mitchell wrote the book's final moments first and then wrote the events that led to them. \"Gone with the Wind\" was published in June 1936.\nTitle.\nThe author tentatively titled the novel \"Tomorrow Is Another Day\", from its last line. Other proposed titles included \"Bugles Sang True\", \"Not in Our Stars\", and \"Tote the Weary Load\". The title Mitchell finally chose is from the first line of the third stanza of the poem \"Non Sum Qualis Eram Bonae sub Regno Cynarae\" by Ernest Dowson:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScarlett O'Hara uses the title phrase when she wonders if her home on a plantation called \"Tara\" is still standing or if it had \"gone with the wind which had swept through Georgia\". In a general sense, the title is a metaphor for the demise of a way of life in the South before the Civil War. When taken in the context of Dowson's poem about \"Cynara\", the phrase \"gone with the wind\" alludes to erotic loss. The poem expresses the regrets of someone who has lost his feelings for his \"old passion\", Cynara. Dowson's Cynara, a name that comes from the Greek word for artichoke, represents a lost love.\nIt is also possible that the author was influenced by the connection of the phrase \"Gone with the wind\" with Tara in a line of James Joyce's \"Ulysses\" in the chapter \"Aeolus\".\nStructure.\nComing-of-age story.\nMargaret Mitchell arranged \"Gone with the Wind\" chronologically, focusing on the life and experiences of the main character, Scarlett O'Hara, as she grew from adolescence into adulthood. During the novel's period, from 1861 to 1873, Scarlett ages from sixteen to twenty-eight. This is a type of \"Bildungsroman\", a novel concerned with the moral and psychological growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood (coming-of-age story). Scarlett's development is affected by the events of her time. Mitchell used a smooth linear narrative structure. The novel is known for its exceptional \"readability\". The plot is rich with vivid characters.\nGenre.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" is often placed in the literary subgenre of the historical romance novel. Pamela Regis has argued that it is more appropriately classified as a historical novel, as it does not contain all of the elements of the romance genre. The novel has been described as an early classic of the erotic historical genre because it is thought to contain some degree of pornography.\nPlot elements.\nSlavery.\nSlavery in \"Gone with the Wind\" is a backdrop to a story that is essentially about other things. Southern plantation fiction (also known as Anti-Tom literature, in reference to reactions to Harriet Beecher Stowe's anti-slavery novel, \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" of 1852) from the mid-19th century, culminating in \"Gone with the Wind\", is written from the perspective and values of an enslaver and tends to present slaves as docile and happy.\nCaste system.\nThe characters in the novel are organized into two basic groups along class lines: the white planter class, such as Scarlett and Ashley, and the black house servant class. The enslaved people depicted in \"Gone with the Wind\" are primarily loyal house servants, such as Mammy, Pork, Prissy, and Uncle Peter. House servants are the highest \"caste\" of enslaved people in Mitchell's caste system. They choose to stay with their masters after the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 and subsequent Thirteenth Amendment of 1865 sets them free. Scarlett thinks of the servants who stayed at Tara, \"There were qualities of loyalty and tirelessness and love in them that no strain could break, no money could buy.\"\nThe enslaved field workers make up the lower class in Mitchell's caste system. The enslaved field workers from the Tara plantation and the foreman, Big Sam, are taken away by Confederate soldiers to dig ditches and never return to the plantation. Mitchell wrote that other enslaved field workers were \"loyal\" and \"refused to avail themselves of the new freedom\", but the novel has no enslaved field workers who stay on the plantation to work after emancipation.\nAmerican William Wells Brown escaped from slavery and published his memoir, or slave narrative, in 1847. He wrote of the disparity in conditions between the house servant and the field hand:\nDuring the time that Mr. Cook was overseer, I was a house servant\u00a0\u2013 a situation preferable to a field hand, as I was better fed, better clothed, and not obliged to rise at the ringing bell, but about a half-hour after. I have often laid and heard the crack of the whip, and the screams of the slave.\nFaithful and devoted slave.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWay back in the dark days of the Early Sixties, regrettable tho it was\u00a0\u2013 men fought, bled, and died for the freedom of the negro\u00a0\u2013 her freedom!\u00a0\u2013 and she stood by and did her \"duty\" to the last ditch\u00a0\u2013 \nIt was and is her life to \"serve\", and she has done it well.\nWhile shot and shell thundered to release the shackles of slavery from her body and her soul\u00a0\u2013 she loved, fought for, and \"protected\"\u00a0\u2013 Us who held her in bondage, her \"Marster\" and her \"Missus!\"\n\u2014Excerpt from \"My Old Black Mammy\" by James W. Elliott, 1914.\nAlthough the novel is more than 1,000 pages long, the character of Mammy never considers what her life might be like away from Tara. She recognizes her freedom to come and go as she pleases, saying, \"Ah is free, Miss Scarlett. You kain sen' me nowhar Ah doan wanter go\", but Mammy remains duty-bound to \"Miss Ellen's chile\". (No other name for Mammy is given in the novel.)\nEighteen years before the publication of \"Gone with the Wind\", an article titled \"The Old Black Mammy\", written in the \"Confederate Veteran\" in 1918, discussed the romanticized view of the mammy character persisting in Southern literature:\nfor her faithfulness and devotion, she has been immortalized in the literature of the South; so the memory of her will never pass, but live on in the tales that are told of those \"dear dead days beyond recall\".\nMicki McElya, in her book \"Clinging to Mammy\", suggests the myth of the faithful enslaved person, in the figure of Mammy, lingered because white Americans wished to live in a world in which African Americans were not angry over the injustice of slavery.\nThe best-selling anti-slavery novel, \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" by Harriet Beecher Stowe, published in 1852, is mentioned briefly in \"Gone with the Wind\" as being accepted by the Yankees as \"revelation second only to the Bible\". The enduring interest of both \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\" and \"Gone with the Wind\" has resulted in lingering stereotypes of 19th-century enslaved Black people. \"Gone with the Wind\" has become a reference point for subsequent writers about the South, both black and white alike.\nSouthern belle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nYoung misses whut frowns an' pushes out dey chins an' says 'Ah will' an' 'Ah woan' mos' gener'ly doan ketch husbands.\n\u2014Mammy\nThe southern belle is an archetype for a young woman of the antebellum American South upper class. The southern belle was considered physically attractive but, more importantly, personally charming with sophisticated social skills. She is subject to the correct code of female behavior. The novel's heroine, Scarlett O'Hara, charming though not beautiful, is a classic southern belle.\nFor young Scarlett, her mother, Ellen O'Hara, represents the ideal southern belle. In \"A Study in Scarlett\", published in \"The New Yorker\", Claudia Roth Pierpont wrote:\nThe Southern belle was bred to conform to a subspecies of the nineteenth-century \"lady\"\u00a0... For Scarlett, the ideal is embodied in her adored mother, the saintly Ellen, whose back is never seen to rest against the back of any chair on which she sits, whose broken spirit everywhere is mistaken for righteous calm\nHowever, Scarlett is not always willing to conform. Kathryn Lee Seidel, in her book, \"The Southern Belle in the American Novel\", wrote:\npart of her does try to rebel against the restraints of a code of behavior that relentlessly attempts to mold her into a form to which she is not naturally suited.\nScarlett, the figure of a pampered southern belle, lives through an extreme reversal of fortune and wealth and survives to rebuild Tara and her self-esteem. Her bad belle traits (Scarlett's deceitfulness, shrewdness, manipulation, and superficiality), in contrast to Melanie's good belle traits (trust, self-sacrifice, and loyalty), enable her to survive in the post-war South and pursue her main interest, which is to make enough money to survive and prosper. Although Scarlett was \"born\" around 1845, she is portrayed to appeal to modern-day readers for her passionate and independent spirit, determination, and obstinate refusal to feel defeated.\nHistorical background.\nMarriage was supposed to be the goal of all southern belles, as that of their husbands largely determined women's status. All social and educational pursuits were directed towards it. Despite the Civil War and the loss of a generation of eligible men, young ladies were still expected to marry. By law and Southern social convention, household heads were adult, white propertied males, and all white women and all African Americans were thought to require protection and guidance because they lacked the capacity for reason and self-control.\nThe Atlanta Historical Society has produced many \"Gone with the Wind\" exhibits, among them a 1994 exhibit titled \"Disputed Territories: \"Gone with the Wind\" and Southern Myths\". The exhibit asked, \"Was Scarlett a Lady?\", finding that historically most women of the period were not involved in business activities as Scarlett was during Reconstruction when she ran a sawmill. White women performed traditional jobs such as teaching and sewing and generally disliked work outside the home.\nDuring the Civil War, Southern women played a significant role as volunteer nurses in makeshift hospitals. Many were middle- and upper-class women who had never worked for wages or seen the inside of a hospital. One such nurse was Ada W. Bacot, a young widow who had lost two children. Bacot came from a wealthy South Carolina plantation family that enslaved 87 people.\nIn the fall of 1862, Confederate laws were changed to permit women to be employed in hospitals as members of the Confederate Medical Department. Twenty-seven-year-old nurse Kate Cumming from Mobile, Alabama, described the primitive hospital conditions in her journal:\nThey are in the hall, on the gallery, and crowded into very small rooms. The foul air from this mass of human beings at first made me giddy and sick, but I soon got over it. We have to walk, and when we give the men any thing kneel, in blood and water; but we think nothing of it at all.\nBattles.\nThe Civil War ended on April 26, 1865, when Joseph E. Johnston surrendered his armies in the Carolinas campaign to U.S. Army General William Tecumseh Sherman. Several battles are mentioned or depicted in Gone with the Wind.\nAshley Wilkes is stationed on the Rapidan River, Virginia, in the winter of 1863, later captured and sent to a U.S. Army prisoner-of-war camp, Rock Island Arsenal.\nAtlanta Campaign.\nThe Atlanta Campaign (May\u2013September 1864) took place in northwest Georgia and the area around Atlanta.\nConfederate General Johnston fights and retreats from Dalton (May 7\u201313) to Resaca (May 13\u201315) to Kennesaw Mountain (June 27). Union General Sherman suffers heavy losses to the entrenched Confederate army. Unable to pass through Kennesaw, Sherman swings his men around to the Chattahoochee River, where the Confederate army is waiting on the opposite side of the river. Once again, General Sherman flanks the Confederate army, forcing Johnston to retreat to Peachtree Creek (July 20), five miles northeast of Atlanta.\nMarch to the Sea.\nSherman's March to the Sea was conducted in Georgia during November and December 1864.\nPresident Lincoln's murder.\nAlthough Abraham Lincoln is mentioned in the novel 14 times, no reference is made to his assassination on April 14, 1865.\nManhood.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSomebody's darling! so young and so brave!\nWearing still on his pale, sweet face\u00a0\u2013 \nSoon to be hid by the dust of the grave\u00a0\u2013 \nThe lingering light of his boyhood's grace!\n\u2014\"Somebody's Darling\" by Marie La Coste, of Georgia.\nAshley Wilkes is the beau ideal of Southern manhood in Scarlett's eyes. A planter by inheritance, Ashley knew the Confederate cause had died. However, Ashley's name signifies paleness. His \"pallid skin literalizes the idea of Confederate death\".\nAshley contemplates leaving Georgia for New York City. Had he gone North, he would have joined numerous other ex-Confederate transplants there. Ashley, embittered by war, tells Scarlett he has been \"in a state of suspended animation\" since the surrender. He feels he is not \"shouldering a man's burden\" at Tara and believes he is \"much less than a man\u00a0\u2013 much less, indeed, than a woman\".\nA \"young girl's dream of the Perfect Knight\", Ashley is like a young girl himself. With his \"poet's eye\", Ashley has a \"feminine sensitivity\". Scarlett is angered by the \"slur of effeminacy flung at Ashley\" when her father tells her the Wilkes family was \"born queer\". (Mitchell's use of the word \"queer\" is for its sexual connotation because queer, in the 1930s, was associated with homosexuality.) Ashley's effeminacy is associated with his appearance, his lack of forcefulness, and sexual impotence. He rides, plays poker, and drinks like \"proper men\", but his heart is not in it, Gerald claims. The embodiment of castration, Ashley wears the head of Medusa on his cravat pin.\nScarlett's love interest, Ashley Wilkes, lacks manliness, and her husbands\u00a0\u2013 the \"calf-like\" Charles Hamilton, and the \"old-maid in britches\", Frank Kennedy\u00a0\u2013 are unmanly as well. Mitchell is critiquing masculinity in southern society since Reconstruction. Even Rhett Butler, the well-groomed dandy, is effeminate or \"gay-coded\". Charles, Frank, and Ashley represent the impotence of the post-war white South. Its power and influence have been diminished.\nScallawag.\nThe word \"scallawag\" is defined as a loafer, a vagabond, or a rogue. Scallawag had a special meaning after the Civil War as an epithet for a white Southerner who accepted and supported Republican reforms. Mitchell defines scallawags as \"Southerners who had turned Republican very profitably.\" Rhett Butler is accused of being a \"damned Scallawag\". In addition to scallawags, Mitchell portrays other types of scoundrels in the novel: Yankees, carpetbaggers, Republicans, prostitutes, and overseers. In the early years of the Civil War, Rhett is called a \"scoundrel\" for his \"selfish gains\" profiteering as a blockade-runner.\nAs a scallawag, Rhett is despised. He is the \"dark, mysterious, and slightly malevolent hero loose in the world\". Literary scholars have identified elements of Mitchell's first husband, Berrien \"Red\" Upshaw, in the character of Rhett. Another sees the image of Italian actor Rudolph Valentino, whom Margaret Mitchell interviewed as a young reporter for \"The Atlanta Journal\". Fictional hero Rhett Butler has a \"swarthy face, flashing teeth and dark alert eyes\". He is a \"scamp, blackguard, without scruple or honor\".\nThemes.\nSurvival.\nIf \"Gone with the Wind\" has a theme it is that of survival. What makes some people come through catastrophes and others, apparently just as able, strong, and brave, go under? It happens in every upheaval. Some people survive; others don't. What qualities are in those who fight their way through triumphantly that are lacking in those that go under? I only know that survivors used to call that quality \"gumption.\" So I wrote about people who had gumption and people who didn't.\n\u2014 Margaret Mitchell, 1936\nColors.\nMitchell's use of color in the novel is symbolic and open to interpretation. Red, green, and a variety of hues of each of these colors are the predominant palette of colors related to Scarlett.\nIrishness.\nIn \"Gone with the Wind\", Mitchell explores some complexities in racial issues. A Yankee woman asked Scarlett for advice on whom to appoint as a nurse for her children; Scarlett suggested a \"darky\", much to the disgust of the Yankee woman who was seeking an Irish maid, a \"Bridget\". African Americans and Irish Americans are treated \"in precisely the same way\" in \"Gone with the Wind\", writes David O'Connell in his 1996 book, \"The Irish Roots of Margaret Mitchell's Gone With the Wind\". Ethnic slurs on the Irish and Irish stereotypes pervade the novel, O'Connell claims, and Scarlett is not an exception to the terminology. Irish scholar Geraldine Higgins notes that Jonas Wilkerson labels Scarlett: \"you highflying, bogtrotting Irish\". Higgins says that, as the Irish American O'Haras were enslavers and held African Americans in bondage, the two ethnic groups are not equivalent in the ethnic hierarchy of the novel.\nCritical reception.\nReviews.\nThe sales of Margaret Mitchell's novel in the summer of 1936, as the nation was recovering from the Great Depression and at the virtually unprecedented price of three dollars, reached about 1 million by the end of December. The book was a bestseller when reviews began appearing in national magazines. Herschel Brickell, a critic for the \"New York Evening Post\", lauded Mitchell for the way she \"tosses out the window all the thousands of technical tricks our novelists have been playing with for the past twenty years.\"\nRalph Thompson, a book reviewer for \"The New York Times\", was critical of the length of the novel and wrote in June 1936:I happen to feel that the book would have been infinitely better had it been edited down to say, 500 pages, but there speaks the harassed daily reviewer as well as the would-be judicious critic. Very nearly every reader will agree, no doubt, that a more disciplined and less prodigal piece of work would have more nearly done justice to the subject-matter.Some reviewers compared the book to William Thackeray's \"Vanity Fair\" and Leo Tolstoy's \"War and Peace\". Mitchell claimed Charles Dickens as an inspiration and called \"Gone with the Wind\" a \"'Victorian' type novel.\"\nHelen Keller read the 12-volume Braille edition. The book brought her fond memories of her Southern infancy, but she also felt sadness compared to what she knew about the South. Keller's father had enslaved people and fought as a Confederate captain, but Helen would later support the NAACP and the ACLU.\nThe book was popular in Nazi Germany; within two days of its publication there in 1937, it had sold 12 thousand copies; by 1941 it had sold 276 thousand copies. William L. Shirer noted in 1939 that it was one of the most popular novels in Germany; the novel for the most part received positive reviews. The novel continued to have high sales until 1942, when books by American authors were banned. \nScholarship: Racial, ethnicity and social issues.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" has been criticized for its stereotypical and derogatory portrayal of African Americans in the 19th century South. Former field hands during the early days of Reconstruction are described as behaving \"as creatures of small intelligence might naturally be expected to do. Like monkeys or small children turned loose among treasured objects whose value is beyond their comprehension, they ran wild\u00a0\u2013 either from perverse pleasure in destruction or simply because of their ignorance.\"\nCommenting on this passage of the novel, Jabari Asim, author of \"The N Word: Who Can Say It, Who Shouldn't, and Why\", says, in \"one of the more charitable passages in \"Gone With the Wind\", Margaret Mitchell hesitated to blame black 'insolence' during Reconstruction solely on 'mean niggers', of which, she said, there were few even in slavery days.\"\nThe novel has been criticized for promoting plantation values and romanticizing the white supremacy of the antebellum South. Mitchell biographer Marianne Walker, author of \"Margaret Mitchell and John Marsh: The Love Story Behind Gone with the Wind\", believes those who attack the book on these grounds have not read it. She said that the popular 1939 film \"promotes a false notion of the Old South\". Mitchell was not involved in the screenplay or film production.\nJames Loewen, author of \"Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History Textbook Got Wrong\", says this novel is \"profoundly racist and profoundly wrong\". \nThe novel came under intense criticism for alleged racist and white supremacist themes in 2020 following the murder of George Floyd, and the ensuing protests and focus on systemic racism in the United States.\nAs a result of this criticism, the novel has faced challenges a number of times leading to a successful ban in Anaheim, California (1978) and an unsuccessful attempt to remove it from schools in Waukegan, Illinois (1984).\nReconstruction.\nCritics say that Mitchell downplayed the violent role of the Ku Klux Klan and their abuse of freedmen. Author Pat Conroy, in his preface to a later edition of the novel, describes Mitchell's portrayal of the Ku Klux Klan as having \"the same romanticized role it had in \"The Birth of a Nation\" and appears to be a benign combination of the Elks Club and a men's equestrian society\".\nRegarding the historical inaccuracies of the novel, historian Richard N. Current points out:\nNo doubt it is indeed unfortunate that \"Gone with the Wind\" perpetuates many myths about Reconstruction, particularly with respect to blacks. Margaret Mitchell did not originate them and a young novelist can scarcely be faulted for not knowing what the majority of mature, professional historians did not know until many years later.\nAwards and recognition.\nIn 1937, Margaret Mitchell received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for \"Gone with the Wind\" and the second annual National Book Award for Fiction from the American Booksellers Association. It is ranked as the second favorite book by American readers, just behind the Bible, according to a 2008 Harris poll. The poll found the novel has the strongest following among women, those aged 44 or more, both Southerners and Midwesterners, both whites and Hispanics, and those who have not attended college. In a 2014 Harris poll, Mitchell's novel ranked again as second, after the Bible. The novel is on the list of best-selling books. As of 2010, over 30 million copies have been printed in the United States and abroad. More than 24 editions of \"Gone with the Wind\" have been issued in China. \"Time\" magazine critics Lev Grossman and Richard Lacayo included the novel on their list of the 100 best English-language novels published between 1923 and 2005. In 2003, the book was listed at number 21 on the BBC's The Big Read poll of the UK's \"best-loved novel\".\nCensorship.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" frequently has been the center of controversy.\nIn 1978, the book was banned from English classrooms in the Anaheim Union High School District in Anaheim, California. \nIn 1984, an alderman in Waukegan, Illinois, challenged the book's inclusion on the reading list of the Waukegan School District on the grounds of \"racism\" and \"unacceptable language\". He objected to the frequent use of the racial slur \"nigger\". He also objected to several other books: \"The Nigger of the 'Narcissus\"', \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\", and \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\" for the same reason.\nAdaptations.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" has been adapted several times for stage and screen:\nIn popular culture.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" has appeared in many places and forms in popular culture:\nCollectibles.\nOn June 30, 1986, the 50th anniversary of the day \"Gone with the Wind\" went on sale, the U.S. Post Office issued a 1-cent stamp showing an image of Margaret Mitchell. The stamp was designed by Ronald Adair and was part of the U.S. Postal Service's Great Americans series.\nOn September 10, 1998, the U.S. Post Office issued a 32-cent stamp as part of its Celebrate the Century series, recalling various important events in the 20th century. The stamp, designed by Howard Paine, displays the book with its original dust jacket, a white Magnolia blossom, and a hilt placed against a background of green velvet.\nTo commemorate the 75th anniversary (2011) of the publication of \"Gone with the Wind\" in 1936, Scribner published a paperback edition featuring the book's original jacket art.\nThe Windies.\nThe Windies are ardent \"Gone with the Wind\" fans who follow all the latest news and events surrounding the book and film. They gather periodically in costumes from the film or dressed as Margaret Mitchell. Atlanta, Georgia, is their meeting place.\nLegacy.\nThe novel appeals worldwide due to its universal themes: war, love, death, racial conflict, class, gender, and generation, which speak especially to women. In North Korea, readers relate to the novel's theme of survival, finding it to be \"the most compelling message of the novel\". Margaret Mitchell's personal collection of nearly 70 foreign language translations of her novel was given to the Atlanta Public Library after her death.\nThe Lost Cause.\nOne legacy of \"Gone with the Wind\" is the persistence in the people's minds of its representation of the history of the Old South and how the American Civil War and Reconstruction changed it. The film adaptation of the novel \"amplified this effect\". The plantation legend was \"burned\" into the mind of the public. Moreover, her fictional account of the war and its aftermath has influenced how the world has viewed the city of Atlanta for successive generations.\nHelen Taylor wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Gone with the Wind\" has almost certainly done its ideological work. It has sealed in popular imaginations a fascinated nostalgia for the glamorous southern plantation house and ordered hierarchical society in which slaves are \"family\" and there is a mystical bond between the landowner and the rich soil those slaves work for him.\nDavid W. Blight wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From this combination of Lost Cause voices, a reunited America arose pure, guiltless, and assured that the deep conflicts in its past had been imposed upon it by otherworldly forces. The side that lost was especially assured that its cause was true and good. One of the ideas the reconciliationist Lost Cause instilled deeply into the national culture is that even when Americans lose, they win. Such was the message, the indomitable spirit, that Margaret Mitchell infused into her character Scarlett O'Hara in \"Gone With the Wind\" ...\nSoutherners were portrayed as noble, heroic figures, living in a doomed romantic society that rejected the realistic advice offered by the Rhett Butler character and never understood the risk that they were taking in going to war.\nDifferences with the film.\nSome readers of the novel have seen the film first and read the novel afterward. One difference between the film and the novel is the staircase scene, in which Rhett carries Scarlett up the stairs. In the film, Scarlett weakly struggles and does not scream as Rhett starts up the stairs. In the novel, \"he hurt her and she cried out, muffled, frightened.\"\nEarlier in the novel, in an intended rape at Shantytown (Chapter 44), Scarlett is attacked by a black man who rips open her dress while a white man grabs hold of the horse's bridle. She is rescued by another black man, Big Sam. In the film, she is attacked by a white man while a black man grabs the horse's bridle.\nPlace in American literature.\nThe Library of Congress began a multiyear \"Celebration of the Book\" in July 2012 with an exhibition on \"Books That Shaped America\" and an initial list of 88 books by American authors that have influenced American lives. \"Gone with the Wind\" was included in the Library's list. Librarian of Congress, James H. Billington said:\nThis list is a starting point. It is not a register of the 'best' American books \u2013 although many of them fit that description. Rather, the list is intended to spark a national conversation on books written by Americans that have influenced our lives, whether they appear on this initial list or not. \nAmong books on the list considered to be the Great American Novel were \"Moby-Dick\", \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\", \"The Great Gatsby\", \"The Grapes of Wrath\", \"The Catcher in the Rye\", \"Invisible Man\", and \"To Kill a Mockingbird\".\nMargaret Mitchell Estate.\nOn August 16, 2012, the Archdiocese of Atlanta announced that it had been bequeathed a 50% stake in the trademarks and literary rights to \"Gone With the Wind\" from the estate of Margaret Mitchell's deceased nephew, Joseph Mitchell. Margaret Mitchell had separated from the Catholic Church. However, one of Mitchell's biographers, Darden Asbury Pyron, stated that Margaret Mitchell had \"an intense relationship\" with her mother, who was a Roman Catholic.\nPublication history.\nOriginal manuscript.\nAlthough some of Mitchell's papers and documents related to the writing of \"Gone with the Wind\" were burned after her death, many documents, including assorted draft chapters, were preserved. The last four chapters of the novel are held by the Pequot Library of Southport, Connecticut.\nPublication and reprintings (1936 \u2013 US).\nThe first printing of 10,000 copies contains the original publication date: \"Published May, 1936\". After the book was chosen as the Book-of-the-Month Club's selection for July, the publication was delayed until June 30. The second printing of 25,000 copies (and subsequent printings) contains the release date: \"Published June, 1936\". The third printing of 15,000 copies was made in June 1936. Additionally, 50,000 copies were printed for the Book-of-the-Month Club July selection. \"Gone with the Wind\" was officially released to the American public on June 30, 1936.\nSequels and prequels.\nAlthough Mitchell refused to write a sequel to \"Gone with the Wind\", Mitchell's estate authorized Alexandra Ripley to write a sequel, which was titled \"Scarlett\". The book was subsequently adapted into a television mini-series in 1994. A second sequel was authorized by Mitchell's estate titled \"Rhett Butler's People\", by Donald McCaig. The novel parallels \"Gone with the Wind\" from Rhett Butler's perspective. In 2010, Mitchell's estate authorized McCaig to write a prequel, which follows the life of the house servant Mammy, whom McCaig names \"Ruth\". The novel, \"Ruth's Journey\", was released in 2014.\nThe copyright holders of \"Gone with the Wind\" attempted to suppress publication of \"The Wind Done Gone\" by Alice Randall, which retold the story from the perspective of the enslaved people. A federal appeals court denied the plaintiffs an injunction (\"Suntrust v. Houghton Mifflin\") against publication on the basis that the book was a parody and therefore protected by the First Amendment. The parties subsequently settled out of court, and the book became a \"New York Times\" Best Seller.\nA book sequel unauthorized by the copyright holders, \"The Winds of Tara\" by Katherine Pinotti, was blocked from publication in the United States. The novel was republished in Australia, avoiding U.S. copyright restrictions.\nAway from copyright lawsuits, Internet fan fiction has proved to be a fertile medium for sequels (some of them book-length), parodies, and rewritings of \"Gone with the Wind\".\nNumerous unauthorized sequels to \"Gone with the Wind\" have been published in Russia, mostly under the pseudonym Yuliya Hilpatrik, a cover for a consortium of writers. \"The New York Times\" states that most have a \"Slavic\" flavor.\nSeveral sequels were written in Hungarian under the pseudonym Audrey D. Milland or Audrey Dee Milland by at least four different authors (who are named in the colophon as translators to make the book seem a translation from the English original, a procedure common in the 1990s but prohibited by law since then). The first picks up where Ripley's \"Scarlett\" ended; the next is about Scarlett's daughter Cat. Other books include a prequel trilogy about Scarlett's grandmother, Solange, and a three-part miniseries about a supposed illegitimate daughter of Carreen.\nCopyright status.\n\"Gone with the Wind\" has been in the public domain in Australia and Canada since 1999 (50 years after Margaret Mitchell's death). On January 1, 2020, the book entered the public domain in the European Union (70 years after the author's death). Under an extension of copyright law, \"Gone with the Wind\" will not enter the public domain in the United States until January 1, 2032.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12996", "revid": "3461395", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12996", "title": "Group 1 element", "text": ""}
{"id": "12997", "revid": "50287924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12997", "title": "George Washington Carver", "text": "American botanist and inventor (1864\u20131943)\nGeorge Washington Carver (c. 1864 \u2013 January 5, 1943) was an American agricultural scientist and inventor who promoted alternative crops to cotton and methods to prevent soil depletion. He was one of the most prominent black scientists of the early 20th century.\nWhile a professor at Tuskegee Institute, Carver developed techniques to improve types of soils depleted by repeated plantings of cotton. He wanted poor farmers to grow other crops, such as peanuts and sweet potatoes, as a source of their own food and to improve their quality of life. Under his leadership, the Experiment Station at Tuskegee published over forty practical bulletins for farmers, many written by him, which included recipes; many of the bulletins contained advice for poor farmers, including combating soil depletion with limited financial means, producing bigger crops, and preserving food.\nApart from his work to improve the lives of farmers, Carver was also a leader in promoting environmentalism. He received numerous honors for his work, including the Spingarn Medal of the NAACP. In an era of high racial polarization, his fame reached beyond the black community. He was widely recognized and praised in the white community for his many achievements and talents. In 1941, \"Time\" magazine dubbed Carver a \"Black Leonardo\".\nEarly years.\nCarver was born into slavery, in Diamond Grove, (now Diamond, Newton County, Missouri), near Crystal Palace, sometime in the early 1860s. The date of his birth is uncertain and was not known to Carver because it was before slavery was abolished in Missouri, which occurred in January 1865, during the American Civil War. His enslaver, Moses Carver, descended from a family of immigrants of German or English descent, had purchased George's parents, Mary and Giles, from William P. McGinnis on October 9, 1855, for $700 (~$ in 2024).\nGiles died before George was born and when he was a week old, he, his sister, and his mother were kidnapped by night raiders from Arkansas. George's brother, James, was rushed to safety from the kidnappers. The kidnappers sold the trio in Kentucky. Moses Carver hired John Bentley to find them, but he found only the infant George. Moses negotiated with the raiders to gain the boy's return and rewarded Bentley. After slavery was abolished, Moses Carver and his wife, Susan, raised George and his older brother, James, as their own children. They encouraged George to continue his intellectual pursuits, and \"Aunt Susan\" taught him the basics of reading and writing.\nBlack people were not allowed at the public school in Diamond Grove. George decided to go to a school for black children 10 miles (16\u00a0km) south, in Neosho. When he reached the town, he found the school closed for the night. He slept in a nearby barn. By his own account, the next morning he met a kind woman, Mariah Watkins, from whom he wished to rent a room. When he identified himself as \"Carver's George\", as he had done his whole life, she replied that from now on his name was \"George Carver\". George liked Mariah Watkins and her words, \"You must learn all you can, then go back out into the world and give your learning back to the people\", made a great impression on him.\nAt age 13, because he wanted to attend the academy there, he moved to the home of another foster family, in Fort Scott, Kansas. After witnessing the killing of a black man by a group of white people, Carver left the city. He attended a series of schools before earning his diploma at Minneapolis High School in Minneapolis, Kansas.\nDuring his time spent in Minneapolis, there was another George Carver in town, which caused confusion over receiving mail. Carver chose a middle initial at random and began requesting letters to him be addressed to George W. Carver. Someone once asked if the \"W\" stood for Washington, and Carver grinned and said, \"Why not?\" However, he never used Washington as his middle name, and signed his name as either George W. Carver or simply George Carver.\nCollege education.\nCarver applied to several colleges before being accepted at Highland University in Highland, Kansas. When he arrived, they refused to let him attend because of his race. In August 1886, Carver traveled by wagon with J. F. Beeler from Highland to Eden Township in Ness County, Kansas. He homesteaded a claim near Beeler, where he maintained a small conservatory of plants and flowers and a geological collection. He manually plowed of the claim, planting rice, corn, Indian corn and garden produce, as well as various fruit trees, forest trees, and shrubbery. He also earned money by odd jobs in town and worked as a ranch hand.\nIn early 1888, Carver obtained a $300 (~$ in 2024) loan at the Bank of Ness City for education. By June he left the area. In 1890, Carver started studying art and piano at Simpson College in Indianola, Iowa. His art teacher, Etta Budd, recognized Carver's talent for painting flowers and plants; she encouraged him to study botany at Iowa State Agricultural College (now Iowa State University) in Ames.\nWhen he began there in 1891, he was the first black student at Iowa State. Carver's bachelor's thesis for a degree in Agriculture was \"Plants as Modified by Man\", dated 1894. Iowa State University professors Joseph Budd and Louis Pammel convinced Carver to continue there for his master's degree. Carver did research at the Iowa Agricultural and Home Economics Experiment Station under Pammel over the next two years. His work at the experiment station in plant pathology and mycology first gained him national recognition and respect as a botanist. Carver received his MSc in 1896. Carver was the first African American faculty member at Iowa State.\nDespite occasionally being addressed as \"doctor\", Carver never received an official doctorate, and in a personal communication with Pammel, he noted that it was a \"misnomer\", given to him by others due to his abilities and their assumptions about his education. Though he did not have an earned doctorate, both Simpson College and Selma University awarded him honorary doctorates of science in his lifetime. In addition, Iowa State awarded him a posthumous doctor of humane letters degree in 1994.\nTuskegee Institute.\nIn 1896, Booker T. Washington, the first principal and president of the Tuskegee Institute (now Tuskegee University), invited Carver to head its Agriculture Department. Carver taught there for 47 years, developing the department into a strong research center and working with two additional college presidents during his tenure. He taught methods of crop rotation, introduced several alternative cash crops for farmers that would also improve the soil of areas heavily cultivated in cotton, initiated research into crop products (chemurgy), and taught generations of black students farming techniques for self-sufficiency.\nCarver designed a mobile classroom to take education out to farmers. He called it a \"Jesup wagon\" after the New York financier and philanthropist Morris Ketchum Jesup, who provided funding to support the program.\nTo recruit Carver to Tuskegee, Washington gave him an above average salary and two rooms for his personal use, although both concessions were resented by some other faculty. Because he had earned a master's in a scientific field from a \"white\" institution, some faculty perceived him as arrogant. Unmarried faculty members normally had to share rooms, with two to a room, in the spartan early days of the institute.\nOne of Carver's duties was to administer the Agricultural Experiment Station farms. He had to manage the production and sale of farm products to generate revenue for the institute. He soon proved to be a poor administrator and clashed with other faculty members, especially George Ruffin Bridgeforth. In 1900, Carver complained that the physical work and the letter-writing required were too much.\nIn 1904, an Institute committee reported that Carver's reports on yields from the poultry yard were exaggerated, and Washington confronted Carver about the issue. Carver replied in writing, \"Now to be branded as a liar and party to such hellish deception it is more than I can bear, and if your committee feel that I have willfully lied or [was] party to such lies as were told my resignation is at your disposal.\" During Washington's last five years at Tuskegee, Carver submitted or threatened his resignation several times: when the administration reorganized the agriculture programs, when he disliked a teaching assignment, to manage an experiment station elsewhere, and when he did not get summer teaching assignments in 1913\u201314. In each case, Washington smoothed things over.\nCarver started his academic career as a researcher and teacher. In 1911, Washington wrote a letter to him complaining that Carver had not followed orders to plant particular crops at the experiment station. This revealed Washington's micro-management of Carver's department, which he had headed for more than 10 years by then. Washington at the same time refused Carver's requests for a new laboratory, research supplies for his exclusive use, and respite from teaching classes. Washington praised Carver's abilities in teaching and original research but said this about his administrative skills:\nWhen it comes to the organization of classes, the ability required to secure a properly organized and large school or section of a school, you are wanting in ability. When it comes to the matter of practical farm managing which will secure definite, practical, financial results, you are wanting again in ability.\nIn 1911, Carver complained that his laboratory had not received the equipment which Washington had promised 11 months before. He also complained about Institute committee meetings. Washington praised Carver in his 1911 memoir, \"My Larger Education: Being Chapters from My Experience\". Washington called Carver \"one of the most thoroughly scientific men of the Negro race with whom I am acquainted\". After Washington died in 1915, his successor made fewer demands on Carver for administrative tasks.\nFrom 1915 to 1923, Carver concentrated on researching and experimenting with new uses for peanuts, sweet potatoes, soybeans, pecans, and other crops, as well as having his assistants research and compile existing uses. This work, and especially his speaking to a national conference of the Peanut Growers Association in 1920 and in testimony before Congress in 1921 to support passage of a tariff on imported peanuts, brought him wide publicity and increasing renown. In these years, he became one of the most well-known African Americans of his time.\nRise to fame.\nCarver developed techniques to improve soils depleted by repeated plantings of cotton. Together with other agricultural experts, he urged farmers to restore nitrogen to their soils by practicing systematic crop rotation: alternating cotton crops with plantings of sweet potatoes or legumes, such as peanuts, soybeans and cowpeas. These crops both restored nitrogen to the soil and were good for human consumption.\nFollowing the crop rotation practice resulted in improved cotton yields and gave farmers alternative cash crops. To train farmers to successfully rotate and cultivate the new crops, Carver developed an agricultural extension program for Alabama that was similar to the one at Iowa State. To encourage better nutrition in the South, he widely distributed recipes using the alternative crops.\nHe founded an industrial research laboratory, where he and assistants worked to popularize the new crops by developing hundreds of applications for them. They did original research as well as promoting applications and recipes, which they collected from others. Carver distributed his information as agricultural bulletins.\nCarver's work was known by officials in the national capital before he became a public figure. President Theodore Roosevelt publicly admired his work. Former professors of Carver's from Iowa State University were appointed to positions as Secretary of Agriculture: James Wilson, a former dean and professor of Carver's, served from 1897 to 1913. Henry Cantwell Wallace served from 1921 to 1924. He knew Carver personally because his son Henry A. Wallace and the researcher were friends. The younger Wallace served as U.S. Secretary of Agriculture from 1933 to 1940, and as Franklin Delano Roosevelt's vice president from 1941 to 1945.\nThe American industrialist, farmer, and inventor William C. Edenborn of Winn Parish, Louisiana, grew peanuts on his demonstration farm. He consulted with Carver.\nIn 1916, Carver was made a member of the Royal Society of Arts in England, one of only a handful of Americans at that time to receive this honor. Carver's promotion of peanuts gained him the most notice.\nBy 1920, the U.S. peanut farmers were being undercut by low prices on imported peanuts from the Republic of China. In 1921, peanut farmers and industry representatives planned to appear at Congressional hearings to ask for a tariff. Based on the quality of Carver's presentation at their convention, they asked the African-American professor to testify on the tariff issue before the Ways and Means Committee of the United States House of Representatives. Due to segregation, it was highly unusual for an African American to appear as an expert witness, but Carver appeared and unpacked numerous exhibits and samples to make his case for greater food and industrial uses for the peanut. Southern congressmen mocked him, but as he talked about the importance of the peanut and its uses for American agriculture and manufacturing, committee members repeatedly extended the time for his testimony. The Fordney\u2013McCumber Tariff was enacted in 1922, and included a duty on imported peanuts. Carver's testimony, including samples of peanut milk, peanut flour, industrial dyes made from peanuts, and other peanut-based products, made him widely known as a public figure.\nLife while famous.\nDuring the last two decades of his life, Carver seemed to enjoy his celebrity status. He was often on the road promoting Tuskegee University, peanuts, sweet potatoes, and racial harmony. Although he only published six agricultural bulletins after 1922, he published articles in peanut industry journals and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, \"Professor Carver's Advice\". Business leaders came to seek his help, and he often responded with free advice. Three American presidents\u2014Theodore Roosevelt, Calvin Coolidge and Franklin D. Roosevelt\u2014met with him, and the Crown Prince of Sweden studied with him for three weeks. From 1923 to 1933, Carver toured white Southern colleges for the Commission on Interracial Cooperation.\nWith his increasing notability, Carver became the subject of biographies and articles. Raleigh H. Merritt contacted him for his biography published in 1929. Merritt wrote:\nAt present not a great deal has been done to utilize Dr. Carver's discoveries commercially. He says that he is merely scratching the surface of scientific investigations of the possibilities of the peanut and other Southern products.\nIn 1932, the writer James Saxon Childers wrote that Carver and his peanut products were almost solely responsible for the rise in U.S. peanut production after the boll weevil devastated the American cotton crop beginning about 1892. His article, \"A Boy Who Was Traded for a Horse\" (1932), in \"The American Magazine\", and its 1937 reprint in \"Reader's Digest\", contributed to this myth about Carver's influence. Other popular media tended to exaggerate Carver's impact on the peanut industry.\nFrom 1933 to 1935, Carver worked to develop peanut oil massages to treat infantile paralysis (polio). Ultimately, researchers found that the massages, not the peanut oil, provided the benefits of maintaining some mobility to paralyzed limbs.\nFrom 1935 to 1937, Carver participated in the USDA Disease Survey. Carver had specialized in plant diseases and mycology for his master's degree.\nIn 1937, Carver attended two chemurgy conferences, an emerging field in the 1930s, during the Great Depression and the Dust Bowl, concerned with developing new products from crops. He was invited by Henry Ford to speak at the conference held in Dearborn, Michigan, and they developed a friendship. That year Carver's health declined, and Ford later installed an elevator at the Tuskegee dormitory where Carver lived, so that the elderly man would not have to climb stairs.\nCarver had been frugal in his life, and in his seventies he established a legacy by creating a museum of his work, as well as the George Washington Carver Foundation at Tuskegee in 1938 to continue agricultural research. He donated nearly US$ in his savings to create the foundation.\nCarver headed the modern organic movement in the southern agricultural system. Carver's background for his interest in organic farming sprouted from his father being killed during the Civil War, and when his mother was kidnapped by Confederate slave raiders. Now an orphan, Carver found comfort in botany when he was just 11 years old in Kansas. Carver learned about herbal medicine, natural pesticides, and natural fertilizers that yielded plentiful crops from his caretaker. When crops and house plants were dying, he would use his knowledge and go and nurse them back to health. As a teenager, he was termed the \"plant doctor\".\nWhen his study about infection in soybean reached Booker T. Washington, he invited him to come and teach at the Tuskegee Agricultural school.\nAlthough the emancipation allowed Black families 40 acres and a mule, President Johnson revoked this and gave the land to white plantation owners instead. This prompted Black farmers to exchange what was once their land, and in turn, a small part of the land's harvest. This led to sharecropping. Carver soon realized that farmers were not obtaining enough food to survive, and how the industrialization of cotton had contaminated the soil.\nCarver wanted to find a way to organically transform Alabama's failing soil. He found that alternating nitrogen-rich crops would let the soil get back to its natural state. Keeping crops like sweet potatoes, peanuts, and cowpeas would produce more food surplus and different types of food for farmers. Carver worked to pioneer organic fertilizers like swamp muck and compost for the farmers to use. These fertilizers were more sustainable to the planet and helped farmers to spend less money on fertilizers since they were recycling products.\nCarver pushed for woodland preservation, to help improve the quality of the topsoil. He urged farmers to feed their hogs acorns. The acorns contained natural pesticides and feeding them acorns was cheaper for the farms too. Carver's efforts towards the holistic and organic approach are still in practice today. In his research, Carver discovered Permaculture. Permaculture could be used to remove carbon from the atmosphere, produce a higher quantity of crops, and let crops flourish despite global warming.\nRelationships.\nCarver never married. At age 40, he began a courtship with Sarah L. Hunt, an elementary school teacher and the sister-in-law of Warren Logan, Treasurer of Tuskegee Institute. This lasted three years until she took a teaching job in California. In her 2015 biography, Christina Vella reviews his relationships and suggests that Carver was bisexual and constrained by mores of his historic period.\nWhen he was 70, Carver established a friendship and research partnership with the scientist Austin W. Curtis Jr. This young black man, a graduate of Cornell University, had some teaching experience before coming to Tuskegee. Carver bequeathed to Curtis his royalties from an authorized 1943 biography by Rackham Holt. After Carver died in 1943, Curtis was fired from Tuskegee Institute. He left Alabama and resettled in Detroit. There he manufactured and sold peanut-based personal care products.\nDeath.\nUpon returning home one day, Carver suffered a bad fall down a flight of stairs; he was found unconscious by a maid who took him to a hospital. Carver died January 5, 1943, at the age of 78 or 79 from complications (anemia) resulting from this fall. His death came when he was sitting up in bed while painting a Christmas card which said, \"Peace on earth and goodwill to all men.\" Carver biographer Prema Ramakrishnan said of him that \"His death was characteristic of him and his entire life's work.\" He was buried next to Booker T. Washington at Tuskegee University. Due to his frugality, Carver's life savings totaled $60,000, all of which he donated in his last years and at his death to the Carver Museum and to the George Washington Carver Foundation.\nOn his grave was written, \"He could have added fortune to fame, but caring for neither, he found happiness and honor in being helpful to the world.\"\nPersonal life.\nChristianity.\nCarver believed he could have faith both in God and science and integrated them into his life. He testified on many occasions that his faith in Jesus was the only mechanism by which he could effectively pursue and perform the art of science. Carver became a Christian when he was still a young boy, as he wrote in connection to his conversion in 1931:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was just a mere boy when converted, hardly ten years old. There isn't much of a story to it. God just came into my heart one afternoon while I was alone in the 'loft' of our big barn while I was shelling corn to carry to the mill to be ground into meal.\nA dear little white boy, one of our neighbors, about my age came by one Saturday morning, and in talking and playing he told me he was going to Sunday school tomorrow morning. I was eager to know what a Sunday school was. He said they sang hymns and prayed. I asked him what prayer was and what they said. I do not remember what he said; only remember that as soon as he left I climbed up into the 'loft,' knelt down by the barrel of corn and prayed as best I could. I do not remember what I said. I only recall that I felt so good that I prayed several times before I quit.\nMy brother and myself were the only colored children in that neighborhood and of course, we could not go to church or Sunday school, or school of any kind.\nThat was my simple conversion, and I have tried to keep the faith.\u2014\u200a\nHe was not expected to live past his 21st birthday due to failing health. He lived well past the age of 21, and his belief deepened as a result. Throughout his career, he always found friendship with other Christians. He relied on them especially when criticized by the scientific community and media regarding his research methodology.\nCarver viewed faith in Jesus Christ as a means of destroying both barriers of racial disharmony and social stratification. He was as concerned with his students' character development as he was with their intellectual development. He compiled a list of \"eight cardinal virtues\" whose possession defines \"a lady or a gentleman\":\nBeginning in 1906 at Tuskegee, Carver led a Bible class on Sundays for several students at their request. He regularly portrayed stories by acting them out.\nVoice pitch.\nEven as an adult Carver spoke with a high pitch. Historian Linda O. McMurry noted that he \"was a frail and sickly child\" who suffered \"from a severe case of whooping cough and frequent bouts of what was called croup\". McMurry contested the diagnosis of croup, holding rather that \"His stunted growth and apparently impaired vocal cords suggest instead tubercular or pneumococcal infection. Frequent infections of that nature could have caused the growth of polyps on the larynx and may have resulted from a gamma globulin deficiency.\u00a0... until his death the high pitch of his voice startled all who met him, and he suffered from frequent chest congestion and loss of voice.\"\nLegacy.\nA movement to establish a U.S. national monument to Carver began before his death. Because of World War II, such non-war expenditures had been banned by presidential order. Missouri senator Harry S. Truman sponsored a bill in favor of a monument. In a committee hearing on the bill, one supporter said:\nThe bill is not simply a momentary pause on the part of busy men engaged in the conduct of the war, to do honor to one of the truly great Americans of this country, but it is in essence a blow against the Axis, it is in essence a war measure in the sense that it will further unleash and release the energies of roughly 15,000,000 Negro people in this country for full support of our war effort.\nThe bill passed unanimously in both houses.\nOn July 14, 1943, President Franklin D. Roosevelt dedicated $30,000 (~$ in 2024) for the George Washington Carver National Monument west-southwest of Diamond, Missouri, the area where Carver had spent time in his childhood. This was the first national monument dedicated to an African American and the first to honor someone other than a president. The national monument complex includes a bust of Carver, a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444-mile nature trail, a museum, the 1881 Moses Carver house, and the Carver cemetery. The national monument opened in July 1953.\nIn December 1947, a fire broke out in the Carver Museum, and much of the collection was damaged. \"Time\" magazine reported that all but 3 of the 48 Carver paintings at the museum were destroyed. His best-known painting, displayed at the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago, depicts a yucca and cactus. This canvas survived and has undergone conservation. It is displayed together with several of his other paintings.\nCarver was featured on U.S. 1948 commemorative stamps. From 1951 to 1954, he was depicted on the commemorative Carver-Washington half dollar coin along with Booker T. Washington. A second stamp honoring Carver, of face value 32\u00a2, was issued on February 3, 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series. Two ships, the Liberty ship SS \"George Washington Carver\" and the nuclear submarine USS \"George Washington Carver\" (SSBN-656), were named in his honor.\nIn 1977, Carver was elected to the Hall of Fame for Great Americans. In 1990, he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame. In 1994, Iowa State University awarded Carver a Doctor of Humane Letters. In 2000, Carver was a charter inductee in the USDA Hall of Heroes as the \"Father of Chemurgy\".\nMany institutions continue to honor George Washington Carver. Dozens of elementary schools and high schools are named after him. National Basketball Association star David Robinson and his wife, Valerie, founded an academy named after Carver; it opened on September 17, 2001, in San Antonio, Texas. The Carver Community Cultural Center, a historic center located in San Antonio, is named for him.\nIn 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed George Washington Carver as one of 100 Greatest African Americans.\nIn 2005, Carver's research at the Tuskegee Institute was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society. On February 15, 2005, an episode of \"Modern Marvels\" included scenes from within Iowa State University's Food Sciences Building and about Carver's work. In 2005, the Missouri Botanical Garden in St. Louis, Missouri, opened a George Washington Carver garden in his honor, which includes a life-size statue of him.\nA color film of Carver shot around 1937 by African American surgeon C. Allen Alexander was added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress in 2019. The 12 minutes of footage were taken at the Tuskegee Institute, and includes Carver in his apartment, office and laboratory, as well as scenes of him tending flowers and displaying his paintings.\nImpact on the Black Diaspora.\nGeorge Washington Carver has heavily influenced the Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics industry (STEAM) Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, and the Black Diaspora as a whole. Carver made sure black farmers knew the foundation and strategies when finding and maintaining their crops. His widely noticed impact with peanuts even brought black and white communities together due his farming strategies being essential for both races as he was working towards racial equality. Institutions all over the world such as Tuskegee University, and STEAM programs in different parts of the world continue to center Carver as a role model for his bravery, inventions, and combining science and agriculture with black empowerment. He was not just \"The Peanut Man\",but he was a pioneer who used his ability to understand science and agriculture as a way to educate and uplift the Black Diaspora.\nCarver's ideas were far ahead of his time. His methods and discoveries surrounding farming promote environmental awareness, economic opportunity, and black excellence within STEAM. Traditions that Carver taught farmers are still taught and used as cooking, and technological strategies today. Examples include Carver learning how to turn sweet potatoes into flour, writing ink, and vinegar, emphasizing that crops can be interpreted in so many ways. Through these innovations, African American farmers learned different methods that helped them create businesses, and sustainable farming techniques which help reshape agriculture in the South and become noticed all over the world, even taught in schools today.\nDuring an era of intense racial injustice, Carver became one of the most noticed and highly admired scientist in the world. Overturning a world of racism and discrimination, he used his platform to educate people amongst the diaspora, and to advocate for equal rights.. The outstanding accomplishments landed the scientist a lot of friendships, such as Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Henry Ford. Carver even became friends with Mahatma Gandhi, flying all the way to India to conversate and educate Gandhi on nutrition to improve his health . His legacy helps the Black Diaspora today to pursue education, and challenge systems of discrimination by expressing that Black people all over the world that they could thrive in antagonistic environments and display excellence. \nReputed inventions.\nCarver has been given credit in popular folklore for many inventions that did not come out of his lab. Three patents (one for cosmetics; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;, issued \u00a0, and two for paints and stains; &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;, issued \u00a0, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;, issued \u00a0) were issued to Carver in 1925 to 1927; however, they were not commercially successful.\nAside from these patents and some recipes for food, Carver left no records of formulae or procedures for making his products. He did not keep a laboratory notebook.\nMackintosh notes that, \"Carver did not explicitly claim that he had personally discovered all the peanut attributes and uses he cited, but he said nothing to prevent his audiences from drawing the inference.\"\nCarver's research was intended to produce replacements from common crops for commercial products, which were generally beyond the budget of the small one-horse farmer. A misconception grew that his research on products for subsistence farmers were developed by others commercially to change Southern agriculture. Carver's work to provide small farmers with resources for more independence from the cash economy foreshadowed the \"appropriate technology\" work of E. F. Schumacher.\nPeanut products.\nDennis Keeney, director of the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture at Iowa State University, wrote in the \"Leopold Letter\" (newsletter):\nCarver worked on improving soils, growing crops with low inputs, and using species that fixed nitrogen (hence, the work on the cowpea and the peanut). Carver wrote in 'The Need of Scientific Agriculture in the South': \"The virgin fertility of our soils and the vast amount of unskilled labor have been more of a curse than a blessing to agriculture. This exhaustive system for cultivation, the destruction of forest, the rapid and almost constant decomposition of organic matter, have made our agricultural problem one requiring more brains than of the North, East or West.\nCarver worked for years to create a company to market his products. The most important was the Carver Penol Company, which sold a mixture of creosote and peanuts as a patent medicine for respiratory diseases such as tuberculosis. Sales were lackluster and the product was ineffective according to the Food and Drug Administration. Other ventures were The Carver Products Company and the Carvoline Company. Carvoline Antiseptic Hair Dressing was a mix of peanut oil and lanolin. Carvoline Rubbing Oil was a peanut oil for massages.\nCarver is often mistakenly credited with the invention of peanut butter. By the time Carver published \"How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing it For Human Consumption\" in 1916, many methods of preparation of peanut butter had been developed or patented by various pharmacists, doctors and food scientists working in the US and Canada. The Aztecs were known to have made peanut butter from ground peanuts as early as the 15th century. Canadian pharmacist Marcellus Gilmore Edson was awarded https:// (for its manufacture) in 1884, 12 years before Carver began his work at Tuskegee.\nSweet potato products.\nCarver is also associated with developing sweet potato products. In his 1922 sweet potato bulletin, Carver listed a few dozen recipes, \"many of which I have copied verbatim from Bulletin No. 129, U. S. Department of Agriculture\". Carver's records included the following sweet potato products: 73 dyes, 17 wood fillers, 14 candies, 5 library pastes, 5 breakfast foods, 4 starches, 4 flours, and 3 molasses. He also had listings for vinegars, dry coffee and instant coffee, candy, after-dinner mints, orange drops, and lemon drops.\nCarver bulletins.\nDuring his more than four decades at Tuskegee, Carver's official published work consisted mainly of 44 practical bulletins for farmers. His first bulletin in 1898 was on feeding acorns to farm animals. His final bulletin in 1943 was about the peanut. He also published six bulletins on sweet potatoes, five on cotton, and four on cowpeas. Some other individual bulletins dealt with alfalfa, wild plum, tomato, ornamental plants, corn, poultry, dairying, hogs, preserving meats in hot weather, and nature study in schools.\nHis most popular bulletin, \"How to Grow the Peanut and 105 Ways of Preparing it for Human Consumption\", was first published in 1916 and has been reprinted numerous times. It provides a short overview of peanut crop production and contains a list of recipes from other agricultural bulletins, cookbooks, magazines, and newspapers, such as the \"Peerless Cookbook\", \"Good Housekeeping\", and \"Berry's Fruit Recipes\". While Carver's was not the first American agricultural bulletin devoted to peanuts, his bulletins seem to have been more popular and widespread than those that preceded his.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Carver is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nArchival collections\nOther\nhttp:// from the National Park Service\nhttps:// from the National Park Service\nPrint publications"}
{"id": "12998", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12998", "title": "Grok", "text": "Neologism coined by Robert Heinlein\nGrok () is a neologism coined by the American writer Robert A. Heinlein for his 1961 science fiction novel \"Stranger in a Strange Land\". While the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" summarizes the meaning of \"grok\" as \"to understand intuitively or by empathy, to establish rapport with\" and \"to empathize or communicate sympathetically (with); also, to experience enjoyment\", Heinlein's concept of a human who comes to Earth in early adulthood after being born on the planet Mars is far more nuanced, with critic Istvan Csicsery-Ronay Jr. observing that \"the book's major theme can be seen as an extended definition of the term.\" The concept of \"grok\" garnered significant critical scrutiny in the years after the book's initial publication. The term and aspects of the underlying concept have become part of communities such as computer science.\nDescriptions in \"Stranger in a Strange Land\".\nCritic David E. Wright Sr. points out that in the 1991 \"uncut\" edition of \"Stranger\", the word \"grok\" \"was used first \"without any explicit definition\" on page 22\" and continued to be used without being explicitly defined until page 253 (emphasis in original). He notes that this first intentional definition is simply \"to drink\", but that this is only a metaphor \"much as English 'I see' often means the same as 'I understand'\". Critics have bridged this absence of explicit definition by citing passages from \"Stranger\" that illustrate the term. A selection of these passages follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Grok\" means \"to understand\", of course, but Dr. Mahmoud, who might be termed the leading Terran expert on Martians, explains that it also means, \"to drink\" and \"a hundred other English words, words which we think of as antithetical concepts. 'Grok' means \"all\" of these. It means 'fear', it means 'love', it means 'hate'\u00a0\u2014 proper hate, for by the Martian 'map' you cannot hate anything unless you grok it, understand it so thoroughly that you merge with it and it merges with you\u00a0\u2014 then you can hate it. By hating yourself. But this implies that you love it, too, and cherish it and would not have it otherwise. Then you can \"hate\"\u00a0\u2014 and (I think) Martian hate is an emotion so black that the nearest human equivalent could only be called mild distaste.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Grok\" means \"identically equal\". The human clich\u00e9 \"This hurts me worse than it does you\" has a distinctly Martian flavor. The Martian seems to know instinctively what we learned painfully from modern physics, that observer acts with observed through the process of observation. \"Grok\" means to understand so thoroughly that the observer becomes a part of the observed\u00a0\u2014 to merge, blend, intermarry, lose identity in group experience. It means almost everything that we mean by religion, philosophy, and science and it means as little to us as color does to a blind man.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nRobert A. Heinlein originally coined the term \"grok\" in his 1961 novel \"Stranger in a Strange Land\" as a Martian word that could not be defined in Earthling terms, but can be associated with various literal meanings such as \"water\", \"to drink\", \"to relate\", \"life\", or \"to live\", and had a much more profound figurative meaning that is hard for terrestrial culture to understand because of its assumption of a singular reality.\nAccording to the book, drinking water is a central focus on Mars, where it is scarce. Martians use the merging of their bodies with water as a simple example or symbol of how two entities can combine to create a new reality greater than the sum of its parts. The water becomes part of the drinker, and the drinker part of the water. Both \"grok\" each other. Things that once had separate realities become entangled in the same experiences, goals, history, and purpose. Within the book, the statement of divine immanence verbalized among the main characters, \"thou art God\", is logically derived from the concept inherent in the term \"grok\".\nHeinlein describes Martian words as \"guttural\" and \"jarring\". Martian speech is described as sounding \"like a bullfrog fighting a cat\". Accordingly, \"grok\" is generally pronounced as a guttural \"gr\" terminated by a sharp \"k\" with very little or no vowel sound (a narrow IPA transcription might be ). William Tenn suggests Heinlein in creating the word might have been influenced by Tenn's very similar concept of \"griggo\", introduced in Tenn's 1949 story \"Venus and the Seven Sexes\". In his later afterword to the story, Tenn says Heinlein considered such influence \"very possible\".\nAdoption and modern usage.\nIn computer programmer culture.\nUses of the word in the decades after the 1960s are more concentrated in computer culture, such as an \"InfoWorld\" columnist in 1984 imagining a computer saying, \"There isn't any software! Only different internal states of hardware. It's all hardware! It's a shame programmers don't grok that better.\"\nThe Jargon File, which describes itself as \"The Hacker's Dictionary\" and has been published under that name three times, puts \"grok\" in a programming context:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When you claim to \"grok\" some knowledge or technique, you are asserting that you have not merely learned it in a detached instrumental way but that it has become part of you, part of your identity. For example, to say that you \"know\" Lisp is simply to assert that you can code in it if necessary\u00a0\u2013 but to say you \"grok\" Lisp is to claim that you have deeply entered the world-view and spirit of the language, with the implication that it has transformed your view of programming. Contrast zen, which is a similar supernatural understanding experienced as a single brief flash.\nThe entry existed in the very earliest forms of the Jargon File in the early 1980s. \nThe 2005 book \"Perl Best Practices\" defines \"grok\" as understanding a portion of computer code in a profound way. It goes on to suggest that to \"re-grok\" code is to reload the intricacies of that portion of code into one's memory after some time has passed and all the details of it are no longer remembered. In that sense, \"to grok\" means to load everything into memory for immediate use. It is analogous to the way a processor caches memory for short term use, but the only implication by this reference was that it was something a human (or perhaps a Martian) would do.\nExamples of usage.\nA typical tech usage from the \"Linux Bible\" characterizes the Unix software development philosophy as \"one that can make your life a lot simpler once you grok the idea\".\nThe 1994 book \"Cyberia\" covers its use in this subculture extensively:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is all latter day usage, the original derivation was from an early text processing utility from so long ago that no one remembers but, grok was the output when it understood the file. K&amp;R would remember.\nIn counterculture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I caught the references to Aristotle, the old man of the tribe with his unfortunate epistemological paresis, and also to that feisty little lady I always imagine is really the lost Anastasia, but I still didn\u2019t grok. \u201cWhat do you mean?\u201d I asked (...)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Williams went on. \"You've got to think of time ripples, as well as space ripples, to grok the quantum world. ...\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12999", "revid": "141948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12999", "title": "German Commander-in-Chief for Submarines", "text": ""}
{"id": "13007", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13007", "title": "Geelong Football Club", "text": "Australian rules football club\nThe Geelong Football Club, nicknamed the Cats, is a professional Australian rules football club based in Geelong, Victoria, Australia. The club competes in the Australian Football League (AFL), the sport's premier competition. The club formed on 13 April 1859, making it the second-oldest AFL side after Melbourne and one of the oldest football clubs in the world.\nIn the 1860s, Geelong participated in a series of Challenge Cup competitions, and was a foundation member of both the Victorian Football Association (VFA) in 1877 and the Victorian Football League (VFL) in 1897, now the national AFL. The club won the Western District Challenge Cup in 1875, a then-record seven VFA premierships between 1878 and 1886, and six VFL premierships by 1963, after which it experienced a 44-year waiting period until it won its next premiership, a grand final record 119-point victory in 2007. Geelong won a further three premierships in 2009, 2011 and 2022. The Cats have fierce competitive rivalries with Hawthorn and Collingwood.\nGeelong play most of their home games at Kardinia Park in South Geelong (nicknamed the Cattery and known for sponsorship reasons as GMHBA Stadium) and play the remainder at the Melbourne Cricket Ground. Geelong's traditional guernsey colours are white with navy blue hoops. The club's nickname was first used in 1923 after a run of losses prompted a local cartoonist to suggest that the club needed a black cat to bring it good luck. The club's official team song and anthem is \"We Are Geelong\".\nGeelong also fields a reserves men's team in the Victorian Football League (VFL), a senior women's team in the AFL Women's (AFLW) and a reserves women's team in the VFL Women's (VFLW) competitions.\nHistory.\nThe club was founded in 1859 in the city of Geelong, Australia, and is the second oldest AFL club. It is believed to be the fourth oldest football club in Australia and one of the oldest in the world and one of the most successful. Initially playing under its own rules, some of which, notably, were permanently introduced into Australian Football, it adopted the Laws of Australian Football in the early 1860s after a series of compromises with the Melbourne Football Club.\nGeelong went on to play for most of its existence in the premier competitions, the first competition, the Caledonian Society Cup, a foundation club of both the Victorian Football Association (VFA) in 1877 and the Victorian Football League (VFL) in 1897., VFL and continues in the elite Australian Football League (AFL). The Cats have been the VFL/AFL premiers ten times, with four in the AFL era (since 1990) in 2007, 2009, 2011, and most recently, 2022, to be the third most successful club over that period behind Brisbane and Hawthorn. They have also won ten McClelland Trophies, the most of any AFL/VFL club.\nMany of the club's official records before 1920 have disappeared.\nClub identity and culture.\nGuernseys.\nGeelong's traditional navy blue and white hooped guernsey has been worn since the club's inception in the mid-1800s. The design is said to represent the white seagulls and blue water of Corio Bay.\nThe team has worn various away guernseys since 1998, all featuring the club's logo and traditional colours.\nNickname.\nGeelong has been nicknamed the Cats since 1923. Following a disappointing start to the season, the \"Melbourne Herald\"'s sporting cartoonist, Samuel Garnet Wells, suggested that adopting a black cat as a mascot might bring the club good luck. A local entrepreneur seized on the idea, producing and selling badges featuring a black cat at games. Shortly afterward, Geelong won four consecutive games, cementing the cat in club folklore.\nIn earlier years, Geelong was often referred to as the Pivotonians, a name derived from the city's nickname, the Pivot. They were also called the Seagulls, in reference to Geelong's seaside location.\nSongs.\nGeelong's official club song, \"We Are Geelong\", is set to the tune of \"Toreador\" from \"Carmen\", with lyrics written by former premiership player John Watts. For many years only the first verse was performed at matches and following victories, however since the start of the 2025 season, the club has played both verses. The version currently used by the club was recorded by the Fable Singers in 1972. The lyrics are as follows:\n \"We are Geelong, the greatest team of all\"\n \"We are Geelong; we're always on the ball\"\n \"We play the game as it should be played\"\n \"At home or far away\"\n \"Our banners fly high, from dawn to dark\"\n \"Down at Kardinia Park.\"\n \"So! Stand up and fight, remember our tradition\"\n \"Stand up and fight, it's always our ambition\"\n \"Throughout the game to fight with all our might\"\n \"Because we're the mighty blue and white\"\n \"And when the ball is bounced, to the final bell\"\n \"Stand up and fight like hell!\"\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Geelong experimented with alternative club songs, starting with Barry Crocker's \"C'mon the Cats!\" and followed by \"Cat Attack\", which the team ran out to during the 1992 Grand Final. However, these received a lukewarm response from fans at the time, and the club returned to its traditional anthem. In 2022, the club revived \"Cat Attack\" for Retro Round and has continued to play it following victories at Kardinia Park.\nStadium and training facilities.\nGeelong's administrative headquarters is its home stadium, GMHBA Stadium or also known as Kardinia Park. The club trains here during the season, however it also trains at its alternate training venue, the Deakin University Elite Sports Precinct. The latter features an MCG-sized oval and is used often by the club in the pre-season, when Kardinia Park is being used for other events.\nRivalries.\nHawthorn.\nThe rivalry between Hawthorn and Geelong is defined by two Grand Finals: those of 1989 and 2008. In the 1989 Grand Final, Geelong played the man, resulting in major injuries for several Hawks players, Mark Yeates knocking out Dermott Brereton at the opening bounce; Hawthorn controlled the game, leading by approximately 40 points for most of the match; in the last quarter, Geelong almost managed to come from behind to win, but fell short by six points. In the 2008 Grand Final, Geelong was the heavily backed favourite and had lost only one match for the season, but lost by 26 points; Geelong then won its next eleven matches against Hawthorn over the following five years, under a curse, which was dubbed the \"Kennett curse\" which was attributed to disrespectful comments made by Hawthorn president Jeff Kennett following the 2008 Grand Final. It was later revealed that after the 2008 grand final, Paul Chapman initiated a pact between other Geelong players to never lose to Hawthorn again. The curse was broken in a preliminary final in 2013, after Paul Chapman played his final match for Geelong the previous week. Hawthorn went on to win the next three premierships. In 2016 Geelong again defeated Hawthorn in the qualifying final. In twenty matches between the two sides between 2008 and 2017, twelve were decided by less than ten points, with Geelong victorious in eleven of those twelve matches.\nCollingwood.\nIn 1925, Geelong won their first flag over Collingwood. In 1930, Collingwood defeated Geelong in the grand final making it four flags in-a-row for the Pies. Geelong would later deny Collingwood three successive premierships in 1937, winning a famous grand final by 32 points.\nThe two sides played against each other in 6 finals between 1951 and 1955, including the 1952 Grand Final when Geelong easily beat Collingwood by 46 points. In 1953, Collingwood ended Geelong's record 23-game winning streak in the home and away season, and later defeated them by 12 points in the grand final, denying the Cats a third successive premiership.\nSince 2007, the clubs have again both been at the top of the ladder and have met regularly in finals. Geelong won a memorable preliminary final by five points on their way to their first flag in 44 years. In 2008, Collingwood inflicted Geelong's only home-and-away loss, by a massive 86 points, but the teams did not meet in the finals. They would meet in preliminary finals in 2009 and 2010, each winning one \"en route\" to a premiership. They finally met again in a Grand Final in 2011, which Geelong won by 38 points; Geelong inflicted Collingwood's only three losses for the 2011 season.\nBrisbane.\nIn the 2020s, Geelong and Brisbane have played off against each other in 5 finals (2020 Preliminary final, 2022 Preliminary Final, 2024 Preliminary final, 2025 2nd Qualifying Final and 2025 Grand Final). The current record in this time frame stands at 3 wins for Geelong and Brisbane with 2 wins. This includes Brisbane's most recent premiership in 2025, beating Geelong by 47 points in what was a dominant fashion during the 2nd half of play in front of a crowd of 100,022 at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.\nCorporate.\nSponsorship.\nAt 100 years as of 2025, Geelong's sponsorship with the Ford Motor Company is one of the longest active sports sponsorship of any sports team in the world, with continuous sponsorship dating back to 1925. The sponsorship had previously been ratified as the longest in the world by the Guinness World Records, until a change in definitions.\nIn recent years Geelong-based retail company Cotton On Group has become synonymous with the club, with the company manufacturing on-field and other team merchandise since 2016.\n \"Statistics are correct to end of the 2025 season\"\nReserves team.\nThe Geelong reserves (also known as the Bendigo Bank Cats for sponsorship reasons) are the reserves side of the club, playing in the Victorian Football League.\nHistory.\nGeelong's reserves side began competing in the Victorian Junior Football League, later known as the VFL/AFL reserves, in 1922. The team won thirteen premierships during that time (1923, 1924, 1930, 1937, 1938, 1948, 1960, 1963, 1964, 1975, 1980, 1981 and 1982), the most of any club.\nSince the demise of the AFL reserves competition, the Geelong reserves have competed in the Victorian Football League. Unlike all other Victorian AFL clubs, Geelong has never operated in a reserves affiliation with an existing VFL club, having instead operated its stand-alone reserves team continuously. The team is composed of both reserves players from the club's primary and rookie AFL lists, and a separately maintained list of players eligible only for VFL matches. Home games are played at GMHBA Stadium, with some played as curtain-raisers to senior AFL matches.\nThe side is also known as the Bendigo Bank Cats, referring to the club's commercial partnership with Bendigo Bank.\nWomen's teams.\nIn 2017, following the inaugural AFL Women's (AFLW) season, Geelong was among eight clubs that applied for licences to enter the competition from 2019 onwards. In September 2017, the club was announced as one of two clubs, along with North Melbourne, to receive a licence to join the competition in 2019. The club has also had a team in the second-tier VFL Women's league since 2017.\nThe club has qualified for the AFL Women's finals on three occasions, making it through the preliminary final in 2023 before losing to eventual premiers Brisbane.\n \"Statistics are correct to end of the 2025 season\"\nActivism.\nSame-Sex Marriage.\nDuring the Australian Marriage Law Postal Survey, Geelong Football Club supported the Yes vote.\nVoice to Parliament.\nGeelong Football Club was a supporter of the Voice to Parliament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13009", "revid": "28916033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13009", "title": "Galileo (satellite navigation)", "text": "European global navigation satellite system\nGalileo is a global navigation satellite system (GNSS) created by the European Union through the European Space Agency (ESA) and operated by the European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA). It is headquartered in Prague in Czechia, with two ground operations centres in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany (mostly responsible for the control of the satellites), and in Fucino, Italy (mostly responsible for providing the navigation data). The \u20ac10 billion project began offering limited services in 2016. It is named after the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei. \nOne of the aims of Galileo is to provide an independent high-precision positioning system so European political and military authorities do not have to rely on the United States GPS or the Russian GLONASS systems, which could be disabled or degraded by their operators at any time. The use of basic (lower-precision) Galileo services is free and open to everyone. A higher-precision service is available for free since 24 January 2023, previously only available to government-authorized users. Galileo is also to provide a new global search and rescue (SAR) function as part of the MEOSAR system.\nThe second Galileo test satellite GIOVE-A was launched 28 December 2005, while the first satellite to be part of the operational system was launched on 21 October 2011. Galileo started offering Early Operational Capability (EOC) on 15 December 2016, providing initial services with a weak signal. In October 2018, four more Galileo satellites were brought online, increasing the number of active satellites to 18. In November 2018, the FCC approved use of Galileo in the US. As of September 2024, there are 25 launched satellites that operate in the constellation. It is expected that the next generation of satellites will begin to become operational after 2026 to replace the first generation, which can then be used for backup capabilities. Most satellites of the programme were built by OHB in Bremen, Germany, with the contribution of Surrey Satellite Technology (SSTL) in Guildford, United Kingdom.\nThe Galileo system has a greater accuracy than GPS, having an accuracy of less than 1 m when using broadcast ephemeris (GPS: 3 m) and a signal-in-space ranging error (SISRE) of 1.6\u00a0cm (GPS: 2.3\u00a0cm) when using real-time corrections for satellite orbits and clocks.\nHistory.\nMain objectives.\nIn 2008, the different concepts of the three main contributors of the European Space Agency (ESA) (Germany, France and Italy) for Galileo were compared and reduced to one by a joint team of engineers from all three countries. The first stage of the Galileo programme was agreed upon officially on 26 May 2003 by the European Union and the ESA. The system is intended primarily for civilian use, unlike the more military-focused systems of the United States (GPS), Russia (GLONASS) and China (BeiDou) in that Galileo doesn't limit accuracy for non-military applications. The European system could be subject to shutdown for military purposes in extreme circumstances (such as an armed conflict). Italy and Germany led the development of the first generation of the Galileo programme, while France is playing a more prominent role in the development of the Galileo Second Generation (G2G).\nFunding.\nThe European Commission had some difficulty funding the project's next stage, after several allegedly \"per annum\" sales projection graphs for the project were exposed in November 2001 as \"cumulative\" projections, which for each year projected included all previous years of sales. The attention that was brought to this multi-billion euro growing error in sales forecasts resulted in a general awareness in the commission and elsewhere that it was unlikely that the programme would yield the return on investment that had previously been suggested to investors and decision-makers. On 17 January 2002, a spokesman for the project stated that, as a result of US pressure and economic difficulties, \"Galileo is almost dead\".\nA few months later, however, the situation changed dramatically. European Union member states decided it was important to have a satellite-based positioning and timing infrastructure that the US could not easily turn off in times of political conflict.\nThe European Union and the European Space Agency agreed in March 2002 to fund the project, pending a review in 2003 (which was completed on 26 May 2003). The starting cost for the period ending in 2005 is estimated at \u20ac1.1 billion. The required satellites (the planned number is 30) were to be launched between 2011 and 2014, with the system up and running and under civilian control from 2019. The final cost is estimated at \u20ac3 billion, including the infrastructure on Earth, constructed in 2006 and 2007. The plan was for private companies and investors to invest at least two-thirds of the cost of implementation, with the EU and ESA dividing the remaining cost. The base \"Open Service\" is to be available without charge to anyone with a Galileo-compatible receiver, with an encrypted higher-bandwidth improved-precision \"Commercial Service\" originally planned to be available at a cost, but in February 2018 the high accuracy service (HAS) (providing Precise Point Positioning data on the E6 frequency) was agreed to be made freely available, with the authentication service remaining commercial. By early 2011 costs for the project had run 50% over initial estimates.\nTension with the United States.\nGalileo is intended to be an EU civilian GNSS that allows all users access to it. Initially GPS reserved the highest quality signal for military use, and the signal available for civilian use was intentionally degraded (Selective Availability). This changed with President Bill Clinton signing a policy directive in 1996 to turn off Selective Availability. Since May 2000 the same precision signal has been provided to both civilians and the military.\nSince Galileo was designed to provide the highest possible precision (greater than GPS) to anyone, the US was concerned that an enemy could use Galileo signals in military strikes against the US and its allies (some weapons like missiles use GNSSs for guidance). The frequency initially chosen for Galileo would have made it impossible for the US to block the Galileo signals without also interfering with its own GPS signals. The US did not want to lose their GNSS capability with GPS while denying enemies the use of GNSS. Some US officials became especially concerned when Chinese interest in Galileo was reported.\nAn anonymous EU official claimed that the US officials implied that they might consider shooting down Galileo satellites in the event of a major conflict in which Galileo was used in attacks against American forces.The EU's stance is that Galileo is a neutral technology, available to all countries and everyone. At first, EU officials did not want to change their original plans for Galileo, but they have since reached the compromise that Galileo is to use different frequencies. This allows the blocking or jamming of either GNSS without affecting the other.\nGPS and Galileo.\nOne of the reasons given for developing Galileo as an independent system was that position information from GPS can be made significantly inaccurate by the deliberate application of universal selective availability (SA) by the US military. GPS is widely used worldwide for civilian applications; Galileo's proponents argued that civil infrastructure, including aircraft navigation and landing, should not rely solely upon a system with this vulnerability.\nOn 2 May 2000, the selective availability was disabled by the President of the United States, Bill Clinton; in late 2001 the entity managing the GPS confirmed that it did not intend to enable selective availability ever again. Though Selective Availability capability still exists, on 19 September 2007 the US Department of Defense announced that newer GPS satellites would not be capable of implementing Selective Availability; the wave of Block IIF satellites launched in 2009, and all subsequent GPS satellites, are stated not to support selective availability. As old satellites are replaced in the GPS Block III programme, selective availability will cease to be an option. The modernisation programme also contains standardised features that allow GPS III and Galileo systems to inter-operate, allowing receivers to be developed to utilise GPS and Galileo together to create an even more accurate GNSS.\nCooperation with the United States.\nIn June 2004, in a signed agreement with the United States, the European Union agreed to switch to a binary offset carrier modulation 1.1, or BOC(1,1), allowing the coexistence of both GPS and Galileo and the future combined use of both systems. The European Union also agreed to address the \"mutual concerns related to the protection of allied and US national security capabilities\".\nFirst experimental satellites: GIOVE-A and GIOVE-B.\nThe first experimental satellite, GIOVE-A, was launched in December 2005 and was followed by a second test satellite, GIOVE-B, launched in April 2008. After successful completion of the In-Orbit Validation (IOV) phase, additional satellites were launched. On 30 November 2007, the 27 EU transport ministers involved reached an agreement that Galileo should be operational by 2013, but later press releases suggest it was delayed to 2014.\nContinued funding and governance issues.\nIn mid-2006, the public\u2013private partnership fell apart, and the European Commission decided to nationalise the Galileo programme.\nIn early 2007, the EU had yet to decide how to pay for the system and the project was said to be \"in deep crisis\" due to lack of more public funds. German Transport Minister Wolfgang Tiefensee was particularly doubtful about the consortium's ability to end the infighting at a time when only one testbed satellite had been successfully launched.\nAlthough a decision was yet to be reached, on 13 July 2007 EU countries discussed cutting \u20ac548 million (US$755 million, \u00a3370 million) from the union's competitiveness budget for the following year and shifting some of these funds to other parts of the financing pot, a move that could meet part of the cost of the union's Galileo satellite navigation system. European Union research and development projects could be scrapped to overcome a funding shortfall.\nIn November 2007, it was agreed to reallocate funds from the EU's agriculture and administration budgets and to soften the tendering process in order to invite more EU companies.\nIn April 2008, the EU transport ministers approved the Galileo Implementation Regulation. This allowed the \u20ac3.4 billion to be released from the EU's agriculture and administration budgets to allow the issuing of contracts to start construction of the ground station and the satellites.\nIn June 2009, the European Court of Auditors published a report, pointing out governance issues, substantial delays and budget overruns that led to project stalling in 2007, leading to further delays and failures.\nIn October 2009, the European Commission cut the number of satellites definitively planned from 28 to 22, with plans to order the remaining six at a later time. It also announced that the first OS, PRS and SoL signal would be available in 2013, and the CS and SOL some time later. The \u20ac3.4 billion budget for the 2006\u20132013 period was considered insufficient. In 2010, the think-tank Open Europe estimated the total cost of Galileo from start to 20 years after completion at \u20ac22.2 billion, borne entirely by taxpayers. Under the original estimates made in 2000, this cost would have been \u20ac7.7 billion, with \u20ac2.6 billion borne by taxpayers and the rest by private investors.\nIn November 2009, a ground station for Galileo was inaugurated near Kourou (French Guiana). The launch of the first four in-orbit validation (IOV) satellites was planned for the second half of 2011, and the launch of full operational capability (FOC) satellites was planned to start in late 2012.\nIn March 2010, it was verified that the budget for Galileo would only be available to provide the 4 IOV and 14 FOC satellites by 2014, with no funds then committed to bring the constellation above this 60% capacity. Paul Verhoef, the satellite navigation program manager at the European Commission, indicated that this limited funding would have serious consequences commenting at one point \"To give you an idea, that would mean that for three weeks in the year you will not have satellite navigation\" in reference to the proposed 18-vehicle constellation.\nIn July 2010, the European Commission estimated further delays and additional costs of the project to grow up to \u20ac1.5\u20131.7 billion, and moved the estimated date of completion to 2018. After completion the system will need to be subsidised by governments at \u20ac750 million per year. An additional \u20ac1.9 billion was planned to be spent bringing the system up to the full complement of 30 satellites (27 operational + 3 active spares).\nIn December 2010, EU ministers in Brussels voted Prague, in the Czech Republic, as the headquarters of the Galileo project.\nIn January 2011, infrastructure costs up to 2020 were estimated at \u20ac5.3 billion. In that same month, Wikileaks revealed that Berry Smutny, the CEO of the German satellite company OHB-System, said that Galileo \"is a stupid idea that primarily serves French interests\". The BBC learned in 2011 that \u20ac500 million (\u00a3440 million) would become available to make the extra purchase, taking Galileo within a few years from 18 operational satellites to 24.\nThe first two Galileo In-Orbit Validation satellites were launched by Soyuz ST-B flown from Centre Spatial Guyanais on 21 October 2011, and the remaining two on 12 October 2012. As of 2017, the satellites are fully useful for precise positioning and geodesy with a limited usability in navigation.\nTwenty-two further satellites with Full Operational Capability (FOC) were on order as of 2018[ [update]]. The first four pairs of satellites were launched on 22 August 2014, 27 March 2015, 11 September 2015 and 17 December 2015.\nClock failures.\nIn January 2017, news agencies reported that six of the passive hydrogen masers (PHM) and three of the rubidium atomic clocks (RAFS) had failed; four of the full operational satellites had each lost at least one clock, but no satellite had lost more than two. The operation was not affected as each satellite is launched with four clocks (2 PHM and 2 RAFS). SpectraTime, the Swiss producer of both on-board clock types, declined to comment. According to ESA, they concluded with their industrial partners for the rubidium atomic clocks that some implemented testing and operational measures were required. Additionally some refurbishment is required for the rubidium atomic clocks that still have to be launched. For the passive hydrogen masers operational measures are being studied to reduce the risk of failure. China and India use the same SpectraTime-built atomic clocks in their satellite navigation systems. ESA contacted the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) who initially reported not having experienced similar failures. However, at the end of January 2017, Indian news outlets reported that all three clocks aboard the IRNSS-1A satellite (launched in July 2013 with a 10-year life expectancy) had failed and that a replacement satellite would be launched in the second half of 2017: these atomic clocks were said to be supplied under a four-million-euro deal.\nIn July 2017, the European Commission reported that the main causes of the malfunctions have been identified and measures have been put in place to reduce the possibility of further malfunctions of the satellites already in space. According to European sources, ESA took measures to correct both identified sets of problems by replacing a faulty component that can cause a short circuit in the rubidium clocks and improve the passive hydrogen maser clocks as well on satellites still to be launched.\nOutages.\nFrom 11 July till 18 July 2019, the whole constellation experienced an \"unexplained\" signal outage with all active satellites showing \"NOT USABLE\" status on the Galileo status page. The cause of the incident was an equipment malfunction in the Galileo ground infrastructure that affected the calculation of time and orbit predictions.\nOn 14 December 2020, starting at 0:00 UTC, Galileo experienced a system-wide performance degradation lasting for 6 hours. GNSS receivers ignoring a 'marginal' status flag in the Galileo data could have experienced a pseudorange error of up to almost 80 km. The problem was related to an abnormal behaviour of a ground segment atomic clock in the time determination function of the system. The system uses parallel functioning Precise Timing Facilities in the Fucino and Oberpfaffenhofen Galileo Control Centres, and an issue occurred in Fucino whilst maintenance was performed on the parallel system in Oberpfaffenhofen.\nInternational involvement.\nIn September 2003, China joined the Galileo project. China was to invest \u20ac230 million (US$302 million, \u00a3155 million, CNY 2.34 billion) in the project over the following years.\nIn July 2004, Israel signed an agreement with the EU to become a partner in the Galileo project.\nOn 3 June 2005, the European Union and Ukraine signed an agreement for Ukraine to join the project, as noted in a press release. As of November 2005, Morocco also joined the programme.\nIn September 2005, India signed an agreement with the EU to join the project.\nIn mid-2006, the public\u2013private partnership fell apart and the European Commission decided to nationalise Galileo as an EU programme. In November 2006, China opted instead to upgrade BeiDou navigation system, its then-regional satellite navigation system. The decision was due to security concerns and issues with Galileo financing.\nOn 30 November 2007, the 27 member states of the European Union unanimously agreed to move forward with the project, with plans for bases in Germany and Italy. Spain did not approve during the initial vote, but approved it later that day. This greatly improved the viability of the Galileo project: \"The EU's executive had previously said that if agreement was not reached by January 2008, the long-troubled project would essentially be dead\".\nOn 3 April 2009, Norway too joined the programme pledging \u20ac68.9 million toward development costs and allowing its companies to bid for the construction contracts. Norway, while not a member of the EU, is a member of ESA.\nOn 18 December 2013, Switzerland signed a cooperation agreement to fully participate in the program, and retroactively contributed \u20ac80 million for the period 2008\u20132013. As a member of ESA, it already collaborated in the development of the Galileo satellites, contributing the hydrogen-maser clocks. Switzerland's financial commitment for the period 2014\u20132020 will be calculated in accordance with the standard formula applied for the Swiss participation in the EU research Framework Programme.\nIn March 2018, the European Commission announced that the United Kingdom may be excluded from parts of the project (especially relating to the secured service (PRS) following its exit from the European Union (EU). As a result, Airbus was to relocate work on the Ground Control Segment (GCS) from its Portsmouth premises to an EU state. British officials have been reported to be seeking legal advice on whether they can reclaim the \u20ac1.4 billion invested by the United Kingdom, of the \u20ac10 billion spent to date. In a speech at the EU Institute for Security Studies conference, the EU Chief Negotiator in charge of the Brexit negotiations, Michel Barnier, stressed the EU position that the UK had decided to leave the EU and thus all EU programmes, including Galileo. In August 2018, the UK stated that it would look into creating a competing satellite navigation system to Galileo post-Brexit. In December 2018, British Prime Minister Theresa May announced that the UK would no longer seek to reclaim the investment, and Science Minister Sam Gyimah resigned over the matter.\nSystem description.\nSpace segment.\nAs of 2012, the system was scheduled to have 15 satellites operational in 2015 and reach full operation in 2020 with the following specifications:\nGround segment.\nThe system's orbit and signal accuracy is controlled by a ground segment consisting of:\nSignals.\nThe system transmits three signals: E1 (1575.42\u00a0MHz), E5 (1191.795\u00a0MHz) consisting of E5a (1176.45\u00a0MHz) and E5b (1207.14\u00a0MHz), and E6 (1278.75\u00a0MHz):\nServices.\nThe Galileo system will have four main services:\nQuarterly Service Performance Reports.\nThe European GNSS Service Centre provides public quarterly performance reports regarding the Open Service and Search and Rescue Service since 2017. Generally, the reported performance parameters measurements surpass the target values.\nThe Galileo April, May, June 2021 Quarterly Open Service Performance Report by the European GNSS Service Centre reported the UTC Time Dissemination Service Accuracy was \u2264\u00a04.3 nanoseconds, computed by accumulating samples over the previous 12 months and exceeding the \u2264\u00a030 ns target value. The Signal In Space Error (SISE) was also well within the \u2264\u00a0 target value for Single and (more accurate) Dual Frequency receivers. The Galileo navigation message includes the differences between Galileo System Time (GST), UTC and GPS Time (GPST) (to promote interoperability).\nThe Galileo April, May, June 2021 Quarterly Search and Rescue Service Performance Report by the European GNSS Service Centre reported the various performance parameters measurements surpassed their target values.\nConcept.\nEach Galileo satellite has two master passive hydrogen maser atomic clocks and two secondary rubidium atomic clocks which are independent of one other. As precise and stable space-qualified atomic clocks are critical components to any satellite-navigation system, the employed quadruple redundancy keeps Galileo functioning when onboard atomic clocks fail in space. The onboard passive hydrogen maser clocks are four times more precise than the onboard rubidium atomic clocks, with an estimated drift of just 1 second every 3 million years. A timing error of just 1 nanosecond would correspond to a positional error of 30\u202fcm on Earth's surface. These clocks provide the accurate timing signals necessary for calculating signal travel time to the receiver. The Galileo satellites are configured to run one hydrogen maser clock in primary mode and a rubidium clock as hot backup. Under normal conditions, the operating hydrogen maser clock produces the reference frequency from which the navigation signal is generated. Should the hydrogen maser encounter any problem, an instantaneous switchover to the rubidium clock would be performed. In case of a failure of the primary hydrogen maser the secondary hydrogen maser could be activated by the ground segment to take over within a period of days as part of the redundant system. A clock monitoring and control unit provides the interface between the four clocks and the navigation signal generator unit (NSU). It passes the signal from the active hydrogen master clock to the NSU and also ensures that the frequencies produced by the master clock and the active spare are in phase, so that the spare can take over instantly should the master clock fail. The NSU information is used to calculate the position of the receiver by trilaterating the difference in received signals from multiple satellites.\nThe onboard passive hydrogen maser and rubidium clocks are very stable over a few hours. If they were left to run indefinitely, though, their timekeeping would drift, so they need to be synchronized regularly with a network of even more stable ground-based reference clocks. These include active hydrogen maser clocks and clocks based on the caesium frequency standard, which show a far better medium and long-term stability than rubidium or passive hydrogen maser clocks. These clocks on the ground are gathered together within the parallel functioning Precise Timing Facilities in the Fucino and Oberpfaffenhofen Galileo Control Centres. The ground based clocks also generate a worldwide time reference called Galileo System Time (GST), the standard for the Galileo system and are routinely compared to the local realisations of UTC, the UTC(k) of the European frequency and time laboratories.\nFor more information of the concept of global satellite navigation systems, see GNSS and GNSS positioning calculation.\nEuropean GNSS Service Centre.\nThe European GNSS Service Centre (GSC), located in Madrid, is an integral part of Galileo and provides the single interface between the Galileo system and Galileo users. GSC publishes Galileo official documentation, promotes Galileo current and future services worldwide, supports standardisation and distributes Galileo almanacs, ephemeris and metadata.\nThe GSC User Helpdesk is the point of contact for Galileo user's assistance.\u00a0GSC answers queries and gathers incident notifications from users on Galileo. The helpdesk is continuously available for all worldwide Galileo users through the GSC web portal.\nGSC provides updated Galileo constellation status and informs on planned and unplanned events through Notice Advisory to Galileo Users (NAGU). GSC publishes Galileo reference documentation and general information on Galileo services and signals description and Galileo performance reports.\nSearch and rescue.\nGalileo provides a global search and rescue (SAR) function as part of the MEOSAR system. Like Russia's Glonass, the United States' Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites, and some Chinese BeiDou satellites, Galileo satellites are equipped with a transponder which relays 406\u00a0MHz distress frequency signals from emergency beacons by a Forward Link Service (FLS) to the Rescue coordination centre, which will then initiate a rescue operation.\nAfter receipt of an emergency beacon signal, the Galileo SAR system provides a signal, the Return Link Message (RLM), \"to\" the emergency beacon, informing the person(s) in distress that the activated beacon has been detected and help is on the way. This return message feature is new in a satellite constellation and is considered a major upgrade compared to the existing Cospas-Sarsat system, which up to then did not provide feedback to the user. Tests in February 2014 found that for Galileo's search and rescue function, operating as part of the existing International Cospas-Sarsat Programme, 77% of simulated distress locations can be pinpointed within , and 95% within .\nThe Galileo Return Link Service (RLS) went live in January 2020 for all RLS capable emergency beacons.\nConstellation.\nGalileo satellite test beds: GIOVE.\nIn 2004, the Galileo System Test Bed Version 1 (GSTB-V1) project validated the on-ground algorithms for Orbit Determination and Time Synchronisation (OD&amp;TS). This project, led by ESA and European Satellite Navigation Industries, has provided industry with fundamental knowledge to develop the mission segment of the Galileo positioning system.\nA third satellite, GIOVE-A2, was originally planned to be built by SSTL for launch in the second half of 2008. Construction of GIOVE-A2 was terminated due to the successful launch and in-orbit operation of GIOVE-B.\nThe GIOVE Mission segment operated by European Satellite Navigation Industries used the GIOVE-A/B satellites to provide experimental results based on real data to be used for risk mitigation for the IOV satellites that followed on from the testbeds. ESA organised the global network of ground stations to collect the measurements of GIOVE-A/B with the use of the GETR receivers for further systematic study. GETR receivers are supplied by Septentrio as well as the first Galileo navigation receivers to be used to test the functioning of the system at further stages of its deployment. Signal analysis of GIOVE-A/B data confirmed successful operation of all the Galileo signals with the tracking performance as expected.\nIn-Orbit Validation (IOV) satellites.\nThese testbed satellites were followed by four IOV Galileo satellites that are much closer to the final Galileo satellite design. The search and rescue (SAR) feature is also installed. The first two satellites were launched on 21 October 2011 from Centre Spatial Guyanais using a Soyuz launcher, the other two on 12 October 2012. This enables key validation tests, since earth-based receivers such as those in cars and phones need to \"see\" a minimum of four satellites in order to calculate their position in three dimensions. Those 4 IOV Galileo satellites were constructed by Astrium GmbH and Thales Alenia Space. On 12 March 2013, a first fix was performed using those four IOV satellites. Once this In-Orbit Validation (IOV) phase has been completed, the remaining satellites will be installed to reach the Full Operational Capability.\nFull Operational Capability (FOC) satellites.\nFOC Batch 1.\nOn 7 January 2010, it was announced that the contract to build the first 14 FOC satellites was awarded to OHB System and for the navigation payload to Surrey Satellite Technology Limited (SSTL). The first batch of Galileo First Generation satellites known as \"Batch-1\" consists of the Galileo-FOC FM1 to Galileo-FOC FM14 satellites.\nFourteen satellites were built at a cost of \u20ac566 million (\u00a3510 million; US$811 million). Arianespace will launch the satellites for a cost of \u20ac397 million (\u00a3358 million; US$569 million). The European Commission also announced that the \u20ac85 million contract for system support covering industrial services required by ESA for integration and validation of the Galileo system had been awarded to Thales Alenia Space. Thales Alenia Space subcontract performances to Astrium GmbH and security to Thales Communications.\nFOC Batch 2.\nIn February 2012, an additional order of 8 FOC satellites was awarded to OHB Systems for \u20ac250 million (US$327 million), after outbidding EADS Astrium tender offer. The second batch of Galileo First Generation satellites known as \"Batch-2\" consists of the Galileo-FOC FM15 to Galileo-FOC FM22 satellites. Thus bringing the total to 22 FOC satellites. The satellites were built by OHB, with the contribution of Surrey Satellite Technology (SSTL).\nFOC Batch 3.\nIn June and October 2017, two additional orders for 8 and 4 FOC satellites were awarded to OHB Systems for \u20ac324 million and \u20ac157.75 million. This third and final batch of Galileo First Generation satellites known as \"Batch-3\" consists of the Galileo-FOC FM23 to Galileo-FOC FM34 satellites. The satellites are being built by OHB in Bremen, Germany, with the contribution of Surrey Satellite Technology (SSTL) in Guildford, United Kingdom. When completed Batch-3 brings the total to 34 FOC satellites.\nFOC launches.\nOn 7 May 2014, the first two FOC satellites landed in Guyana for their joint launch planned in summer. Originally planned for launch during 2013, problems tooling and establishing the production line for assembly led to a delay of a year in serial production of Galileo satellites. These two satellites (Galileo satellites GSAT-201 and GSAT-202) were launched on 22 August 2014. The names of these satellites are Doresa and Milena named after European children who had previously won a drawing contest. On 23 August 2014, launch service provider Arianespace announced that the flight VS09 experienced an anomaly and the satellites were injected into an incorrect orbit. They ended up in elliptical orbits and thus could not be used for navigation. However, it was later possible to use them to perform a physics experiment, so they were not a complete loss.\nOn 15 December 2016, Galileo started offering Initial Operational Capability (IOC). The services currently offered are Open Service, Public Regulated Service and Search and Rescue Service.\nSecond generation (G2G) satellites.\nDuring 2014, ESA and its industry partners began studies on Galileo Second Generation (G2G) satellites, which were to be presented to the EC for the late 2020s launch period. One idea was to employ electric propulsion, which would eliminate the need for an upper stage during launch and allow satellites from a single batch to be inserted into more than one orbital plane.\nOn 20 January 2021, the European Commission announced that it had awarded a \u20ac1.47 billion contract to Thales Alenia Space (TAS) and Airbus Defence and Space for six spacecraft by each manufacturer. The signing of the contracts to Thales Alenia Space and Airbus Defence and Space, scheduled on 29 January 2021, was suspended by the European Court of Justice following a protest filed by OHB SE, the losing bidder. The OHB protest at the ECJ's General Court is based on \"allegations of theft of trade secrets\", and seeks both a suspension of the contract signatures and the cancellation of the contract award. In May 2021 ESA reported it signed the contracts to design and build the first batch of Galileo Second Generation (G2G) satellites with Thales Alenia Space and Airbus Defence and Space.\nThe twelve G2G satellites will feature a fully digital navigational payload, electric propulsion, enhanced navigation signals and capabilities, inter-satellite links and reconfigurability in space. The number of atomic clocks will increase from four to six. The satellites' increase in payloads will result in a mass of approximately 2300 kg. The design life is extended from twelve to fifteen years.\nApplications and impact.\nScience projects using Galileo.\nIn July 2006, an international consortium of universities and research institutions embarked on a study of potential scientific applications of the Galileo constellation. This project, named GEO6, is a broad study oriented to the general scientific community, aiming to define and implement new applications of Galileo.\nAmong the various GNSS users identified by the Galileo Joint Undertaking, the GEO6, project addresses the Scientific User Community (UC). The GEO6 project aims at fostering possible novel applications within the scientific UC of GNSS signals, and particularly of Galileo.\nThe AGILE project is an EU-funded project devoted to the study of the technical and commercial aspects of location-based services (LBS). It includes technical analysis of the benefits brought by Galileo (and EGNOS) and studies the hybridisation of Galileo with other positioning technologies (network-based, WLAN, etc.). Within these projects, some pilot prototypes were implemented and demonstrated.\nOn the basis of the potential number of users, potential revenues for Galileo Operating Company or Concessionaire (GOC), international relevance, and level of innovation, a set of Priority Applications (PA) will be selected by the consortium and developed within the time-frame of the same project.\nThese applications will help to increase and optimise the use of the EGNOS services and the opportunities offered by the Galileo Signal Test-Bed (GSTB-V2) and the Galileo (IOV) phase.\nAll Galileo satellites are equipped with laser retroreflector arrays which allow them to be tracked by the stations of the International Laser Ranging Service. Satellite laser ranging to Galileo satellites are used for the validation of satellite orbits, determination of Earth rotation parameters and for the combined solutions incorporating laser and microwave observations.\nReceivers.\nAll major GNSS receiver chips support Galileo and hundreds of end-user devices are compatible with Galileo. The first, dual-frequency-GNSS-capable Android devices, which track more than one radio signal from each satellite, E1 and E5a frequencies for Galileo, were the Huawei Mate 20 line, Xiaomi Mi 8, Xiaomi Mi 9 and Xiaomi Mi MIX 3. As of July 2019[ [update]], there were more than 140 Galileo-enabled smartphones on the market of which 9 were dual-frequency enabled. An extensive list of enabled devices, for various uses, on land, sea and in air is frequently updated at the EU website. On 24 December 2018, the European Commission passed a mandate for all new smartphones to implement Galileo for E112 support.\nEffective from 1 April 2018, all new vehicles sold in Europe must support eCall, an automatic emergency response system that dials 112 and transmits Galileo location data in the event of an accident.\nUntil late 2018, Galileo was not authorized for use in the United States and, as a consequence, only variably worked on devices that could receive Galileo signals within United States territory. The Federal Communications Commission's (FCC) position on the matter was that non-GPS radio navigation satellite systems (RNSS) receivers must be granted a licence to receive said signals. A waiver of this requirement for Galileo was requested by the EU and submitted in 2015, and on 6 January 2017, public comment on the matter was requested. On 15 November 2018, the FCC granted the requested waiver, explicitly allowing non-federal consumer devices to access Galileo E1 and E5 frequencies. However, most devices, including smartphones, still require operating system updates or similar updates to allow the use of Galileo signals within the United States (most smartphones since the Apple iPhone 6S and Samsung Galaxy S7 have the hardware capability, and simply require a software modification).\nCoins.\nThe European Satellite Navigation project was selected as the main motif of a very high-value collectors' coin: the Austrian European Satellite Navigation commemorative coin, minted on 1 March 2006. The coin has a silver ring and gold-brown niobium \"pill\". In the reverse, the niobium portion depicts navigation satellites orbiting the Earth. The ring shows different modes of transport, for which satellite navigation was developed: an aircraft, a car, a lorry, a train and a container ship.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13010", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13010", "title": "Gavrilo Princip", "text": "Assassin of Archduke Franz Ferdinand (1894\u20131918)\nGavrilo Princip (, ; 25 July 1894\u00a0\u2013 28 April 1918) was a Bosnian Serb student who assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir presumptive to the throne of Austria-Hungary, and his wife Sophie, Duchess von Hohenberg, in Sarajevo on 28 June 1914. The assassination set off the July Crisis, a series of events that within one month led to the outbreak of World War I.\nPrincip was born in western Bosnia to a poor Serb family. Aged 13, he was sent to Sarajevo, the capital of Austrian-occupied Bosnia, to study at the Merchants' School. He later transferred to the gymnasium, where he became politically aware. In 1911, he joined Young Bosnia, a secret local society aiming to free Bosnia from Austrian rule and achieve the unification of the South Slavs. After attending anti-Austrian demonstrations in Sarajevo, he was expelled from school and walked to Belgrade, Serbia, to continue his education. During the First Balkan War, Princip traveled to Southern Serbia to volunteer with the Serbian army's irregular forces fighting against the Ottoman Empire but was rejected for being too small and weak. He also suffered from tuberculosis which was untreatable at the time and might have played a role in his motivation for the assassination.\nIn 1913, following the unexpected success of the Serbians in the war against the Ottomans, the Austrian military governor of Bosnia, Oskar Potiorek, declared a state of emergency, dissolved the parliament, imposed martial rule, and banned Serbian public, cultural, and educational societies. Inspired by assassination attempts against Imperial officials by Slavic nationalists and anarchists, Princip persuaded two other young Bosnians to join a plot to assassinate the heir to the Habsburg Empire during his announced visit to Sarajevo. The Black Hand, a Serbian secret society with ties to Serbian military intelligence, provided the conspirators with weapons and training before facilitating their re-entry into Bosnia.\nOn Sunday 28 June 1914, during the royal couple's visit to Sarajevo, the then-teenager Princip mortally wounded Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie, Duchess von Hohenberg, by firing a pistol into their convertible car. Princip was arrested immediately by Austro-Hungarian authorities and tried alongside 24 others, all Bosnians and thus Austro-Hungarian subjects. At his trial, Princip stated: \"I am a Yugoslav nationalist, aiming for the unification of all Yugoslavs, and I do not care what form of state, but it must be free from Austria.\" Princip was spared the death penalty because of his age (19) and sentenced to twenty years in prison. He was imprisoned at the Terez\u00edn fortress. The Serbian government itself did not inspire the assassination but the Austrian Foreign Office and Army used the murders as a reason for a preventive war which led directly to World War I.\nPrincip died on 28 April 1918 of tuberculosis, worsened by harsh prison conditions, that had already led to the amputation of his right arm. His legacy is viewed as controversial; many Serbs regard him as a hero who stood against colonial oppression and slavery, while Bosniaks and Croats frequently view him as a terrorist.\nEarly life.\nGavrilo Princip was born on 25 July\u00a0[O.S. 13 July]\u00a01894, in the remote hamlet of Obljaj, near Bosansko Grahovo, in western Bosnia. Bosnia was administered by Austria-Hungary, while still formally a province of the Ottoman Empire. He was the second of his parents' nine children, six of whom died in infancy. Princip's mother Marija wanted to name him after her late brother, \u0160piro, but he was named Gavrilo at the insistence of a local Eastern Orthodox priest, who claimed naming the sickly infant after the Archangel Gabriel would help him survive.\nA Serb family, the Princips had lived in northwestern Bosnia for centuries. Their ancestors came from Grahovo, Nik\u0161i\u0107 in Montenegro, emigrating in the early 1700s, they belonged to the Jovi\u0107evi\u0107 clan, and adhered to the Serbian Orthodox Christian faith. Princip's parents, Petar and Marija (n\u00e9e Mi\u0107i\u0107), were poor farmers who lived off the meager land they owned. They were part of a class of Christian peasants known to the Ottomans as \"kmetovi\" (serfs), and were often oppressed by their Muslim landlords. Petar, who insisted on \"strict correctness\", never drank or swore and was mocked by his neighbours as a result. In his youth, he fought in the Herzegovina Uprising against the Ottomans. After the revolt, he resumed farming in the Grahovo valley, cultivating around of land and was forced to give a third of his income to his landlord. To supplement his income and sustain his family, he resorted to transporting mail and passengers across the mountains connecting northwestern Bosnia and Dalmatia.\nDespite his father's initial objections, as he needed a shepherd to tend his sheep, Princip commenced primary school in 1903, at the age of nine. Despite facing challenges in his first year, he excelled in his studies, eventually receiving a collection of Serbian epic poetry from his headmaster in recognition of his academic success. At thirteen, Princip moved to Sarajevo, where his elder brother Jovan initially intended to enroll him at Sarajevo's Austro-Hungarian Military Academy. By the time Princip reached Sarajevo, Jovan had changed his mind following advice from a shopkeeper, who cautioned against sending his younger brother to become \"an executioner of his own people.\" Instead, Princip was admitted to the Merchants' School, with Jovan financing his education through earnings from manual labor, such as transporting logs from the surrounding forests to mills in the city. After three years, Princip transferred to secondary school, the Sarajevo Gymnasium.\nJoining Young Bosnia.\nFollowing the annexation of the region by the Austro-Hungarian empire in 1908, Bosnia, like the other southern Slavic states under imperial rule, yearned for independence. As a result, various student groups emerged interested in movements such as romantic nationalism, nihilism, or anti imperialism. While at school and through his roommate Danilo Ili\u0107, Princip was also exposed to socialist, anarchist, and communist writing. Princip started to associate with like-minded young nationalist revolutionaries and came to admire Bogdan \u017deraji\u0107, a Bosnian Serb who had attempted to assassinate the Austro-Hungarian Governor of Bosnia and Herzegovina, before taking his own life. \u017deraji\u0107, who was from Herzegovina like Princip, came to epitomize, in the eyes of many, the ideal of self sacrifice. On the anniversary of his death, Serb youths from Sarajevo started to visit his grave to lay flowers. According to Luigi Albertini, this is where, after spending nights reflecting at the grave, that Princip resolved to participate in his own attack. In 1911, Princip graduated from the fourth grade and joined Young Bosnia (), a society with members from all three major Bosnian ethnic groups, that sought the liberation of Bosnia from Austro-Hungarian rule and the unification of all Southern Slavs in a common nation. Some believed that the newly independent Kingdom of Serbia, as the free part of the south Slavs, was obligated to help unify the southern Slavic peoples. Because the local authorities had forbidden students to form organisations and clubs, Princip and other members of Young Bosnia met in secret. During their meetings, they discussed literature, ethics and politics.\nOn 18 February 1912, Princip took part in a demonstration against the Habsburg authority in Sarajevo, organised by Luka Juki\u0107, a Croat student from Bosnia. The demonstrators burned a Hungarian flag and many were injured and arrested by the police. During the scuffle Princip was hit with a sabre and his clothes were torn. The following day the students declared a general strike, and for the first time in Bosnian history, Croats, Serbs and Muslims took part together. A student present that day claimed that \"Princip went from class to class, threatening with his knuckle-duster all the boys who wavered in coming to the new demonstrations.\" As a result of his conduct and his involvement in the demonstrations against Austro-Hungarian authorities, Princip was expelled from school and in the spring of 1912 decided to go to Belgrade, making the 280-kilometre (170\u00a0mi) journey on foot. According to one account, he fell to his knees and kissed the ground upon crossing the border into Serbia. Having left Sarajevo without telling his brother, Princip lived without money and in difficult conditions alongside other Bosnian students. In June 1912, he went to the First Belgrade Gymnasium to take the fifth grade exam which he failed.\nWhen war broke out between the Balkan states and Turkey in October 1912, Princip went to a recruitment office in Belgrade to volunteer his service with the , the irregular Serbian units. Upon being rejected because of his small build, he traveled to a different recruitment office this time in Prokuplje, north of the Turkish frontier in southern Serbia. After taking one look at him, Major Vojislav Tankosi\u0107, the commander of all Komite units, rejected him for being too small and looking too weak. Humiliated, Princip returned first briefly to Belgrade then back to the village of Had\u017ei\u0107i. According to Vladimir Dedijer, his failure to be accepted in the army on the account that he looked weak, was one of the primary motives which pushed Princip to do something exceptionally brave. In the South Slav lands, the unexpected success of the Serbian army resulted in numerous celebrations and demonstrations of support. In reaction on 2 May 1913, while Princip was in Sarajevo, the Austro-Hungarian Governor of Bosnia and Herzegovina General Potiorek declared a state of emergency, suspended the 1910 constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, implemented martial law, seized control of all schools, and prohibited all Serb public, cultural, and educational societies.\nIn the summer of 1913 Princip passed the fifth and sixth grades of high school, then in early 1914 he left Sarajevo for Belgrade, stopping briefly in his village to see his parents. While in Belgrade preparing for his sixth-class examinations in the First Belgrade High School, Princip was shown by his friend Nedeljko \u010cabrinovi\u0107 a newspaper cutting announcing Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria's visit to Bosnia in June. Princip decided to lead a group of assassins back to Bosnia and attack the Archduke during his official visit to Sarajevo. He convinced \u010cabrinovi\u0107 and his old schoolfriend Trifko Grabe\u017e to join the plot. They also talked about killing Oskar Potiorek, the provincial governor, as a means of protest against the emergency r\u00e9gime. To find weapons, Princip asked his Bosnian Muslim friend, Djulaga Bukovac, a veteran of the Balkan wars. Bukovac introduced them to Milan Ciganovi\u0107, another Bosnian expatriate who had fought under Major Tankosi\u0107 during the Second Balkan War. Ciganovi\u0107 was also a freemason and an associate of the Black Hand, the secretive, ultra-nationalist Serbian group responsible for the regicide of 1903. Ciganovi\u0107 then approached Tankosi\u0107, another Black Hand member of Bosnian descent, from whom he obtained the weapons. \nOn 27 May 1914, Ciganovi\u0107 supplied the three young Bosnians with five Browning pistols, six grenades, and several vials of poison. Ciganovi\u0107 took the would-be assassins to Top\u010dider forest, just outside the centre of Belgrade, training them on how to use the weapons. Princip proved to be the best marksman. The three-man assassination team left Belgrade on 28 May 1914, taking a river boat that took them to \u0160abac, they then split up crossing separately the border into Bosnia. Each of them was carrying two bombs tied around their waist as well as pistols, ammunition and a bottle of cyanide in their pockets. Before leaving Serbia, Princip wrote to his former roommate in Sarajevo Danilo Ili\u0107, to notify him of his assassination plan and to ask him to recruit more people. Ili\u0107 recruited Muhamed Mehmedba\u0161i\u0107, a Bosnian Muslim carpenter, Cvetko Popovi\u0107, and Vaso \u010cubrilovi\u0107, both Bosnian Serb students aged eighteen and seventeen.\nAssassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand.\nArchduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, Duchess Sophie Chotek, arrived in Sarajevo by train shortly before 10 a.m. on 28 June 1914. Their car was the third in a six-car motorcade heading towards Sarajevo Town Hall.\nPrincip and five other conspirators were positioned along the route, spaced out along the Appel Quay, each instructed to assassinate the Archduke when the royal car reached their position. The first, Muhamed Mehmedba\u0161i\u0107, stood near the Austro-Hungarian Bank but lost his nerve and allowed the car to pass without acting. At 10:15\u00a0am, as the motorcade passed the central police station, 19-year-old student Nedeljko \u010cabrinovi\u0107 hurled a grenade at the Archduke's car. The driver accelerated upon seeing the grenade, which had a 10-second delay, and the bomb exploded under the fourth car, seriously wounding two occupants. Following this failed attempt, the motorcade sped away, and the remaining conspirators, including Princip, were unable to act due to the speed of the vehicles.\nAfter delivering his scheduled speech at the Town Hall, the Archduke decided to visit the victims of \u010cabrinovi\u0107's grenade attack at the Sarajevo Hospital. To avoid the city centre, General Oskar Potiorek directed the royal car to travel straight along the Appel Quay to the hospital. However, Potiorek failed to inform the driver, Leopold Lojka, a Czech, about this change. On the way to the hospital, Lojka, following the original plan, turned onto a side street where Princip happened to be standing in front of a delicatessen. After Potiorek shouted at him to stop, Lojka halted the car and began reversing. As he did so, the engine stalled, and the gears locked. Princip stepped forward, drew an FN Model 1910 semi-automatic pistol, and fired twice at close range into the car. The first bullet struck the Archduke in the neck, while the second hit the Duchess in the abdomen. Both died shortly afterward.\nOn 13 July 1914, Austro-Hungarian official Friedrich Wiesner submitted a report concluding that there was no evidence to implicate the Serbian government in the conspiracy behind the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife in Sarajevo. This assessment, communicated to Vienna, confirmed that the Serbian state had not been involved in the plot. Despite this, the Austro-Hungarian government, perceiving Serbia's nationalist ambitions as a direct threat to the stability of its multi-ethnic empire, seized upon the assassination as a pretext for action against Serbia. \nThis pivotal event set off the July Crisis, a rapid sequence of diplomatic and military escalations among Europe's great powers. Tensions reached a breaking point on 28 July 1914, when Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia. Within days, the conflict expanded as Germany, France, Russia, and Great Britain issued their own declarations of war, plunging Europe into the First World War. Samuel Williamson, a preeminent authority on Austria-Hungary and its role in the lead-up to the war, asserts that Vienna's unwavering determination to exploit the assassination to subjugate Serbia and assert dominance over the Balkans was the principal driving force behind the outbreak of the global conflict.\nArrest and trial.\nBefore Princip could fire for a third time, the pistol was wrested from his hand and he was pushed to the ground. He managed to swallow a capsule of cyanide, which failed to kill him. The trial opened on 12 October and lasted until 23 October 1914. Princip and twenty-four people were indicted. All six assassins, except Mehmedba\u0161i\u0107, were under twenty at the time of the assassination. While the group was dominated by Bosnian Serbs, four of the indicted were Bosnian Croats and all of them were Austro-Hungarian citizens, none being from Serbia. The state's attorney charged twenty-two of the accused with high treason and murder and three with complicity in the murder. Princip stated that he regretted the killing of the Duchess and meant to kill Potiorek, but was nonetheless proud of what he had done. The Austrian police investigators were eager to emphasise the exclusively Serbian nature of the assassination plot for political reasons, but during his trial Princip insisted that, even though he was an ethnic Serb, his commitment was to freeing all south Slavs. All the chief conspirators mentioned the revolutionary destruction of Austria-Hungary and the liberation of the South Slavs as the motivation behind their act.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am a Yugoslav nationalist, aiming for the unification of all Yugoslavs, and I do not care what form of state, but it must be free from Austria... The plan was to unite all South Slavs. It was understood that Serbia as the free part of the South Slavs had the moral duty to help in the unification, to be to the South Slavs as the Piedmont was to Italy... In my opinion every Serb, Croat and Slovene should be an enemy of Austria.\u2014\u200a\nThe Austro-Hungarian authorities tried to hide the fact that the conspirators included Croats and Bosniaks, going as far as changing the name of one of them in the press reports, to portray the entire scheme as being of Serbian origin and carried out only by Serbs. Since it provided the weapons to the assassins and helped them cross the border, the Black Hand was implicated in the assassination. This did not prove that the Serbian government knew about the assassination, let alone approved of it, but was enough for Austria-Hungary to issue a d\u00e9marche to Serbia known as the July Ultimatum, which led up to the outbreak of World War I. According to David Fromkin what the killings gave Vienna was not a reason, but an excuse, for destroying Serbia.\nPrincip was nineteen years old at the time and too young to be executed, as he was twenty-seven days shy of the twenty-year minimum age limit required by Habsburg law. On Thursday 28 October 1914 the court found Princip guilty of murder and high treason, he received the maximum sentence of twenty years in prison, he was to serve out his sentence in a military prison within the Habsburg fortress of Theresienstadt in northern Bohemia (now in the Czech Republic).\nImprisonment and death.\nPrincip was chained to a wall and held in solitary confinement at the Small Fortress in Theresienstadt (present-day Terez\u00edn, Czech Republic), where his tuberculosis worsened. The disease, aggravated by the harsh conditions of his imprisonment, ultimately led to the amputation of his right arm. \nFrom February to June 1916, Princip was interviewed four times by , a psychiatrist in the Austro-Hungarian army. According to Pappenheim, Princip stated that the First World War would have occurred even without the Sarajevo assassination, and that he \"cannot feel himself responsible for the catastrophe\". \nPrincip died on 28 April 1918, nearly four years after the assassination. At the time of his death, weakened by tuberculosis and prolonged malnutrition, he weighed only about .\nLegacy.\nLong after his death, Princip's legacy is still disputed, and he remains a historically significant but polarising figure. For the Habsburg monarchy and its supporters, he was a murderous terrorist; the Kingdom of Yugoslavia portrayed him as a Yugoslav hero; during World War II, Nazis and Croatian fascist Usta\u0161e viewed him as a degenerate criminal and a left-wing anarchist; and for socialist Yugoslavia, he represented a youthful hero of armed resistance, a freedom fighter who fought to liberate all the peoples of Yugoslavia from Imperial rule, fighting for the workers and the oppressed. In 1920, Princip and the other conspirators were exhumed and brought to Sarajevo, where they were buried together beneath the Vidovdan Heroes Chapel. In the 1990s, Princip started to be seen by some as a Serbian nationalist acting for the creation of a Greater Serbia. Political movements and regimes have either praised or demonized him to promote their ideology.\nToday he is still celebrated as a hero by numerous Serbs and regarded as a terrorist by many Croats and Bosniaks. Asim Sarajli\u0107, a senior MP of the Bosniak nationalist Party of Democratic Action, stated in 2014 that Princip brought an end to \"a golden era of history under Austrian rule\" and that \"we are strongly against the mythology of Princip as a fighter of freedom\". Many of Bosnia's Serbs continue to venerate his memory: Nenad Samard\u017eija, the Serb governor of East Sarajevo, said in 2014 that \"we once all lived in one state (Yugoslavia), and we never looked on it as any kind of terrorist act\" but \"a movement of young people who wanted to liberate themselves from colonial slavery\".\nMemorials and commemoration.\nThe house where Princip lived in Sarajevo was destroyed during World War I. After the war, it was rebuilt as a museum in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was conquered by Germany in 1941 and Sarajevo became part of the Independent State of Croatia. The Croatian Usta\u0161e destroyed the house again. After the establishment of Communist Yugoslavia in 1944, the house was rebuilt, became a museum again, and there was another museum dedicated to him within the city of Sarajevo. During the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s, the house was destroyed again and then rebuilt for the third time in 2015.\nPrincip's pistol was confiscated by the authorities and eventually given, along with the Archduke's blood-stained undershirt, to Anton Puntigam, a Jesuit priest who was a close friend of the Archduke and had given the Archduke and his wife their last rites. The pistol and shirt remained in the possession of the Austrian Jesuits until they were offered on long-term loan to the Museum of Military History in Vienna in 2004. It is now part of the permanent exhibition there. During the Yugoslavian era, Latin Bridge, the site of the assassination, was renamed \"Princip's Bridge\" in remembrance; it reverted to its old name in 1992. In Sarajevo about a half-dozen memorials to Gavrilo Princip have been erected on the site and torn down with each change in power.\nIn 1917, a pillar was constructed at the corner of where the assassination took place. It was destroyed the following year. In 1941, the 1930 plaque commemorating Princip was removed by the local Germans when the German Army invaded. It was presented to Adolf Hitler as a birthday gift and kept in a museum, only to be lost after 1945. After World War II, a new plaque went up which claimed that \"Gavrilo Princip threw off the German occupiers\". During the Bosnian War, embossed footprints marking where Princip fired the fatal shots were torn out.\nAs the centenary of the assassination neared, an apolitical plaque was put up at the corner where the assassination took place, which states: \"From this place on 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sofia.\" On 21 April 2014, a bust of Princip was unveiled in Tovari\u0161evo, and on the centenary itself, a statue was erected in East Sarajevo. A year later, a statue of Princip was unveiled in Belgrade by President of Serbia Tomislav Nikoli\u0107 and the President of Republika Srpska Milorad Dodik, as a gift from Republika Srpska to Serbia. At the unveiling Nikoli\u0107 gave a speech, saying in part: \"Princip was a hero, a symbol of liberation ideas, tyrant-killer, idea-holder of liberation from slavery, which spanned through Europe\".\nOn 11 November 2018, the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I, Princess Anita of Hohenberg, the eldest great-grandchild of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, and Branislav Princip, grandnephew of Gavrilo Princip, shook hands in a symbolic act of reconciliation in Graz, Austria.\nPortrayals.\nFilm.\nIn the German drama film \"1914\" (1931), Carl Balhaus played Gavrilo Princip. Irfan Mensur played Princip in \"The Day That Shook the World\" (1975), based on the assassination. In the Austrian biopic \"Death of a Schoolboy\" (1990, original German title \"Gavre Princip \u2013 Himmel unter Steinen\") by Peter Patzak about Princip's life, he was portrayed by British actor and director Reuben Pillsbury. He is portrayed by Eugen Knecht in \"Sarajevo\" (2014), a German-Austrian television film based on the assassination, and by Joel Basman in \"The King's Man\" (2021), the third film in the Kingsman fiction film series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13011", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13011", "title": "Greenwich Village", "text": "Neighborhood in New York City\nGreenwich Village, or simply the Village, is a neighborhood on the west side of Lower Manhattan in New York City, bounded by 14th Street to the north, Broadway to the east, Houston Street to the south, and the Hudson River to the west. Greenwich Village also contains several subsections, including the West Village west of Seventh Avenue and the Meatpacking District in the northwest corner of Greenwich Village.\nIts name comes from \"Groenwijck\", Dutch for \"Green District\". In the 20th century, Greenwich Village was known as an artists' haven, the bohemian capital, the cradle of the modern LGBTQ movement, and the East Coast birthplace of both the Beat Generation and counterculture of the 1960s. Greenwich Village contains Washington Square Park, as well as two of New York City's private colleges, New York University (NYU) and The New School. In later years it has been associated with hipsters.\nGreenwich Village is part of Manhattan Community District 2, and is patrolled by the 6th Precinct of the New York City Police Department. Greenwich Village has undergone extensive gentrification and commercialization; the four ZIP Codes that constitute the Village \u2013 10011, 10012, 10003, and 10014 \u2013 were all ranked among the ten most expensive in the United States by median housing prices in 2014, according to \"Forbes\", with residential property sale prices in the West Village neighborhood typically exceeding US in 2017.\nGeography.\nBoundaries.\nThe neighborhood is bordered by Broadway to the east, the North River (part of the Hudson River) to the west, Houston Street to the south, and 14th Street to the north. It is roughly centered on Washington Square Park and New York University. Adjacent to Greenwich Village are the neighborhoods of NoHo and the East Village to the east, SoHo and Hudson Square to the south, and Chelsea and Union Square to the north. The East Village was formerly considered part of the Lower East Side and has never been considered a part of Greenwich Village. The western part of Greenwich Village is known as the West Village; the dividing line of its eastern border is debated but commonly cited as Seventh Avenue or Sixth Avenue. The Far West Village is another sub-neighborhood of Greenwich Village that is bordered on its west by the Hudson River and on its east by Hudson Street.\nInto the early 20th century, Greenwich Village was distinguished from the upper-class neighborhood of Washington Square\u2014based on the major landmark of Washington Square Park or Empire Ward in the 19th century.\n\"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\"'s 1956 article on \"New York (City)\" states (under the subheading \"Greenwich Village\") that the southern border of the Village is Spring Street, reflecting an earlier understanding. Today, Spring Street overlaps with the modern, newer SoHo neighborhood designation, while the modern \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" cites the southern border as Houston Street.\nGrid plan.\nAs Greenwich Village was once a rural, isolated hamlet to the north of the 17th century European settlement on Manhattan Island, its street layout is more organic than the planned grid pattern of the 19th century grid plan (based on the Commissioners' Plan of 1811). Greenwich Village was allowed to keep the 18th century street pattern of what is now called the West Village: areas that were already built up when the plan was implemented, west of what is now Greenwich Avenue and Sixth Avenue, resulted in a neighborhood whose streets are dramatically different, in layout, from the ordered structure of the newer parts of Manhattan.\nMany of the neighborhood's streets are narrow and some curve at odd angles. This is generally regarded as adding to both the historic character and charm of the neighborhood. In addition, as the meandering Greenwich Street used to be on the Hudson River shoreline, much of the neighborhood west of Greenwich Street is on landfill, but still follows the older street grid. When Sixth and Seventh Avenues were extended in the early 20th century, they were built diagonally to the existing street plan, and many older, smaller streets had to be demolished.\nUnlike the streets of most of Manhattan above Houston Street, streets in the Village are typically named, not numbered. While some of the formerly named streets (including Factory, Herring and Amity Streets) are now numbered, they still do not always conform to the usual grid pattern when they enter the neighborhood. For example, West 4th Street runs east\u2013west across most of Manhattan, but runs north\u2013south in Greenwich Village, causing it to intersect with West 10th, 11th, and 12th Streets before ending at West 13th Street.\nA large section of Greenwich Village, made up of more than 50 northern and western blocks in the area up to 14th Street, is part of a Historic District established by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. The District's convoluted borders run no farther south than 4th Street or St. Luke's Place, and no farther east than Washington Square East or University Place. Redevelopment in that area is severely restricted, and developers must preserve the main fa\u00e7ade and aesthetics of the buildings during renovation.\nMost of the buildings of Greenwich Village are mid-rise apartments, 19th century row houses, and the occasional one-family walk-up, a sharp contrast to the high-rise landscape in Midtown and Downtown Manhattan.\nPolitical representation.\nPolitically, Greenwich Village is in New York's 10th congressional district. It is also in the New York State Senate's 25th district, the New York State Assembly's 66th district, and the New York City Council's 3rd district.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nIn the 16th century, Lenape referred to its farthest northwest corner, by the cove on the Hudson River at present-day Gansevoort Street, as Sapokanikan (\"tobacco field\"). The land was cleared and turned into pasture by the Dutch and their enslaved Africans, who named their settlement (also spelled , \"North district\", equivalent to 'Northwich/Northwick'). In the 1630s, Governor Wouter van Twiller farmed tobacco on here at his \"Farm in the Woods\". The English conquered the Dutch settlement of New Netherland in 1664, and Greenwich Village developed as a hamlet separate from the larger New York City to the south on land that would eventually become the Financial District. In 1644, the eleven Dutch African settlers in the area were granted half freedoms after the first Black legal protest in America. All received parcels of land in what is now Greenwich Village, in an area that became known as the Land of the Blacks.\nThe earliest known reference to the village's name as \"Greenwich\" dates back to 1696, in the will of Yellis Mandeville of Greenwich; however, the village was not mentioned in the city records until 1713. Sir Peter Warren began accumulating land in 1731 and built a frame house capacious enough to hold sittings of the New York General Assembly when smallpox rendered the city dangerous in 1739 and subsequent years; on one occasion in 1746, the house of Mordecai Gomez was used. Warren's house, which survived until the Civil War era, overlooked the North River from a bluff; its site on the block bounded by Perry and Charles Streets, Bleecker and West 4th Streets, can still be recognized by its mid-19th century rowhouses inserted into a neighborhood still retaining many houses of the 1830\u201337 boom.\nNewgate Prison.\nFrom 1797 until 1829, the bucolic village of Greenwich was the location of New York State's first penitentiary, Newgate Prison, on the Hudson River at what is now West 10th Street, near the Christopher Street pier. The building was designed by Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois Mangin, who would later co-design New York City Hall. Although the intention of its first warden, Quaker prison reformer Thomas Eddy, was to provide a rational and humanitarian place for retribution and rehabilitation, the prison soon became an overcrowded and pestilent place, subject to frequent riots by the prisoners which damaged the buildings and killed some inmates. By 1821, the prison, designed for 432 inmates, held 817 instead, a number made possible only by the frequent release of prisoners, sometimes as many as 50 a day. Since the prison was north of the New York City boundary at the time, being sentenced to Newgate became known as being \"sent up the river\". This term became popularized once prisoners started being sentenced to Sing Sing Prison, in the town of Ossining upstream of New York City.\nIsaacs-Hendricks House.\nThe oldest house remaining in Greenwich Village is the Isaacs-Hendricks House, at 77 Bedford Street (built 1799, much altered and enlarged 1836, third story 1928). When the Church of St. Luke in the Fields was founded in 1820, it stood in fields south of the road (now Christopher Street) that led from Greenwich Lane (now Greenwich Avenue) down to a landing on the North River. In 1822, a yellow fever epidemic in New York encouraged residents to flee to the healthier air of Greenwich Village, and afterwards many stayed. The future site of Washington Square was a potter's field from 1797 to 1823 when up to 20,000 of New York's poor were buried here, and still remain. The handsome Greek revival rowhouses on the north side of Washington Square were built about 1832, establishing the fashion of Washington Square and lower Fifth Avenue for decades to come. Well into the 19th century, the district of Washington Square was considered separate from Greenwich Village.\nIn 1825, the \"Commercial Advertiser\" was writing that \"Greenwich is no longer a country village. Such has been the growth of our city that the building of one block more will connect the two places\" of Greenwich and New York. By 1850, the city had developed entirely around Greenwich Village such that the two were no longer considered separate.\nReputation as urban bohemia.\nGreenwich Village historically was known as an important landmark on the map of American bohemian culture in the early and mid-20th century. The neighborhood was known for its colorful, artistic residents and the alternative culture they propagated. Due in part to the progressive attitudes of many of its residents, the Village was a focal point of new movements and ideas, whether political, artistic, or cultural. This tradition as an enclave of avant-garde and alternative culture was established during the 19th century and continued into the 20th century, when small presses, art galleries, and experimental theater thrived. In 1969, enraged members of the gay community, in search for equality, started the Stonewall riots. The Stonewall Inn was later recognized as a National Historic Landmark for having been the location where the gay rights movement originated. On June 27, 2019, the National LGBTQ Wall of Honor was inaugurated at the Stonewall Inn; and on June 28, 2024, the Stonewall National Monument Visitors Center opened, as the first official national visitors center dedicated to the LGBTQ+ experience to open anywhere in the world. Numerous politicians and celebrities participated in the inauguration ceremonies, and the New York City Subway's Christopher Street\u2013Sheridan Square station was renamed the Christopher Street\u2013Stonewall station on the same day.\nThe Tenth Street Studio Building was situated at 51 West 10th Street, between Fifth and Sixth Avenues. The building was commissioned by James Boorman Johnston and designed by Richard Morris Hunt. Its innovative design soon represented a national architectural prototype, and featured a domed central gallery, from which interconnected rooms radiated. Hunt's studio within the building housed the first architectural school in the United States. Soon after its completion in 1857, the building helped to make Greenwich Village central to the arts in New York City, drawing artists from all over the country to work, exhibit, and sell their art. In its initial years Winslow Homer took a studio there, as did Edward Lamson Henry, and many of the artists of the Hudson River School, including Frederic Church and Albert Bierstadt.\nFrom the late 19th century until the present, the Hotel Albert has served as a cultural icon of Greenwich Village. Opened during the 1880s and originally located at 11th Street and University Place, called the Hotel St. Stephan and then, after 1902, called the Hotel Albert while under the ownership of William Ryder, it served as a meeting place, restaurant and dwelling for several important artists and writers from the late 19th century well into the 20th century. After 1902, the owner's brother Albert Pinkham Ryder lived and painted there. Some other noted guests who lived there include: Augustus St. Gaudens, Robert Louis Stevenson, Mark Twain, Hart Crane, Walt Whitman, Ana\u00efs Nin, Thomas Wolfe, Robert Lowell, Horton Foote, Salvador Dal\u00ed, Philip Guston, Jackson Pollock, and Andy Warhol. During the golden age of bohemianism, Greenwich Village became famous for such eccentrics as Joe Gould (profiled at length by Joseph Mitchell) and Maxwell Bodenheim, dancer Isadora Duncan, writer William Faulkner, and playwright Eugene O'Neill. Political rebellion also made its home here, whether serious (John Reed) or frivolous (Marcel Duchamp and friends set off balloons from atop Washington Square Arch, proclaiming the founding of \"The Independent Republic of Greenwich Village\" on January 24, 1917).\nIn 1924, the Cherry Lane Theatre was established. Located at 38 Commerce Street, it is New York City's oldest continuously running Off-Broadway theater. A landmark in Greenwich Village's cultural landscape, it was built as a farm silo in 1817, and also served as a tobacco warehouse and box factory before Edna St. Vincent Millay and other members of the Provincetown Players converted the structure into a theatre they christened the Cherry Lane Playhouse, which opened on March 24, 1924, with the play \"The Man Who Ate the Popomack\". During the 1940s The Living Theatre, Theatre of the Absurd, and the Downtown Theater movement all took root there, and it developed a reputation as a showcase for aspiring playwrights and emerging voices.\nIn one of the many Manhattan properties that Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney and her husband owned, Gertrude Whitney established the \"Whitney Studio Club\" at 8 West 8th Street in 1914, as a facility where young artists could exhibit their works. By the 1930s it had evolved into her greatest legacy, the Whitney Museum of American Art, on the site of today's New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture. The Whitney was founded in 1931, as an answer to the Museum of Modern Art, founded 1928, and its collection of mostly European modernism and its neglect of American Art. Gertrude Whitney decided to put the time and money into the museum after the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art turned down her offer to contribute her twenty-five-year collection of modern art works. In 1936, the renowned Abstract Expressionist artist and teacher Hans Hofmann moved his art school from East 57th Street to 52 West 9th Street. In 1938, Hofmann moved again to a more permanent home at 52 West 8th Street. The school remained active until 1958, when Hofmann retired from teaching.\nOn January 8, 1947, stevedore Andy Hintz was fatally shot by hitmen John M. Dunn, Andrew Sheridan, and Danny Gentile in front of his apartment. Before he died on January 29, he told his wife that \"Johnny Dunn shot me.\" The three gunmen were immediately arrested. Sheridan and Dunn were executed.\nThe Village hosted the nation's first racially integrated nightclub, when Caf\u00e9 Society was opened in 1938 at 1 Sheridan Square by Barney Josephson. Caf\u00e9 Society showcased African American talent and was intended to be an American version of the political cabarets that Josephson had seen in Europe before World War I. Notable performers there included: Pearl Bailey, Count Basie, Nat King Cole, John Coltrane, Miles Davis, Ella Fitzgerald, Coleman Hawkins, Billie Holiday, Lena Horne, Burl Ives, Lead Belly, Anita O'Day, Charlie Parker, Les Paul and Mary Ford, Paul Robeson, Kay Starr, Art Tatum, Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington, Josh White, Teddy Wilson, Lester Young, and the Weavers, who also in Christmas 1949, played at the Village Vanguard.\nThe annual Greenwich Village Halloween Parade, initiated in 1974 by Greenwich Village puppeteer and mask maker Ralph Lee, is the world's largest Halloween parade and America's only major Halloween nighttime parade, attracting more than 60,000 costumed participants, two million in-person spectators, and a worldwide television audience of over 100 million. The parade has its roots in New York's queer community.\nPostwar.\nGreenwich Village again became important to the bohemian scene during the 1950s, when the Beat Generation focused its energies there. Fleeing from what they saw as oppressive social conformity, a loose collection of writers, poets, artists, and students (later known as the Beats) and the Beatniks, moved to Greenwich Village, and to North Beach in San Francisco, in many ways creating the U.S. East Coast and West Coast predecessors, respectively, to the East Village-Haight Ashbury hippie scene of the next decade. The Village (and surrounding New York City) would later play central roles in the writings of, among others, Maya Angelou, James Baldwin, William S. Burroughs, Truman Capote, Allen Ginsberg, Jack Kerouac, Rod McKuen, Marianne Moore, and Dylan Thomas, who collapsed at the Chelsea Hotel, and died at St. Vincents Hospital at 170 West 12th Street, in the Village after drinking at the White Horse Tavern on November 5, 1953.\nOff-Off-Broadway began in Greenwich Village in 1958 as a reaction to Off Broadway, and a \"complete rejection of commercial theatre\". Among the first venues for what would soon be called \"Off-Off-Broadway\" (a term supposedly coined by critic Jerry Tallmer of the \"Village Voice\") were coffeehouses in Greenwich Village, in particular, the Caffe Cino at 31 Cornelia Street, operated by the eccentric Joe Cino, who early on took a liking to actors and playwrights and agreed to let them stage plays there without bothering to read the plays first, or to even find out much about the content. Also integral to the rise of Off-Off-Broadway were Ellen Stewart at La MaMa, originally located at 321 E. 9th Street, and Al Carmines at the Judson Poets' Theater, located at Judson Memorial Church on the south side of Washington Square Park.\nThe Village had a cutting-edge cabaret and music scene. \"The Village Gate\", the \"Village Vanguard\", and the \"Blue Note\" (since 1981) regularly hosted some of the biggest names in jazz. Greenwich Village also played a major role in the development of the folk music scene of the 1960s. Music clubs included \"Gerde's Folk City\", \"The Bitter End,\" \"Cafe Au Go Go\", \"Cafe Wha?\", \"The Gaslight Cafe\" and \"The Bottom Line\". Three of the four members of the Mamas &amp; the Papas met there. Guitarist and folk singer Dave Van Ronk lived there for many years. Village resident and cultural icon Bob Dylan by the mid-60s had become one of the world's foremost popular songwriters, and often developments in Greenwich Village would influence the simultaneously occurring folk rock movement in San Francisco and elsewhere, and vice versa. Dozens of other cultural and popular icons got their start in the Village's nightclub, theater, and coffeehouse scene during the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s. Many artists garnered critical acclaim, some before and some after, performed in the Village. This list includes Eric Andersen, Joan Baez, Jackson Browne, the Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem, Richie Havens, Jimi Hendrix, Janis Ian, the Kingston Trio, the Lovin' Spoonful, Bette Midler, Liza Minnelli, Joni Mitchell, Maria Muldaur, Laura Nyro, Phil Ochs, Tom Paxton, Peter, Paul, and Mary, Carly Simon, Simon &amp; Garfunkel, Nina Simone, Barbra Streisand, James Taylor, and the Velvet Underground. The Greenwich Village of the 1950s and 1960s was at the center of Jane Jacobs's book \"The Death and Life of Great American Cities\", which defended it and similar communities, while criticizing common urban renewal policies of the time.\nFounded by New York-based artist Mercedes Matter and her students, the New York Studio School of Drawing, Painting and Sculpture is an art school formed in the mid-1960s in the Village. Officially opened September 23, 1964, the school is still active, at 8 W. 8th Street, the site of the original Whitney Museum of American Art.\nGreenwich Village was home to a safe house used by the radical anti-war movement known as the Weather Underground. On March 6, 1970, their safehouse was destroyed when an explosive device they were constructing was accidentally detonated, killing three of their members (Ted Gold, Terry Robbins, and Diana Oughton).\nThe Village has been a center for movements that challenged the wider American culture, most notably its seminal role in sparking the gay liberation movement. The Stonewall riots were a series of spontaneous, violent protests by members of the gay community against a police raid that took place in the early morning hours of June 28, 1969, at the Stonewall Inn, 53 Christopher Street. Considered together, the demonstrations are widely considered to constitute the single most important event leading to the gay liberation movement and the modern fight for LGBTQ rights in the United States. On June 23, 2015, the Stonewall Inn was the first landmark in New York City to be recognized by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission on the basis of its status in LGBTQ history, and on June 24, 2016, the Stonewall National Monument was named the first U.S. National Monument dedicated to the LGBTQ-rights movement. Greenwich Village contains the world's oldest gay and lesbian bookstore, Oscar Wilde Bookshop, founded in 1967, while The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual &amp; Transgender Community Center \u2013 best known as simply \"The Center\" \u2013 has occupied the former Food &amp; Maritime Trades High School at 208 West 13th Street since 1984. In 2006, the Village was the scene of an assault involving seven lesbians and a straight man that sparked appreciable media attention, with strong statements defending both sides of the case. \nOn June 20, 2023, the intersection of Fifth Avenue and Washington Square North was officially renamed Edie Windsor and Thea Speyer Way at the state level by New York Governor Kathy Hochul, in honor of the Greenwich Village plaintiffs who prevailed at the United States Supreme Court in 2013, in finding the Defense of Marriage Act, which had limited the definition of marriage as being valid strictly between one man and one woman, to be unconstitutional.\nPreservation.\nSince the end of the 20th century, many artists and local historians have mourned the fact that the bohemian days of Greenwich Village are long gone, because of the extraordinarily high housing costs in the neighborhood. The artists fled to other New York City neighborhoods including SoHo, Tribeca, Dumbo, Williamsburg, and Long Island City. Nevertheless, residents of Greenwich Village still possess a strong community identity and are proud of their neighborhood's unique history and fame, and its well-known liberal live-and-let-live attitudes.\nHistorically, local residents and preservation groups have been concerned about development in the Village and have fought to preserve its architectural and historic integrity. In the 1960s, Margot Gayle led a group of citizens to preserve the Jefferson Market Courthouse (later reused as Jefferson Market Library), while other citizen groups fought to keep traffic out of Washington Square Park, and Jane Jacobs, using the Village as an example of a vibrant urban community, advocated to keep it that way.\nSince then, preservation has been a part of the Village ethos. Shortly after the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission (LPC) was established in 1965, it acted to protect parts of Greenwich Village, designating the small Charlton-King-Vandam Historic District in 1966, which contains the city's largest concentration of row houses in the Federal style, as well as a significant concentration of Greek Revival houses, and the even smaller MacDougal-Sullivan Gardens Historic District in 1967, a group of 22 houses sharing a common back garden, built in the Greek Revival style and later renovated with Colonial Revival fa\u00e7ades. In 1969, the LPC designated the Greenwich Village Historic District \u2013 which remained the city's largest for four decades \u2013 despite preservationists' advocacy for the entire neighborhood to be designated an historic district. Advocates continued to pursue their goal of additional designation, spurred in particular by the increased pace of development in the 1990s.\nRezoned areas.\nThe Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation (GVSHP), a nonprofit organization dedicated to the architectural and cultural character and heritage of the neighborhood, successfully proposed new districts and individual landmarks to the LPC. Those include:\nThe Landmarks Preservation Commission designated as landmarks several individual sites proposed by the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation, including the former Bell Telephone Labs Complex (1861\u20131933), now Westbeth Artists' Housing, designated in 2011; the Silver Towers/University Village Complex (1967), designed by I.M. Pei and including the Picasso sculpture \"Portrait of Sylvette\", designated in 2008; and three early 19th-century federal houses at 127, 129 and 131 MacDougal Street.\nSeveral contextual rezonings were enacted in Greenwich Village in recent years to limit the size and height of allowable new development in the neighborhood, and to encourage the preservation of existing buildings. The following were proposed by the GVSHP and passed by the City Planning Commission:\nNYU dispute.\nNew York University and Greenwich Village preservationists have frequently become embroiled in conflicts between the university's campus expansion efforts and the preservation of the scale and character of the Village.\nAs one press critic put it in 2013, \"For decades, New York University has waged architectural war on Greenwich Village.\" In recent years, the university has clashed most prominently with community groups such as the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation over the construction of new NYU academic buildings and residence halls. During the design of Furman Hall in 2000, the site of which is adjacent to the Judson Memorial Church, community groups sued the university, claiming the construction of a 13-story tower on the site would \"loom behind the campanile of [the church]\" and \"mar the historic silhouette of Greenwich Village as viewed from Washington Square Park\". Despite a justice in State Supreme Court dismissing the case, the university agreed to a settlement with the groups to avoid future appeals, which included reducing the building to 9 stories and restoring the facades of two historic houses located on the site, the Judson House and a red-brick town house where Edgar Allan Poe once lived, which NYU reconstructed as they appeared in the 19th century.\nAnother dispute arose during the construction of the 26-story Founders Hall, a residence hall planned to be constructed on the site of St. Ann's Church at 120 East Twelfth Street. Amidst protests of the demolition of the church, the university decided to maintain and restore the facade and steeple of the building, parts of which were deteriorating or missing, and it now stands freely directly in front of the 12th Street entrance of the building. Further controversy also arose over the height of the building, as well as how the university would integrate the church's facade into the building's uses; however, in 2006, NYU began construction and the new dorm was completed in December 2008.\nIn recent years, the most conflict has arisen over the proposed NYU 2031 plan, which the university released in 2010 as its plan for long-term growth, both within and outside of Greenwich Village. This included a court battle over the City of New York's right to transfer three plots of Department of Transportation-owned land to the university for constructing staging, which plaintiffs claimed required the consent of the state legislature. Ultimately, the Appellate Division of New York's Supreme Court ruled in the university's favor after a lower court blocked the expansion plan; however, so far, the university has only begun construction on 181 Mercer Street, the first building in the planned expansion southwards.\nDemographics.\nFor census purposes, the New York City government classifies Greenwich Village as part of the West Village neighborhood tabulation area. According to the 2010 United States census, the population of West Village was 66,880, a change of \u22121,603 (\u22122.4%) from the 68,483 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of . The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 80.9% (54,100) White, 2% (1,353) African American, 0.1% (50) Native American, 8.2% (5,453) Asian, 0% (20) Pacific Islander, 0.4% (236) from other races, and 2.4% (1,614) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 6.1% (4,054) of the population. Greenwich Village is home to a significant concentration of same-sex couples.\nThe entirety of Community District 2, which comprises Greenwich Village and SoHo, had 91,638 inhabitants as of NYC Health's 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 85.8 years. This is higher than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. Most inhabitants are adults: a plurality (42%) are between the ages of 25\u201344, while 24% are between 45 and 64, and 15% are 65 or older. The ratio of youth and college-aged residents was lower, at 9% and 10%, respectively.\nAs of 2017, the median household income in Community Districts 1 and 2 (including the Financial District and Tribeca) was $144,878, though the median income in Greenwich Village individually was $119,728. In 2018, an estimated 9% of Greenwich Village and SoHo residents lived in poverty, compared to 14% in all of Manhattan and 20% in all of New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 38% in Greenwich Village and SoHo, compared to the boroughwide and citywide rates of 45% and 51%, respectively. Based on this calculation, as of 2018[ [update]], Greenwich Village and SoHo are considered high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.\nManhattan's 3rd Little Italy.\nThroughout the 1930s, many Italian-Americans starting leaving Little Italy and moved on the north side of Houston Street and around Bleecker Street and Carmine Street. Many of them being immigrants from Naples and Sicily. Up until the late 2000s, the village was home to one of the largest Italian speaking communities in the United States. In the 2010s, many affluent Italians from Northern Italy, especially from Milan, started moving to Greenwich Village, helping strengthen and modernize the neighborhood's identity as a modern day Little Italy.\nPoints of interest.\nGreenwich Village includes several collegiate institutions. Since the 1830s, New York University (NYU) has had a campus there. In 1973 NYU moved from its campus in University Heights in the West Bronx (the current site of Bronx Community College), to Greenwich Village with many buildings around Gould Plaza on West 4th Street. In 1976 Yeshiva University established the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law in the northern part of Greenwich Village. In the 1980s Hebrew Union College was built in Greenwich Village. The New School, with its Parsons The New School for Design, a division of The New School, and the School's Graduate School expanded in the 2000s, with the renovated, award-winning design of the Sheila C. Johnson Design Center at 66 Fifth Avenue on 13th Street. The Cooper Union is located in Greenwich Village, at Astor Place, near St. Mark's Place on the border of the East Village. Pratt Institute established its latest Manhattan campus in an adaptively reused Brunner &amp; Tryon-designed loft building on 14th Street, east of Seventh Avenue. The university campus building expansion was followed by a gentrification process in the 1980s. There are numerous historic buildings in the neighborhood including Emma Lazarus's former residence on West 10th Street and Edward Hopper's former studio (now the NYU Silver School of Social Work).\nThe historic Washington Square Park is the center and heart of the neighborhood. Additionally, the Village has several other, smaller parks: Christopher, Father Fagan, Little Red Square, Minetta Triangle, Petrosino Square, and Time Landscape. There are also city playgrounds, including DeSalvio Playground, Minetta, Thompson Street, Bleecker Street, Downing Street, Mercer Street, Cpl. John A. Seravelli, and William Passannante Ballfield. One of the most famous courts, is \"The Cage\", officially known as the West Fourth Street Courts. Sitting atop the West Fourth Street\u2013Washington Square station at Sixth Avenue, the courts are used by basketball and American handball players from across the city. The Cage has become one of the most important tournament sites for the citywide \"Streetball\" amateur basketball tournament. Since 1975, New York University's art collection has been housed at the Grey Art Gallery bordering Washington Square Park, at 100 Washington Square East. The Grey Art Gallery is notable for its museum-quality exhibitions of contemporary art.\nThe Village has a bustling performing arts scene. It is home to many Off Broadway and Off-Off-Broadway theaters; for instance, \"Blue Man Group\" has taken up residence in the Astor Place Theater. \"The Village Gate\" (until 1992), the \"Village Vanguard\" and the \"Blue Note\" are still presenting some of the biggest names in jazz on a regular basis. Other music clubs include \"The Bitter End,\" and \"Lion's Den\". The Village has its own orchestra aptly named the \"Greenwich Village Orchestra\". Comedy clubs dot the Village as well, including \"Comedy Cellar\", where many American stand-up comedians got their start.\nSeveral publications have offices in the Village, most notably the monthly magazines \"American Heritage\" and \"Fortune\" and formerly also the citywide newsweekly the \"Village Voice\". The National Audubon Society, having relocated its national headquarters from a mansion in Carnegie Hill to a restored and very green, former industrial building in NoHo, relocated to smaller but even greener LEED certified building at 225 Varick Street, on Houston Street near the Film Forum. The Salvation Army's former American headquarters at 120\u2013130 West 14th Street is in the northern portion of Greenwich Village.\nPolice and crime.\nGreenwich Village is patrolled by the 6th Precinct of the NYPD, located at 233 West 10th Street. The 6th Precinct ranked 68th safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. This is due to a high incidence of property crime. As of 2018[ [update]], with a non-fatal assault rate of 10 per 100,000 people, Greenwich Village's rate of violent crimes per capita is less than that of the city as a whole. The incarceration rate of 100 per 100,000 people is lower than that of the city as a whole.\nThe 6th Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 80.6% between 1990 and 2018. The precinct reported 1 murder, 20 rapes, 153 robberies, 121 felony assaults, 163 burglaries, 1,031 grand larcenies, and 28 grand larcenies auto in 2018.\nIn 1916, Greenwich Village was the site of a lynching, one of the few in New York since the American Civil War. Italian immigrant and working-class shoemaker Paulo Boleta was beaten and trampled to death by a mob after randomly firing his revolver on a crowded street, wounding one bystander.\nFire safety.\nGreenwich Village is served by two New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire stations:\nHealth.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], preterm births are more common in Greenwich Village and SoHo than in other places citywide, though births to teenage mothers are less common. In Greenwich Village and SoHo, there were 91 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 1 teenage birth per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide), though the teenage birth rate is based on a small sample size. Greenwich Village and SoHo have a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 4%, less than the citywide rate of 12%, though this was based on a small sample size.\nThe concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Greenwich Village and SoHo is , more than the city average. Sixteen percent of Greenwich Village and SoHo residents are smokers, which is more than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Greenwich Village and SoHo, 4% of residents are obese, 3% are diabetic, and 15% have high blood pressure, the lowest rates in the city\u2014compared to the citywide averages of 24%, 11%, and 28% respectively. In addition, 5% of children are obese, the lowest rate in the city, compared to the citywide average of 20%.\nNinety-six percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is more than the city's average of 87%. In 2018, 91% of residents described their health as \"good\", \"very good\", or \"excellent\", more than the city's average of 78%. For every supermarket in Greenwich Village and SoHo, there are 7 bodegas.\nThe nearest major hospitals are the Bellevue Hospital Center and NYU Langone Medical Center in Kips Bay, and NewYork-Presbyterian Lower Manhattan Hospital in the Civic Center area. In addition, Beth Israel Medical Center in Stuyvesant Town operated until 2025.\nPost offices and ZIP Codes.\nGreenwich Village is located within four primary ZIP Codes. The subsection of West Village, south of Greenwich Avenue and west of Sixth Avenue, is located in 10014, while the northwestern section of Greenwich Village north of Greenwich Avenue and Washington Square Park and west of Fifth Avenue is in 10011. The northeastern part of the Village, north of Washington Square Park and east of Fifth Avenue, is in 10003. The neighborhood's southern portion, the area south of Washington Square Park and east of Sixth Avenue, is in 10012. The United States Postal Service operates three post offices near Greenwich Village:\nEducation.\nGreenwich Village and SoHo generally have a higher rate of college-educated residents than the rest of the city as of 2018[ [update]]. The vast majority of residents age 25 and older (84%) have a college education or higher, while 4% have less than a high school education and 12% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 64% of Manhattan residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Greenwich Village and SoHo students excelling in math rose from 61% in 2000 to 80% in 2011, and reading achievement increased from 66% to 68% during the same time period.\nGreenwich Village and SoHo's rate of elementary school student absenteeism is lower than the rest of New York City. In Greenwich Village and SoHo, 7% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, less than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 91% of high school students in Greenwich Village and SoHo graduate on time, more than the citywide average of 75%.\nSchools.\nGreenwich Village residents are zoned to two elementary schools: PS 3, Melser Charrette School, and PS 41, Greenwich Village School. Residents are zoned to Baruch Middle School 104. Residents apply to various New York City high schools. The private Greenwich Village High School was formerly located in the area, but later moved to SoHo.\nGreenwich Village is home to New York University, which owns large sections of the area and most of the buildings around Washington Square Park. To the north is the campus of The New School, which is housed in several buildings that are considered historical landmarks because of their innovative architecture. The New School's Sheila Johnson Design Center doubles as a public art gallery. Cooper Union has been located in the East Village since its founding in 1859.\nLibraries.\nThe New York Public Library (NYPL) operates two branches in Greenwich Village. The Jefferson Market Library is located at 425 Avenue of the Americas (Sixth Avenue). The building was a courthouse in the 19th and 20th centuries before being converted into a library in 1967, and it is now a city-designated landmark. The Hudson Park branch is located at 66 Leroy Street. The branch is housed in Carnegie library that was built in 1906 and expanded in 1920.\nTransportation.\nGreenwich Village is served by the IND Eighth Avenue Line ( A , \u200b C , and \u200b E trains), the IND Sixth Avenue Line ( B , \u200b D , \u200b F , &lt;F&gt;, and \u200b M trains), the BMT Canarsie Line ( L trains), and the IRT Broadway\u2013Seventh Avenue Line ( 1 , \u200b 2 , and \u200b 3 trains) of the New York City Subway. The 14th Street/Sixth Avenue, 14th Street/Eighth Avenue, West Fourth Street\u2013Washington Square, and stations are in the neighborhood. Local New York City Bus routes, operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, include the M55, M7, M11, M14, and M20. On the PATH, the , , and stations are in Greenwich Village.\nNotable residents.\nGreenwich Village has long been a popular neighborhood for numerous artists and other notable people. Past and present notable residents include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13015", "revid": "3940708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13015", "title": "George S. Kaufman", "text": "American playwright, theater director and producer (1889\u20131961)\nGeorge Simon Kaufman (November 16, 1889\u00a0\u2013 June 2, 1961) was an American playwright, theater director and producer, humorist, and drama critic. In addition to comedies and political satire, he wrote several musicals for the Marx Brothers and others. He won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for the musical \"Of Thee I Sing\" (with Morrie Ryskind and Ira Gershwin) in 1932, and won again in 1937 for the play \"You Can't Take It with You\" (with Moss Hart). He also won the Tony Award for Best Director in 1951 for the musical \"Guys and Dolls\".\nEarly years.\nGeorge S. Kaufman was born to Joseph S. Kaufman, a hatband manufacturer, and Nettie Meyers in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He had a younger sister, Ruth. His other sister was Helen, nicknamed \"Helse\". Kaufman's family was Jewish. He graduated from high school in 1907 and studied law for three months. He grew disenchanted and took on a series of odd jobs, selling silk and working in wholesale ribbon sales.\nCareer.\nKaufman began contributing humorous material to the column that Franklin P. Adams wrote for the \"New York Mail\". He became close friends with Adams, who helped him get his first newspaper job\u2014humor columnist for \"The Washington Times\"\u2014in 1912. By 1915 he was a drama reporter on \"The New York Tribune\", working under Heywood Broun. In 1917 Kaufman joined \"The New York Times\", becoming drama editor and staying with the newspaper until 1930.\nKaufman took his editorial responsibilities seriously. According to legend, on one occasion a press agent asked: \"How do I get our leading lady's name in the \"Times\"?\" Kaufman: \"Shoot her.\"\nTheater.\nKaufman's Broadway debut was September 4, 1918, at the Knickerbocker Theatre, with the premiere of the melodrama \"Someone in the House\". He coauthored the play with Walter C. Percival, based on a magazine story written by Larry Evans. The play opened on Broadway (running for only 32 performances) during that year's serious flu epidemic, when people were being advised to avoid crowds. With \"dour glee\", Kaufman suggested that the best way to avoid crowds in New York City was to attend his play.\nEvery Broadway season from 1921 through 1958 had a play written or directed by Kaufman. Since Kaufman's death in 1961, revivals of his work on Broadway were produced in the 1960s, the 1970s, the 1980s, the 2000s, and the 2010s. Kaufman wrote only one play alone, \"The Butter and Egg Man\" in 1925. With Marc Connelly, he wrote \"Merton of the Movies\", \"Dulcy\", and \"Beggar on Horseback\"; with Ring Lardner, he wrote \"June Moon\"; with Edna Ferber, he wrote \"The Royal Family\", \"Dinner at Eight\", and \"Stage Door\"; with John P. Marquand, he wrote a stage adaptation of Marquand's novel \"The Late George Apley\"; and with Howard Teichmann, he wrote \"The Solid Gold Cadillac\". According to his biography on PBS, \"he wrote some of the American theater's most enduring comedies\" with Moss Hart. Their work includes \"Once in a Lifetime\" (in which he also performed), \"Merrily We Roll Along\", \"The Man Who Came to Dinner\", and \"You Can't Take It with You\", which won the Pulitzer Prize in 1937.\nFor a period, Kaufman lived at 158 West 58th Street in New York City. The building later was the setting for \"Stage Door\". It is now the Park Savoy Hotel, and for many years was considered a single room occupancy hotel.\nMusical theater.\nDespite his claim that he knew nothing about music and hated it in the theater, Kaufman collaborated on many musical theater projects. His most successful of such efforts include two Broadway shows crafted for the Marx Brothers, \"The Cocoanuts\", written with Irving Berlin, and \"Animal Crackers\", written with Morrie Ryskind, Bert Kalmar, and Harry Ruby. According to Charlotte Chandler, \"By the time \"Animal Crackers\" opened\u00a0... the Marx Brothers were becoming famous enough to interest Hollywood. Paramount signed them to a contract\". Kaufman was one of the writers who excelled in writing intelligent nonsense for Groucho Marx, a process that was collaborative, given Groucho's skills at expanding upon the scripted material. Though the Marx Brothers were notoriously critical of their writers, Groucho and Harpo Marx expressed admiration and gratitude towards Kaufman. Dick Cavett, introducing Groucho onstage at Carnegie Hall in 1972, told the audience that Groucho considered Kaufman to be \"his god\".\nWhile \"The Cocoanuts\" was being developed in Atlantic City, Irving Berlin was hugely enthusiastic about including the song \"Always\", which he had written as a wedding present for his bride. Kaufman was less enthusiastic, and refused to rework the libretto to include this number. The song ultimately became a huge hit for Berlin, recorded by many popular performers. According to Laurence Bergreen, \"Kaufman's lack of enthusiasm caused Irving to lose confidence in the song, and 'Always' was deleted from the score of \"The Cocoanuts\" \u2013 though not from its creator's memory.\u00a0... Kaufman, a confirmed misogynist, had had no use for the song in \"The Cocoanuts\", but his disapproval did not deter Berlin from saving it for a more important occasion.\" \"The Cocoanuts\" would remain Irving Berlin's only Broadway musical \u2013 until his last one, \"Mr. President\" \u2013 that did not include at least one eventual hit song.\nKaufman recalled the matter differently. In an article in \"Stage\" magazine, he recalled that Berlin woke him up at 5 am one morning to play a new song he had just written. \"Even \"my\" deficient musical sense recognized that here was a song that was going to be popular. I listened to it two or three times, then took a stab at it myself, and as dawn came up over the Atlantic, Irving and I were happily singing 'Always' together\u2014its first performance on any stage. I went back to bed a happy man, and stayed happy until rehearsals started, when it turned out that 'Always' had not been written for our show at all, but purely for Irving's music-publishing house. In its place in \"The Cocoanuts\" was a song called 'A Little Bungalow,' which we never could reprise in Act Two because the actors couldn't remember it that long.\"\nHumor derived from political situations was of particular interest to Kaufman. He collaborated on the hit musical \"Of Thee I Sing\", which won the 1932 Pulitzer Prize, the first musical so honored, and its sequel \"Let 'Em Eat Cake\", as well as one troubled, but eventually successful, satire that had several incarnations, \"Strike Up the Band\". Working with Kaufman on these ventures were Ryskind, George Gershwin, and Ira Gershwin. Also, Kaufman, with Moss Hart, wrote the book to \"I'd Rather Be Right\", a musical starring George M. Cohan as Franklin Delano Roosevelt (the U.S. president at the time), with songs by Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart. He also co-wrote the 1935 comedy-drama \"First Lady\". In 1945, Kaufman adapted \"H.M.S. Pinafore\" into \"Hollywood Pinafore\".\nKaufman also contributed to major New York revues, including \"The Band Wagon\" (which shared songs but not plot with the 1953 film version) with Arthur Schwartz and Howard Dietz. His often-anthologized sketch \"The Still Alarm\" from the revue \"The Little Show\" lasted long after the show closed. Another well-known sketch of his is \"If Men Played Cards as Women Do\". Also, musicals have been based on Kaufman properties, such as the 1981 musical version of \"Merrily We Roll Along\", adapted by George Furth and Stephen Sondheim. The musical \"Sherry!\" (1967) was based on his play \"The Man Who Came to Dinner\".\nDirecting and producing.\nKaufman directed the original or revival stage productions of many plays and musicals, including \"The Front Page\" by Charles MacArthur and Ben Hecht (1928), \"Of Thee I Sing\" (1931 and 1952), \"Of Mice and Men\" by John Steinbeck (1937), \"My Sister Eileen\" by Joseph Fields and Jerome Chodorov (1940), \"Hollywood Pinafore\" (1945), \"The Next Half Hour\" (1945), \"Park Avenue\" (1946, also co-wrote the book), \"Town House\" (1948), \"Bravo!\" (1948, also co-wrote the script), \"Metropole\" (1949), the Frank Loesser musical \"Guys and Dolls\", for which he won the 1951 Best Director Tony Award, \"The Enchanted\" (1950), \"The Small Hours\" (1951, also co-wrote the script), \"Fancy Meeting You Again\" (1952, also co-wrote the script), \"The Solid Gold Cadillac\" (1953, also co-wrote the script), and \"Romanoff and Juliet\" by Peter Ustinov (1957).\nKaufman produced many of his own plays, as well as those of other writers. For a short time, from \"circa\" 1940 to 1946, Kaufman, with Moss Hart and Max Gordon, owned and operated the Lyceum Theatre.\nFilm and television.\nMany of Kaufman's plays were adapted into Hollywood and British films. Among the more well-received were \"Dinner At Eight\", \"Stage Door\" (almost completely rewritten by others for the film version) and \"You Can't Take It with You\" (changed significantly by others for the film version), which won the Best Picture Oscar in 1938, and \"The Dark Tower\". He also occasionally wrote directly for the movies, most significantly the screenplay for \"A Night at the Opera\" for the Marx Brothers. His only credit as a film director was \"The Senator Was Indiscreet\" (1947) starring William Powell.\nFrom 1949 until midway through the 1952\u20131953 season, he appeared as a panelist on the CBS television series \"This Is Show Business\". Kaufman made a remark about the excessive airing of \"Silent Night\" during the Christmas season, \"Let's make this one program\", he said, \"on which no one sings 'Silent Night'.\" The resulting public outcry prompted his dismissal by CBS. In response, Fred Allen said, \"There were only two wits on television: Groucho Marx and George S. Kaufman. Without Kaufman, television has reverted to being half-witted.\" It would be more than a year before Kaufman appeared on TV again.\nBridge.\nKaufman was a prominent player of bridge, probably both auction bridge and contract bridge. \"The New Yorker\" published many of his humorous items about the card game; at least some have been reprinted more than once, including:\nHis first wife Beatrice Bakrow Kaufman was also an avid bridge player, and an occasional poker player with Algonquin men, who wrote at least one \"New Yorker\" article on bridge herself, in 1928.\nPersonal life.\nIn the 1920s, Kaufman was a member of the Algonquin Round Table, a circle of writers and show business people. From the 1920s through the 1950s, Kaufman was as well known for his personality as he was for his writing. In the Moss Hart autobiography \"Act One\", Hart portrayed Kaufman as a morose and intimidating figure, uncomfortable with any expressions of affection between human beings\u2014in life or on the page. Hart writes that Max Siegel said: \"Maybe I should have warned you. Mr Kaufman hates any kind of sentimentality\u2014can't stand it!\"\nThis perspective, along with a number of taciturn observations made by Kaufman himself, led to a simplistic but commonly held belief that Hart was the emotional soul of the creative team while Kaufman was a misanthropic writer of punchlines. Kaufman preferred never to leave Manhattan. He once said: \"I never want to go any place where I can't get back to Broadway and 44th by midnight.\"\nCalled \"Public Lover Number One\", he dated several prominent actresses on Broadway. Kaufman found himself in the center of a scandal in 1936 when, in the midst of a child custody suit, the former husband of actress Mary Astor threatened to publish one of Astor's diaries purportedly containing extremely explicit details of an affair between Kaufman and the actress. The diary was eventually destroyed by the court, unread, in 1952, but details of the supposed contents were published in \"Confidential\" magazine, \"Hollywood Babylon\" by Kenneth Anger (both always have been considered unreliable sources) and in various other questionable publications. Some of the sexually explicit portions of Mary Astor's writing about Kaufman were reprinted in \"New York\" magazine in 2012 and \"Vanity Fair\" magazine in 2016. Kaufman had an affair with actress Natalie Schafer during the 1940s.\nKaufman joined the theater club The Lambs in 1944.\nKaufman was married to his first wife Beatrice from 1917 until her death in 1945. They had one daughter, Anne Kaufman (Booth). Four years later, on May 26, 1949, he married actress Leueen MacGrath, with whom he collaborated on a number of plays before their divorce in August 1957. Kaufman died in New York City on June 2, 1961, at the age of 71. His granddaughter, Beatrice Colen, was an actress who had recurring appearances on both \"Happy Days\" and \"Wonder Woman\".\nIn 1979, Donald Oliver compiled and edited a collection of Kaufman's humorous pieces, with a foreword by Dick Cavett.\nPortrayals.\nKaufman was portrayed by the actor David Thornton in the 1994 film \"Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle\" and by Jason Robards in the 1963 film \"Act One\". In the 2014 Broadway adaptation of the latter by James Lapine, he was played by Tony Shalhoub.\nThe title character of the 1991 Coen brothers film \"Barton Fink\", who is a playwright, bears a strong physical resemblance to Kaufman.\nKaufman is portrayed in the film \"Mank\" by actor Adam Shapiro.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13017", "revid": "43240415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13017", "title": "Gilbert N. Lewis", "text": "American physical chemist (1875\u20131946)\nGilbert Newton Lewis (October 23 or October 25, 1875 \u2013 March 23, 1946) was an American physical chemist and a dean of the college of chemistry at University of California, Berkeley. Lewis was best known for his discovery of the covalent bond and his concept of electron pairs; his Lewis dot structures and other contributions to valence bond theory have shaped modern theories of chemical bonding. Lewis successfully contributed to chemical thermodynamics, photochemistry, and isotope separation, and is also known for his concept of acids and bases. Lewis also researched on relativity and quantum physics, and in 1926 he coined the term \"photon\" for the smallest unit of radiant energy.\nG. N. Lewis was born in 1875 in Weymouth, Massachusetts. After receiving his PhD in chemistry from Harvard University and studying abroad in Germany and the Philippines, Lewis moved to California in 1912 to teach chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley, where he became the dean of the college of chemistry and spent the rest of his life. As a professor, he incorporated thermodynamic principles into the chemistry curriculum and reformed chemical thermodynamics in a mathematically rigorous manner accessible to ordinary chemists. He began measuring the free energy values related to several chemical processes, both organic and inorganic. In 1916, he also proposed his theory of bonding and added information about electrons in the periodic table of the chemical elements. In 1933, he started his research on isotope separation. Lewis worked with hydrogen and managed to purify a sample of heavy water. He then came up with his theory of acids and bases, and did work in photochemistry during the last years of his life.\nThough he was nominated 41 times, G. N. Lewis never won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, resulting in a major Nobel Prize controversy. On the other hand, Lewis mentored and influenced numerous Nobel laureates at Berkeley including Harold Urey (1934 Nobel Prize), William F. Giauque (1949 Nobel Prize), Glenn T. Seaborg (1951 Nobel Prize), Willard Libby (1960 Nobel Prize), Melvin Calvin (1961 Nobel Prize) and so on, turning Berkeley into one of the world's most prestigious centers for chemistry. On March 23, 1946, Lewis was found dead in his Berkeley laboratory where he had been working with hydrogen cyanide; many postulated that the cause of his death was suicide. After Lewis' death, his children followed their father's career in chemistry, and the Lewis Hall on the Berkeley campus is named after him.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLewis was born in 1875 and raised in Weymouth, Massachusetts, where there exists a street named for him, G.N. Lewis Way, off Summer Street. Additionally, the wing of the new Weymouth High School Chemistry department has been named in his honor. Lewis received his primary education at home from his parents, Frank Wesley Lewis, a lawyer of independent character, and Mary Burr White Lewis. He read at age three and was intellectually precocious. In 1884 his family moved to Lincoln, Nebraska, and in 1889 he received his first formal education at the university preparatory school.\nIn 1893, after two years at the University of Nebraska, Lewis transferred to Harvard University, where he obtained his B.S. in 1896. After a year of teaching at Phillips Academy in Andover, Lewis returned to Harvard to study with the physical chemist T. W. Richards and obtained his Ph.D. in 1899 with a dissertation on electrochemical potentials. After a year of teaching at Harvard, Lewis took a traveling fellowship to Germany, the center of physical chemistry, and studied with Walther Nernst at G\u00f6ttingen and with Wilhelm Ostwald at Leipzig. While working in Nernst's lab, Lewis apparently developed a lifelong enmity with Nernst. In the following years, Lewis started to criticize and denounce his former teacher on many occasions, calling Nernst's work on his heat theorem \"a regrettable episode in the history of chemistry\". A Swedish friend of Nernst's, , was a member of the Nobel Chemistry Committee. There is evidence that he used the Nobel nominating and reporting procedures to block a Nobel Prize for Lewis in thermodynamics by nominating Lewis for the prize three times, and then using his position as a committee member to write negative reports.\nHarvard, Manila, and MIT.\nAfter his stay in Nernst's lab, Lewis returned to Harvard in 1901 as an instructor for three more years. He was appointed instructor in thermodynamics and electrochemistry. In 1904, Lewis was granted a leave of absence and became Superintendent of Weights and Measures for the Bureau of Science in Manila, Philippines. The next year he returned to Cambridge, Massachusetts when the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) appointed him to a faculty position, in which he had a chance to join a group of outstanding physical chemists under the direction of Arthur Amos Noyes. He became an assistant professor in 1907, associate professor in 1908, and full professor in 1911.\nUniversity of California, Berkeley.\nG. N. Lewis left MIT in 1912 to become a professor of physical chemistry and dean of the College of Chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley. On June 21, 1912, he married Mary Hinckley Sheldon, daughter of a Harvard professor of Romance languages. They had two sons, both of whom became chemistry professors, and a daughter. In 1913, he joined the Alpha Chi Sigma at Berkeley, the professional chemistry fraternity.\nLewis' graduate advisees at Berkeley went on to be exceptionally successful with the Nobel Committee. 14 Nobel prizes were eventually awarded to the men he took as students. The best-known of these include Harold Urey (1934 Nobel Prize), William F. Giauque (1949 Nobel Prize), Glenn T. Seaborg (1951 Nobel Prize), Willard Libby (1960 Nobel Prize), Melvin Calvin (1961 Nobel Prize). Due to his efforts, the college of chemistry at Berkeley became one of the top chemistry centers in the world.\nWhile at Berkeley he also refused entry to women, including preventing Margaret Melhase from conducting graduate studies. Melhase had previously co-discovered Cesium-137 with Seaborg as an undergraduate. In 1913, he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1918. He resigned in 1934, refusing to state the cause for his resignation; it has been speculated that it was due to a dispute over the internal politics of that institution or to the failure of those he had nominated to be elected. His decision to resign may also have been sparked by his resentment over the award of the 1934 Nobel Prize for chemistry to his student, Harold Urey, for his 1931 isolation of deuterium and the confirmation of its spectrum. This was a prize Lewis almost certainly felt he should have shared for his efforts to purify and characterize heavy water.\nDeath.\nOn 23 March 1946, a graduate student found Lewis's lifeless body under a laboratory workbench at Berkeley. Lewis had been working on an experiment with liquid hydrogen cyanide, and deadly fumes from a broken line had leaked into the laboratory. The coroner ruled that the cause of death was coronary artery disease, because of a lack of any signs of cyanosis, but some believe that it may have been a suicide. Berkeley Emeritus Professor William Jolly, who reported the various views on Lewis's death in his 1987 history of UC Berkeley's College of Chemistry, \"From Retorts to Lasers\", wrote that a higher-up in the department believed that Lewis had committed suicide.\nIf Lewis's death was indeed a suicide, a possible explanation was depression brought on by a lunch with Irving Langmuir. Langmuir and Lewis had a long rivalry, dating back to Langmuir's extensions of Lewis's theory of the chemical bond. Langmuir had been awarded the 1932 Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work on surface chemistry, while Lewis had not received the Prize despite having been nominated 41 times. On the day of Lewis's death, Langmuir and Lewis had met for lunch at Berkeley, a meeting that Michael Kasha recalled only years later. Associates reported that Lewis came back from lunch in a dark mood, played a morose game of bridge with some colleagues, then went back to work in his lab. An hour later, he was found dead. Langmuir's papers at the Library of Congress confirm that he had been on the Berkeley campus that day to receive an honorary degree.\nLewis Hall at Berkeley, built in 1948, is named in his honor.\nScientific achievements.\nThermodynamics.\nMost of Lewis\u2019 lasting interests originated during his Harvard years. The most important was thermodynamics, a subject in which Lewis was very active at that time. Although most of the important thermodynamic relations were known by 1895, they were seen as isolated equations, and had not yet been rationalized as a logical system, from which, given one relation, the rest could be derived. Moreover, these relations were inexact, applying only to ideal chemical systems. These were two outstanding problems of theoretical thermodynamics. In two long and ambitious theoretical papers in 1900 and 1901, Lewis tried to provide a solution. Lewis introduced the thermodynamic concept of activity and coined the term \"fugacity\". His new idea of fugacity, or \"escaping tendency\", was a function with the dimensions of pressure which expressed the tendency of a substance to pass from one chemical phase to another. Lewis believed that fugacity was the fundamental principle from which a system of real thermodynamic relations could be derived. This hope was not realized, though fugacity did find a lasting place in the description of real gases.\nLewis\u2019 early papers also reveal an unusually advanced awareness of J. W. Gibbs's and P. Duhem's ideas of free energy and thermodynamic potential. These ideas were well known to physicists and mathematicians, but not to most practical chemists, who regarded them as abstruse and inapplicable to chemical systems. Most chemists relied on the familiar thermodynamics of heat (enthalpy) of Berthelot, Ostwald, and Van \u2019t Hoff, and the calorimetric school. Heat of reaction is not, of course, a measure of the tendency of chemical changes to occur, and Lewis realized that only free energy and entropy could provide an exact chemical thermodynamics. He derived free energy from fugacity; he tried, without success, to obtain an exact expression for the entropy function, which in 1901 had not been defined at low temperatures. Richards too tried and failed, and not until Nernst succeeded in 1907 was it possible to calculate entropies unambiguously. Although Lewis\u2019 fugacity-based system did not last, his early interest in free energy and entropy proved most fruitful, and much of his career was devoted to making these useful concepts accessible to practical chemists.\nAt Harvard, Lewis also wrote a theoretical paper on the thermodynamics of blackbody radiation in which he postulated that light has a pressure. He later revealed that he had been discouraged from pursuing this idea by his older, more conservative colleagues, who were unaware that Wilhelm Wien and others were successfully pursuing the same line of thought. Lewis\u2019 paper remained unpublished; but his interest in radiation and quantum theory, and (later) in relativity, sprang from this early, aborted effort. From the start of his career, Lewis regarded himself as both chemist and physicist.\nValence theory.\nAbout 1902 Lewis started to use unpublished drawings of cubical atoms in his lecture notes, in which the corners of the cube represented possible electron positions. Lewis later cited these notes in his classic 1916 paper on chemical bonding, as being the first expression of his ideas.\nA third major interest that originated during Lewis\u2019 Harvard years was his valence theory. In 1902, while trying to explain the laws of valence to his students, Lewis conceived the idea that atoms were built up of a concentric series of cubes with electrons at each corner. This \u201ccubic atom\u201d explained the cycle of eight elements in the periodic table and was in accord with the widely accepted belief that chemical bonds were formed by transfer of electrons to give each atom a complete set of eight. This electrochemical theory of valence found its most elaborate expression in the work of Richard Abegg in 1904, but Lewis\u2019 version of this theory was the only one to be embodied in a concrete atomic model. Again Lewis\u2019 theory did not interest his Harvard mentors, who, like most American chemists of that time, had no taste for such speculation. Lewis did not publish his theory of the cubic atom, but in 1916 it became an important part of his theory of the shared electron pair bond.\nIn 1916, he published his classic paper on chemical bonding \"The Atom and the Molecule\" in which he formulated the idea of what would become known as the covalent bond, consisting of a shared pair of electrons, and he defined the term odd molecule (the modern term is free radical) when an electron is not shared. He included what became known as Lewis dot structures as well as the cubical atom model. These ideas on chemical bonding were expanded upon by Irving Langmuir and became the inspiration for the studies on the nature of the chemical bond by Linus Pauling.\nAcids and bases.\nIn 1923, he formulated the electron-pair theory of acid\u2013base reactions. In this theory of acids and bases, a \"Lewis acid\" is an \"electron-pair acceptor\" and a \"Lewis base\" is an \"electron-pair donor\". This year he also published a monograph on his theories of the chemical bond.\nBased on work by J. Willard Gibbs, it was known that chemical reactions proceeded to an equilibrium determined by the free energy of the substances taking part. Lewis spent 25 years determining free energies of various substances. In 1923 he and Merle Randall published the results of this study, which helped formalize modern chemical thermodynamics.\nHeavy water.\nLewis was the first to produce a pure sample of deuterium oxide (heavy water) in 1933 and the first to study survival and growth of life forms in heavy water. By accelerating deuterons (deuterium nuclei) in Ernest O. Lawrence's cyclotron, he was able to study many of the properties of atomic nuclei. During the 1930s, he was mentor to Glenn T. Seaborg, who was retained for post-doctoral work as Lewis' personal research assistant. Seaborg went on to win the 1951 Nobel Prize in Chemistry and have the element seaborgium named in his honor while he was still alive.\nO4 Tetraoxygen.\nIn 1924, by studying the magnetic properties of solutions of oxygen in liquid nitrogen, Lewis found that O4 molecules were formed. This was the first evidence for tetratomic oxygen.\nRelativity and quantum physics.\nIn 1908, he published the first of several papers on relativity, in which he derived the mass-energy relationship in a different way from Albert Einstein's derivation. In 1909, he and Richard C. Tolman combined his methods with special relativity. In 1912 Lewis and Edwin Bidwell Wilson presented a major work in mathematical physics that not only applied synthetic geometry to the study of spacetime, but also noted the identity of a spacetime squeeze mapping and a Lorentz transformation.\nIn 1926, he coined the term \"photon\" for the smallest unit of radiant energy (light). Actually, the outcome of his letter to \"Nature\" was not what he had intended. In the letter, he proposed a photon being a structural element, not energy. He insisted on the need for a new variable, \"the number of photons\". Although his theory differed from the quantum theory of light introduced by Albert Einstein in 1905, his name was adopted for what Einstein had called a light quantum (Lichtquant in German).\nOther achievements.\nIn 1921, Lewis was the first to propose an empirical equation describing the failure of strong electrolytes to obey the law of mass action, a problem that had perplexed physical chemists for twenty years. His empirical equations for what he called ionic strength were later confirmed to be in accord with the Debye\u2013H\u00fcckel equation for strong electrolytes, published in 1923.\nOver the course of his career, Lewis published on many other subjects besides those mentioned in this entry, ranging from the nature of light quanta to the economics of price stabilization. In the last years of his life, Lewis and graduate student Michael Kasha, his last research associate, established that phosphorescence of organic molecules involves emission of light from one electron in an excited triplet state (a state in which two electrons have their spin vectors oriented in the \"same\" direction, but in different orbitals) and measured the paramagnetism of this triplet state.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13018", "revid": "48342268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13018", "title": "Governor of Michigan", "text": "Head of government of the U.S. state of Michigan\nThe governor of Michigan is the head of government of the U.S. state of Michigan. The current governor is Gretchen Whitmer, a member of the Democratic Party, who was inaugurated on January 1, 2019, as the state's 49th governor. She was re-elected to serve a second term in 2022. The governor is elected to a four-year term and is limited to two terms.\nQualifications.\nGovernors of Michigan, as well as their lieutenant governors, must be United States citizens who have been qualified electors in Michigan for the four years preceding election and must be at least 30 years of age. A constitutional amendment adopted at the 2010 general election provides that a person is ineligible for any elected office, including governor and lieutenant governor, if convicted of a felony involving dishonesty, deceit, fraud, or a breach of the public trust, and if the conviction were related to the person's official capacity while holding any elective office or position of employment in local, state, or federal government.\nElections and term of office.\nFrom statehood until the election of 1966, governors were elected to two-year terms. Elections are held in November, and the governor assumes office the following January, except in the case of death or resignation. From statehood until 1851, elections were held in odd-numbered years. A new state constitution was drafted in 1850 and took effect in 1851. As part of the process bringing the constitution into effect, there was a single one-year term of governor in 1851. Thereafter elections were held in even years.\nThe constitution adopted in 1963 changed the governor's term to four years, starting in 1967. Since then, gubernatorial elections have been offset by two years between the U.S. presidential elections (e.g., presidential elections were in 2008 and 2012, while gubernatorial elections in that time period were in 2010 and 2014). Gubernatorial elections are held concurrently with state Senate elections. The winner of the gubernatorial election takes office at noon on January 1 of the year following the election.\nBefore 1992, governors could serve an unlimited number of terms. In 1992, an amendment to the Michigan constitution imposed a limit of two four-year terms for the office of governor, whether successive or separated. However, only those terms served after the amendment took effect counted toward the two-term limit. Thus, John Engler, the governor at the time, served three terms as his first term occurred before the restriction. Engler was reelected in 1994 and 1998, but was required to leave office for good in 2002.\nPowers and duties.\nThe governor has responsibilities to:\nThe governor appoints the members of the governing boards of 10 of the state's 13 public universities and department commissions.\nHistory of the office.\nForty-seven people have been governor of the state over forty-nine distinct periods, with two, John S. Barry and Frank Fitzgerald, serving non-consecutive terms. Before statehood, there were five governors of the Michigan Territory. Stevens T. Mason, Michigan's first governor, also served as a territorial governor. He was elected governor at age 23 as a member of the Democratic Party in 1835 and served until 1840. Mason was the youngest state governor in United States history.\nJennifer Granholm became the first female governor of Michigan on January 1, 2003, when she succeeded Engler; she served for 8 years, until January 1, 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13019", "revid": "1305321875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13019", "title": "G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung", "text": "1876 opera by Richard Wagner\n (; Twilight of the Gods), WWV 86D, is the last of the four epic music dramas that constitute Richard Wagner's cycle \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" (English: \"The Ring of the Nibelung\"). It received its premiere at the on 17 August 1876, as part of the first complete performance of the whole work.\nThe title is a German calque of the Old Norse phrase \"\", which in Norse mythology refers to a prophesied war among various beings and gods that ultimately results in the burning, immersion in water, and renewal of the world. As with the rest of the \"Ring\", however, Wagner's account diverges significantly from these Old Norse sources.\nThe autograph manuscript of the work is preserved in the Richard Wagner Foundation.\nSynopsis.\nPrologue.\nPrelude to the Prologue\n\"Scene 1\".\nThe three Norns, daughters of Erda, the goddess of Nature, gather beside Br\u00fcnnhilde's rock, weaving the Rope of Destiny. From it they read of the past, the present, and of the future when Valhalla will be set on fire and the end of the gods will come (\"Welch' Licht leuchtet dort?\"). As their narration approaches the point when they want to sing about the fate of Alberich's ring and its curse and as the themes of Siegfried and the Curse of the ring are heard, the rope breaks. Lamenting the loss of their wisdom, the Norns disappear, returning to their mother Erda beneath the earth (\"Zu End' ewiges Wissen!\").\nOrchestral Interlude - \"Tagesgrauen\" (\"Dawn\")\n\"Scene 2\".\nAs day breaks, Siegfried and Br\u00fcnnhilde emerge from their dwelling high on a mountaintop surrounded by magic fire (\"Zu neuen Thaten, theurer Helde\"). Br\u00fcnnhilde sends Siegfried off to new heroic deeds, urging him to keep their love in mind. Siegfried proclaims himself to be simply an executor of her will, and as a pledge of his fidelity he gives her the ring of power that he took from Fafner's hoard. In a duet, both of them extoll their loving bond, which nothing can untie, even when distance keeps them apart (\"O! heilige G\u00f6tter!\"). Bearing Br\u00fcnnhilde's shield and mounting her steed Grane, Siegfried then rides away.\nOrchestral Interlude - \"Siegfrieds Rheinfahrt\" (\"Siegfried's Rhine Journey\")\nAct 1.\n\"Scene 1\".\nThe act begins on the shores of the Rhine in the Hall of the Gibichungs, a people named after the deceased king Gibich. Gunther, his son and heir, sits enthroned. Gunther's half-brother and chief minister Hagen advises him to find a wife for himself and a husband for Gutrune, the sister of them both, to enlarge the glory and might of their dynasty and secure it for the future. He suggests Br\u00fcnnhilde, the noblest of women, as appropriate for Gunther, and Siegfried, the dragon-slayer, the greatest of heroes, as the best husband for Gutrune. Neither Gunther nor Gutrune knows how to win themselves such partners, but Hagen reminds Gutrune that he has given her a potion she can use to make Siegfried forget any woman he has ever seen and fall in love with her. Enamoured of Gutrune, Siegfried will then also be surely willing to bring Br\u00fcnnhilde, who sleeps on a mountaintop encircled by fire only the fearless can pass, to Gunther in order to gain from him the permission for marriage with Gutrune. Gunther and Gutrune, not knowing that Siegfried and Br\u00fcnnhilde are actually in love with each other, agree enthusiastically with this plan.\n\"Scene 2\".\nSiegfried lands near the Gibichung Hall with his boat, seeking to meet Gunther, of whose fame he has heard during his journey (\"Heil, Siegfried, theurer Held!\"). Gunther extends hospitality to the hero, and Gutrune offers him the potion. Unaware of deception, Siegfried toasts Br\u00fcnnhilde and their mutual love and drinks. In a while he loses his memory of her and is struck by desire for Gutrune. Drugged, Siegfried then offers to win a wife for Gunther, who tells him about Br\u00fcnnhilde and the magic fire, which only a fearless person can cross. They swear blood-brotherhood, mixing their blood in a drinking horn (\"Bl\u00fchenden Lebens labendes Blut\"). Hagen holds the horn but does not join in the oath, and the two new brothers then leave for Br\u00fcnnhilde's rock. Hagen, left on guard duty, gloats that his so-called masters are unwittingly bringing the ring to him (\"Hier sitz ich zur Wacht\" - \"Hagens Wacht\" - \"Hagen's Watch\").\nOrchestral Interlude\n\"Scene 3\".\nMeanwhile, Br\u00fcnnhilde is visited on her rock by her Valkyrie sister Waltraute, who recounts that Wotan returned from his wanderings with his spear shattered. The spear was the symbol of the god's authority and the source and instrument of his power, carved with all the treaties through which he ruled. Unable to influence events any more, he has ordered branches of the World tree to be piled around Valhalla by its heroes and waits in resignation for his ravens to bring him news about the ring (\"H\u00f6re mit Sinn, was ich dir sage!\" - \"Waltraute's Monologue\"). Waltraute begs Br\u00fcnnhilde to return the ring to the Rhinemaidens, but Br\u00fcnnhilde refuses to relinquish the pledge of Siegfried's love, and Waltraute rides away in despair.\nCrossing the ring of fire, Siegfried arrives disguised as Gunther by using the Tarnhelm and claims Br\u00fcnnhilde for his wife (\"Br\u00fcnnhild', ein Freier kam\"). Though Br\u00fcnnhilde, terrified by the appearance of an unknown man, tries to resist him, without the divine powers she has earlier renounced for love's sake she has now nothing with which to defend herself but the ring, which Siegfried manages to snatch cruelly from her hand during a fight, being immune to its coercive power thanks to his fearlessness. Putting the ring on his own hand instead, Siegfried then spends the night with Br\u00fcnnhilde on her rock, placing the magic sword Nothung between them as a witness to his loyalty to Gunther and his keeping the promise to bring Br\u00fcnnhilde untouched (\"Nun Nothung, zeuge du\").\nAct 2.\nPrelude to Act 2\n\"Scene 1\".\nAs Hagen sits sleeping on night watch, his father Alberich appears and urges him to obtain the ring (\"Schl\u00e4fst du, Hagen, mein Sohn?\"). Hagen, barely conscious, swears to do so and Alberich vanishes with pleas for Hagen to remain loyal to him.\nOrchestral Interlude - \"Morgenr\u00f6the\" (\"The Blush of Dawn\")\n\"Scene 2\".\nSiegfried arrives at dawn via Tarnhelm-magic back to the settlement of the Gibichungs, having resumed his natural form and left Br\u00fcnnhilde on a boat on the Rhine with Gunther. He explains to Gutrune how he managed to change his form back from Gunther's just in time for Br\u00fcnnhilde to not be able to recognize the deceit.\n\"Scene 3\".\nHagen summons the Gibichung vassals to welcome Gunther and his bride (\"Hagens Ruf\" - \"Hagen's Call\"). He does this by sounding the war-alarm. The vassals are surprised to learn that the occasion is not battle, but their master's wedding and party. Hagen announces that Gunther has won himself a wife, and orders them to slay sacrificial animals so that the gods may grant a happy marriage. The vassals are then told to defend their new queen's honour if someone were to wrong her.\n\"Scene 4\".\nGunther lands on the Rhine's shore in front of Siegfried, Gutrune, Hagen, and the assembled Gibichung men and women and leads in a downcast Br\u00fcnnhilde as his trophy. With false pomp he then triumphantly announces a double wedding: Br\u00fcnnhilde to himself, and Gutrune to Siegfried (\"Br\u00fcnnhild', die hehrste Frau\"). Br\u00fcnnhilde almost faints in despair as she now sees her beloved, who doesn't even recognize her, with a different woman. However, she notices the ring on Siegfried's hand, and realizes she has been betrayed (\"Betrug! Betrug! Sch\u00e4ndlichster Betrug!\"). Declaring publicly that the man who conquered her and took the ring was not Gunther but Siegfried in disguise she exposes Gunther as an impostor who tried to increase his own prestige through the deeds of someone else. Filled with unquenchable desperate rage she also denounces Siegfried and falsely accuses him of having intercourse with her while in Gunther's form, thus breaking his blood-brotherhood with Gunther. \nSiegfried denies Br\u00fcnnhilde's charge, but the vassals urge him to prove his innocence by taking an oath. Hagen offers his spear as the weapon by which Siegfried can do so. Siegfried agrees and swears upon Hagen's spear-point that he may be killed with it if he has ever loved Br\u00fcnnhilde (\"Helle Wehr, heilige Waffe!\"). She also seizes the spear and swears that Siegfried may be killed with it for swearing the false oath. Once again Hagen supervises silently as others take oaths to his advantage. The naively light-hearted Siegfried, wishing for his wedding day to be joyful, then leads Gutrune and the bystanders exuberantly off to the wedding feast, as if nothing too significant has happened.\nOrchestral Interlude\n\"Scene 5\".\nBr\u00fcnnhilde, Hagen, and Gunther do not join the celebration and stay alone by the shore. Deeply shamed by Br\u00fcnnhilde's outburst in front of his subjects and thus threatened in his authority, Gunther agrees to Hagen's suggestion that Siegfried must be killed in order for Gunther to regain his standing. Indeed, to see Siegfried die is Gunther's duty, since the hero has apparently broken the sacred bond of blood-brotherhood during the night on the rock with Br\u00fcnnhilde, which betrayal condemns him by law to the rightful punishment of death. Br\u00fcnnhilde, seeking revenge for Siegfried's manifest treachery, joins the plot and tells Hagen that Siegfried would be vulnerable only to a stab in the back. Hagen and Gunther decide to lure Siegfried on a hunting-trip and murder him. They sing a trio in which Br\u00fcnnhilde and Gunther vow in the name of Wotan, \"guardian of oaths\", to kill Siegfried, while Hagen repeats his pledge to Alberich: to acquire the ring and rule the world through its power (\"Rache-Terzett\" - \"Vengeance Trio\").\nAct 3.\nPrelude to Act 3\n\"Scene 1\".\nIn the woods by the bank of the Rhine, the Rhinemaidens swim playfully and sing a song to the Sun, mourning their lost Rhine gold (\"Frau Sonne sendet lichte Strahlen\"). Siegfried happens by, separated from the hunting party while searching for prey. The Rhinemaidens urge him to return the ring to the Rhine and thus avoid its curse, but he laughs at them in heroic pride and says he prefers to die rather than bargain for his life. They swim away, predicting that Siegfried will die this very day and that his heir, a lady, will treat them more fairly.\n\"Scene 2\".\nSiegfried rejoins the hunters, who include Gunther and Hagen. While resting, he sings them in high spirits a hero's song about the adventures of his youth (\"Mime hie\u00df ein m\u00fcrrischer Zwerg\"), recounting his life with Mime, the forging of Nothung, slaying the dragon Fafner and understanding the language of birds. Hagen gives him another potion, which restores his memory, and Siegfried tells of discovering the sleeping Br\u00fcnnhilde and awakening her with a kiss. Upon hearing this, now having the apparent evidence of Siegfried's betrayal of the blood-brotherhood in front of Gunther and his men, Hagen stabs Siegfried in the back with his spear, declares that he had avenged perjury and calmly walks away. In his final agony Siegfried recollects the awakening of Br\u00fcnnhilde and his love for her and with the memory of blessed fear the feeling for Br\u00fcnnhilde had taught him, seeing her giving him greetings in a vision, dies (\"Br\u00fcnnhilde! Heilige Braut!\"). His body is carried away in a solemn funeral procession that forms the interlude as the scene is changed and recapitulates many of the themes associated with Siegfried and the W\u00e4lsungs.\nOrchestral Interlude - \"Siegfrieds Trauermusik\" (\"Siegfried's Funeral March\")\n\"Scene 3\".\nBack in the Gibichung Hall, Gutrune awaits Siegfried's return. Hagen arrives ahead of the funeral party. Gutrune is devastated when Siegfried's corpse is brought in. Confronted with his sister's pain, Gunther blames Siegfried's death on Hagen, who replies that Siegfried had incurred the penalty of his false oath. Moreover, he claims the ring on Siegfried's finger by right of conquest. When Gunther objects, Hagen appeals to the vassals to support his lawful claim. Gunther draws his sword but Hagen attacks and easily kills him. As he moves to take the ring, however, Siegfried's hand rises miraculously in a threatening gesture. Hagen, as well as all present, recoil in utmost fear.\nBr\u00fcnnhilde, with her features as if transfigured, suddenly makes her entrance (\"Schweigt eures Jammers jauchzenden Schwall!\"), having in the meantime met on the river's shores the daughters of the Rhine, who talked to her about the ring and its curse. She proclaims Siegfried innocent, as she now recognizes that he betrayed her only due to an intrigue, and declares that Siegfried's betrayal and death were necessary for her to become all-knowing and completely free. \nAs the queen of the Gibichungs, Br\u00fcnnhilde then issues orders for a huge funeral pyre for the dead hero to be assembled by the river (\"Starke Scheite schichtet mir dort\"), and takes the ring from Siegfried's hand. With her eyes turned upwards to the sky, she then, in an apostrophe, addresses Wotan, the ruler of oaths and laws, and proclaims that the death of the free hero Siegfried has atoned for the god's guilt. Renouncing and overcoming the power of the ring through the might of grieving love, she bequeaths it to the Rhinemaidens \u2014 who are to claim it from her own ashes after fire has cleansed it of its curse \u2014 and declares that Wotan can finally truly rest in peace (\"Mein Erbe nun nehm' ich zu eigen\"). Br\u00fcnnhilde then lights the funeral pyre with a firebrand, and with \"anxiously longed-for tidings\", sends Wotan's ravens home to command Loge, the god of fire that still burns on her rock, to fly to Valhalla and set it on fire (\"Fliegt heim, ihr Raben!\"). After a final eulogy to the dead hero, Br\u00fcnnhilde, willing to be reunited with her love, mounts her horse Grane and, as a valkyrie, rides into the flames, joining Siegfried in death.\nA sequence of leitmotifs portray the fire flaring up, and the hall of the Gibichungs catching fire and collapsing. The Rhine overflows its banks, quenching the flames, and the Rhinemaidens swim in to claim the ring. Hagen in a frenzy tries at the last moment to stop them and seize the ring for himself, but they drag him into the depths and drown him (\"Zur\u00fcck vom Ring!\"), the theme of the curse of the ring then being heard for the final time. As they celebrate the return of the Rhinegold to their river and the breaking of its curse, a red glow spreads through the sky. The surviving Gibichungs now see the interior of Valhalla with gods and heroes visible, as described by Waltraute in Act I, Scene 3. A new fire flares up around the Hall of the Gods, hiding it from sight; the gods are consumed in flames and the curtain falls. At the very end of the work the strains of the \"Liebeserl\u00f6sung\" (redemption-through-love) leitmotif emerge.\nReactions.\nRobert A. Hall Jr. has analysed \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" in terms of cultural symbolism. Hermann Danuser has discussed the dramaturgy of the ending of \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" in the context of the entire \"Ring\" cycle. William Kinderman has evaluated a large-scale instance of musical recapitulation in Act III. Warren J. Darcy has expostulated on the potential influence of Wagner's readings of the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer on the music of the \"Ring\" cycle, particularly on the ending of \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\".\nThe historian John Roberts suggested that the killing of Siegfried by Hagen with a stab in the back gave inspiration for the myth that the German Army did not lose World War I, but was instead defeated by a treasonous \"stab in the back\" from civilians, in particular Jews and Socialists.\nThe German bass Kurt Moll noted that the role of the principal villain, Hagen, is unique in the bass repertoire. It demands a shouting, blaring vocal technique that risks damaging the singer's voice; only very large-voiced, powerful singers can perform it. Moll himself chose to avoid the role.\nFriedrich Nietzsche's 1888\u20131889 book, \"G\u00f6tzend\u00e4mmerung\"\u2014Twilight of the Idols\u2014is a pun on the title of \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\", with \"G\u00f6tze\" being the German word for \"idol\" or \"false god\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
