{"id": "12326", "revid": "46191224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12326", "title": "Galen", "text": "Greek physician, surgeon, and philosopher (c. 129\u2013216 AD)\nAelius Galenus or Claudius Galenus (; September 129 \u2013 c.\u2009216 AD), often anglicized as Galen () or Galen of Pergamon, was a Roman and Greek physician, surgeon, and philosopher. Considered to be one of the most accomplished of all medical researchers of antiquity, Galen influenced the development of various scientific disciplines, including anatomy, physiology, pathology, pharmacology, and neurology, as well as philosophy and logic.\nThe son of Aelius Nicon, a wealthy Greek architect with scholarly interests, Galen received a comprehensive education that prepared him for a successful career as a physician and philosopher. Born in the ancient city of Pergamon (present-day Bergama, Turkey), Galen traveled extensively, exposing himself to a wide variety of medical theories and discoveries before settling in Rome, where he served prominent members of Roman society and eventually was given the position of personal physician to several emperors.\nGalen's understanding of anatomy and medicine was principally influenced by the contemporary theory of the four humors: black bile, yellow bile, blood, and phlegm, as first advanced by the author of \"On the Nature of Man\" in the Hippocratic corpus. Galen's views dominated and influenced Western medical science for more than 1,300 years. His anatomical reports were based mainly on the dissection of Barbary apes. However, while dissections and vivisections on humans were practiced in Alexandria by Herophilus and Erasistratus in the 3rd century BCE under Ptolemaic permission, by Galen's time these procedures were strictly forbidden in the Roman Empire. As Galen discovered that the facial expressions of the Barbary apes were particularly vivid, Galen switched to pigs for his research to avoid prosecution. Aristotle had used pigs centuries earlier for his study of anatomy and physiology. Galen, like others, reasoned that animal anatomy had a strong conciliance with that of humans. Galen would encourage his students to go look at dead gladiators or bodies that washed up in order to get better acquainted with the human body.\nGalen's theory of the physiology of the circulatory system remained unchallenged until c.\u20091242, when Ibn al-Nafis published his book \"Sharh tashrih al-qanun li' Ibn Sina\" (\"Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon\"), in which he reported his discovery of pulmonary circulation. His anatomical reports remained uncontested until 1543, when printed descriptions and illustrations of human dissections were published in the seminal work \"De humani corporis fabrica\" by Andreas Vesalius, where Galen's physiological theory was accommodated to these new observations.\nGalen saw himself as both a physician and a philosopher, as he wrote in his treatise titled \"That the Best Physician Is Also a Philosopher\". Galen was very interested in the debate between the rationalist and empiricist medical sects, and his use of direct observation, dissection, and vivisection represents a complex middle ground between the extremes of those two viewpoints. Many of his works have been preserved or translated from the original Greek, although many were destroyed and some credited to him are believed to be spurious. Although there is some debate over the date of his death, he was no younger than seventy when he died.\nBiography.\nGalen's Greek name (\"Gal\u0113n\u00f3s\") comes from the adjective (\"gal\u0113n\u00f3s\") 'calm'. Galen's Latin name (Aelius or Claudius) implies he had Roman citizenship.\nGalen describes his early life in \"On the affections of the mind\". He was born in September 129 AD. His father, Aelius Nicon, was a wealthy patrician, an architect and builder, with eclectic interests including philosophy, mathematics, logic, astronomy, agriculture and literature. Galen describes his father as a \"highly amiable, just, good and benevolent man\". At that time Pergamon (modern-day Bergama, Turkey) was a major cultural and intellectual centre, noted for its library, second only to that in Alexandria, as well as being the site of a large temple to the healing god Asclepius. The city attracted both Stoic and Platonic philosophers, to whom Galen was exposed at age 14. His studies also took in each of the principal philosophical systems of the time, including Aristotelian and Epicurean. His father had planned a traditional career for Galen in philosophy or politics and took care to expose him to literary and philosophical influences. However, Galen states that in around 145 his father had a dream in which the god Asclepius appeared and commanded Nicon to send his son to study medicine.\nMedical education.\nFollowing his earlier liberal education, Galen at age 16 began his studies at the prestigious local healing temple or asclepeion as a \u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c0\u03b5\u03c5\u03c4\u03ae\u03c2 (\"therapeutes\", or attendant) for four years. There he came under the influence of men like Aeschrion of Pergamon, Stratonicus and Satyrus. Asclepiea functioned as spas or sanitoria to which the sick would come to seek the ministrations of the priesthood. Romans frequented the temple at Pergamon in search of medical relief from illness and disease. It was also the haunt of notable people such as the historian Claudius Charax, the orator Aelius Aristides, the sophist Polemo, and the consul Cuspius Rufinus.\nGalen's father died in 148, leaving Galen independently wealthy at the age of 19. He then followed the advice he found in Hippocrates' teaching and traveled and studied widely including such destinations as Smyrna (now \u0130zmir), Corinth, Crete, Cilicia (now \u00c7ukurova), Cyprus, and finally the great medical school of Alexandria, exposing himself to the various schools of thought in medicine. In 157, aged 28, he returned to Pergamon as physician to the gladiators of the High Priest of Asia, one of the most influential and wealthy men in Asia. Galen claims that the High Priest chose him over other physicians after he eviscerated an ape and challenged other physicians to repair the damage. When they refused, Galen performed the surgery himself and in so doing won the favor of the High Priest of Asia. Over his four years there, he learned the importance of diet, fitness, hygiene, and preventive measures, as well as living anatomy, and the treatment of fractures and severe trauma, referring to their wounds as \"windows into the body\". Only five deaths among the gladiators occurred while he held the post, compared to sixty in his predecessor's time, a result that is in general ascribed to the attention he paid to their wounds. At the same time he pursued studies in theoretical medicine and philosophy.\nRome.\nGalen went to Rome in 162 and made his mark as a practicing physician. His public demonstrations and impatience with alternative views on medicine brought him into conflict with other doctors practicing in the city. When the Peripatetic philosopher Eudemus became ill with quartan fever, Galen felt obliged to treat him \"since he was my teacher and I happened to live nearby\". He wrote: \"I return to the case of Eudemus. He was thoroughly attacked by the three attacks of quartan ague, and the doctors had given him up, as it was now mid-winter.\" Some Roman physicians criticized Galen for his use of the prognosis in his treatment of Eudemus. This practice conflicted with the then-current standard of care, which relied upon divination and mysticism. Galen retaliated against his detractors by defending his own methods. Garcia-Ballester quotes Galen as saying: \"In order to diagnose, one must observe and reason.\" This was the basis of his criticism of the doctors who proceeded alogos and askeptos.\nHowever, Eudemus warned Galen that engaging in conflict with these physicians could lead to his assassination. \"Eudemus said this, and more to the same effect; he added that if they were not able to harm me by unscrupulous conduct they would proceed to attempts at poisoning. Among other things he told me that, some ten years before, a young man had come to the city and had given, like me practical demonstrations of the resources of our art; this young man was put to death by poison, together with two servants who accompanied him.\" When Galen's animosity with the Roman medical practitioners became serious, he feared he might be exiled or poisoned, so he left the city.\nRome was engaged in foreign wars in 161; Marcus Aurelius and his then co-Emperor and adoptive brother Lucius Verus were in the north fighting the Marcomanni. During the autumn of 169 when Roman troops were returning to Aquileia, a great plague, most likely one of the first appearances of smallpox (then referred to as the Antonine Plague) in the Mediterranean world, broke out, and the emperor summoned Galen back to Rome. He was ordered to accompany Marcus and Verus to Germany as the court physician. The following spring Marcus was persuaded to release Galen after receiving a report that Asclepius was against the project. He was left behind to act as physician to the imperial heir Commodus. It was here in court that Galen wrote extensively on medical subjects. Ironically, Lucius Verus died in 169, and Marcus Aurelius himself died in 180, both victims of the plague.\nGalen was the physician to Commodus for much of the emperor's life and treated his common illnesses. According to Dio Cassius 72.14.3\u20134, in about 189, under Commodus' reign, a pestilence occurred which at its height killed 2,000 people a day in Rome. This was most likely the same plague (the so-called \"Antonine Plague\" and most likely smallpox) that struck Rome during Marcus Aurelius' reign. Galen was also physician to Septimius Severus during his reign in Rome. He complimented Severus and Caracalla on keeping a supply of drugs for their friends and mentioned three cases in which they had been of use in 198.\nThe Antonine Plague.\nThe Antonine Plague was named after Marcus Aurelius' family name of Antoninus. It was also known as the Plague of Galen and held an important place in medicinal history because of its association with Galen. He had first-hand knowledge of the disease, and was present in Rome when it first struck in 166, and was also present in the winter of 168\u201369 during an outbreak among troops stationed at Aquileia. He had experience with the epidemic, referring to it as very long lasting, and described its symptoms and his treatment of it. His references to the plague are scattered and brief. Galen was not trying to present a description of the disease so that it could be recognized in future generations; he was more interested in the treatment and physical effects of the disease. For example, in his writings about a young man afflicted with the plague, he concentrated on the treatment of internal and external ulcerations. According to Niebuhr, \"this pestilence must have raged with incredible fury; it carried off innumerable victims. The ancient world never recovered from the blow inflicted upon it by the plague that visited it in the reign of M. Aurelius.\"\nThe mortality rate of the plague was 7\u201310 percent; the outbreak in 165\u2013168 would have caused approximately 3.5 to 5 million deaths. Otto Seeck believes that over half the population of the empire perished. J. F. Gilliam believes that the Antonine plague probably caused more deaths than any other epidemic during the empire before the mid-3rd century. Although Galen's description is incomplete, it is sufficient to enable a firm identification of the disease as related to smallpox.\nGalen notes that the exanthema covered the victim's entire body and was usually black. The exanthem became rough and scabby where there was no ulceration. He states that those who were going to survive developed a black exanthem. According to Galen, it was black because of a remnant of blood putrefied in a fever blister that was pustular. His writings state that raised blisters were present in the Antonine plague, usually in the form of a blistery rash. Galen states that the skin rash was close to the one Thucydides described. Galen describes symptoms of the alimentary tract via a patient's diarrhea and stools. If the stool was very black, the patient died. He says that the amount of black stools varied. It depended on the severity of the intestinal lesions. He observes that in cases where the stool was not black, the black exanthema appeared. Galen describes the symptoms of fever, vomiting, fetid breath, catarrh, cough, and ulceration of the larynx and trachea.\nLater years.\nGalen continued to work and write in his final years, finishing treatises on drugs and remedies as well as his compendium of diagnostics and therapeutics, which would have much influence as a medical text both in the Latin Middle Ages and Medieval Islam.\nThe 11th-century \"Suda\" lexicon states that Galen died at the age of 70, which would place his death in about the year 199. However, there is a reference in Galen's treatise \"On Theriac to Piso\" (which may, however, be spurious) to events of 204. There are also statements in Arabic sources that he died in Sicily at age 87, after 17 years studying medicine and 70 practicing it, which would mean he died about 216. According to these sources, the tomb of Galenus in Palermo was still well preserved in the tenth century. Nutton believes that \"On Theriac to Piso\" is genuine, that the Arabic sources are correct, and that the \"Suda\" has erroneously interpreted the 70 years of Galen's career in the Arabic tradition as referring to his whole lifespan. Boudon-Millot more or less concurs and favors a date of 216.\nMedicine.\nGalen contributed a substantial amount to the understanding of pathology. Under the Hippocratic bodily humors theory, differences in human moods come as a consequence of imbalances in one of the four bodily fluids: blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm. Galen promoted this theory and the typology of human temperaments. In Galen's view, an imbalance of each humor corresponded with a particular human temperament (blood\u00a0\u2013 sanguine, black bile\u00a0\u2013 melancholic, yellow bile\u00a0\u2013 choleric, and phlegm\u00a0\u2013 phlegmatic). Thus, individuals with sanguine temperaments are extroverted and social; choleric people have energy, passion, and charisma; melancholics are creative, kind, and considerate; and phlegmatic temperaments are characterised by dependability, kindness, and affection.\nGalen was also a skilled surgeon, operating on human patients. Many of his procedures and techniques would not be used again for centuries, such as the procedures he performed on brains and eyes. His surgical experiments included ligating the arteries of living animals. Although many 20th-century historians have claimed that Galen believed the lens to be in the exact center of the eye, Galen actually understood that the crystalline lens is located in the anterior aspect of the human eye.\nAt first reluctantly but then with increasing vigor, Galen promoted Hippocratic teaching, including venesection and bloodletting, then unknown in Rome. This was sharply criticized by the Erasistrateans, who predicted dire outcomes, believing that it was not blood but \"pneuma\" that flowed in the veins. Galen, however, staunchly defended venesection in his three books on the subject and in his demonstrations and public disputations. Galen's work on anatomy remained largely unsurpassed and unchallenged up until the 16th century in Europe. In the middle of the 16th century, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius challenged the anatomical knowledge of Galen by conducting dissections on human cadavers. These investigations allowed Vesalius to refute aspects of Galen's theories regarding anatomy.\nAnatomy.\nGalen's interest in human anatomy ran afoul of Roman law that prohibited the dissection of human cadavers since roughly 150 BC. Because of this restriction, Galen performed anatomical dissections on living (vivisection) and dead animals, mostly focusing on primates. Galen believed that the anatomical structures of these animals closely mirrored those of humans. Galen clarified the anatomy of the trachea and was the first to demonstrate that the larynx generates the voice. In one experiment, Galen used bellows to inflate the lungs of a dead animal. Galen's research on physiology was largely influenced by previous works of philosophers Plato and Aristotle, as well as from the physician Hippocrates. He was one of the first people to use experiments as a method of research for his medical findings. Doing so allowed him to explore various parts of the body and its functions.\nAmong Galen's major contributions to medicine was his work on the circulatory system. He was the first to recognize that there are distinct differences between venous (dark) and arterial (bright) blood. In addition to these discoveries, Galen postulated much more about the nature of the circulatory system. He believed that blood originated in the liver, which follows the teachings of Hippocrates. The liver converted nutrients gathered from ingested food into blood to be used in the circulatory system. The blood created in the liver would eventually flow unidirectionally into the right ventricle of the heart via the great vein. Galen also proposed a theory on how blood receives air from the lungs to be distributed throughout the body. He declared that the venous artery carried air from the lungs into the left ventricle of the heart to mix with created blood from the liver. This same venous artery allowed for an exchange of waste products from the blood back into the lungs to be exhaled. In order to receive air from the lungs in the left ventricle, the new blood needed to get there from the right ventricle. Thus, Galen asserted that there are small holes in the septum dividing the left and right sides of the heart; these holes allowed the blood to pass through easily to receive air and exchange the aforementioned waste products. Although his anatomical experiments on animal models led him to a more complete understanding of the circulatory system, nervous system, respiratory system, and other structures, his work contained scientific errors. Galen believed the circulatory system to consist of two separate one-way systems of distribution, rather than a single unified system of circulation. He believed venous blood to be generated in the liver, from where it was distributed and consumed by all organs of the body. He posited that arterial blood originated in the heart, from where it was distributed and consumed by all organs of the body. The blood was then regenerated in either the liver or the heart, completing the cycle. Galen also believed in the existence of a group of blood vessels he called the rete mirabile in the carotid sinus. Both of these theories of the circulation of blood were later (beginning with works of Ibn al-Nafis published c.\u20091242) shown to be incorrect.\nGalen was also a pioneer in research about the human spine. His dissections and vivisections of animals led to key observations that helped him accurately describe the human spine, spinal cord, and vertebral column. Galen also played a major role in the discoveries of the central nervous system. He was also able to describe the nerves that emerge from the spine, which is integral to his research about the nervous system. Galen went on to be the first physician to study what happens when the spinal cord is transected on multiple different levels. He worked with pigs and studied their neuroanatomy by severing different nerves either totally or partially to see how it affected the body. He even dealt with diseases affecting the spinal cord and nerves. In his work \"De motu musculorum\", Galen explained the difference between motor and sensory nerves, discussed the concept of muscle tone, and explained the difference between agonists and antagonists.\nGalen's work on animals led to some inaccuracies, most notably his anatomy of the uterus which largely resembled a dog's. Though incorrect in his studies of human reproduction and reproductive anatomy, he came very close to identifying the ovaries as analogous to the male testes. Reproduction was a controversial topic in Galen's lifetime, as there was much debate over if the male was solely responsible for the seed, or if the woman was also responsible.\nThrough his vivisection practices, Galen also proved that the voice was controlled by the brain. One of the most famous experiments that he recreated in public was the squealing pig: Galen would cut open a pig, and while it was squealing he would tie off the recurrent laryngeal nerve, or vocal cords, showing they controlled the making of sound. He used the same method to tie off the ureters to prove his theories of kidney and bladder function. Galen believed the human body had three interconnected systems that allowed it to work. The first system that he theorized consisted of the brain and the nerves, responsible for thought and sensation. The second theorized system was the heart and the arteries, which Galen believed to be responsible for providing life-giving energy. The last theorized system was the liver and veins, which Galen theorized were responsible for nutrition and growth. Galen also theorized that blood was made in the liver and sent out around the body.\nLocalization of function.\nOne of Galen's major works, \"On the Doctrines of Hippocrates and Plato\", sought to demonstrate the unity of the two subjects and their views. Using their theories, combined with Aristotle's, Galen developed a tripartite soul consisting of similar aspects. He used the same terms as Plato, referring to the three parts as rational, spiritual, and appetitive. Each corresponded to a localized area of the body. The rational soul was in the brain, the spiritual soul was in the heart, and the appetitive soul was in the liver. Galen was the first scientist and philosopher to assign specific parts of the soul to locations in the body because of his extensive background in medicine. This idea is now referred to as localization of function. Galen's assignments were revolutionary for the time period, which set the precedent for future localization theories.\nGalen believed each part of this tripartite soul controlled specific functions within the body and that the soul, as a whole, contributed to the health of the body, strengthening the \"natural functioning capacity of the organ or organs in question\". The rational soul controlled higher level cognitive functioning in an organism, for example, making choices or perceiving the world and sending those signals to the brain. He also listed \"imagination, memory, recollection, knowledge, thought, consideration, voluntary motion, and sensation\" as being found within the rational soul. The functions of \"growing or being alive\" resided in the spirited soul. The spirited soul also contained our passions, such as anger. These passions were considered to be even stronger than regular emotions, and, as a consequence, more dangerous. The third part of the soul, or the appetitive spirit, controlled the living forces in our body, most importantly blood. The appetitive spirit also regulated the pleasures of the body and was moved by feelings of enjoyment. This third part of the soul is the animalistic, or more natural, side of the soul; it deals with the natural urges of the body and survival instincts. Galen proposed that when the soul is moved by too much enjoyment, it reaches states of \"incontinence\" and \"licentiousness\", the inability to willfully cease enjoyment, which was a negative consequence of too much pleasure.\nIn order to unite his theories about the soul and how it operated within the body, he adapted the theory of the \"pneuma\", which he used to explain how the soul operated within its assigned organs, and how those organs, in turn, interacted together. Galen then distinguished the vital \"pneuma\", in the arterial system, from the psychic \"pneuma\", in the brain and nervous system. Galen placed the vital \"pneuma\" in the heart and the psychic \"pneuma\" (\"spiritus animalis\") within the brain. He conducted many anatomical studies on animals, most famously an ox, to study the transition from vital to psychic \"pneuma\". Although highly criticized for comparing animal anatomy to human anatomy, Galen was convinced that his knowledge was abundant enough in both anatomies to base one on the other.\nIn his treatise \"On the usefulness of the parts of the body\", Galen argued that the perfect suitability of each part of the body to its function indicated the role of an intelligent creator. His creationism was anticipated by the anatomical examples of Socrates and Empedocles.\nPhilosophy.\nAlthough the main focus of his work was on medicine, anatomy, and physiology, Galen also wrote about logic and philosophy. His writings were influenced by earlier Greek and Roman thinkers, including Plato, Aristotle, the Stoics, and the Pyrrhonists. Galen was concerned to combine philosophical thought with medical practice, as in his brief work \"That the Best Physician is also a Philosopher\" he took aspects from each group and combined them with his original thought. He regarded medicine as an interdisciplinary field that was best practiced by utilizing theory, observation, and experimentation in conjunction.\nGalen combined his observations of his dissections with Plato's theory about the soul. Plato believed that the body and the soul were separate entities, rivaling the Stoics. Plato proclaimed that the soul is immortal, so it must exist before one is born, beyond the human body. This influenced Galen's thinking that the soul had to be acquired because the soul does not always reside within the human body. Plato's influence in Galen's model showed itself most prominently in what Galen dubbed arterial blood, which is a mixture of nutritious blood from the liver and the vital spirit (the soul) which was attained from the lungs. The vital spirit within this medium was necessary for the body to function and eventually completely absorbed. This process was then repeated indefinitely, according to Galen, so that the body could be replenished with the soul, or the vital spirit.\nSeveral schools of thought existed within the medical field during Galen's lifetime, the main two being the Empiricists and Rationalists (also called Dogmatists or Philosophers), with the Methodists being a smaller group. The Empiricists emphasized the importance of physical practice and experimentation or \"active learning\" in the medical discipline. In direct opposition to the Empiricists were the Rationalists, who valued the study of established teachings in order to create new theories in the name of medical advancements. The Methodists formed somewhat of a middle ground, as they were not as experimental as the Empiricists, nor as theoretical as the Rationalists. The Methodists mainly utilized pure observation, showing greater interest in studying the natural course of ailments than making efforts to find remedies. Galen's education had exposed him to the five major schools of thought (Platonists, Peripatetics, Stoics, Epicureans, Pyrrhonists), with teachers from the Rationalist sect and from the Empiricist sect.\nOpposition to the Stoics.\nGalen was well known for his advancements in medicine and the circulatory system, but he was also concerned with philosophy. He developed his own tripartite soul model following the examples of Plato; some scholars refer to him as a Platonist. Galen developed a theory of personality based on his understanding of fluid circulation in humans, and he believed that there was a physiological basis for mental disorders. Galen connected many of his theories to the \"pneuma\" and he opposed the Stoics' definition of and use of the \"pneuma\".\nThe Stoics, according to Galen, failed to give a credible answer for the localization of functions of the psyche, or the mind. Through his use of medicine, he was convinced that he came up with a better answer, the brain. The Stoics only recognized the soul as having one part, which was the rational soul and they claimed it would be found in the heart. Galen, following Plato's idea, came up with two more parts to the soul.\nGalen also rejected Stoic propositional logic and instead embraced a hypothetical syllogistic which was strongly influenced by the Peripatetics and based on elements of Aristotelian logic.\nPsychology.\nMind\u2013body problem.\nGalen believed there is no sharp distinction between the mental and the physical. This was a controversial argument at the time, and Galen agreed with some Greek philosophical schools in believing that the mind and body were not separate faculties. He believed that this could be scientifically shown. This was where his opposition to the Stoics became most prevalent. Galen proposed organs within the body to be responsible for specific functions. According to Galen, the Stoics' lack of scientific justification discredited their claims of the separateness of mind and body, which is why he spoke so strongly against them. There is an intense scholarly debate about soul\u2013body relations in Galen's psychological writings. In his brief treatise \"Quod animi mores\", Galen says both that the soul \"follows\" the mixtures of the body, and that the soul is a bodily mixture. Scholars have offered ways of reconciling these claims, arguing for a materialist reading of Galen's philosophy of mind. According to this materialist reading, Galen identifies the soul with the mixtures of the body.\nPsychotherapy.\nAnother one of Galen's major works, \"On the Diagnosis and Cure of the Soul's Passion\", discussed how to approach and treat psychological problems. This was Galen's early attempt at what would later be called psychotherapy. His book contained directions on how to provide counsel to those with psychological issues to prompt them to reveal their deepest passions and secrets, and eventually cure them of their mental deficiency. The leading individual, or therapist, had to be a male, preferably of an older, wiser, age, as well as free from the control of the passions. These passions, according to Galen, caused the psychological problems that people experienced.\nPublished works.\nGalen may have produced more work than any author in antiquity, rivaling the quantity of work issued from Augustine of Hippo. So profuse was Galen's output that the surviving texts represent nearly half of all the extant literature from ancient Greece. It has been reported that Galen employed twenty scribes to write down his words. Galen may have written as many as 500 treatises, amounting to some 10 million words. Although his surviving works amount to some 3 million words, this is thought to represent less than a third of his complete writings. In 191, or more likely in 192, a fire in the Temple of Peace destroyed many of his works, in particular treatises on philosophy.\nBecause Galen's works were not translated into Latin in the ancient period, and because of the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West, the study of Galen, along with the Greek medical tradition as a whole, went into decline in Western Europe during the Early Middle Ages, when very few Latin scholars could read Greek. However, in general, Galen and the ancient Greek medical tradition continued to be studied and followed in the Eastern Roman Empire, commonly known as the Byzantine Empire. All of the extant Greek manuscripts of Galen were copied by Byzantine scholars.\nIn the Abbasid period (after 750) Arab Muslims began to be interested in Greek scientific and medical texts for the first time, and had some of Galen's texts translated into Arabic, often by Syrian Christian scholars (see below). As a result, some texts of Galen exist only in Arabic translation, while others exist only in medieval Latin translations of the Arabic. In some cases scholars have even attempted to translate from the Latin or Arabic back into Greek where the original is lost. For some of the ancient sources, such as Herophilus, Galen's account of their work is all that survives.\nEven in his own time, forgeries and unscrupulous editions of his work were a problem, prompting him to write \"On His Own Books\". Forgeries in Latin, Arabic or Greek continued until the Renaissance. Some of Galen's treatises have appeared under many different titles over the years. Sources are often in obscure and difficult-to-access journals or repositories. Although written in Greek, by convention the works are referred to by Latin titles, and often by merely abbreviations of those. No single authoritative collection of his work exists, and controversy remains as to the authenticity of a number of works attributed to Galen. As a consequence, research on Galen's work is fraught with hazard.\nVarious attempts have been made to classify Galen's vast output. For instance Coxe (1846) lists a Prolegomena, or introductory books, followed by 7 classes of treatise embracing Physiology (28 vols.), Hygiene (12), Aetiology (19), Semeiotics (14), Pharmacy (10), Blood letting (4), and Therapeutics (17), in addition to 4 of aphorisms, and spurious works. The most complete compendium of Galen's writings, surpassing even modern projects like the \"Corpus Medicorum Graecorum/Latinorum\", is the one compiled and translated by Karl Gottlob K\u00fchn of Leipzig between 1821 and 1833. This collection consists of 122 of Galen's treatises, translated from the original Greek into Latin (the text is presented in both languages). Over 20,000 pages in length, it is divided into 22 volumes, with 676 index pages. Many of Galen's works are included in the \"Thesaurus Linguae Graecae\", a digital library of Greek literature started in 1972. Another useful modern source is the French http:// (BIUM).\nLegacy.\nLate antiquity.\nIn his time, Galen's reputation as both physician and philosopher was legendary, the emperor Marcus Aurelius describing him as \"Primum sane medicorum esse, philosophorum autem solum\" (first among doctors and unique among philosophers \"Praen 14: 660\"). Other contemporary authors in the Greek world confirm this including Theodotus the Shoemaker, Athenaeus and Alexander of Aphrodisias. The 7th-century poet George of Pisida went so far as to refer to Christ as a second and neglected Galen. Galen continued to exert an important influence over the theory and practice of medicine until the mid-17th century in the Byzantine and Arabic worlds and Europe. A few centuries after Galen, Palladius Iatrosophista stated in his commentary on Hippocrates that Hippocrates sowed and Galen reaped.\nGalen summarized and synthesized the work of his predecessors, and it is in Galen's words (Galenism) that Greek medicine was handed down to subsequent generations, such that Galenism became the means by which Greek medicine was known to the world. Often, this was in the form of restating and reinterpreting, such as in Magnus of Nisibis' 4th-century work on urine, which was in turn translated into Arabic. Yet the full importance of his contributions was not appreciated until long after his death. Galen's rhetoric and prolificity were so powerful as to convey the impression that there was little left to learn. The term Galenism has subsequently taken on both a positive and pejorative meaning as one that transformed medicine in late antiquity yet so dominated subsequent thinking as to stifle further progress.\nAfter the collapse of the Western Empire the study of Galen and other Greek works almost disappeared in the Latin West. In contrast, in the predominantly Greek-speaking eastern half of the Roman empire (Byzantium), many commentators of the subsequent centuries, such as Oribasius, physician to the emperor Julian who compiled a \"Synopsis\" in the 4th century, preserved and disseminated Galen's works, making them more accessible. Nutton refers to these authors as the \"medical refrigerators of antiquity\". In late antiquity, medical writing veered increasingly in the direction of the theoretical at the expense of the practical, with many authors merely debating Galenism. Magnus of Nisibis was a pure theorist, as were John of Alexandria and Agnellus of Ravenna with their lectures on Galen's \"De Sectis\". So strong was Galenism that other authors such as Hippocrates began to be seen through Galen's eyes, while his opponents became marginalised and other medical sects such as Asclepiadism slowly disappeared.\nGreek medicine was part of Greek culture, and Syrian Christians came in contact with it while the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantium) ruled Syria and western Mesopotamia, regions that were conquered in the 7th century by the Arabs. After 750, these Syrian Christians made the first translations of Galen into Syriac and Arabic. From then on, Galen and the Greek medical tradition in general became assimilated into the medieval and early modern Islamic Middle East. Job of Edessa is said to have translated 36 of Galen's works into Syriac, some of which were later translated into Arabic by Hunain ibn Ishaq.\nMedieval Islam.\nGalen's approach to medicine became and remains influential in the Islamic world. The first major translator of Galen into Arabic was the Arab Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq. He translated (c.\u2009830\u2013870) 129 works of \"Jalinos\" into Arabic. Arabic sources, such as Muhammad ibn Zakar\u012bya al-R\u0101zi (AD 865\u2013925), continue to be the source of discovery of new or relatively inaccessible Galenic writings. One of Hunayn's Arabic translations, \"Kitab ila Aglooqan fi Shifa al Amrad\", which is extant in the Library of Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine &amp; Sciences, is regarded as a masterpiece of Galen's literary works. A part of the Alexandrian compendium of Galen's work, this 10th-century manuscript comprises two parts that include details regarding various types of fevers (Humyat) and different inflammatory conditions of the body. More important is that it includes details of more than 150 single and compound formulations of both herbal and animal origin. The book provides an insight into understanding the traditions and methods of treatment in the Greek and Roman eras. In addition, this book provides a direct source for the study of more than 150 single and compound drugs used during the Greco-Roman period.\nAs the title of \"Doubts on Galen\" by al-R\u0101zi implies, as well as the writings of physicians such as Ibn Zuhr and Ibn al-Nafis, the works of Galen were not accepted unquestioningly, but as a challengeable basis for further inquiry. A strong emphasis on experimentation and empiricism led to new results and new observations, which were contrasted and combined with those of Galen by writers such as al-R\u0101zi, Ali ibn Abbas al-Majusi, Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi, Ibn Sina (Avicenna), Ibn Zuhr, and Ibn al-Nafis. For example, Ibn al-Nafis' discovery of the pulmonary circulation contradicted the Galenic theory on the heart.\nThe influence of Galen's writings, including humorism, remains strong in modern Unani medicine, now closely identified with Islamic culture, and widely practiced from India (where it is officially recognized) to Morocco.\nMaimonides was influenced by Galen, whom he cited most often in his medical works, and whom he considered to be the greatest physician of all time. In India many Hindu physicians studied Persian and Urdu languages and learnt Galenic medicine. This trend of studies among Hindu physicians began in the 17th century and lasted until the early 20th century (Speziale 2018).\nMiddle Ages.\nFrom the 11th century onwards, Latin translations of Islamic medical texts began to appear in the West, alongside the Salerno school of thought, and were soon incorporated into the curriculum at the universities of Naples and Montpellier. From that time, Galenism took on a new, unquestioned authority, Galen even being referred to as the \"Medical Pope of the Middle Ages\". Constantine the African was amongst those who translated both Hippocrates and Galen from Arabic. In addition to the more numerous translations of Arabic texts in this period, there were a few translations of Galenic works directly from the Greek, such as Burgundio of Pisa's translation of \"De complexionibus\". Galen's works on anatomy and medicine became the mainstay of the medieval physician's university curriculum, alongside Ibn Sina's \"The Canon of Medicine\", which elaborated on Galen's works. Unlike pagan Rome, Christian Europe did not exercise a universal prohibition of the dissection and autopsy of the human body and such examinations were carried out regularly from at least the 13th century. However, Galen's influence was so great that when dissections discovered anomalies compared with Galen's anatomy, the physicians often tried to fit these into the Galenic system. An example of this is Mondino de Liuzzi, who describes rudimentary blood circulation in his writings but still asserts that the left ventricle should contain air. Some cited these changes as proof that human anatomy had changed since the time of Galen.\nThe most important translator of Galen's works into Latin was Niccol\u00f2 di Deoprepio da Reggio, who spent several years working on Galen. Niccol\u00f2 worked at the Angevin Court during the reign of king Robert of Naples. Among Niccol\u00f2's translations is a piece from a medical treatise by Galen, of which the original text is lost.\nRenaissance.\nThe first edition of Galen's complete works in Latin translation was edited by Diomede Bonardo of Brescia and printed at Venice by Filippo Pinzi in 1490.\nThe Renaissance, and the fall of the Byzantine Empire (1453), were accompanied by an influx of Greek scholars and manuscripts to the West, allowing direct comparison between the Arabic commentaries and the original Greek texts of Galen. This New Learning and the Humanist movement, particularly the work of Linacre, promoted \"literae humaniores\" including Galen in the Latin scientific canon, \"De Naturalibus Facultatibus\" appearing in London in 1523. Debates on medical science now had two traditions, the more conservative Arabian and the liberal Greek. The more extreme liberal movements began to challenge the role of authority in medicine, as exemplified by Paracelsus' symbolically burning the works of Avicenna and Galen at his medical school in Basel. Nevertheless, Galen's pre-eminence amongst the great thinkers of the millennium is exemplified by a 16th-century mural in the refectory of the Great Lavra of Mount Athos. It depicts pagan sages at the foot of the Tree of Jesse, with Galen between the Sibyl and Aristotle.\nGalenism's final defeat came from a combination of the negativism of Paracelsus and the constructivism of the Italian Renaissance anatomists, such as Vesalius in the 16th century. In the 1530s, the Flemish anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius took on a project to translate many of Galen's Greek texts into Latin. Vesalius' most famous work, \"De humani corporis fabrica\", was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form. Seeking to examine critically Galen's methods and outlook, Vesalius turned to human cadaver dissection as a means of verification. Galen's writings were shown by Vesalius to describe details present in monkeys but not in humans, and he demonstrated Galen's limitations through books and hands-on demonstrations despite fierce opposition from orthodox pro-Galenists such as Jacobus Sylvius. Since Galen states that he is using observations of monkeys (human dissection was prohibited) to give an account of what the body looks like, Vesalius could portray himself as using Galen's approach of description of direct observation to create a record of the exact details of the human body, since he worked in a time when human dissection was allowed. Galen argued that monkey anatomy was close enough to humans for physicians to learn anatomy with monkey dissections and then make observations of similar structures in the wounds of their patients, rather than trying to learn anatomy only from wounds in human patients, as would be done by students trained in the Empiricist model. The examinations of Vesalius also disproved medical theories of Aristotle and Mondino de Liuzzi. One of the best known examples of Vesalius' overturning of Galenism was his demonstration that the interventricular septum of the heart was not permeable, as Galen had taught (\"Nat Fac III xv\"). However, this had been revealed two years before by Michael Servetus in his fateful \"Christianismi restitutio\" (1553) with only three copies of the book surviving, but these remained hidden for decades; the rest were burned shortly after its publication because of persecution of Servetus by religious authorities.\nMichael Servetus, using the name \"Michel de Villeneuve\" during his stay in France, was Vesalius' fellow student and the best Galenist at the University of Paris, according to Johann Winter von Andernach, who taught both. In the Galenism of the Renaissance, editions of the \"Opera Omnia\" by Galen were very important, beginning from the Aldine Press' editio princeps in Venice in 1525. It was followed in Venice in 1541\u20131542 by the Giunta. There were fourteen editions of the book from that date until 1625. Just one edition was produced from Lyon between 1548 and 1551. The Lyon edition has commentaries on breathing and blood streaming that correct the work of earlier renowned authors such as Vesalius, Caius, or Janus Cornarius. \"Michel De Villeneuve\" had contracts with Jean Frellon for that work, and the Servetus scholar-researcher Francisco Javier Gonz\u00e1lez Echeverr\u00eda presented research that became an accepted communication in the International Society for the History of Medicine, which concluded that Michael De Villeneuve (Michael Servetus) is the author of the commentaries of this edition of Frellon, in Lyon.\nAnother convincing case where understanding of the body was extended beyond where Galen had left it came from these demonstrations of the nature of human circulation and the subsequent work of Andrea Cesalpino, Fabricio of Acquapendente, and William Harvey. Some Galenic teaching, such as his emphasis on bloodletting as a remedy for many ailments, however, remained influential until well into the 19th century.\nContemporary scholarship.\nGalenic scholarship remains an intense and vibrant field, with interest in Galen's work bolstered by the German encyclopedia \"Realencyclop\u00e4die der Classischen Altertumswissenschaft\".\nCopies of his works translated by Robert M. Green are held at the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland.\nIn 2018, the University of Basel discovered that a mysterious Greek papyrus with mirror writing on both sides, which is in the collection of Basilius Amerbach, a professor of jurisprudence at the university in the 16th century, is an unknown medical document of Galen or an unknown commentary on his work. The medical text describes the phenomenon of \"hysterical apnea\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The works of Galen are listed in Galenic corpus.\"\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12327", "revid": "50959829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12327", "title": "Speaking in tongues", "text": "Phenomenon in which people speak words apparently in languages unknown to them\nSpeaking in tongues, also known as glossolalia, is a phenomenon or practice in which people utter words or speech-like sounds, often thought by believers to be languages unknown to the speaker. One definition used by linguists is the fluid vocalizing of speech-like syllables that lack any readily comprehensible meaning. In some cases, as part of religious practice, some believe it to be a divine language unknown to the speaker. Glossolalia is practiced in Pentecostal and charismatic Christianity, as well as in other religions.\nSometimes a distinction is made between \"glossolalia\" and \"xenolalia\", or \"xenoglossy\", which specifically relates to the belief that the language being spoken is a natural language previously unknown to the speaker.\nEtymology.\n\"Glossolalia\" is a borrowing of the (), which is a compound of the () 'tongue, language' and () 'to speak, talk, chat, prattle, make a sound'. The Greek expression (in various forms) appears in the New Testament in the books of Acts and First Corinthians. In Acts 2, the followers of Christ receive the Holy Spirit and speak in the languages of at least fifteen countries or ethnic groups.\nThe exact phrase \"speaking in tongues\" has been used at least since the translation of the New Testament into Middle English in the Wycliffe Bible in the 14th century. Frederic Farrar first used the word \"glossolalia\" in 1879.\nLinguistics.\nIn 1972, William J. Samarin, a linguist from the University of Toronto, published a thorough assessment of Pentecostal glossolalia that became a classic work on its linguistic characteristics. His assessment was based on a large sample of glossolalia recorded in public and private Christian meetings in Italy, the Netherlands, Jamaica, Canada, and the United States over the course of five years; his wide range of subjects included the Puerto Ricans of the Bronx, the snake handlers of the Appalachians and the Molokans from Russia in Los Angeles.\nSamarin found that glossolalic speech does resemble human language in some respects. The speaker uses accent, rhythm, intonation and pauses to break up the speech into distinct units. Each unit is itself made up of syllables, the syllables being formed from consonants and vowels found in a language known to the speaker:\nIt is verbal behaviour that consists of using a certain number of consonants and vowels ... in a limited number of syllables that in turn are organized into larger units that are taken apart and rearranged pseudogrammatically ... with variations in pitch, volume, speed and intensity.\n[Glossolalia] consists of strings of syllables, made up of sounds taken from all those that the speaker knows, put together more or less haphazardly but emerging nevertheless as word-like and sentence-like units because of realistic, language-like rhythm and melody.\nThat the sounds are taken from the set of sounds already known to the speaker is confirmed by others. Felicitas Goodman, a psychological anthropologist and linguist, also found that the speech of glossolalists reflected the patterns of speech of the speaker's native language. These findings were confirmed by Kavan (2004).\nSamarin found that the resemblance to human language was merely on the surface and so concluded that glossolalia is \"only a facade of language\". He reached this conclusion because the syllable string did not form words, the stream of speech was not internally organized, and \u2013 most importantly of all \u2013 there was no systematic relationship between units of speech and concepts. Humans use language to communicate, but glossolalia does not. Therefore, he concluded that glossolalia is not \"a specimen of human language because it is neither internally organized nor systematically related to the world man perceives\". On the basis of his linguistic analysis, Samarin defined Pentecostal glossolalia as \"meaningless but phonologically structured human utterance, believed by the speaker to be a real language but bearing no systematic resemblance to any natural language, living or dead\".\nFelicitas Goodman studied a number of Pentecostal communities in the United States, the Caribbean, and Mexico; these included English-, Spanish- and Mayan-speaking groups. She compared what she found with recordings of non-Christian rituals from Africa, Borneo, Indonesia and Japan. She took into account both the segmental structure (such as sounds, syllables, phrases) and the supra-segmental elements (rhythm, accent, intonation) and concluded that there was no distinction between what was practised by the Pentecostal Protestants and the followers of other religions.\nHistory.\nClassical antiquity.\nIt was a commonplace idea within the Ancient world that divine beings spoke languages different from human languages, and historians of religion have identified references to esoteric speech in Greco-Roman literature that resemble glossolalia, sometimes explained as angelic or divine language. An example is the account in the Testament of Job, a non-canonical elaboration of the Book of Job, where the daughters of Job are described as being given sashes enabling them to speak and sing in angelic languages.\nAccording to Dale B. Martin, glossolalia was accorded high status in the ancient world due to its association with the divine. Alexander of Abonoteichus may have exhibited glossolalia during his episodes of prophetic ecstasy. Neoplatonist philosopher Iamblichus linked glossolalia to prophecy, writing that prophecy was divine spirit possession that \"emits words which are not understood by those that utter them; for they pronounce them, as it is said, with an insane mouth (\"mainomen\u03cc stomati\") and are wholly subservient, and entirely yield themselves to the energy of the predominating God\".\nIn his writings on early Christianity, the Greek philosopher Celsus includes an account of Christian glossolalia. Celsus describes prophecies made by several Christians in Palestine and Phoenicia of which he writes, \"Having brandished these threats they then go on to add incomprehensible, incoherent, and utterly obscure utterances, the meaning of which no intelligent person could discover: for they are meaningless and nonsensical, and give a chance for any fool or sorcerer to take the words in whatever sense he likes\".\nReferences to speaking in tongues by the Church Fathers are rare. Except for Irenaeus' 2nd-century reference to many in the church speaking all kinds of languages \"through the Spirit\", and Tertullian's reference in 207 AD to the spiritual gift of interpretation of tongues being encountered in his day, there are no other known first-hand accounts of glossolalia, and very few second-hand accounts among their writings.\n20th century.\nDuring the 20th century, glossolalia primarily became associated with Pentecostalism and the later charismatic movement. Preachers in the Holiness Movement preachers Charles Parham and William Seymour are credited as co-founders of the movement. Parham and Seymour taught that \"baptism of the Holy Spirit was not the blessing of sanctification but rather a third work of grace that was accompanied by the experience of tongues\". It was Parham who formulated the doctrine of \"initial evidence\". After studying the Bible, Parham came to the conclusion that speaking in tongues was the Bible evidence that one had received the baptism with the Holy Spirit.\nIn 1900, Parham opened Bethel Bible College in Topeka, Kansas, America, where he taught initial evidence, a Charismatic belief about how to initiate the practice. During a service on 1 January 1901, a student named Agnes Ozman asked for prayer and the laying on of hands to specifically ask God to fill her with the Holy Spirit. She became the first of many students to experience glossolalia, in the first hours of the 20th century. Parham followed within the next few days. Parham called his new movement the apostolic faith. In 1905, he moved to Houston and opened a Bible school there. One of his students was William Seymour, an African-American preacher. In 1906, Seymour traveled to Los Angeles where his preaching ignited the Azusa Street Revival. This revival is considered the birth of the global Pentecostal movement. According to the first issue of William Seymour's newsletter, \"The Apostolic Faith\", from 1906:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A Mohammedan, a Soudanese by birth, a man who is an interpreter and speaks sixteen languages, came into the meetings at Azusa Street and the Lord gave him messages which none but himself could understand. He identified, interpreted and wrote a number of the languages.\nParham and his early followers believed that speaking in tongues was xenoglossia, and some followers traveled to foreign countries and tried to use the gift to share the Gospel with non-English-speaking people. From the time of the Azusa Street revival and among early participants in the Pentecostal movement, there were many accounts of individuals hearing their own languages spoken 'in tongues'. The majority of Pentecostals and Charismatics consider speaking in tongues to primarily be divine, or the \"language of angels\", rather than human languages. In the years following the Azusa Street revival Pentecostals who went to the mission field found that they were unable to speak in the language of the local inhabitants at will when they spoke in tongues in strange lands.\nThe revival at Azusa Street lasted until around 1915. From it grew many new Pentecostal churches as people visited the services in Los Angeles and took their newfound beliefs to communities around the United States and abroad. During the 20th century, glossolalia became an important part of the identity of these religious groups. During the 1960s, the charismatic movement within the mainline Protestant churches and among charismatic Roman Catholics adopted some Pentecostal beliefs, and the practice of glossolalia spread to other Christian denominations. The discussion regarding tongues has permeated many branches of Protestantism, particularly since the widespread charismatic movement in the 1960s. Many books have been published either defending or attacking the practice.\nChristianity.\nTheological explanations.\nIn Christianity, a supernatural explanation for glossolalia is advocated by some and rejected by others. Proponents of each viewpoint use the biblical writings and historical arguments to support their positions.\nBiblical practice.\nThere are five places in the New Testament where speaking in tongues is referred to explicitly:\nOther verses by inference may be considered to refer to \"speaking in tongues\", such as , and .\nThe biblical account of Pentecost in the second chapter of the book of Acts describes the sound of a mighty rushing wind and \"divided tongues like fire\" coming to rest on the apostles. The text further describes that \"they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak in other languages\". It goes on to say in verses 5\u201311 that when the Apostles spoke, each person in attendance \"heard their own language being spoken\". Therefore, the gift of speaking in tongues refers to the Apostles' speaking languages that the people listening heard as \"them telling in our own tongues the mighty works of God\". Glossolalists and cessationists both recognize this as xenoglossia, a miraculous ability that marked their baptism in the Holy Spirit. Something similar (although perhaps not xenoglossia) took place on at least two subsequent occasions, in Caesarea and Ephesus.\nGlossolalists and cessationists generally agree that the primary purpose of the gift of speaking in tongues was to mark the Holy Spirit being poured out. At Pentecost the Apostle Peter declared that this gift, which was making some in the audience ridicule the disciples as drunks, be the fulfilment of the prophecy of Joel, which described that God would pour out his Spirit on all flesh ().\nDespite these commonalities, there are significant variations in interpretation.\nPentecostal and charismatic practices.\nBaptism with the Holy Spirit is regarded by the Holiness Pentecostals as being the third work of grace, following the new birth (first work of grace) and entire sanctification (second work of grace). Holiness Pentecostals teach that this third work of grace is accompanied with glossolalia.\nBecause Pentecostal and charismatic beliefs are not monolithic, there is not complete theological agreement on speaking in tongues. Generally, followers believe that speaking in tongues is a spiritual gift that can be manifested as either a human language or a heavenly supernatural language in three ways:\nMany Pentecostals and charismatics quote Paul's words in 1 Corinthians 14 which established guidelines on the public use of glossolalia in the church at Corinth although the exegesis of this passage and the extent to which these instructions are followed is a matter of academic debate.\nThe gift of tongues is often referred to as a \"message in tongues\". Practitioners believe that this use of glossolalia requires an interpretation so that the gathered congregation can understand the message, which is accomplished by the interpretation of tongues. There are two schools of thought concerning the nature of a message in tongues:\nIn addition to praying in the Spirit, many Pentecostal and charismatic churches practice what is known as singing in the Spirit.\nInterpretation of tongues.\nIn Christian theology, the \"interpretation of tongues\" is one of the spiritual gifts listed in 1 Corinthians 12. This gift is used in conjunction with that of the gift of tongues\u00a0\u2013 the supernatural ability to speak in a language (tongue) unknown to the speaker. The gift of interpretation is the supernatural enablement to express in an intelligible language an utterance spoken in an unknown tongue. This is not learned but imparted by the Holy Spirit; therefore, it should not be confused with the acquired skill of language interpretation. While cessationist Christians believe that this miraculous charism has ceased, Charismatic and Pentecostal Christians believe that this gift continues to operate within the church. Much of what is known about this gift was recorded by St. Paul in 1 Corinthians 14. In this passage, guidelines for the proper use of the gift of tongues were given. In order for the gift of tongues to be beneficial to the edification of the church, such supernatural utterances were to be interpreted into the language of the gathered Christians. If no one among the gathered Christians possessed the gift of interpretation, then the gift of tongues was not to be publicly exercised. Those possessing the gift of tongues were encouraged to pray for the ability to interpret.\nNon-Christian practice.\nOther religious groups have been observed to practice some form of theopneustic glossolalia. It is perhaps most commonly in Paganism, Shamanism, and other mediumistic religious practices. In Japan, the God Light Association believed that glossolalia could cause adherents to recall past lives.\nGlossolalia has been postulated as an explanation for the Voynich manuscript.\nIn the 19th century, Spiritism was developed by the work of Allan Kardec, and the practice was seen as one of the self-evident manifestations of spirits. Spiritists argued that some cases were actually cases of xenoglossia.\nMedical research.\nIn most cases tongues speakers have no underlying neuropsychiatric disorder precipitating the manifestations, although it rarely occurs in neurogenic conditions. Speakers report finding personal meaning in the utterances, although they are unintelligible and have no linguistic structure. The link to psychopathology has been disproven - tongues speakers are not over-represented in those with depression or psychosis, nor other disorders and one study found tongues speaking negatively associated with neuroticism - emotional stability was greater amongst the speakers. Nevertheless the language spoken by the speakers is devoid of semantic meaning, although the utterances appear to be derived from the language of the speaker. Studies have thus suggested this could be learned behaviour by the speakers.\nNeuroimaging of brain activity during glossolalia does not show activity in the language areas of the brain. In other words, it may be characterized by a specific brain activity.\nA 1973 experimental study highlighted the existence of two basic types of glossolalia: a static form which tends to a somewhat coaction to repetitiveness and a more dynamic one which tends to free association of speech-like elements.\nA study done by the \"American Journal of Human Biology\" found that speaking in tongues is associated with both a reduction in circulatory cortisol, and enhancements in alpha-amylase enzyme activity\u00a0\u2013 two common biomarkers of stress reduction that can be measured in saliva. Several sociological studies report various social benefits of engaging in Pentecostal glossolalia, such as an increase in self-confidence.\nAs of April 2021, further studies are needed to corroborate the 1980s view of glossolaly with more sensitive measures of outcome, by using the more recent techniques of neuroimaging. \nCessationism.\nVarious Christian groups have criticized the Pentecostal and charismatic movement for paying too much attention to mystical manifestations, such as glossolalia. In certain evangelical and other Protestant Churches, this experience was understood as a gift to speak foreign languages without having learned them (xenoglossy) for evangelization, and cessationism is the theological position that argues that this and other spiritual gifts were meant only for the apostolic age, and thereafter withdrawn.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12332", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12332", "title": "Gustav Kirchhoff", "text": "German physicist and mathematician (1824\u20131887)\nGustav Robert Kirchhoff (; 12 March 1824 \u2013 17 October 1887) was a German physicist and mathematician who contributed to the fundamental understanding of electrical circuits, spectroscopy, and the emission of black-body radiation by heated objects. He coined the term \"black body\" in 1860.\nSeveral different sets of concepts are named \"Kirchhoff's laws\" after him, which include Kirchhoff's circuit laws, Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation, Kirchhoff's diffraction formula, and Kirchhoff's law of thermochemistry.\nThe Bunsen\u2013Kirchhoff Award for spectroscopy is named after Kirchhoff and his colleague, Robert Bunsen.\nBiography.\nGustav Robert Kirchhoff was born on 12 March 1824 in K\u00f6nigsberg, Prussia, the son of Friedrich Kirchhoff, a lawyer, and Johanna Henriette Wittke. His family were Lutherans in the Evangelical Church of Prussia.\nKirchhoff studied at the University of K\u00f6nigsberg, where he attended the mathematico-physical seminar directed by C. G. J. Jacobi, Franz Ernst Neumann, and Friedrich Julius Richelot. In 1845, while a student, Kirchhoff formulated two circuit laws\u2014which are now ubiquitous in electrical engineering. He completed this study as a seminar exercise; it later became his doctoral thesis, supervised by Neumann.\nIn 1847, Kirchhoff graduated from the University of K\u00f6nigsberg and became a \"Privatdozent\" (unsalaried lecturer) at the University of Berlin, where he stayed until 1850 when he was offered a professorship at the University of Breslau. In 1854, he was called to the University of Heidelberg, where he collaborated with Robert Bunsen in spectroscopic work. In 1875, Kirchhoff returned to Berlin, where he remained until his death in 1887.\nIn 1857, Kirchhoff married Clara Richelot, the daughter of his mathematics professor Richelot; the couple had five children. In 1872, after Clara's death in 1869, he married Luise Br\u00f6mmel.\nKirchhoff died on 17 October 1887 in Berlin at the age of 63. He is buried at \"Alter St.-Matth\u00e4us-Kirchhof\" (Old St. Matthew's Cemetery) in Sch\u00f6neberg, Berlin (just a few meters from the graves of the Brothers Grimm).\nResearch.\nIn 1857, Kirchhoff calculated that an electric signal in a resistanceless wire travels along the wire at the speed of light.\nIn 1859, Kirchhoff proposed a law of thermal radiation, and gave a proof in 1861. \nTogether, Kirchhoff and Bunsen improved on Joseph von Fraunhofer's 1814 spectroscope, which Kirchhoff used to pioneer the identification of the elements in the Sun, showing in 1859 that the Sun contains sodium. Kirchhoff and Bunsen discovered caesium and rubidium in 1861.\nKirchhoff contributed greatly to the field of spectroscopy by formalizing three laws that describe the spectral composition of light emitted by incandescent objects, building substantially on the discoveries of David Alter and Anders Jonas \u00c5ngstr\u00f6m. In 1862, he was awarded the Rumford Medal \"for his researches on the fixed lines of the solar spectrum, and on the inversion of the bright lines in the spectra of artificial light\".\nKirchhoff also contributed to optics, carefully solving the wave equation to provide a solid foundation for Huygens' principle (and correct it in the process).\nKirchhoff's circuit laws.\nKirchhoff's first law states that at any node in an electrical circuit where current can branch, the sum of the currents leaving the node is equal to the sum of the currents entering the node. The second law states that the algebraic sum of the potential drops along a closed circuit, taken in any direction of flow, is equal to zero.\nKirchhoff's three laws of spectroscopy.\nKirchhoff did not know about the existence of energy levels in atoms. The existence of discrete spectral lines had been known since Fraunhofer discovered them in 1814. That the lines formed a discrete mathematical pattern was described by Johann Balmer in 1885. Joseph Larmor explained the splitting of the spectral lines in a magnetic field known as the Zeeman Effect by the oscillation of electrons. These discrete spectral lines were not explained as electron transitions until the Bohr model of the atom in 1913, which helped lead to quantum mechanics.\nKirchhoff's law of thermal radiation.\nIt was Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation in which he proposed an unknown universal law for radiation that led Max Planck to the discovery of the quantum of action leading to quantum mechanics.\nKirchhoff's law of thermochemistry.\nKirchhoff showed in 1858 that, in thermochemistry, the variation of the heat of a chemical reaction is given by the difference in heat capacity between products and reactants:\nformula_1.\nIntegration of this equation permits the evaluation of the heat of reaction at one temperature from measurements at another temperature.\nKirchhoff's theorem in graph theory.\nKirchhoff also worked in the mathematical field of graph theory, in which he proved Kirchhoff's matrix tree theorem.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12333", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12333", "title": "G. K. Chesterton", "text": "English author and Christian apologist (1874\u20131936)\nGilbert Keith Chesterton (29 May 1874\u00a0\u2013 14 June 1936) was an English author, philosopher, Christian apologist, poet, journalist and magazine editor, and literary and art critic. Chesterton's wit, paradoxical style, and defence of tradition made him a dominant figure in early 20th-century literature. \nChesterton created the fictional priest-detective Father Brown, and wrote on apologetics, such as his works \"Orthodoxy\" and \"The Everlasting Man\". Chesterton routinely referred to himself as an orthodox Christian and came to identify this position more and more with Catholicism, eventually converting from high church Anglicanism. Biographers have identified him as a successor to such Victorian authors as Matthew Arnold, Thomas Carlyle, John Henry Newman and John Ruskin.\nHe has been referred to as the \"prince of paradox\". Of his writing style, \"Time\" observes: \"Whenever possible, Chesterton made his points with popular sayings, proverbs, allegories\u2014first carefully turning them inside out.\" His writings were an influence on Jorge Luis Borges, who compared his work with that of Edgar Allan Poe.\nInitially educated in art, Chesterton became a prolific author, producing around 80 books, 200 short stories, 4,000 essays, and notable works such as \"The Man Who Was Thursday\", and the Father Brown detective stories. Raised in a loosely Unitarian family, he became agnostic in his early adulthood, but later spent much of his life as a member of the Church of England through the influence of his wife. He converted to Catholicism in 1922 largely under the influence of his longtime partnership with Hilaire Belloc, who shaped much of his writing. A charismatic public intellectual, he debated figures like George Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells, opposed imperialism and eugenics, and promoted distributism\u2014a \"third way\" between capitalism and socialism. He died in 1936, leaving a vast and enduring legacy, with his possible sainthood still periodically discussed.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nChesterton was born in Campden Hill in Kensington, London, on 29 May 1874. His father was Edward Chesterton, an estate agent, and his mother was Marie Louise, n\u00e9e Grosjean, of Swiss-French origin. Chesterton was baptised at the age of one month into the Church of England, though his family were irregularly practising Unitarians. According to his autobiography, as a young man he became fascinated with the occult and, along with his brother Cecil, experimented with Ouija boards. He was educated at St Paul's School, then attended the Slade School of Art to become an illustrator. The Slade is a department of University College London, where Chesterton also took classes in literature, but he did not complete a degree in either subject. He married Frances Blogg in 1901; the marriage lasted the rest of his life. Chesterton credited Frances with leading him back to Anglicanism, though he later considered Anglicanism to be a \"pale imitation\". He entered in full communion with the Catholic Church in 1922. The couple were unable to have children.\nA friend from schooldays was Edmund Clerihew Bentley, inventor of the clerihew, a whimsical four-line biographical poem. Chesterton wrote clerihews and illustrated his friend's first published collection of poetry, \"Biography for Beginners\" (1905), which popularised the clerihew form. He became godfather to Bentley's son Nicolas and opened his novel \"The Man Who Was Thursday\" with a poem written to Bentley.\nCareer.\nIn September 1895, Chesterton began working for the London publisher George Redway, where he remained for just over a year. In October 1896, he moved to the publishing house T. Fisher Unwin, where he remained until 1902. During this period he undertook his first journalistic work as a freelance art and literary critic. In 1902, \"The Daily News\" gave him a weekly opinion column, followed in 1905 by a weekly column in \"The Illustrated London News\", for which he continued to write for the next 30 years.\nEarly on Chesterton showed a great interest in and talent for art. He had planned to become an artist, and his writing shows a vision that clothed abstract ideas in concrete and memorable images. Father Brown is perpetually correcting the incorrect vision of the bewildered folk at the scene of the crime and wandering off at the end with the criminal to exercise his priestly role of recognition, repentance and reconciliation. For example, in the story \"The Flying Stars\", Father Brown entreats the character Flambeau to give up his life of crime: \"There is still youth and honour and humour in you; don't fancy they will last in that trade. Men may keep a sort of level of good, but no man has ever been able to keep on one level of evil. That road goes down and down. The kind man drinks and turns cruel; the frank man kills and lies about it. Many a man I've known started like you to be an honest outlaw, a merry robber of the rich, and ended stamped into slime.\"\nChesterton loved to debate, often engaging in friendly public disputes with such men as George Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, Bertrand Russell and Clarence Darrow. According to his autobiography, he and Shaw played cowboys in a silent film that was never released. On 7 January 1914 Chesterton (along with his brother Cecil and future sister-in-law Ada) took part in the mock-trial of John Jasper for the murder of Edwin Drood. Chesterton was Judge, and Shaw played the role of foreman of the jury. That autumn, Chesterton was struck with a serious illness from which he barely recovered, bedridden for months and unconscious for a significant portion of it.\nDuring the First World War, Chesterton was editing \"New Witness\" writing editorials and publishing letters from writers and thinkers, such as Thomas Maynard\u2014 English poet and historian of the Catholic Church whose thinking was influenced by Chesterton's (1908) \"Orthodoxy\"\u2014and Hilaire Belloc. In 1917, issues of \"New Witness\" shed light on these writers' moral concerns about the way the war was being fought on the home front, by commentary on \"the 'Gordon Scandal'\", the undercover agent alias \"Alex Gordon\". This scandal was the refusal of the Attorney-General F.E. Smith to produce 'Gordon', the 'vanishing spy', for examination in court but on whose 'evidence' three defendants to conspiracy to murder (David Lloyd George and Arthur Henderson) were convicted and imprisoned (\"R v Alice Wheeldon &amp; Ors\", 1917).\nChesterton was a large man, standing tall and weighing around . His girth gave rise to an anecdote during the First World War, when a lady in London asked why he was not \"out at the Front\"; he replied, \"If you go round to the side, you will see that I am.\" On another occasion he remarked to Shaw, \"To look at you, anyone would think a famine had struck England.\" Shaw retorted, \"To look at you, anyone would think you had caused it.\" P. G. Wodehouse once described a very loud crash as \"a sound like G.\u00a0K. Chesterton falling onto a sheet of tin\". Chesterton usually wore a cape and a crumpled hat, with a swordstick in hand and a cigar hanging out of his mouth. He had a tendency to forget where he was supposed to be going and miss the train that was supposed to take him there. It is reported that on several occasions he sent a telegram to his wife Frances from an incorrect location, writing such things as \"Am in Market Harborough. Where ought I to be?\" to which she would reply, \"Home\". Chesterton told this story but omitting his wife's alleged reply, in his autobiography.\nIn 1931, the BBC invited Chesterton to give a series of radio talks. He accepted, tentatively at first. He was allowed (and encouraged) to improvise on the scripts. This allowed his talks to maintain an intimate character, as did the decision to allow his wife and secretary to sit with him during his broadcasts. The talks were very popular. A BBC official remarked, after Chesterton's death, that \"in another year or so, he would have become the dominating voice from Broadcasting House.\" Chesterton was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1935.\nChesterton was part of the Detection Club, a society of British mystery authors founded by Anthony Berkeley in 1928. He was elected as the first president and served from 1930 to 1936 until he was succeeded by E. C. Bentley. Chesterton was one of the dominating figures of the London literary scene in the early 20th century.\nDeath.\nChesterton died of congestive heart failure on 14 June 1936, 16 days after his 62nd birthday, at his home in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire. His last words were a greeting of good morning spoken to his wife Frances. The sermon at Chesterton's Requiem Mass in Westminster Cathedral, London, was delivered by Ronald Knox on 27 June 1936. Knox said, \"All of this generation has grown up under Chesterton's influence so completely that we do not even know when we are thinking Chesterton.\" He is buried in Beaconsfield in the Catholic Cemetery. Chesterton's estate was probated at \u00a328,389, .\nNear the end of Chesterton's life, Pope Pius XI invested him as Knight Commander with Star of the Papal Order of St. Gregory the Great (KC*SG). The Chesterton Society has proposed that he be beatified.\nWriting.\nChesterton wrote around 80 books, several hundred poems, some 200 short stories, 4,000 essays (mostly newspaper columns), and several plays. He was a literary and social critic, historian, playwright, novelist, and Catholic theologian and apologist, debater, and mystery writer. He was a columnist for the \"Daily News\", \"The Illustrated London News\", and his own paper, \"G. K.'s Weekly\"; he also wrote articles for the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", including the entry on Charles Dickens and part of the entry on Humour in the 14th edition (1929). His best-known character is the priest-detective Father Brown, who appears only in short stories, while \"The Man Who Was Thursday\" is arguably his best-known novel. He was a convinced Christian long before he was received into the Catholic Church, and Christian themes and symbolism appear in much of his writing. In the United States, his writings on distributism were popularised through \"The American Review\", published by Seward Collins in New York. Chesterton's writings consistently displayed wit and a sense of humour. He employed paradox, while making serious comments on the world, government, politics, economics, philosophy, theology and many other topics.\nOf his nonfiction, \"Charles Dickens: A Critical Study\" (1906) has received some of the broadest-based praise. According to Ian Ker (\"The Catholic Revival in English Literature, 1845\u20131961\", 2003), \"In Chesterton's eyes Dickens belongs to Merry, not Puritan, England\"; Ker treats Chesterton's thought in chapter 4 of that book as largely growing out of his true appreciation of Dickens, a somewhat shop-soiled property in the view of other literary opinions of the time. The biography was largely responsible for creating a popular revival for Dickens's work as well as a serious reconsideration of Dickens by scholars.\nT. S. Eliot sums up his work as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEliot comments further: \"His poetry was first-rate journalistic balladry, and I do not suppose that he took it more seriously than it deserved. He reached a high imaginative level with \"The Napoleon of Notting Hill\", and higher with \"The Man Who Was Thursday\", romances in which he turned the Stevensonian fantasy to more serious purpose. His book on Dickens seems to me the best essay on that author that has ever been written. Some of his essays can be read again and again; though of his essay-writing as a whole, one can only say that it is remarkable to have maintained such a high average with so large an output.\"\nIn 2022, a three-volume bibliography of Chesterton was published, listing 9,000 contributions he made to newspapers, magazines, and journals, as well as 200 books and 3,000 articles about him.\nContemporaries.\n\"Chesterbelloc\".\nChesterton is often associated with his close friend, poet and essayist Hilaire Belloc. George Bernard Shaw coined the name \"Chesterbelloc\" for their partnership, and this stuck. Though they were very different men, they shared many beliefs; in 1922, Chesterton joined Belloc in the Catholic faith, and both voiced criticisms of capitalism and socialism. They instead espoused a third way: distributism. \"G.\u00a0K.'s Weekly\", which occupied much of Chesterton's energy in the last 15 years of his life, was the successor to Belloc's \"New Witness\", taken over from Cecil Chesterton, who died in World War I.\nIn his book \"On the Place of Gilbert Chesterton in English Letters\", Belloc wrote that \"Everything he wrote upon any one of the great English literary names was of the first quality. He summed up any one pen (that of Jane Austen, for instance) in exact sentences; sometimes in a single sentence, after a fashion which no one else has approached. He stood quite by himself in this department. He understood the very minds (to take the two most famous names) of Thackeray and of Dickens. He understood and presented Meredith. He understood the supremacy in Milton. He understood Pope. He understood the great Dryden. He was not swamped as nearly all his contemporaries were by Shakespeare, wherein they drown as in a vast sea \u2013 for that is what Shakespeare is. Gilbert Chesterton continued to understand the youngest and latest comers as he understood the forefathers in our great corpus of English verse and prose.\"\nWilde.\nIn his book \"Heretics\", Chesterton said this of Oscar Wilde: \"The same lesson [of the pessimistic pleasure-seeker] was taught by the very powerful and very desolate philosophy of Oscar Wilde. It is the religion; but the carpe diem religion is not the religion of happy people, but of very unhappy people. Great joy does not gather the rosebuds while it may; its eyes are fixed on the immortal rose which Dante saw.\" More briefly, and with a closer approximation to Wilde's own style, he wrote in his 1908 book \"Orthodoxy\" concerning the necessity of making symbolic sacrifices for the gift of creation: \"Oscar Wilde said that sunsets were not valued because we could not pay for sunsets. But Oscar Wilde was wrong; we can pay for sunsets. We can pay for them by not being Oscar Wilde.\"\nShaw.\nChesterton and George Bernard Shaw were famous friends and enjoyed their arguments and discussions. Although rarely in agreement, they each maintained good will toward, and respect for, the other. In his writing, Chesterton expressed himself very plainly on where they differed and why. In \"Heretics\" he writes of Shaw:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After belabouring a great many people for a great many years for being unprogressive, Mr Shaw has discovered, with characteristic sense, that it is very doubtful whether any existing human being with two legs can be progressive at all. Having come to doubt whether humanity can be combined with progress, most people, easily pleased, would have elected to abandon progress and remain with humanity. Mr Shaw, not being easily pleased, decides to throw over humanity with all its limitations and go in for progress for its own sake. If man, as we know him, is incapable of the philosophy of progress, Mr Shaw asks, not for a new kind of philosophy, but for a new kind of man. It is rather as if a nurse had tried a rather bitter food for some years on a baby, and on discovering that it was not suitable, should not throw away the food and ask for a new food, but throw the baby out of window, and ask for a new baby.\nViews.\nAdvocacy of Catholicism.\nChesterton's views, in contrast to Shaw and others, became increasingly focused towards the Church. In \"Orthodoxy\" he writes: \"The worship of will is the negation of will... If Mr Bernard Shaw comes up to me and says, 'Will something', that is tantamount to saying, 'I do not mind what you will', and that is tantamount to saying, 'I have no will in the matter.' You cannot admire will in general, because the essence of will is that it is particular.\"\nChesterton's \"The Everlasting Man\" contributed to C. S. Lewis's conversion to Christianity. In a letter to Sheldon Vanauken (14 December 1950), Lewis calls the book \"the best popular apologetic I know\", and to Rhonda Bodle he wrote (31 December 1947) \"the [very] best popular defence of the full Christian position I know is G.\u00a0K. Chesterton's \"The Everlasting Man\"\". The book was cited in a list of 10 books that \"most shaped his vocational attitude and philosophy of life\".\nChesterton's hymn \"O God of Earth and Altar\" was printed in \"The Commonwealth\" and was included in \"The English Hymnal\" in 1906. Several lines of the hymn appear in the beginning of the song \"Revelations\" by the British heavy metal band Iron Maiden on their 1983 album \"Piece of Mind\". Lead singer Bruce Dickinson in an interview stated \"I have a fondness for hymns. I love some of the ritual, the beautiful words, \"Jerusalem\" and there was another one, with words by G.\u00a0K. Chesterton \"O God of Earth and Altar\" \u2013 very fire and brimstone: 'Bow down and hear our cry'. I used that for an Iron Maiden song, \"Revelations\". In my strange and clumsy way I was trying to say look it's all the same stuff.\"\n\u00c9tienne Gilson praised Chesterton's book on Thomas Aquinas: \"I consider it as being, without possible comparison, the best book ever written on Saint Thomas... the few readers who have spent twenty or thirty years in studying St. Thomas Aquinas, and who, perhaps, have themselves published two or three volumes on the subject, cannot fail to perceive that the so-called 'wit' of Chesterton has put their scholarship to shame.\"\nArchbishop Fulton J. Sheen, the author of 70 books, identified Chesterton as the stylist who had the greatest impact on his own writing, stating in his autobiography \"Treasure in Clay\", \"the greatest influence in writing was G.\u00a0K. Chesterton who never used a useless word, who saw the value of a paradox, and avoided what was trite.\" Chesterton wrote the introduction to Sheen's book \"God and Intelligence in Modern Philosophy; A Critical Study in the Light of the Philosophy of Saint Thomas\".\nCommon sense.\nChesterton has been called \"The Apostle of Common Sense\". He was critical of the thinkers and popular philosophers of the day, who though very clever, were saying things that he considered nonsensical. This is illustrated again in \"Orthodoxy\": \"Thus when Mr H. G. Wells says (as he did somewhere), 'All chairs are quite different', he utters not merely a misstatement, but a contradiction in terms. If all chairs were quite different, you could not call them 'all chairs'.\"\nConservatism.\nAlthough Chesterton was an early member of the Fabian Society, he resigned at the time of the Second Boer War. He is often identified as a traditionalist conservative\u00a0due to his staunch support of tradition, expressed in \"Orthodoxy\" and other works with Burkean\u00a0quotes such as the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tradition means giving votes to the most obscure of all classes, our ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. Tradition refuses to submit to the small and arrogant oligarchy of those who merely happen to be walking about. All democrats object to men being disqualified by the accident of birth; tradition objects to their being disqualified by the accident of death. Democracy tells us not to neglect a good man's opinion, even if he is our groom; tradition asks us not to neglect a good man's opinion, even if he is our father.\nChesterton has been considered among the United Kingdom's anti-imperialist conservative wing, contrasted with his intellectual rivals in Shaw and Wells. Chesterton's association with conservatism has expanded beyond British politics; Japanese conservative intellectuals, such as Hidetsugu Yagi, have often referred to Chesterton's appeal to tradition as the \"democracy of the dead\". However, Chesterton did not equate conservatism with complacency, arguing that cultural conservatives had to be politically radical.\nLiberalism.\nIn spite of his association with tradition and conservatism, Chesterton called himself \"the last liberal\". He was a supporter of the Liberal Party until he severed ties in 1928 following the death of former Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith, although his attachment had already gradually weakened over the decades. In addition the \"Daily News\", for which Chesterton had been a columnist between 1903 and 1913, was aligned with the Liberals.\nChesterton's increasing coolness towards the Liberal Party was a response to the rise of New Liberalism in the early 20th century, which differed from his own vision of liberalism in several respects: it was secular, rather than being rooted in Christianity like the party's previously predominant creed of Gladstonian liberalism, and advocated a collectivist approach to social reform at odds with Chesterton's concern about what he saw as an increasingly interventionist and technocratic state challenging both the primacy of the family in social organisation and democracy as a political ideal.\nDespite this critique of the development of left-liberalism in this period, Chesterton also criticised the \"laissez-faire\" approach of Manchester Liberalism which had been influential among Liberals in the late 19th century, arguing that this had led to the development of monopolies and plutocracy rather than the competition classical theorists had predicted, as well as the exploitation of workers for profit.\nIn addition to Chesterton, other distributists including Belloc were also involved with the Liberals before the First World War. They shared much common ground in terms of their policy agenda with the broader party during this time, including devolution of power to local government, franchise reform, replication of the Irish Wyndham Land Act in Britain, supporting trade unions and a degree of social reform by central government, whilst opposing socialism.\nChesterton opposed the Conservative Education Act 1902, which provided for public funding of Church schools, on the grounds that religious freedom was best served by keeping religion out of education. However, he disassociated himself from the campaign against it led by John Clifford, whose invoking of the Act's provisions as resulting in \"Rome on the rates\" was judged by Chesterton to be bigotry appealing to straw man arguments. The Chestertons and Belloc supported the Liberal leadership on the passage of David Lloyd George's People's Budget and the weakening of the power of the House of Lords through the Parliament Act 1911 in response to its resistance to the budget, but were critical of their timidity in pushing for Irish Home Rule.\nFollowing the war, the position of the New Liberals had strengthened, and the distributists came to believe that the party's positions were closer to social democracy than liberalism. They also differed from most Liberals by advocating for home rule for all of Ireland, rather than partition. More generally they developed a policy agenda distinct from any of the main three parties during this time, including promoting craft guilds and the nuclear family, introducing primary elections and referendums, antitrust action, tax reform to favour small businesses, and transparency regarding party funding and the Honours Lists.\nOn war.\nChesterton first emerged as a journalist just after the turn of the 20th century. His great, and very lonely, opposition to the Second Boer War, set him very much apart from most of the rest of the British press. Chesterton was a Little Englander, opposed to imperialism, British or otherwise. Chesterton thought that Great Britain betrayed her own principles in the Boer Wars.\nIn vivid contrast to his opposition to the Boer Wars, Chesterton vigorously defended and encouraged the Allies in World War I. \"The war was in Chesterton's eyes a crusade, and he was certain that England was right to fight as she had been wrong in fighting the Boers.\" Chesterton saw the roots of the war in Prussian militarism. He was deeply disturbed by Prussia's unprovoked invasion and occupation of neutral Belgium and by reports of shocking atrocities the Imperial German Army was allegedly committing in Belgium. Over the course of the War, Chesterton wrote hundreds of essays defending it, attacking pacifism, and exhorting the public to persevere until victory. Some of these essays were collected in the 1916 work, \"The Barbarism of Berlin\".\nOne of Chesterton's most successful works in support of the War was his 1915 tongue-in-cheek \"The Crimes of England\". The work is ironic, supposedly apologizing and trying to help a fictitious Prussian professor named Whirlwind make the case for Prussia in WWI, while actually attacking Prussia throughout. Part of the book's humorous impact is the conceit that Professor Whirlwind never realizes how his supposed benefactor is undermining Prussia at every turn. Chesterton \"blames\" England for historically building up Prussia against Austria, and for its pacifism, especially among wealthy British Quaker political donors, who prevented Britain from standing up to past Prussian aggression.\nAccusations of antisemitism.\nChesterton faced accusations of antisemitism during his lifetime, saying in his 1920 book \"The New Jerusalem\" that it was something \"for which my friends and I were for a long period rebuked and even reviled\". Despite his protestations to the contrary, the accusation continues to be repeated. An early supporter of Captain Dreyfus, by 1906 he had turned into an anti-Dreyfusard. From the early 20th century, his fictional work included caricatures of Jews, stereotyping them as greedy, cowardly, disloyal and communists. Martin Gardner suggests that \"Four Faultless Felons\" was allowed to go out of print in the United States because of the \"anti-Semitism which mars so many pages.\"\nThe Marconi scandal of 1912\u20131913 brought issues of anti-Semitism into the political mainstream. Senior ministers in the Liberal government had secretly profited from advance knowledge of deals regarding wireless telegraphy, and critics regarded it as relevant that some of the key players were Jewish. According to historian Todd Endelman, who identified Chesterton as among the most vocal critics, \"The Jew-baiting at the time of the Boer War and the Marconi scandal was linked to a broader protest, mounted in the main by the Radical wing of the Liberal Party, against the growing visibility of successful businessmen in national life and their challenge to what were seen as traditional English values.\"\nIn a 1917 work, titled \"A Short History of England\", Chesterton considers the royal decree of 1290 by which Edward I expelled Jews from England, a policy that remained in place until 1655. Chesterton writes that popular perception of Jewish moneylenders could well have led Edward I's subjects to regard him as a \"tender father of his people\" for \"breaking the rule by which the rulers had hitherto fostered their bankers' wealth\". He felt that Jews, \"a sensitive and highly civilized people\" who \"were the capitalists of the age, the men with wealth banked ready for use\", might legitimately complain that \"Christian kings and nobles, and even Christian popes and bishops, used for Christian purposes (such as the Crusades and the cathedrals) the money that could only be accumulated in such mountains by a usury they inconsistently denounced as unchristian; and then, when worse times came, gave up the Jew to the fury of the poor\".\nIn \"The New Jerusalem,\" Chesterton dedicated a chapter to his views on the Jewish question: the sense that Jews were a distinct people without a homeland of their own, living as foreigners in countries where they were always a minority. He wrote that in the past, his position:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the same place he proposed the thought experiment (describing it as \"a parable\" and \"a flippant fancy\") that Jews should be admitted to any role in English public life on condition that they must wear distinctively Middle Eastern garb, explaining that \"The point is that we should know where we are; and he would know where he is, which is in a foreign land.\"\nChesterton, like Belloc, openly expressed his abhorrence of Adolf Hitler's rule almost as soon as it started. As Rabbi Stephen Samuel Wise wrote in a posthumous tribute to Chesterton in 1937:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When Hitlerism came, he was one of the first to speak out with all the directness and frankness of a great and unabashed spirit. Blessing to his memory!\nIn \"The Truth About the Tribes,\" Chesterton attacked Nazi racial theories, writing: \"the essence of Nazi Nationalism is to preserve the purity of a race in a continent where all races are impure\".\nThe historian Simon Mayers points out that Chesterton wrote in works such as \"The Crank\", \"The Heresy of Race\", and \"The Barbarian as Bore\" against the concept of racial superiority and critiqued pseudo-scientific race theories, saying they were akin to a new religion. In \"The Truth About the Tribes\" Chesterton wrote, \"the curse of race religion is that it makes each separate man the sacred image which he worships. His own bones are the sacred relics; his own blood is the blood of St. Januarius\". Mayers records that despite \"his hostility towards Nazi antisemitism \u2026 [it is unfortunate that he made] claims that 'Hitlerism' was a form of Judaism, and that the Jews were partly responsible for race theory\". In \"The Judaism of Hitler\", as well as in \"A Queer Choice\" and \"The Crank\", Chesterton made much of the fact that the very notion of \"a Chosen Race\" was of Jewish origin, saying in \"The Crank\": \"If there is one outstanding quality in Hitlerism it is its Hebraism\" and \"the new Nordic Man has all the worst faults of the worst Jews: jealousy, greed, the mania of conspiracy, and above all, the belief in a Chosen Race\".\nMayers also shows that Chesterton portrayed Jews not only as culturally and religiously distinct, but racially as well. In \"The Feud of the Foreigner\" (1920) he said that the Jew \"is a foreigner far more remote from us than is a Bavarian from a Frenchman; he is divided by the same type of division as that between us and a Chinaman or a Hindoo. He not only is not, but never was, of the same race\".\nIn \"The Everlasting Man\", while writing about human sacrifice, Chesterton suggested that medieval stories about Jews killing children might have resulted from a distortion of genuine cases of devil worship. Chesterton wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe has devoted a whole issue of its magazine, \"Gilbert\", to defending Chesterton against charges of antisemitism. Likewise, Ann Farmer, author of \"Chesterton and the Jews: Friend, Critic, Defender\", writes, \"Public figures from Winston Churchill to Wells proposed remedies for the 'Jewish problem'\u00a0\u2013 the seemingly endless cycle of anti-Jewish persecution\u00a0\u2013 all shaped by their worldviews. As patriots, Churchill and Chesterton embraced Zionism; both were among the first to defend the Jews from Nazism\", concluding that \"A defender of Jews in his youth\u00a0\u2013 a conciliator as well as a defender\u00a0\u2013 GKC returned to the defence when the Jewish people needed it most.\"\nOpposition to eugenics.\nIn \"Eugenics and Other Evils\", Chesterton attacked eugenics as Parliament was moving towards passage of the Mental Deficiency Act 1913. Some backing the ideas of eugenics called for the government to sterilise people deemed \"mentally defective\"; this view did not gain popularity but the idea of segregating them from the rest of society and thereby preventing them from reproducing did gain traction. These ideas disgusted Chesterton who wrote, \"It is not only openly said, it is eagerly urged that the aim of the measure is to prevent any person whom these propagandists do not happen to think intelligent from having any wife or children.\" He condemned the proposed wording for such measures as being so vague as to apply to anyone, including \"Every tramp who is sulk, every labourer who is shy, every rustic who is eccentric, can quite easily be brought under such conditions as were designed for homicidal maniacs. That is the situation; and that is the point... we are already under the Eugenist State; and nothing remains to us but rebellion.\" He derided such ideas as founded on nonsense, \"as if one had a right to dragoon and enslave one's fellow citizens as a kind of chemical experiment\". Chesterton mocked the idea that poverty was a result of bad breeding: \"[it is a] strange new disposition to regard the poor as a race; as if they were a colony of Japs or Chinese coolies... The poor are not a race or even a type. It is senseless to talk about breeding them; for they are not a breed. They are, in cold fact, what Dickens describes: 'a dustbin of individual accidents,' of damaged dignity, and often of damaged gentility.\"\nChesterton's fence.\n\"Chesterton's fence\" is the principle that reforms should not be made until the reasoning behind the existing state of affairs is understood. The quotation is from Chesterton's 1929 book, \"The Thing: Why I Am a Catholic\", in the chapter, \"The Drift from Domesticity\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the matter of reforming things, as distinct from deforming them, there is one plain and simple principle; a principle which will probably be called a paradox. There exists in such a case a certain institution or law; let us say, for the sake of simplicity, a fence or gate erected across a road. The more modern type of reformer goes gaily up to it and says, \"I don't see the use of this; let us clear it away.\" To which the more intelligent type of reformer will do well to answer: \"If you don't see the use of it, I certainly won't let you clear it away. Go away and think. Then, when you can come back and tell me that you do see the use of it, I may allow you to destroy it.\"\nDistributism.\nInspired by Leo XIII's encyclical \"Rerum novarum\", Chesterton's brother Cecil and his friend, Hilaire Belloc were instrumental in developing the economic philosophy of distributism, a word Belloc coined. Gilbert embraced their views and, particularly after Cecil's death in World War I, became one of the foremost distributists and the newspaper whose care he inherited from Cecil, which ultimately came to be named \"G.\u00a0K.'s Weekly\", became its most consistent advocate. Distributism stands as a third way, against both unrestrained capitalism, and socialism, advocating a wide distribution of both property and political power.\nScottish and Irish nationalism.\nChesterton was not an opponent of nationalism in general and gave a degree of support to Scottish nationalism and Irish nationalism. He endorsed Cunninghame Graham and Compton Mackenzie for the post of Lord Rector of Glasgow University in 1928 and 1931 respectively and praised Scottish Catholics as \"patriots\" in contrast to Anglophile Protestants such as John Knox. Chesterton was also a supporter of the Irish Home Rule movement and maintained friendships with members of the Irish Parliamentary Party. This was in part due to his belief that Irish Catholics had a naturally distributist outlook on property ownership.\nLegacy.\nJames Parker, in \"The Atlantic\", gave a modern appraisal:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his vastness and mobility, Chesterton continues to elude definition: He was a Catholic convert and an oracular man of letters, a pneumatic cultural presence, an aphorist with the production rate of a pulp novelist. Poetry, criticism, fiction, biography, columns, public debate...Chesterton was a journalist; he was a metaphysician. He was a reactionary; he was a radical. He was a modernist, acutely alive to the rupture in consciousness that produced Eliot's \"The Hollow Men\"; he was an anti-modernist...a parochial Englishman and a post-Victorian gasbag; he was a mystic wedded to eternity. All of these cheerfully contradictory things are true...for the final, resolving fact that he was a genius. Touched once by the live wire of his thought, you don't forget it... His prose ... [is] supremely entertaining, the stately outlines of an older, heavier rhetoric punctually convulsed by what he once called (in reference to the Book of Job) \"earthquake irony\". He fulminates wittily; he cracks jokes like thunder. His message, a steady illumination beaming and clanging through every lens and facet of his creativity, was really very straightforward: get on your knees, modern man, and praise God.\nPossible sainthood.\nThe Bishop Emeritus of Northampton, Peter Doyle, in 2012 had opened a preliminary investigation into possibly launching a cause for beatification and then canonization (for possible sainthood), but eventually decided not to open the cause. Doyle cited Chesterton's lack of a cult of local devotion, his lack of a \"pattern of spirituality\" and charges that he was antisemitic. In 2023 the next Bishop of Northampton, David Oakley, agreed to preach at a Mass during a Chesterton pilgrimage in England (the route goes through London and Beaconsfield, which are both connected to his life). If the cause had been actually opened at the diocesan level (the Vatican must also give approval, that nothing stands in the way \u2013 the \"nihil obstat\"), then he could be given the title \"Servant of God\". His life and writings and views and what he did for others would be closely examined, although it is not known if his alleged anti-Semitism (which would be considered a serious matter by the Church if it is true) played a role.\nLiterary.\nChesterton's socio-economic system of Distributism affected the sculptor Eric Gill, who established a commune of Catholic artists at Ditchling in Sussex. The Ditchling group developed a journal called \"The Game\", in which they expressed many Chestertonian principles, particularly anti-industrialism and an advocacy of religious family life. His novel \"The Man Who Was Thursday\" inspired the Irish Republican leader Michael Collins with the idea that \"If you didn't seem to be hiding nobody hunted you out.\" Collins's favourite work of Chesterton was \"The Napoleon of Notting Hill\", and he was \"almost fanatically attached to it\", according to his friend Sir William Darling. His in \"The Illustrated London News\" on 18 September 1909 had a profound effect on Mahatma Gandhi. P. N. Furbank asserts that Gandhi was \"thunderstruck\" when he read it, while Martin Green notes that \"Gandhi was so delighted with this that he told \"Indian Opinion\" to reprint it\". Another convert was Canadian media theorist Marshall McLuhan, who said that the book \"What's Wrong with the World\" (1910) changed his life in terms of ideas and religion. The author Neil Gaiman stated that he grew up reading Chesterton in his school's library, and that \"The Napoleon of Notting Hill\" influenced his own book \"Neverwhere\". Gaiman based the character Gilbert from the comic book \"The Sandman\" on Chesterton, and \"Good Omens\", the novel Gaiman co-wrote with Terry Pratchett, is dedicated to Chesterton. The Argentine author and essayist Jorge Luis Borges cited Chesterton as influential on his fiction, telling interviewer Richard Burgin that \"Chesterton knew how to make the most of a detective story\".\nEducation.\nChesterton's many references to education and human formation have inspired a variety of educators including the 69 schools of the Chesterton Schools Network, which includes the Chesterton Academy founded by Dale Ahlquist. and the Italian Scuola Libera G. K. Chesterton in San Benedetto del Tronto, Marche. The publisher and educator Christopher Perrin (who completed his doctoral work on Chesterton) makes frequent reference to Chesterton in his work with classical schools.\nNamesakes.\nIn 1974, Ian Boyd, founded \"The Chesterton Review\", a scholarly journal devoted to Chesterton and his circle. The journal is published by the G.\u00a0K. Chesterton Institute for Faith and Culture based in Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey.\nIn 1996, Dale Ahlquist founded the American Chesterton Society to explore and promote Chesterton's writings.\nIn 2008, a Catholic high school, Chesterton Academy, opened in the Minneapolis area. In the same year Scuola Libera Chesterton opened in San Benedetto del Tronto, Italy.\nIn 2012, a crater on the planet Mercury was named Chesterton after the author.\nIn 2014, G.\u00a0K. Chesterton Academy of Chicago, a Catholic high school, opened in Highland Park, Illinois.\nA fictionalised G.\u00a0K. Chesterton is the central character in the \"Young Chesterton Chronicles\", a series of young adult adventure novels by John McNichol, and in the \"G K Chesterton Mystery series\", a series of detective novels by the Australian author Kel Richards.\nAnother fictional character named Gil Chesterton is a food and wine critic who works for KACL, the Seattle radio station featured in the American television series \"Frasier\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nCited biographies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12334", "revid": "49002355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12334", "title": "God Save the King", "text": "British patriotic song\n\"God Save the King\" (also known as \"God Save the Queen\" when the monarch is female) is the \"de facto\" national anthem of the United Kingdom. It is one of the two national anthems of New Zealand and the royal anthem of the Isle of Man, Australia, Canada and some other Commonwealth realms. The author of the tune is unknown and it may originate in plainchant, but an attribution to the composer John Bull has sometimes been made.\nBeyond its first verse, which is consistent, \"God Save the King\" has many historic and extant versions. Since its first publication, different verses have been added and taken away and, even today, different publications include various selections of verses in various orders. In general, only one verse is sung. Sometimes two verses are sung and, on certain occasions, three.\nThe entire composition is the musical salute for the British monarch and their royal consort, while other members of the British royal family who are entitled to royal salute (such as the Prince of Wales, along with his spouse) receive just the first six bars. The first six bars also form all or part of the viceregal salute in some Commonwealth realms other than the UK (e.g., in Canada, governors general and lieutenant governors at official events are saluted with the first six bars of \"God Save the King\" followed by the first four and last four bars of \"O Canada\"), as well as the salute given to governors of British Overseas Territories.\nIn countries not part of the British Empire, the tune of \"God Save the King\" has provided the basis for various patriotic songs, ones generally connected with royal ceremony. The melody is used for the national anthem of Liechtenstein, \"; the royal anthem of Norway, \"; and the American patriotic song \"My Country, 'Tis of Thee\" (also known as \"America\"). The melody was also used for the national anthem \"\" (\"Hail to thee in the Victor's Crown\") of the Kingdom of Prussia from 1795 until 1918; as the anthem of the German Emperor from 1871 to 1918; as \"The Prayer of Russians\", the imperial anthem of the Russian Empire, from 1816 to 1833; and as the national anthem of Switzerland, \"\", from the 1840s until 1961.\nHistory.\nThe text first appeared in England in the late 1590s, with the publication of William Shakespeare's play \"Richard III\". In Act IV, Scene I, Lady Anne says to Queen Elizabeth: \"Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains! Anointed let me be with deadly venom, And die ere men can say 'God save the Queen.'\"\nIn \"The Oxford Companion to Music\", Percy Scholes points out the similarities to an early plainsong melody, although the rhythm is very distinctly that of a galliard, and he gives examples of several such dance tunes that bear a striking resemblance to \"God Save the King\". Scholes quotes a keyboard piece by John Bull (1619) which has some similarities to the modern tune, depending on the placing of accidentals which at that time were unwritten in certain cases and left to the discretion of the player (see ). He also points to several pieces by Henry Purcell, one of which includes the opening notes of the modern tune, setting the words \"God Save the King\". Nineteenth-century scholars and commentators mention the widespread belief that an old Scots carol, \"Remember O Thou Man\", was the source of the tune.\nThe first published version that resembles the present song appeared in 1744, with no title but the heading \"For two voices\", in an anthology originally named \"Harmonia Britannia\" but changed after only a few copies had been printed to \"Thesaurus Musicus\". When the Jacobite pretender Charles Edward Stuart led the 1745 rising, the song spread among those loyal to King George II. The tune published in \"The Gentleman's Magazine\" in 1745 departs from that used today at several points, one as early as the first bar, but is otherwise clearly a strong relative of the contemporary anthem. It was recorded as being sung in London theatres in 1745, with, for example, Thomas Arne writing a setting of the tune for the Drury Lane Theatre.\nScholes' analysis includes mention of \"untenable\" and \"doubtful\" claims, as well as \"an American misattribution\". Some of these are:\nScholes recommends the attribution \"traditional\" or \"traditional; earliest known version by John Bull (1562\u20131628)\". The \"English Hymnal\" (musical editor Ralph Vaughan Williams) gives no attribution, stating merely \"17th or 18th cent.\"\nA theory based on a reinterpretation of the apocryphal memoirs of the Marquise de Cr\u00e9quy attributes the work to Madame de Brinon, superior of the Royal House of Saint-Louis, and its musical setting to Jean-Baptiste Lully. This theory maintains that the work was composed in 1686 to celebrate Louis XIV's recovery from surgery for an anal fistula. The ancestor of \"God Save the King\" would be the song \"Grand Dieu sauve le Roi\" (Great God Save the King).\nThis song is not unrelated to a Latin chant, which the royal chapel had performed since the reign of Louis XIII, entitled \"Domine, salvum fac regem\" (Lord, save the King), whose lyrics were taken directly from the last verse of Psalm 19 of David, \"Domine, salvum fac Regem et exaudi nos in die qua invocaverimus te\" (Lord, save the King and hear us in the day we call upon you). However, it was the Te Deum that functioned as the official royal anthem.\nUse in the United Kingdom.\nLike many aspects of British constitutional life, \"God Save the King\" derives its official status from custom and use, not from royal proclamation or act of Parliament. The variation in the UK of the lyrics to \"God Save the King\" is the oldest among those currently used, and forms the basis on which all other versions used throughout the Commonwealth are formed; though, again, the words have varied over time.\nEngland has no official national anthem of its own; \"God Save the King\" is treated as the English national anthem when England is represented at sporting events (though there are some exceptions to this rule, such as cricket where \"Jerusalem\" is used). There is a movement to establish an English national anthem, with William Blake's and Hubert Parry's \"Jerusalem\" and Edward Elgar's \"Land of Hope and Glory\" among the top contenders. Wales has a \"de facto\" national anthem, \"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadau\" (Land of my Fathers) while Scotland uses unofficial anthems (\"Scotland the Brave\" was traditionally used until the 1990s; since then, \"Flower of Scotland\" is more commonly used), these anthems are used formally at state and national ceremonies as well as international sporting events such as football and rugby union matches. On all occasions in Northern Ireland, \"God Save the King\" is still used as the official anthem.\nIn 2001, it was claimed that the phrase \"No surrender\" was occasionally sung in the bridge before \"Send her victorious\" by England football fans at matches.\nSince 2003, \"God Save the King\", considered an all-inclusive anthem for Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as other countries within the Commonwealth, has been dropped from the Commonwealth Games. Northern Irish athletes receive their gold medals to the tune of the \"Londonderry Air\", popularly known as \"Danny Boy\". In 2006, English winners heard Elgar's \"\"Pomp and Circumstance March\" No. 1\", usually known as \"Land of Hope and Glory\", but after a poll conducted by the Commonwealth Games Council for England prior to the 2010 Games, \"Jerusalem\" was adopted as England's new Commonwealth Games anthem. In sports in which the UK competes as one nation, most notably as Great Britain at the Olympics, the anthem is used to represent anyone or any team that comes from the United Kingdom.\nLyrics in the UK.\nThe phrase \"God Save the King\" is much older than the song, appearing, for instance, several times in the King James Bible. A text based on the 1st Book of Kings Chapter 1: verses 38\u201340, \"And all the people rejoic'd, and said: God save the King! Long live the King! May the King live for ever, Amen\", has been sung and proclaimed at every coronation since that of King Edgar in 973. Scholes says that as early as 1545, \"God Save the King\" was a watchword of the Royal Navy, with the response being \"Long to reign over us\". He also notes that the prayer read in churches on anniversaries of the Gunpowder Plot includes words which might have formed part of the basis for the former standard verse \"Scatter our enemies...assuage their malice and confound their devices\".\nIn 1745, \"The Gentleman's Magazine\" published \"God save our lord the king: A new song set for two voices\", describing it \"As sung at both Playhouses\" (the Theatres Royal at Drury Lane and Covent Garden). Traditionally, the first performance was thought to have been in 1745, when it was sung in support of King George II after his defeat at the Battle of Prestonpans by the army of Charles Edward Stuart, son of James Francis Edward Stuart, the Jacobite claimant to the British throne.\nIt is sometimes claimed that, ironically, the song was originally sung in support of the Jacobite cause: the word \"send\" in the line \"Send him victorious\" could imply that the king was absent. However, the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" cites examples of \"[God] send (a person) safe, victorious, etc.\" meaning \"God grant that he may be safe, etc.\". There are also examples of early 18th-century drinking glasses which are inscribed with a version of the words and were apparently intended for drinking the health of King James II and VII.\nScholes acknowledges these possibilities but argues that the same words were probably being used by both Jacobite and Hanoverian supporters and directed at their respective kings.\nIn 1902, the musician William Hayman Cummings, quoting mid-18th-century correspondence between Charles Burney and Sir Joseph Banks, suggested that the words had been based on a Latin verse composed for King James II at the Chapel Royal.\n&lt;poem&gt;O Deus optime!\nSalvum nunc facito\nRegem nostrum;\nSit laeta victoria,\nComes et gloria,\nSalvum iam facito,\nTu dominum.&lt;/poem&gt;&lt;poem&gt;O most excellent God\nSave our King now;\nMay joyous victory and glory\nBe his companions,\nSave our lord now.&lt;/poem&gt;\nStandard version in the United Kingdom.\nAs the reigning monarch is currently Charles III, the male version of the anthem is used.\n When the current monarch is male \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the monarch of the time is female, \"King\" is replaced with \"Queen\" and all masculine pronouns are replaced with their feminine equivalents.\nThere is no definitive version of the lyrics. However, the version consisting of the two above verses has the best claim to be regarded as the \"standard\" British version as referenced on the Royal Family website.\nThe song with an additional verse appears not only in the 1745 \"Gentleman's Magazine\", but also in publications such as \"The Book of English Songs: From the Sixteenth to the Nineteenth Century\" (1851), \"National Hymns: How They Are Written and How They Are Not Written\" (1861), \"Household Book of Poetry\" (1882), and \"Hymns Ancient and Modern, Revised Version\" (1982).\nThe same version with appears in publications including \"Scouting for Boys\" (1908), and on the Royal Family website.\nIn the UK, the first verse is typically sung alone, even on official occasions, although the second verse is sometimes sung in addition on certain occasions such as during the opening ceremonies of the 2012 Summer Olympics, 2012 Summer Paralympics, and the 2022 Commonwealth Games and usually at the Last Night of the Proms. The second verse was also sung during the coronation of King Charles III and Queen Camilla.\nStandard version of the music.\nThe standard version of the melody and its key of G major are still those of the originally published version, although the start of the anthem is often signalled by an introductory timpani roll of two bars length. The bass line of the standard version differs little from the second voice part shown in the original, and there is a standard version in four-part harmony for choirs. The first three lines (six bars of music) are soft, ending with a short \"crescendo\" into \"Send him victorious\", and then is another \"crescendo\" at \"over us:\" into the final words \"God save the King\".\nIn the early-20th century, there existed a military band version in the higher key of B\u266d, because it was easier for brass instruments to play in that key, though it had the disadvantage of being more difficult to sing; however, now most bands play it in the correct key of concert G.\nSince 1953, the anthem is sometimes preceded by a fanfare composed by Gordon Jacob for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II.\nO Lord Our God Arise.\nAn additional stanza sung second was previously considered part of the standard lyrics in the UK:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese lyrics appeared in some works of literature prior the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, but only the version mentioned in the Standard Version in the United Kingdom was used at her Coronation, and ever since on all official occasions when two stanzas have been sung.\nThere have been several attempts to rewrite the words. In the 19th century, there was some lively debate about the national anthem as verse two was considered by some to be slightly offensive in its use of the phrase \"scatter her enemies\". Some thought it placed better emphasis on the respective power of Parliament and the Crown to change \"her enemies\" to \"our enemies\"; others questioned the theology and proposed \"thine enemies\" instead. Sydney G. R. Coles wrote a completely new version, as did Canon F. K. Harford.\nAccording to Alan Michie's \"The Crown and the People\", which was published in 1952, after the death of King George VI but before the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, when the first General Assembly of the United Nations was held in London in January 1946, the King, in honour of the occasion, \"ordered the belligerent imperious second stanza of 'God Save the King' to be rewritten to bring it more into the spirit of the brotherhood of nations.\"\nWilliam Hickson's alternative version.\nIn 1836, William Edward Hickson wrote an alternative version, of which the first, third and fourth verses gained some currency when they were appended to the national anthem in \"The English Hymnal\" (1906). His fourth verse was sung after the traditional first verse at Queen Elizabeth II's Golden Jubilee National Service of Thanksgiving in 2002, and during the raising of the Union Flag during the 2008 Summer Paralympics closing ceremony, in which London took Paralympic flag from Beijing to host the 2012 Summer games. This verse is currently used as the final verse by the Church of Scotland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSamuel Reynolds Hole's alternative version.\nTo mark the celebration of the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria, a modified version of the second verse was written by the Dean of Rochester, the Very Reverend Samuel Reynolds Hole. A four-part harmony setting was then made by Frederick Bridge, and published by Novello.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe \"Musical Times\" commented: \"There are some conservative minds who may regret the banishment of the 'knavish tricks' and aggressive spirit of the discarded verse, but it must be admitted that Dean Hole's lines are more consonant with the sentiment of modern Christianity.\" Others reactions were more negative, one report describing the setting as \"unwarrantable liberties...worthy of the severest reprobation\", with \"too much of a Peace Society flavour about it...If we go about pleading for peace, other nations will get it into their heads that we are afraid of fighting.\" Perhaps unsurprisingly, Hole's version failed to replace the existing verse permanently.\nOfficial peace version.\nA less militaristic version of the song, titled \"Official peace version, 1919\", was first published in the hymn book \"Songs of Praise\" in 1925. This was \"official\" in the sense that it was approved by the British Privy Council in 1919. However, despite being reproduced in some other hymn books, it is largely unknown today.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoric Jacobite and anti-Jacobite alternative verses.\nAround 1745 anti-Jacobite sentiment was captured in a verse appended to the song, with a prayer for the success of Field Marshal George Wade's army then assembling at Newcastle. These words attained some short-term use, although they did not appear in the published version in the October 1745 \"Gentleman's Magazine\". This verse was first documented as an occasional addition to the original anthem by Richard Clark in 1814, and was also mentioned in a later article on the song, published by the \"Gentleman's Magazine\" in October 1836. Therein, it is presented as an \"additional verse... though being of temporary application only... stored in the memory of an old friend... who was born in the very year 1745, and was thus the associate of those who heard it first sung\", the lyrics given being:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe 1836 article and other sources make it clear that this verse was quickly abandoned after 1745 (Wade was replaced as Commander-in-Chief within a year following the Jacobite invasion of England), and it was certainly not used when the song became accepted as the British national anthem in the 1780s and 1790s. It was included as an integral part of the song in the \"Oxford Book of Eighteenth-Century Verse\" of 1926, although erroneously referencing the \"fourth verse\" to the \"Gentleman's Magazine\" article of 1745.\nOn the opposing side, Jacobite beliefs were demonstrated in an alternative verse used during the same period:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn May 1800, following an attempt to assassinate King George III at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in London, the playwright Richard Sheridan immediately composed an additional verse, which was sung from the stage the same night:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVarious other attempts were made during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to add verses to commemorate particular royal or national events. For example, according to Fitzroy Maclean, when Jacobite forces bypassed Wade's force and reached Derby, but then retreated and when their garrison at Carlisle Castle surrendered to a second government army led by King George's son, the Duke of Cumberland, another verse was added. Other short-lived verses were notably anti-French, such as the following, quoted in the book \"Handel\" by Edward J. Dent:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, none of these additional verses survived into the 20th century. Updated \"full\" versions including additional verses have been published more recently, including the standard three verses, Hickson's fourth verse, Sheridan's verse and the Marshal Wade verse.\nHistoric republican alternative.\nA version from 1794 composed by the American republican and French citizen Joel Barlow celebrated the power of the guillotine to liberate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPerformance in the UK.\nThe style most commonly heard in official performances was proposed as the \"proper interpretation\" by King George V, who considered himself something of an expert (in view of the number of times he had heard it). An Army Order was duly issued in 1933, which laid down regulations for tempo, dynamics and orchestration. This included instructions such as that the opening \"six bars will be played quietly by the reed band with horns and basses in a single phrase. Cornets and side-drum are to be added at the little scale-passage leading into the second half of the tune, and the full brass enters for the last eight bars\". The official tempo for the opening section is a metronome setting of 60, with the second part played in a broader manner, at a metronome setting of 52. In recent years the prescribed sombre-paced introduction is often played at a faster and livelier tempo.\nUntil the latter part of the 20th century, theatre and concert goers were expected to stand while the anthem was played after the conclusion of a show. In cinemas this brought a tendency for audiences to rush out while the end credits played to avoid this formality. (This can be seen in the 1972 \"Dad's Army\" episode \"A Soldier's Farewell\".)\nThe anthem continues to be played at some traditional events such as Wimbledon, Royal Variety Performance, the Edinburgh Tattoo, Royal Ascot, Henley Royal Regatta and The Proms as well as at royal events.\nThe anthem was traditionally played at close-down on the BBC, and with the introduction of commercial television to the UK this practice was adopted by some ITV companies (with the notable exceptions of Granada, Thames Television, Central Television, Border Television and Yorkshire Television). BBC Two also never played the anthem at close-down, and ITV dropped the practice in the late 1980s when the network switched to 24 hour broadcasting, but it continued on BBC One until 8 November 1997 (thereafter BBC One began to simulcast with BBC News after end of programmes). The tradition is carried on, however, by BBC Radio 4, which plays the anthem each night as a transition piece between the end of the Radio 4 broadcasting and the move to BBC World Service. BBC Radio 4 and BBC Radio 2 also play the National Anthem just before the 0700 and 0800 news bulletins on the actual and official birthdays of the King and the birthdays of senior members of the Royal Family. On 17 January 2022 GB News started playing the anthem at 05:59 every morning at the beginning of the day's programming.\nThe UK's national anthem usually prefaces the royal Christmas message (although in 2007 it appeared at the end, taken from a recording of the 1957 television broadcast), and important royal announcements, such as of royal deaths, when it is played in a slower, sombre arrangement.\nOther British anthems.\nFrequently, when an anthem is needed for one of the constituent countries of the United Kingdom\u00a0\u2013 at an international sporting event, for instance\u00a0\u2013 an alternative song is used:\nThe London 2012 Olympics Opening Ceremony provided a conscious use of three of the four anthems listed above; the ceremony began with a rendition of the first verse of \"Jerusalem\", before a choir in Northern Ireland sang \"Danny Boy\" and a choir in Edinburgh performed part of \"Flower of Scotland\". Notably, Wales was represented by the hymn \"Bread of Heaven\", not \"Hen Wlad Fy Nhadhau\".\nIn April 2007 there was an early day motion, number 1319, to the British Parliament to propose that there should be a separate England anthem: \"That this House ... believes that all English sporting associations should adopt an appropriate song that English sportsmen and women, and the English public, would favour when competing as England\". An amendment (EDM 1319A3) was proposed by Evan Harris of the Liberal Democrats that the song \"should have a bit more oomph than \"God Save The Queen\" and should also not involve God.\"\nFor more information see also:\nUse in media.\nOn 3 November 2016, Andrew Rosindell, a Conservative Party MP, argued in an early day motion for a return to the broadcasting of the national anthem at the end of BBC One transmissions each day (the practice had been dropped in 1997, due to BBC One adopting 24-hour broadcasting by simulcasting BBC News 24 overnight, rendering closedown obsolete), to commemorate the Brexit vote and Britain's subsequent withdrawing from the European Union. At the evening of the same day, BBC Two's \"Newsnight\" programme ended its nightly broadcast with host of that night, Kirsty Wark, saying that they were \"incredibly happy to oblige\" Rosindell's request, and then played a clip of the Sex Pistols' similarly named song, much to Rosindell's discontent.\nSince 18 January 2022, GB News has played the national anthem at the start of live programming every day.\nUse in other Commonwealth countries.\n\"God Save the King\" was exported around the world via the expansion of the British Empire, serving as each country's national anthem. Throughout the Empire's evolution into the Commonwealth of Nations, the song declined in use in most states which became independent. In New Zealand, it remains one of the official national anthems.\nAntigua and Barbuda.\nContrary to popular belief, \"God Save The King\" is not the royal anthem of Antigua and Barbuda in practice or officially. As of August 2025, there is no legislation in Antigua and Barbuda establishing a royal anthem, and during a royal visit in 2017, members of the royal family were greeted by the \"de facto\" national anthem \"Fair Antigua, We Salute Thee\". The Governor-General is also greeted by \"Fair Antigua, We Salute Thee\" in all formal circumstances.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia \"God Save the King\" was declared as the royal anthem on 27 October 2022, replacing the previous declaration of \"God Save the Queen\" as the royal anthem on 19 April 1984. It declares that the song is to played when the monarch or a member of the royal family is present. The Australian Government also advises that when the King is in Australia, the royal anthem is played at the beginning of an event and the national anthem, \"Advance Australia Fair\", is to be played at the end.\nPrior to 1974, \"God Save the Queen\" was the national anthem of Australia. It was replaced that year with \"Advance Australia Fair\" by the Labor Whitlam government. Following the elevation of the Liberal Fraser government, \"God Save the Queen\" was restored as the national anthem in 1976 alongside three other \"national songs\". A plebiscite held in 1977 preferred \"Advance Australia Fair\" as the exclusive \"national song\", to exist alongside the national anthem of \"God Save the Queen\". The subsequent Labor Hawke government later advised the proclamation of \"Advance Australia Fair\" as the national anthem in 1984, with \"God Save the Queen\" redesignated as the royal anthem.\nBelize.\n\"God Save the King\" is the royal anthem of Belize. The viceregal salute to the Belizean governor-general is composed of the first verse of \"God Save the King\" and the chorus of national anthem, \"Land of the Free\".\nCanada.\nBy convention \"God Save the King\" (, when a Queen) is the royal anthem of Canada. It is sometimes played or sung together with the national anthem, \"O Canada\", at private and public events organised by groups such as the Government of Canada, the Royal Canadian Legion, police services and loyal groups. The governor general and provincial lieutenant governors are accorded the \"Viceregal Salute\", comprising the first three lines of \"God Save the King\", followed by the first and last lines of \"O Canada\".\n\"God Save the King\" has been sung in Canada since the late 1700s and by the mid-20th century was, along with \"O Canada\", one of the country's two national anthems, the first and last verses of the standard British version being used. By-laws and practices governing the use of either song during public events in municipalities varied; in Toronto, \"God Save the King\" was employed, while in Montreal it was \"O Canada\". Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson in 1964 said one song would have to be chosen as the country's national anthem and, three years later, he advised Governor General Georges Vanier to appoint the Special Joint Committee of the Senate and House of Commons on the National and Royal Anthems. Within two months, on 12 April 1967, the committee presented its conclusion that \"God Save the Queen\" (as this was during the reign of Queen Elizabeth II), whose music and lyrics were found to be in the public domain, should be designated as the royal anthem of Canada and \"O Canada\" as the national anthem, one verse from each, in both official languages, to be adopted by parliament. The group was then charged with establishing official lyrics for each song; for \"God Save the Queen\", the English words were those inherited from the United Kingdom and the French words were taken from those that had been adopted in 1952 for the coronation of Elizabeth II. When the bill pronouncing \"O Canada\" as the national anthem was put through parliament, the joint committee's earlier recommendations regarding \"God Save the Queen\" were not included.\nThe Department of National Defence and the Canadian Forces regulates that \"God Save the King\" be played as a salute to the monarch of Canada and other members of the Canadian royal family, though it may also be used as a hymn or prayer. The words are not to be sung when the song is played as a military royal salute and is abbreviated to the first three lines, while arms are being presented. Elizabeth II stipulated that the arrangement in G major by Lieutenant Colonel Basil H. Brown be used in Canada. The authorised version to be played by pipe bands is \"Mallorca\".\nLyrics in Canada.\n\"God Save the King\" has been translated into French, but this translation does not fit the music and cannot be sung. Nevertheless, this translation has been adapted into a bilingual version that can be sung when the monarch is male, and has been sung during public ceremonies, such as the National Remembrance Day Ceremony at the National War Memorial in Ottawa:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA special singable one-verse adaptation is used when a singable French version is required, such as when royalty is present at an official occasion:\nThere is a special Canadian verse in English which was once commonly sung in addition to the two standing verses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChannel Islands.\n\"God Save the King\" is used by both Bailiwicks of the Channel Islands as an alternative to their respective national anthems. Its use case and popular version is generally similar to how it is used in the United Kingdom. However, the anthem has been translated in J\u00e8rriais:\nThe meaning is broadly similar to the first paragraph of the English version, except for the first two lines which say \"God save our Duke\" and \"Long live our Duke\".\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand inherited \"God Save the King\" as its anthem, which served as the sole national anthem until 1977, when \"God Defend New Zealand\" was introduced as a second. Since then, \"God Save the King\" is most often only played when the sovereign, governor-general or other member of the Royal Family is present, or on some occasions such as Anzac Day. The M\u0101ori-language version was written by Edward Marsh Williams under the title, \"\".\nThere is a special New Zealand verse in English which was once commonly sung to replace the second and third verses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLyrics in M\u0101ori.\nAll verses of \"God Save the King\" have been translated into the M\u0101ori language. The first verse is shown below:\nRhodesia.\nWhen Rhodesia issued its Unilateral Declaration of Independence from the UK on 11 November 1965, it did so while still maintaining loyalty to Queen Elizabeth II as the Rhodesian head of state, despite the non-recognition of the Rhodesian government by the United Kingdom and the United Nations; \"God Save the Queen\" therefore remained the Rhodesian national anthem. This was supposed to demonstrate the continued allegiance of the Rhodesian people to the monarch, but the retention in Rhodesia of a song so associated with the UK while the two countries were at loggerheads regarding its constitutional status caused Rhodesian state occasions to have \"a faintly ironic tone\", in the words of \"The Times\". Nevertheless, \"God Save the Queen\" remained Rhodesia's national anthem until March 1970, when it formally declared itself a republic. \"Rise, O Voices of Rhodesia\" was adopted in its stead in 1974 and remained in use until the country returned to the UK's control in December 1979. Since the internationally recognised independence of the Republic of Zimbabwe in April 1980, \"God Save the King\" has had no official status there.\nSaint Vincent and the Grenadines.\n\"God Save the King\" is the royal anthem of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. It is played on royal and vice-regal occasions. The Vice-Regal Salute to the governor general is composed of the chorus of \"God Save the King\" and followed by that of the National Anthem, \"Saint Vincent, Land so Beautiful\".\nAll proclamations in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines end with the phrase: \"God Save the King\".\nSouth Africa.\n\"God Save the King\" (, when a Queen) was a co-national anthem of South Africa from 1938 until 1957, when it was formally replaced by \" as the sole national anthem. The latter served as a sort of co-national anthem alongside the former until 1938.\nUse elsewhere.\nThe melody has often been used, with lyrics slightly or significantly altered, for royal or national anthems of other countries.\nDuring the 19th century, it was used officially in Sweden, and in Iceland. It was also in official usage for brief periods in Imperial Russia, in Greece, Siam and in the Kingdom of Hawaii. It remains as the royal anthem of Norway (\").\nIn Germany, it was used by the kingdoms of Prussia, Hanover, Saxony and Bavaria, and was adopted as anthem of the German emperor (\") after unification in 1871; however, it lacked the support necessary to become the official anthem of the empire. It remains as the national anthem of Liechtenstein, and was used by Switzerland until 1961 (\").\nIn Latvia, it was used by Latvians for the patriotic song \"\" (\"God bless Kurzeme/Vidzeme!\", depending on the region it was used in) in the 19th century.\nMusical adaptations.\nComposers.\nAbout 140 composers have used the tune in their compositions.\nLudwig van Beethoven composed a set of seven piano variations in the key of C major to the theme of \"God Save the King\", catalogued as WoO 78 (1802\u20131803). He also quotes it in his orchestral work \"Wellington's Victory\". It is also the first song arranged in the collection WoO 157.\nMuzio Clementi used the theme to \"God Save the King\" in his Symphony No. 3 in G major, often called the \"Great National Symphony\", catalogued as WoO 34. Clementi paid a high tribute to his adopted homeland (the United Kingdom) where he grew up and stayed most of his lifetime. He based the symphony (about 1816\u20131824) on \"God Save the King\", which is hinted at earlier in the work, not least in the second movement, and announced by the trombones in the finale.\nJohann Christian Bach composed a set of variations on \"God Save the King\" for the finale to his sixth keyboard concerto (Op. 1) written c.\u20091763.\nJoseph Haydn was impressed by the use of \"God Save the King\" as a national anthem during his visit to London in 1794, and on his return to Austria composed a different tune, \"\" (\"God Save Emperor Francis\"), for the birthday of the last Holy Roman Emperor and Roman-German King, Francis II, which became the basis for the anthem of the later Austrian Empire, and ultimately for the German national anthem.\nFranz Liszt wrote a piano paraphrase on the anthem (S.259 in the official catalogue, c. 1841).\nJohann Strauss I quoted \"God Save the Queen\" in full at the end of his waltz \"\" (Homage to Queen Victoria of Great Britain), Op. 103, where he also quoted \"Rule, Britannia!\" in full at the beginning of the piece.\nSiegfried August Mahlmann in the early 19th century wrote alternate lyrics to adapt the hymn for the Kingdom of Saxony, as \"\" (\"God Bless Saxony\").\nChristian Heinrich Rinck wrote two sets of variations on the anthem: the last movement of his Piano Trio, Op. 34, No. 1 (1815) is a set of five variations and a concluding coda; and Theme (Andante) and (12) Variations in C major on \" (God Save the King), Op. 55.\nHeinrich Marschner used the anthem in his \", Op. 78 (1842).\nGaetano Donizetti used this anthem in his opera \"Roberto Devereux\".\nJoachim Raff used this anthem in his Jubelouverture, Op. 103 (1864) dedicated to Adolf, Duke of Nassau, on the 25th anniversary of his reign.\nGioachino Rossini used this anthem in the last scene of his , when all the characters, coming from many different European countries, sing a song which recalls their own homeland. Lord Sidney, bass, sings \"\" on the notes of \"God Save the King\". Samuel Ramey used to interpolate a spectacular virtuoso cadenza at the end of the song.\nFernando Sor used the anthem in his 12 Studies, Op. 6: No. 10 in C major in the section marked 'Maestoso.'\nArthur Sullivan quotes the anthem at the end of his ballet \"Victoria and Merrie England\".\nClaude Debussy opens with a brief introduction of \"God Save the King\" in one of his Preludes, \"Hommage \u00e0 S. Pickwick Esq. P.P.M.P.C.\". The piece draws its inspiration from the main character of the Charles Dickens novel \"The Pickwick Papers\".\nNiccol\u00f2 Paganini wrote a set of highly virtuosic variations on \"God Save the King\" as his Op. 9.\nMax Reger wrote \"Variations and Fugue on \" (God Save the King)\" for organ in 1901 after the death of Queen Victoria. It does not have an opus number.\nA week before the Coronation Ode was due to be premiered at the June 1902 \"Coronation Gala Concert\" at Covent Garden (it was cancelled, owing to the King's illness), Sir Edward Elgar introduced an arrangement of \"Land of Hope and Glory\" as a solo song performed by Clara Butt at a \"Coronation Concert\" at the Albert Hall. Novello seized upon the prevailing patriotism and requested that Elgar arrange the National Anthem as an appropriate opening for a concert performed in front of the Court and numerous British and foreign dignitaries. This version for orchestra and chorus, which is enlivened by use of and marcato effects, was also performed at the opening of the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley on St. George's Day, 1924, and recorded under the composer's baton in 1928, with the London Symphony Orchestra and the Philharmonic Choir. Elgar also used the first verse of the anthem as the climax of a short \"Civic Procession and Anthem\", written to accompany the mayoral procession at the opening of the Hereford Music Festival on 4 September 1927. This premiere performance was recorded, and is today available on CD; the score was lost following the festival, and Elgar reconstructed it by ear from the recording.\nCarl Maria von Weber uses the \"God Save the King\" theme at the end of his \"Jubel Overture\".\nGiuseppe Verdi included \"God Save the Queen\" in his \"\" (Hymn of the Nations), composed for the London 1862 International Exhibition.\nBenjamin Britten arranged \"God Save the Queen\" in 1961 for the Leeds Festival. This version has been programmed several times at the Last Night of the Proms.\nCharles Ives wrote \"Variations on \"America\"\" for organ in 1891 at age seventeen. It included a polytonal section in three simultaneous keys, though this was omitted from performances at his father's request, because \"it made the boys laugh out loud\". Ives was fond of the rapid pedal line in the final variation, which he said was \"almost as much fun as playing baseball\". The piece was not published until 1949; the final version includes an introduction, seven variations and a polytonal interlude. The piece was adapted for orchestra in 1963 by William Schuman. This version became popular during the bicentennial celebrations, and is often heard at pops concerts.\nMuthuswami Dikshitar (1776\u20131835), one of the musical trinity in South Indian classical (Carnatic) music composed some Sanskrit pieces set to Western tunes. These are in the raga Sankarabharanam and are referred to as \". Among these, the composition \" is set to the tune of \"God Save the Queen\".\nSigismond Thalberg (1812\u20131871), Swiss composer and one of the most famous virtuoso pianists of the 19th century, wrote a fantasia on \"God Save the Queen\".\nJohan Nepomuk Hummel (1778\u20131837) wrote \"Variations on God Save the King in D major\", Op. 10 and quoted the tune briefly in his \"Freudenfest-Ouverture in D major\", S 148.\nJan Ladislav Dussek wrote a set of theme with 5 variations for piano on God Save the King.\nAdolphe Blanc wrote a set of variations for piano six hands on this theme.\nAdrien-Fran\u00e7ois Servais (1807\u201366) and Joseph Ghys (1801\u201348) wrote \" \"God Save the King\", Op. 38, for violin and cello and performed it in London and St Petersburg.\nGeorges Onslow (1784\u20131853) used the tune in his String Quartet No. 7 in G minor, Op. 9, second movement.\nHans Huber used the melody (\") in the first movement of his Symphony no 3 in C minor, Op. 118 (\"Heroic\").\nFerdinando Carulli used the melody in , for recorder &amp; guitar, Op. 102.\nLouis Drouet composed \"Variations on the air God save the King\" for flute and piano.\nGordon Jacob wrote a choral arrangement of \"God Save the Queen\" with a trumpet fanfare introduction, for the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953.\nRock adaptations.\nJimi Hendrix played an impromptu version of \"God Save the Queen\" to open his set at the Isle of Wight Festival 1970. Just before walking onto the stage, he asked \"How does it [the anthem] go again?\". Hendrix gave the same sort of distortion and improvisation of \"God Save the Queen\", as he had done with \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" at the Woodstock Festival in 1969.\nQueen recorded an instrumental version of \"God Save the Queen\" for their 1975 album \"A Night at the Opera\". Guitarist Brian May adapted the melody using layers of overdubbed electric guitars, a technique he also used on many other Queen songs. This recorded version was played at the end of every Queen concert from the end of 1974 to 1986, while the members of the band took their bows. On Queen's Magic Tour in 1986, vocalist Freddie Mercury would leave the stage shortly before the end of the show, and return wearing a crown and cloak as \"God Save the Queen\" played. On 3 June 2002, during the Queen's Golden Jubilee, May performed the anthem on his Red Special electric guitar for Party at the Palace from the roof of Buckingham Palace. Footage of this performance appears on a DVD that was included 30th Anniversary edition of \"A Night at the Opera\".\nIn 1977, the Sex Pistols recorded a song titled \"God Save the Queen\" in open reference to the national anthem and the Queen's Silver Jubilee celebrations that year, with the song intending to stand for sympathy for the working class and resentment of the monarchy. They were banned from many venues, censored by mainstream media, and reached number 2 on the official UK singles charts and number 1 on the NME chart.\nA version of \"God Save the Queen\" by the ska band Madness features the melody of the song played on kazoos. It was included on the compilation album \"The Business \u2013 the Definitive Singles Collection\".\nComputer music.\nThe anthem was the first piece of music played on a computer, and the first computer music to be recorded.\nMusical notes were first generated by a computer programmed by Alan Turing at the Computing Machine Laboratory of the University of Manchester in 1948. The first music proper, a performance of the National Anthem was programmed by Christopher Strachey on the Mark II Manchester Electronic Computer at same venue, in 1951. Later that year, short extracts of three pieces, the first being the National Anthem, were recorded there by a BBC outside broadcasting unit: the other pieces being \"Baa Baa Black Sheep\" and \"In the Mood\". Researchers at the University of Canterbury, Christchurch restored the acetate master disc in 2016 and the results may be heard on SoundCloud.\nReception.\nThe philosopher and reformer Jeremy Bentham praised \"God Save the King\" in 1796: \"the melody recommending itself by beauty to the most polished ears, and by its simplicity to the rudest ear. A song of this complexion, implanted by the habit of half a century in the mass of popular sentiment, can not be refused a place in the inventory of the national blessings.\" Ludwig van Beethoven wrote \"I have to show the English a little of what a blessing 'God Save the King' is\".\nCalls for a new national anthem(s).\nThere have been calls within the UK for a new national anthem, whether it be for the United Kingdom itself, Britain or England (which all currently use \"God Save the King\"). There are many reasons people cite for wishing for a new national anthem, such as: from a secular standpoint, claims of God Save the King\" being long outdated and irrelevant in the 21st century, rejection of odes to promoting war and imperialism and rejection of praising the monarchy from a republican perspective. A further reason is that England has no anthem of its own for sporting contests and the like, whereas Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales have unofficial anthems\u2014\"Flower of Scotland\", \"Londonderry Air\" and \"\"\u2014while England tends to use \"God Save the King\" exclusively and also unofficially.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n]"}
{"id": "12335", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12335", "title": "Gwat Pai", "text": ""}
{"id": "12336", "revid": "40754995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12336", "title": "Gladiator", "text": "Roman combatant for entertainment\nA gladiator ( 'swordsman', from la \" gladius\"\u00a0'sword') was an armed combatant who entertained audiences in the Roman Republic and Roman Empire in violent confrontations with other gladiators, wild animals, and condemned criminals. Some gladiators were volunteers who risked their lives and their legal and social standing by appearing in the arena. Most were despised as slaves, schooled under harsh conditions, socially marginalized, and segregated even in death.\nIrrespective of their origin, gladiators offered spectators an example of Rome's martial ethics and, in fighting or dying well, they could inspire admiration and popular acclaim. They were celebrated in high and low art, and their value as entertainers was commemorated in precious and commonplace objects throughout the Roman world.\nThe origin of gladiatorial combat is open to debate. There is evidence of it in funeral rites during the Punic Wars of the 3rd century BC, and thereafter it rapidly became an essential feature of politics and social life in the Roman world. Its popularity led to its use in ever more lavish and costly games.\nThe gladiator games lasted for nearly a thousand years, reaching their peak between the 1st century BC and the 2nd century AD.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nEarly literary sources seldom agree on the origins of gladiators and the gladiator games. In the late 1st century BC, Nicolaus of Damascus believed they were Etruscan. A generation later, Livy wrote that they were first held in 310 BC by the Campanians in celebration of their victory over the Samnites. Long after the games had ceased, the 7th century AD writer Isidore of Seville derived Latin \"lanista\" (manager of gladiators) from the Etruscan word for \"executioner\", and the title of \"Charon\" (an official who accompanied the dead from the Roman gladiatorial arena) from Charun, psychopomp of the Etruscan underworld. This was accepted and repeated in most early modern, standard histories of the games.\nFor some modern scholars, reappraisal of pictorial evidence supports a Campanian origin, or at least a borrowing, for the games and gladiators. Campania hosted the earliest known gladiator schools (\"ludi\"). Tomb frescoes from the Campanian city of Paestum (4th century BC) show paired fighters, with helmets, spears and shields, in a propitiatory funeral blood-rite that anticipates early Roman gladiator games. Compared to these images, supporting evidence from Etruscan tomb-paintings is tentative and late. The Paestum frescoes may represent the continuation of a much older tradition, acquired or inherited from Greek colonists of the 8th century BC.\nLivy places the first Roman gladiator games (264 BC) in the early stage of Rome's First Punic War, against Carthage, when Decimus Junius Brutus Scaeva had three gladiator pairs fight to the death in Rome's \"cattle market\" forum (\"Forum Boarium\") to honor his dead father, Brutus Pera. Livy describes this as a \"munus\" (plural: \"munera\"), a gift, in this case a commemorative duty owed the manes (spirit, or shade) of a dead ancestor by his descendants. The development of the gladiator \"munus\" and its gladiator types was most strongly influenced by Samnium's support for Hannibal and the subsequent punitive expeditions against the Samnites by Rome and its Campanian allies; the earliest, most frequently mentioned and probably most popular type was the Samnite.\nTo quote Livy:\nThe war in Samnium, immediately afterwards, was attended with equal danger and an equally glorious conclusion. The enemy, besides their other warlike preparation, had made their battle-line to glitter with new and splendid arms. There were two corps: the shields of the one were inlaid with gold, of the other with silver\u00a0... The Romans had already heard of these splendid accoutrements, but their generals had taught them that a soldier should be rough to look on, not adorned with gold and silver but putting his trust in iron and in courage\u00a0... The Dictator, as decreed by the senate, celebrated a triumph, in which by far the finest show was afforded by the captured armour. So the Romans made use of the splendid armour of their enemies to do honour to their gods; while the Campanians, in consequence of their pride and in hatred of the Samnites, equipped after this fashion the gladiators who furnished them entertainment at their feasts, and bestowed on them the name Samnites.\nLivy's account skirts the funereal, sacrificial function of early Roman gladiator combats and reflects the later theatrical ethos of the Roman gladiator show: splendidly, exotically armed and armoured barbarians, treacherous and degenerate, are dominated by Roman iron and native courage. His plain Romans virtuously dedicate the magnificent spoils of war to the gods. Their Campanian allies stage a dinner entertainment using gladiators who may not be Samnites, but play the Samnite role. Other groups and tribes would join the cast list as Roman territories expanded. Most gladiators were armed and armoured in the manner of the enemies of Rome. The gladiator \"munus\" became a morally instructive form of historic enactment in which the only honourable option for the gladiator was to fight well, or else die well.\nDevelopment.\nIn 216 BC, Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, late consul and augur, was honoured by his sons with three days of \"munera gladiatoria\" in the Forum Romanum, using twenty-two pairs of gladiators. Ten years later, Scipio Africanus gave a commemorative \"munus\" in Iberia for his father and uncle, casualties in the Punic Wars. High status non-Romans, and possibly Romans too, volunteered as his gladiators. The context of the Punic Wars and Rome's near-disastrous defeat at the Battle of Cannae (216 BC) link these early games to munificence, the celebration of military victory and the religious expiation of military disaster; these \"munera\" appear to serve a morale-raising agenda in an era of military threat and expansion. The next recorded \"munus\", held for the funeral of Publius Licinius in 183 BC, was more extravagant. It involved three days of funeral games, 120 gladiators, and public distribution of meat (\"visceratio data\")\u2014a practice that reflected the gladiatorial fights at Campanian banquets described by Livy and later deplored by Silius Italicus.\nThe enthusiastic adoption of \"munera gladiatoria\" by Rome's Iberian allies shows how easily, and how early, the culture of the gladiator \"munus\" permeated places far from Rome itself. By 174 BC, \"small\" Roman \"munera\" (private or public), provided by an \"editor\" of relatively low importance, may have been so commonplace and unremarkable they were not considered worth recording:\nMany gladiatorial games were given in that year, some unimportant, one noteworthy beyond the rest\u2014that of Titus Flamininus which he gave to commemorate the death of his father, which lasted four days, and was accompanied by a public distribution of meats, a banquet, and scenic performances. The climax of the show which was big for the time was that in three days seventy four gladiators fought.\nIn 105 BC, the ruling consuls offered Rome its first taste of state-sponsored \"barbarian combat\" demonstrated by gladiators from Capua, as part of a training program for the military. It proved immensely popular. Thereafter, the gladiator contests formerly restricted to private \"munera\" were often included in the state games (\"ludi\") that accompanied the major religious festivals. Where traditional \"ludi\" had been dedicated to a deity, such as Jupiter, the \"munera\" could be dedicated to an aristocratic sponsor's divine or heroic ancestor.\nPeak.\nGladiatorial games offered their sponsors extravagantly expensive but effective opportunities for self-promotion, and gave their clients and potential voters exciting entertainment at little or no cost to themselves. Gladiators became big business for trainers and owners, for politicians on the make and those who had reached the top and wished to stay there. A politically ambitious \"privatus\" (private citizen) might postpone his deceased father's \"munus\" to the election season, when a generous show might drum up votes; those in power and those seeking it needed the support of the plebeians and their tribunes, whose votes might be won with the mere promise of an exceptionally good show. Sulla, during his term as \"praetor\", showed his usual acumen in breaking his own sumptuary laws to give the most lavish \"munus\" yet seen in Rome, for the funeral of his wife, Metella.\nIn the closing years of the politically and socially unstable Late Republic, any aristocratic owner of gladiators had political muscle at his disposal. In 65 BC, newly elected \"curule aedile\" Julius Caesar held games that he justified as \"munus\" to his father, who had been dead for 20 years. Despite an already enormous personal debt, he used 320 gladiator pairs in silvered armour. He had more available in Capua but the senate, mindful of the recent Spartacus revolt and fearful of Caesar's burgeoning private armies and rising popularity, imposed a limit of 320 pairs as the maximum number of gladiators any citizen could keep in Rome. Caesar's showmanship was unprecedented in scale and expense; he had staged a \"munus\" as memorial rather than funeral rite, eroding any practical or meaningful distinction between \"munus\" and \"ludi\".\nGladiatorial games, usually linked with beast shows, spread throughout the republic and beyond. Anti-corruption laws of 65 and 63 BC attempted but failed to curb the political usefulness of the games to their sponsors. Following Caesar's assassination and the Roman Civil War, Augustus assumed imperial authority over the games, including \"munera\", and formalised their provision as a civic and religious duty. His revision of sumptuary law capped private and public expenditure on \"munera\", claiming to save the Roman elite from the bankruptcies they would otherwise suffer, and restricting gladiator \"munera\" to the festivals of Saturnalia and Quinquatria. Henceforth, an imperial praetor's official \"munus\" was allowed a maximum of 120 gladiators at a ceiling cost of 25,000 denarii; an imperial \"ludi\" might cost no less than 180,000 denarii. Throughout the empire, the greatest and most celebrated games would now be identified with the state-sponsored imperial cult, which furthered public recognition, respect and approval for the emperor's divine \"numen\", his laws, and his agents. Between 108 and 109 AD, Trajan celebrated his Dacian victories using a reported 10,000 gladiators and 11,000 animals over 123 days. The cost of gladiators and \"munera\" continued to spiral out of control. Legislation of 177 AD by Marcus Aurelius did little to stop it, and was completely ignored by his son, Commodus.\nDecline.\nThe decline of the gladiatorial \"munus\" was a far from straightforward process. The crisis of the 3rd century imposed increasing military demands on the imperial purse, from which the Roman Empire never quite recovered, and lesser magistrates found their provision of various obligatory \"munera\" an increasingly unrewarding tax on the doubtful privileges of office. Still, emperors continued to subsidize the games as a matter of undiminished public interest. In the early 3rd century AD, the Christian writer Tertullian condemned the attendance of Christians: the combats, he said, were murder, their witnessing spiritually and morally harmful and the gladiator an instrument of pagan human sacrifice. Carolyn Osiek comments:\nThe reason, we would suppose, would be primarily the bloodthirsty violence, but his is different: the extent of religious ritual and meaning in them, which constitutes idolatry. Although Tertullian states that these events are forbidden to believers, the fact that he writes a whole treatise to convince Christians that they should not attend (\"De Spectaculis\") shows that apparently not everyone agreed to stay away from them.\nIn the next century, Augustine of Hippo deplored the youthful fascination of his friend (and later fellow-convert and bishop) Alypius of Thagaste, with the \"munera\" spectacle as inimical to a Christian life and salvation. Amphitheatres continued to host the spectacular administration of Imperial justice: in 315 Constantine the Great condemned child-snatchers \"ad bestias\" in the arena. Ten years later, he forbade criminals being forced to fight to the death as gladiators:\nBloody spectacles do not please us in civil ease and domestic quiet. For that reason we forbid those people to be gladiators who by reason of some criminal act were accustomed to deserve this condition and sentence. You shall rather sentence them to serve in the mines so that they may acknowledge the penalties of their crimes with blood.\nThis has been interpreted as a ban on gladiatorial combat. Yet, in the last year of his life, Constantine wrote a letter to the citizens of Hispellum, granting its people the right to celebrate his rule with gladiatorial games.\nIn 365, Valentinian I (r. 364\u2013375) threatened to fine a judge who sentenced Christians to the arena and in 384 attempted, like most of his predecessors, to limit the expenses of \"gladiatora munera\".\nIn 393, Theodosius I (r. 379\u2013395) adopted Nicene Christianity as the state religion of the Roman Empire and banned pagan festivals. The \"ludi\" continued, very gradually shorn of their stubbornly pagan elements. Honorius (r. 395\u2013423) legally ended gladiator games in 399, and again in 404, at least in the Western Roman Empire. According to Theodoret, the ban was in consequence of Saint Telemachus' martyrdom by spectators at a gladiator \"munus.\" Valentinian III (r. 425\u2013455) repeated the ban in 438, perhaps effectively, though \"venationes\" continued beyond 536. By this time, interest in gladiator contests had waned throughout the Roman world. In the Byzantine Empire, theatrical shows and chariot races continued to attract the crowds, and drew a generous imperial subsidy.\nOrganisation.\nThe earliest \"munera\" took place at or near the tomb of the deceased and these were organised by their \"munerator\" (who made the offering). Later games were held by an \"editor\", either identical with the \"munerator\" or an official employed by him. As time passed, these titles and meanings may have merged. In the republican era, private citizens could own and train gladiators, or lease them from a \"lanista\" (owner of a gladiator training school). From the \"principate\" onwards, private citizens could hold \"munera\" and own gladiators only with imperial permission, and the role of \"editor\" was increasingly tied to state officialdom. Legislation by Claudius required that \"quaestors\", the lowest rank of Roman magistrate, personally subsidise two-thirds of the costs of games for their small-town communities\u2014in effect, both an advertisement of their personal generosity and a part-purchase of their office. Bigger games were put on by senior magistrates, who could better afford them. The largest and most lavish of all were paid for by the emperor himself.\nThe gladiators.\nThe earliest types of gladiator were named after Rome's enemies of that time: the Samnite, Thracian and Gaul. The Samnite, heavily armed, elegantly helmed and probably the most popular type, was renamed secutor and the Gaul renamed murmillo, once these former enemies had been conquered then absorbed into Rome's Empire. In the mid-republican \"munus\", each type seems to have fought against a similar or identical type. In the later Republic and early Empire, various \"fantasy\" types were introduced, and were set against dissimilar but complementary types. For example, the bareheaded, nimble retiarius (\"net-man\"), armoured only at the left arm and shoulder, pitted his net, trident and dagger against the more heavily armoured, helmeted Secutor. Most depictions of gladiators show the most common and popular types. Passing literary references to others has allowed their tentative reconstruction. Other novelties introduced around this time included gladiators who fought from chariots or carts, or from horseback. At an unknown date, cestus fighters were introduced to Roman arenas, probably from Greece, armed with potentially lethal boxing gloves.\nThe trade in gladiators was empire-wide, and subject to official supervision. Rome's military success produced a supply of soldier-prisoners who were redistributed for use in State mines or amphitheatres and for sale on the open market. For example, in the aftermath of the Jewish Revolt, the gladiator schools received an influx of Jews\u2014those rejected for training were sent straight to the arenas as \"noxii\" (lit. \"hurtful ones\"). The best\u2014the most robust\u2014were sent to Rome. In Rome's military ethos, enemy soldiers who had surrendered or allowed their own capture and enslavement had been granted an unmerited gift of life. Their training as gladiators gave them the opportunity to redeem their honour in the \"munus\".\nTwo other sources of gladiators, found increasingly during the Principate and the relatively low military activity of the Pax Romana, were slaves condemned to the arena (\"damnati\"), to gladiator schools or games (\"ad ludum gladiatorium\") as punishment for crimes, and the paid volunteers (\"auctorati\") who by the late Republic may have comprised approximately half\u2014and possibly the most capable half\u2014of all gladiators. The use of volunteers had a precedent in the Iberian \"munus\" of Scipio Africanus; but none of those had been paid.\nFor the poor, and for non-citizens, enrollment in a gladiator school offered a trade, regular food, housing of sorts and a fighting chance of fame and fortune. Mark Antony chose a troupe of gladiators to be his personal bodyguard. Gladiators customarily kept their prize money and any gifts they received, and these could be substantial. Tiberius offered several retired gladiators 100,000 \"sesterces\" each to return to the arena. Nero gave the gladiator Spiculus property and residence \"equal to those of men who had celebrated triumphs.\"\nWomen.\nFrom the 60s AD female gladiators appear as rare and \"exotic markers of exceptionally lavish spectacle\". In 66 AD, Nero had Ethiopian women, men and children fight at a \"munus\" to impress the King Tiridates I of Armenia. Romans seem to have found the idea of a female gladiator novel and entertaining, or downright absurd; Juvenal titillates his readers with a woman named \"Mevia\", hunting boars in the arena \"with spear in hand and breasts exposed\", and Petronius mocks the pretensions of a rich, low-class citizen, whose \"munus\" includes a woman fighting from a cart or chariot. A \"munus\" of 89 AD, during Domitian's reign, featured a battle between female gladiators, described as \"Amazons\". In Halicarnassus, a 2nd-century AD relief depicts two female combatants named \"Amazon\" and \"Achillia\"; their match ended in a draw. In the same century, an epigraph praises one of Ostia's local elite as the first to \"arm women\" in the history of its games. Female gladiators probably submitted to the same regulations and training as their male counterparts. Roman morality required that all gladiators be of the lowest social classes, and emperors who failed to respect this distinction earned the scorn of posterity. Cassius Dio takes pains to point out that when the much admired emperor Titus used female gladiators, they were of acceptably low class.\nSome regarded female gladiators of any type or class as a symptom of corrupted Roman appetites, morals and womanhood. Before he became emperor, Septimius Severus may have attended the Antiochene Olympic Games, which had been revived by the emperor Commodus and included traditional Greek female athletics. Septimius' attempt to give Rome a similarly dignified display of female athletics was met by the crowd with ribald chants and cat-calls. Probably as a result, he banned the use of female gladiators in 200 AD.\nEmperors.\nCaligula, Titus, Hadrian, Lucius Verus, Caracalla, Geta and Didius Julianus were all said to have performed in the arena, either in public or private, but risks to themselves were minimal. Claudius, characterised by his historians as morbidly cruel and boorish, fought a whale trapped in the harbor in front of a group of spectators. Commentators invariably disapproved of such performances.\nCommodus was a fanatical participant at the \"ludi\", and compelled Rome's elite to attend his performances as gladiator, \"bestiarius\" or \"venator\". Most of his performances as a gladiator were bloodless affairs, fought with wooden swords; he invariably won. He was said to have restyled Nero's colossal statue in his own image as \"Hercules Reborn\", dedicated to himself as \"Champion of \"secutores\"; only left-handed fighter to conquer twelve times one thousand men.\" He was said to have killed 100 lions in one day, almost certainly from an elevated platform surrounding the arena perimeter, which allowed him to safely demonstrate his marksmanship. On another occasion, he decapitated a running ostrich with a specially designed dart, carried the bloodied head and his sword over to the Senatorial seats and gesticulated as though they were next. As reward for these services, he drew a gigantic stipend from the public purse.\nGames.\nPreparations.\nGladiator games were advertised well beforehand, on billboards that gave the reason for the game, its editor, venue, date and the number of paired gladiators (\"ordinarii\") to be used. Other highlighted features could include details of \"venationes\", executions, music and any luxuries to be provided for the spectators, such as an awning against the sun, water sprinklers, food, drink, sweets and occasionally \"door prizes\". For enthusiasts and gamblers, a more detailed program (\"libellus\") was distributed on the day of the \"munus\", showing the names, types and match records of gladiator pairs, and their order of appearance. Left-handed gladiators were advertised as a rarity; they were trained to fight right-handers, which gave them an advantage over most opponents and produced an interestingly unorthodox combination.\nThe night before the \"munus\", the gladiators were given a banquet and opportunity to order their personal and private affairs; Futrell notes its similarity to a ritualistic or sacramental \"last meal\". These were probably both family and public events which included even the \"noxii\", sentenced to die in the arena the following day; and the \"damnati\", who would have at least a slender chance of survival. The event may also have been used to drum up more publicity for the imminent game.\nThe \"ludi\" and \"munus\".\nOfficial \"munera\" of the early Imperial era seem to have followed a standard form (\"munus legitimum\"). A procession (\"pompa\") entered the arena, led by lictors who bore the fasces that signified the magistrate-\"editor\"'s power over life and death. They were followed by a small band of trumpeters (\"tubicines\") playing a fanfare. Images of the gods were carried in to \"witness\" the proceedings, followed by a scribe to record the outcome, and a man carrying the palm branch used to honour victors. The magistrate \"editor\" entered among a retinue who carried the arms and armour to be used; the gladiators presumably came in last.\nThe entertainments often began with \"venationes\" (beast hunts) and \"bestiarii\" (beast fighters). Next came the \"ludi meridiani\", which were of variable content but usually involved executions of \"noxii\", some of whom were condemned to be subjects of fatal re-enactments, based on Greek or Roman myths. Gladiators may have been involved in these as executioners, though most of the crowd, and the gladiators themselves, preferred the \"dignity\" of an even contest. There were also comedy fights; some may have been lethal. A crude Pompeian graffito suggests a burlesque of musicians, dressed as animals named \"Ursus tibicen\" (flute-playing bear) and \"Pullus cornicen\" (horn-blowing chicken), perhaps as accompaniment to clowning by \"paegniarii\" during a \"mock\" contest of the \"ludi meridiani\".\nArmatures.\nThe gladiators may have held informal warm-up matches, using blunted or dummy weapons\u2014some \"munera\", however, may have used blunted weapons throughout. The \"editor,\" his representative or an honoured guest would check the weapons (\"probatio armorum\") for the scheduled matches. These were the highlight of the day, and were as inventive, varied and novel as the \"editor\" could afford. Armatures could be very costly\u2014some were flamboyantly decorated with exotic feathers, jewels and precious metals. Increasingly the \"munus\" was the \"editor\"'s gift to spectators who had come to expect the best as their due.\nCombat.\nLightly armed and armoured fighters, such as the retiarius, would tire less rapidly than their heavily armed opponents; most bouts would have lasted 10 to 15 minutes, or 20 minutes at most. In late Republican \"munera\", between 10 and 13 matches could have been fought on one day; this assumes one match at a time in the course of an afternoon.\nSpectators preferred to watch highly skilled, well matched \"ordinarii\" with complementary fighting styles; these were the most costly to train and to hire. A general \"melee\" of several, lower-skilled gladiators was far less costly, but also less popular. Even among the \"ordinarii\", match winners might have to fight a new, well-rested opponent, either a \"tertiarius\" (\"third choice gladiator\") by prearrangement; or a \"substitute\" gladiator (\"suppositicius\") who fought at the whim of the \"editor\" as an unadvertised, unexpected \"extra\". This yielded two combats for the cost of three gladiators, rather than four; such contests were prolonged, and in some cases, more bloody. Most were probably of poor quality, but the emperor Caracalla chose to test a notably skilled and successful fighter named Bato against first one \"supposicitius\", whom he beat, and then another, who killed him. At the opposite level of the profession, a gladiator reluctant to confront his opponent might be whipped, or goaded with hot irons, until he engaged through sheer desperation.\nCombats between experienced, well trained gladiators demonstrated a considerable degree of stagecraft. Among the cognoscenti, bravado and skill in combat were esteemed over mere hacking and bloodshed; some gladiators made their careers and reputation from bloodless victories. Suetonius describes an exceptional \"munus\" by Nero, in which no-one was killed, \"not even \"noxii\" (enemies of the state).\"\nTrained gladiators were expected to observe professional rules of combat. Most matches employed a senior referee (\"summa rudis\") and an assistant, shown in mosaics with long staffs (\"rudes\") to caution or separate opponents at some crucial point in the match. Referees were usually retired gladiators whose decisions, judgement and discretion were, for the most part, respected; they could stop bouts entirely, or pause them to allow the combatants rest, refreshment and a rub-down.\nLudi and \"munera\" were accompanied by music, played as interludes, or building to a \"frenzied crescendo\" during combats, perhaps to heighten the suspense during a gladiator's appeal; blows may have been accompanied by trumpet-blasts. The Zliten mosaic in Libya (circa 80\u2013100 AD) shows musicians playing an accompaniment to provincial games (with gladiators, \"bestiarii\", or \"venatores\" and prisoners attacked by beasts). Their instruments are a long straight trumpet (\"tubicen\"), a large curved horn (\"Cornu\") and a water organ (\"hydraulis\"). Similar representations (musicians, gladiators and \"bestiari\") are found on a tomb relief in Pompeii.\nVictory and defeat.\nA match was won by the gladiator who overcame his opponent, or killed him outright. Victors received the palm branch and an award from the \"editor\". An outstanding fighter might receive a laurel crown and money from an appreciative crowd but for anyone originally condemned \"ad ludum\" the greatest reward was manumission (emancipation), symbolised by the gift of a wooden training sword or staff (\"rudis\") from the \"editor\". Martial describes a match between Priscus and Verus, who fought so evenly and bravely for so long that when both acknowledged defeat at the same instant, Titus awarded victory and a \"rudis\" to each. Flamma was awarded the \"rudis\" four times, but chose to remain a gladiator. His gravestone in Sicily includes his record: \"Flamma, \"secutor\", lived 30 years, fought 34 times, won 21 times, fought to a draw 9 times, defeated 4 times, a Syrian by nationality. Delicatus made this for his deserving comrade-in-arms.\"\nA gladiator could acknowledge defeat by raising a finger (\"ad digitum\"), in appeal to the referee to stop the combat and refer to the \"editor\", whose decision would usually rest on the crowd's response. In the earliest \"munera\", death was considered a righteous penalty for defeat; later, those who fought well might be granted remission at the whim of the crowd or the \"editor\". During the Imperial era, matches advertised as \"sine missione\" (usually understood to mean \"without reprieve\" for the defeated) suggest that \"missio\" (the sparing of a defeated gladiator's life) had become common practice. The contract between \"editor\" and his \"lanista\" could include compensation for unexpected deaths; this could be \"some fifty times higher than the lease price\" of the gladiator.\nUnder Augustus' rule, the demand for gladiators began to exceed supply, and matches \"sine missione\" were officially banned; an economical, pragmatic development that happened to match popular notions of \"natural justice\". When Caligula and Claudius refused to spare defeated but popular fighters, their own popularity suffered. In general, gladiators who fought well were likely to survive. At a Pompeian match between chariot-fighters, Publius Ostorius, with previous 51 wins to his credit, was granted missio after losing to Scylax, with 26 victories. By common custom, the spectators decided whether or not a losing gladiator should be spared, and chose the winner in the rare event of a standing tie. Even more rarely, perhaps uniquely, one stalemate ended in the killing of one gladiator by the \"editor\" himself. In any event, the final decision of death or life belonged to the \"editor\", who signalled his choice with a gesture described by Roman sources as \"pollice verso\" meaning \"with a turned thumb\"; a description too imprecise for reconstruction of the gesture or its symbolism. Whether victorious or defeated, a gladiator was bound by oath to accept or implement his editor's decision, \"the victor being nothing but the instrument of his [editor's] will.\" Not all \"editors\" chose to go with the crowd, and not all those condemned to death for putting on a poor show chose to submit:\nOnce a band of five \"retiarii\" in tunics, matched against the same number of \"secutores\", yielded without a struggle; but when their death was ordered, one of them caught up his trident and slew all the victors. Caligula bewailed this in a public proclamation as a most cruel murder.\nDeath and disposal.\nA gladiator who was refused \"missio\" was dispatched by his opponent. To die well, a gladiator should never ask for mercy, nor cry out. A \"good death\" redeemed the gladiator from the dishonourable weakness and passivity of defeat, and provided a noble example to those who watched:\nFor death, when it stands near us, gives even to inexperienced men the courage not to seek to avoid the inevitable. So the gladiator, no matter how faint-hearted he has been throughout the fight, offers his throat to his opponent and directs the wavering blade to the vital spot. (Seneca. \"Epistles\", 30.8)\nSome mosaics show defeated gladiators kneeling in preparation for the moment of death. Seneca's \"vital spot\" seems to have meant the neck. Gladiator remains from Ephesus confirm this.\nThe body of a gladiator who had died well was placed on a couch of Libitina and removed with dignity to the arena morgue, where the corpse was stripped of armour, and probably had its throat cut as confirmation of death. The Christian author Tertullian, commenting on \"ludi meridiani\" in Roman Carthage during the peak era of the games, describes a more humiliating method of removal. One arena official, dressed as the \"brother of Jove\", Dis Pater (god of the underworld) strikes the corpse with a mallet. Another, dressed as Mercury, tests for life-signs with a heated \"wand\"; once confirmed as dead, the body is dragged from the arena.\nWhether these victims were gladiators or \"noxii\" is unknown. Modern pathological examination confirms the probably fatal use of a mallet on some, but not all the gladiator skulls found in a gladiators' cemetery. Kyle (1998) proposes that gladiators who disgraced themselves might have been subjected to the same indignities as \"noxii\", denied the relative mercies of a quick death and dragged from the arena as carrion. Whether the corpse of such a gladiator could be redeemed from further ignominy by friends or \"familia\" is not known.\nThe bodies of \"noxii\", and possibly some \"damnati\", were thrown into rivers or dumped unburied; Denial of funeral rites and memorial condemned the shade (\"manes\") of the deceased to restless wandering upon the earth as a dreadful \"larva\" or \"lemur\". Ordinary citizens, slaves and freedmen were usually buried beyond the town or city limits, to avoid the ritual and physical pollution of the living; professional gladiators had their own, separate cemeteries. The taint of \"infamia\" was perpetual.\nRemembrance and epitaphs.\nGladiators could subscribe to a union (\"collegia\"), which ensured their proper burial, and sometimes a pension or compensation for wives and children. Otherwise, the gladiator's \"familia\", which included his \"lanista\", comrades and blood-kin, might fund his funeral and memorial costs, and use the memorial to assert their moral reputation as responsible, respectful colleagues or family members. Some monuments record the gladiator's career in some detail, including the number of appearances, victories\u2014sometimes represented by an engraved crown or wreath\u2014defeats, career duration, and age at death. Some include the gladiator's type, in words or direct representation: for example, the memorial of a retiarius at Verona included the engraving of a trident and sword. A wealthy editor might commission artwork to celebrate a particularly successful or memorable show, and include named portraits of winners and losers in action; the Borghese Gladiator Mosaic is a notable example. According to Cassius Dio, the emperor Caracalla gave the gladiator Bato a magnificent memorial and State funeral; more typical are the simple gladiator tombs of the Eastern Roman Empire, whose brief inscriptions include the following:\n\"The familia set this up in memory of Saturnilos.\"\n\"For Nikepharos, son of Synetos, Lakedaimonian, and for Narcissus the secutor. Titus Flavius Satyrus set up this monument in his memory from his own money.\"\n\"For Hermes. Paitraeites with his cell-mates set this up in memory\".\nVery little evidence survives of the religious beliefs of gladiators as a class, or their expectations of an afterlife. Modern scholarship offers little support for the once-prevalent notion that gladiators, \"venatores\" and \"bestiarii\" were personally or professionally dedicated to the cult of the Graeco-Roman goddess Nemesis. Rather, she seems to have represented a kind of \"Imperial Fortuna\" who dispensed Imperial retribution on the one hand, and Imperially subsidised gifts on the other\u2014including the \"munera\". One gladiator's tomb dedication clearly states that her decisions are not to be trusted. Many gladiator epitaphs claim Nemesis, fate, deception or treachery as the instrument of their death, never the superior skills of the flesh-and-blood adversary who defeated and killed them. Having no personal responsibility for his own defeat and death, the losing gladiator remains the better man, worth avenging.\n\"I, Victor, left-handed, lie here, but my homeland was in Thessalonica. Doom killed me, not the liar Pinnas. No longer let him boast. I had a fellow gladiator, Polyneikes, who killed Pinnas and avenged me. Claudius Thallus set up this memorial from what I left behind as a legacy.\"\nLife expectancy.\nA gladiator might expect to fight in two or three \"munera\" annually, and an unknown number would have died in their first match. Few gladiators survived more than 10 contests, though one survived an extraordinary 150 bouts; and another died at 90 years of age, presumably long after retirement. A natural death following retirement is also likely for three individuals who died at 38, 45, and 48 years respectively. George Ville, using evidence from 1st century gladiator headstones, calculated an average age at death of 27, and mortality \"among all who entered the arena\" at 19/100. Marcus Junkelmann disputes Ville's calculation for average age at death; the majority would have received no headstone, and would have died early in their careers, at 18\u201325 years of age. Between the early and later Imperial periods the risk of death for defeated gladiators rose from 1/5 to 1/4, perhaps because \"missio\" was granted less often. Hopkins and Beard tentatively estimate a total of 400 arenas throughout the Roman Empire at its greatest extent, with a combined total of 8,000 deaths per annum from executions, combats and accidents.\nSchools and training.\nThe earliest named gladiator school (singular: \"ludus\"; plural: \"ludi\") is that of Aurelius Scaurus at Capua. He was \"lanista\" of the gladiators employed by the state circa 105 BC to instruct the legions and simultaneously entertain the public. Few other \"lanistae\" are known by name: they headed their \"familia gladiatoria\", and had lawful power over life and death of every family member, including \"servi poenae\", \"auctorati\" and ancillaries. Socially, they were \"infames\", on a footing with pimps and butchers and despised as price gougers. No such stigma was attached to a gladiator owner (\"munerarius\" or \"editor\") of good family, high status and independent means; Cicero congratulated his friend Atticus on buying a splendid troop\u2014if he rented them out, he might recover their entire cost after two performances.\nThe Spartacus revolt had originated in a gladiator school privately owned by Lentulus Batiatus, and had been suppressed only after a protracted series of costly, sometimes disastrous campaigns by regular Roman troops. In the late Republican era, a fear of similar uprisings, the usefulness of gladiator schools in creating private armies, and the exploitation of \"munera\" for political gain led to increased restrictions on gladiator school ownership, siting and organisation. By Domitian's time, many had been more or less absorbed by the State, including those at Pergamum, Alexandria, Praeneste and Capua. The city of Rome itself had four; the \"Ludus Magnus\" (the largest and most important, housing up to about 2,000 gladiators), \"Ludus Dacicus\", \"Ludus Gallicus\", and the \"Ludus Matutinus\", which trained \"bestiarii\".\nIn the Imperial era, volunteers required a magistrate's permission to join a school as \"auctorati\". If this was granted, the school's physician assessed their suitability. Their contract (\"auctoramentum\") stipulated how often they were to perform, their fighting style and earnings. A condemned bankrupt or debtor accepted as novice (\"novicius\") could negotiate with his \"lanista\" or \"editor\" for the partial or complete payment of his debt. Faced with runaway re-enlistment fees for skilled \"auctorati\", Marcus Aurelius set their upper limit at 12,000 \"sesterces\".\nAll prospective gladiators, whether volunteer or condemned, were bound to service by a sacred oath (\"sacramentum\"). Novices (\"novicii\") trained under teachers of particular fighting styles, probably retired gladiators. They could ascend through a hierarchy of grades (singular: \"palus\") in which \"primus palus\" was the highest. Lethal weapons were prohibited in the schools\u2014weighted, blunt wooden versions were probably used. Fighting styles were probably learned through constant rehearsal as choreographed \"numbers\". An elegant, economical style was preferred. Training included preparation for a stoical, unflinching death. Successful training required intense commitment.\nThose condemned \"ad ludum\" were probably branded or marked with a tattoo (\"stigma\", plural \"stigmata\") on the face, legs and/or hands. These \"stigmata\" may have been text\u2014slaves were sometimes thus marked on the forehead until Constantine banned the use of facial stigmata in 325 AD. Soldiers were routinely marked on the hand.\nGladiators were typically accommodated in cells, arranged in barrack formation around a central practice arena. Juvenal describes the segregation of gladiators according to type and status, suggestive of rigid hierarchies within the schools: \"even the lowest scum of the arena observe this rule; even in prison they're separate\". \"Retiarii\" were kept away from \"damnati\", and \"fag targeteers\" from \"armoured heavies\". As most \"ordinarii\" at games were from the same school, this kept potential opponents separate and safe from each other until the lawful \"munus\". Discipline could be extreme, even lethal. Remains of a Pompeian \"ludus\" site attest to developments in supply, demand and discipline; in its earliest phase, the building could accommodate 15\u201320 gladiators. Its replacement could have housed about 100 and included a very small cell, probably for lesser punishments and so low that standing was impossible.\nDiet and medical care.\nDespite the harsh discipline, gladiators represented a substantial investment for their \"lanista\" and were otherwise well fed and cared for. Their daily, high-energy, vegetarian diet consisted of barley, boiled beans, oatmeal, ash and dried fruit. Gladiators were sometimes called \"hordearii\" (eaters of barley). Romans considered barley inferior to wheat\u2014a punishment for legionaries replaced their wheat ration with it\u2014but it was thought to strengthen the body. Regular massage and high quality medical care helped mitigate an otherwise very severe training regimen. Part of Galen's medical training was at a gladiator school in Pergamum where he saw (and would later criticise) the training, diet, and long-term health prospects of the gladiators.\nLegal and social status.\n\"He vows to endure to be burned, to be bound, to be beaten, and to be killed by the sword.\" \"The gladiator's oath as cited by Petronius (Satyricon, 117).\"\nModern customs and institutions offer few useful parallels to the legal and social context of the \"gladiatoria munera\". In Roman law, anyone condemned to the arena or the gladiator schools (\"damnati ad ludum\") was a \"servus poenae\" (slave of the penalty), and was considered to be under sentence of death unless manumitted. A rescript of Hadrian reminded magistrates that \"those sentenced to the sword\" (execution) should be despatched immediately \"or at least within the year\", and those sentenced to the \"ludi\" should not be discharged before five years, or three years if granted manumission. Only slaves found guilty of specific offences could be sentenced to the arena; however, citizens found guilty of particular offenses could be stripped of citizenship, formally enslaved, then sentenced; and slaves, once freed, could be legally reverted to slavery for certain offences. Arena punishment could be given for banditry, theft and arson, and for treasons such as rebellion, census evasion to avoid paying due taxes and refusal to swear lawful oaths.\nOffenders seen as particularly obnoxious to the state (\"noxii\") received the most humiliating punishments. By the 1st century BC, \"noxii\" were being condemned to the beasts (\"damnati ad bestias\") in the arena, with almost no chance of survival, or were made to kill each other. From the early Imperial era, some were forced to participate in humiliating and novel forms of mythological or historical enactment, culminating in their execution. Those judged less harshly might be condemned \"ad ludum venatorium\" or \"ad gladiatorium\"\u2014combat with animals or gladiators\u2014and armed as thought appropriate. These \"damnati\" at least might put on a good show and retrieve some respect and, very rarely, survive to fight another day. Some may even have become \"proper\" gladiators.\nAmong the most admired and skilled \"auctorati\" were those who, having been granted manumission, volunteered to fight in the arena. Some of these highly trained and experienced specialists may have had no other practical choice open to them. Their legal status\u2014slave or free\u2014is uncertain. Under Roman law, a freed gladiator could not \"offer such services [as those of a gladiator] after manumission, because they cannot be performed without endangering [his] life.\" All contracted volunteers, including those of equestrian and senatorial class, were legally enslaved by their \"auctoratio\" because it involved their potentially lethal submission to a master. All \"arenarii\" (those who appeared in the arena) were \"\"infames\" by reputation\", a form of social dishonour which excluded them from most of the advantages and rights of citizenship. Payment for such appearances compounded their \"infamia\". The legal and social status of even the most popular and wealthy \"auctorati\" was thus marginal at best. They could not vote, plead in court nor leave a will; and unless they were manumitted, their lives and property belonged to their masters. Nevertheless, there is evidence of informal if not entirely lawful practices to the contrary. Some \"unfree\" gladiators bequeathed money and personal property to wives and children, possibly via a sympathetic owner or \"familia\"; some had their own slaves and gave them their freedom. One gladiator was even granted \"citizenship\" to several Greek cities of the Eastern Roman world.\nCaesar's \"munus\" of 46 BC included at least one equestrian, son of a Praetor, and two volunteers of possible senatorial rank. Augustus, who enjoyed watching the games, forbade the participation of senators, equestrians and their descendants as fighters or \"arenarii\", but in 11 AD he bent his own rules and allowed equestrians to volunteer because \"the prohibition was no use\". Under Tiberius, the Larinum decree (19 AD) reiterated Augustus' original prohibitions. Thereafter, Caligula flouted them and Claudius strengthened them. Nero and Commodus ignored them. Even after the adoption of Christianity as Rome's official religion, legislation forbade the involvement of Rome's upper social classes in the games, though not the games themselves. Throughout Rome's history, some volunteers were prepared to risk loss of status or reputation by appearing in the arena, whether for payment, glory or, as in one recorded case, to revenge an affront to their personal honour. In one extraordinary episode, an aristocratic descendant of the Gracchi, already infamous for his marriage, as a bride, to a male horn player, appeared in what may have been a non-lethal or farcical match. His motives are unknown, but his voluntary and \"shameless\" arena appearance combined the \"womanly attire\" of a lowly \"retiarius tunicatus\", adorned with golden ribbons, with the apex headdress that marked him out as a priest of Mars. In Juvenal's account, he seems to have relished the scandalous self-display, applause and the disgrace he inflicted on his more sturdy opponent by repeatedly skipping away from the confrontation.\nAmphitheatres.\nAs \"munera\" grew larger and more popular, open spaces such as the Forum Romanum were adapted (as the Forum Boarium had been) as venues in Rome and elsewhere, with temporary, elevated seating for the patron and high status spectators; they were popular but not truly public events:\nA show of gladiators was to be exhibited before the people in the market-place, and most of the magistrates erected scaffolds round about, with an intention of letting them for advantage. Caius commanded them to take down their scaffolds, that the poor people might see the sport without paying anything. But nobody obeying these orders of his, he gathered together a body of labourers, who worked for him, and overthrew all the scaffolds the very night before the contest was to take place. So that by the next morning the market-place was cleared, and the common people had an opportunity of seeing the pastime. In this, the populace thought he had acted the part of a man; but he much disobliged the tribunes his colleagues, who regarded it as a piece of violent and presumptuous interference.\nTowards the end of the Republic, Cicero (\"Murena\", 72\u201373) still describes gladiator shows as ticketed\u2014their political usefulness was served by inviting the rural tribunes of the plebs, not the people of Rome \"en masse\"\u2013but in Imperial times, poor citizens in receipt of the corn dole were allocated at least some free seating, possibly by lottery. Others had to pay. Ticket scalpers (\"Locarii\") sometimes sold or let out seats at inflated prices. Martial wrote that \"Hermes [a gladiator who always drew the crowds] means riches for the ticket scalpers\".\nThe earliest known Roman amphitheatre was built at Pompeii by Sullan colonists, around 70 BC. The first in the city of Rome was the extraordinary wooden amphitheatre of Gaius Scribonius Curio (built in 53 BC). The first part-stone amphitheatre in Rome was inaugurated in 29\u201330 BC, in time for the triple triumph of Octavian (later Augustus). Shortly after it burned down in 64 AD, Vespasian began its replacement, later known as the Amphitheatrum Flavium (Colosseum), which seated 50,000 spectators and would remain the largest in the Empire. It was inaugurated by Titus in 80 AD as the personal gift of the Emperor to the people of Rome, paid for by the imperial share of booty after the Jewish Revolt.\nAmphitheatres were usually oval in plan. Their seating tiers surrounded the arena below, where the community's judgments were meted out, in full public view. From across the stands, crowd and \"editor\" could assess each other's character and temperament. For the crowd, amphitheatres afforded unique opportunities for free expression and free speech (\"theatralis licentia\"). Petitions could be submitted to the \"editor\" (as magistrate) in full view of the community. \"Factiones\" and claques could vent their spleen on each other, and occasionally on Emperors. The emperor Titus's dignified yet confident ease in his management of an amphitheatre crowd and its factions were taken as a measure of his enormous popularity and the rightness of his imperium. The amphitheatre \"munus\" thus served the Roman community as living theatre and a court in miniature, in which judgement could be served not only on those in the arena below, but on their judges. Amphitheatres also provided a means of social control. Their seating was \"disorderly and indiscriminate\" until Augustus prescribed its arrangement in his Social Reforms. To persuade the Senate, he expressed his distress on behalf of a senator who could not find seating at a crowded games in Puteoli:\nIn consequence of this the senate decreed that, whenever any public show was given anywhere, the first row of seats should be reserved for senators; and at Rome he would not allow the envoys of the free and allied nations to sit in the orchestra, since he was informed that even freedmen were sometimes appointed. He separated the soldiery from the people. He assigned special seats to the married men of the commons, to boys under age their own section and the adjoining one to their preceptors; and he decreed that no one wearing a dark cloak should sit in the middle of the house. He would not allow women to view even the gladiators except from the upper seats, though it had been the custom for men and women to sit together at such shows. Only the Vestal virgins were assigned a place to themselves, opposite the praetor's tribunal.\nThese arrangements do not seem to have been strongly enforced.\nFactions and rivals.\nPopular factions supported favourite gladiators and gladiator types. Under Augustan legislation, the Samnite type was renamed \"Secutor\" (\"chaser\", or \"pursuer\"). The secutor was equipped with a long, heavy \"large\" shield called a \"scutum\"; \"Secutores\", their supporters and any heavyweight \"secutor\"-based types such as the Murmillo were \"secutarii\". Lighter types, such as the Thraex, were equipped with a smaller, lighter shield called a \"parma\", from which they and their supporters were named \"parmularii\" (\"small shields\"). Titus and Trajan preferred the \"parmularii\" and Domitian the \"secutarii\"; Marcus Aurelius took neither side. Nero seems to have enjoyed the brawls between rowdy, enthusiastic and sometimes violent factions, but called in the troops if they went too far.\nThere were also local rivalries. At Pompeii's amphitheatre, during Nero's reign, the trading of insults between Pompeians and Nucerian spectators during public \"ludi\" led to stone throwing and riot. Many were killed or wounded. Nero banned gladiator \"munera\" (though not the games) at Pompeii for ten years as punishment. The story is told in Pompeian graffiti and high quality wall painting, with much boasting of Pompeii's \"victory\" over Nuceria.\nRole in Roman life.\nIt is not known how many \"gladiatoria munera\" were given throughout the Roman period. Many, if not most, involved \"venationes\", and in the later empire some may have been only that. In 165 BC, at least one \"munus\" was held during April's Megalesia. In the early imperial era, \"munera\" in Pompeii and neighbouring towns were dispersed from March through November. They included a provincial magnate's five-day \"munus\" of thirty pairs, plus beast hunts. A single late primary source, the \"Calendar of Furius Dionysius Philocalus\" for 354, shows how seldom gladiators featured among a multitude of official festivals. Of the 176 days reserved for spectacles of various kinds, 102 were for theatrical shows, 64 for chariot races and just 10 in December for gladiator games and \"venationes\". A century before this, the emperor Alexander Severus (r. 222\u2013235) may have intended a more even redistribution of \"munera\" throughout the year; but this would have broken with what had become the traditional positioning of the major gladiator games, at the year's ending. As Wiedemann points out, December was also the month for the Saturnalia, Saturn's festival, in which death was linked to renewal, and the lowest were honoured as the highest.\nRole in the military.\nAccording to Livy: \"A man who knows how to conquer in war is a man who knows how to arrange a banquet and put on a show.\"\nRome was essentially a landowning military aristocracy. From the early days of the Republic, ten years of military service were a citizen's duty and a prerequisite for election to public office. \"Devotio\" (willingness to sacrifice one's life to the greater good) was central to the Roman military ideal, and was the core of the Roman military oath. It applied from highest to lowest alike in the chain of command. As a soldier committed his life (voluntarily, at least in theory) to the greater cause of Rome's victory, he was not expected to survive defeat.\nThe Punic Wars of the late 3rd century BC\u2014in particular the near-catastrophic defeat of Roman arms at Cannae\u2014had long-lasting effects on the Republic, its citizen armies, and the development of the gladiatorial \"munera\". In the aftermath of Cannae, Scipio Africanus crucified Roman deserters and had non-Roman deserters thrown to the beasts. The Senate refused to ransom Hannibal's Roman captives: instead, they consulted the Sibylline books, then made drastic preparations:\nIn obedience to the Books of Destiny, some strange and unusual sacrifices were made, human sacrifices amongst them. A Gaulish man and a Gaulish woman and a Greek man and a Greek woman were buried alive under the Forum Boarium\u00a0... They were lowered into a stone vault, which had on a previous occasion also been polluted by human victims, a practice most repulsive to Roman feelings. When the gods were believed to be duly propitiated\u00a0... Armour, weapons, and other things of the kind were ordered to be in readiness, and the ancient spoils gathered from the enemy were taken down from the temples and colonnades. The dearth of freemen necessitated a new kind of enlistment; 8,000 sturdy youths from amongst the slaves were armed at the public cost, after they had each been asked whether they were willing to serve or no. These soldiers were preferred, as there would be an opportunity of ransoming them when taken prisoners at a lower price.\nThe account notes, uncomfortably, the bloodless human sacrifices performed to help turn the tide of the war in Rome's favour. While the Senate mustered their willing slaves, Hannibal offered his dishonoured Roman captives a chance for honourable death, in what Livy describes as something very like the Roman \"munus\". The \"munus\" thus represented an essentially military, self-sacrificial ideal, taken to extreme fulfillment in the gladiator's oath. By the \"devotio\" of a voluntary oath, a slave might achieve the quality of a Roman (\"Romanitas\"), become the embodiment of true \"virtus\" (manliness, or manly virtue), and paradoxically, be granted \"missio\" while remaining a slave. The gladiator as a specialist fighter, and the ethos and organization of the gladiator schools, would inform the development of the Roman military as the most effective force of its time. Following defeat at the Battle of Arausio in 105 BC:\n...weapons training was given to soldiers by P. Rutilius, consul with C. Mallis. For he, following the example of no previous general, with teachers summoned from the gladiatorial training school of C. Aurelus Scaurus, implanted in the legions a more sophisticated method of avoiding and dealing a blow and mixed bravery with skill and skill back again with virtue so that skill became stronger by bravery's passion and passion became more wary with the knowledge of this art.\nThe military were great aficionados of the games, and supervised the schools. Many schools and amphitheatres were sited at or near military barracks, and some provincial army units owned gladiator troupes. As the Republic wore on, the term of military service increased from ten to the sixteen years formalised by Augustus in the Principate. It would rise to twenty, and later, to twenty-five years. Roman military discipline was ferocious; severe enough to provoke mutiny, despite the consequences. A career as a volunteer gladiator may have seemed an attractive option for some.\nIn AD 69, the Year of the Four Emperors, Otho's troops at Bedriacum included 2000 gladiators. Opposite him on the field, Vitellius's army was swollen by levies of slaves, plebs and gladiators. In 167 AD, troop depletions by plague and desertion may have prompted Marcus Aurelius to draft gladiators at his own expense. During the Civil Wars that led to the Principate, Octavian (later Augustus) acquired the personal gladiator troop of his erstwhile opponent, Mark Antony. They had served their late master with exemplary loyalty but thereafter, they disappear from the record.\nReligion, ethics and sentiment.\nRoman writing as a whole demonstrates a deep ambivalence towards the \"gladiatoria munera\". Even the most complex and sophisticated \"munera\" of the Imperial era evoked the ancient, ancestral \"dii manes\" of the underworld and were framed by the protective, lawful rites of \"sacrificium\". Their popularity made their co-option by the state inevitable; Cicero acknowledged their sponsorship as a political imperative. Despite the popular adulation of gladiators, they were set apart, despised; and despite Cicero's contempt for the mob, he shared their admiration: \"Even when [gladiators] have been felled, let alone when they are standing and fighting, they never disgrace themselves. And suppose a gladiator has been brought to the ground, when do you ever see one twist his neck away after he has been ordered to extend it for the death blow?\" His own death would later emulate this example. Yet, Cicero could also refer to his popularist opponent Clodius, publicly and scathingly, as a \"bustuarius\"\u2014literally, a \"funeral-man\", implying that Clodius has shown the moral temperament of the lowest sort of gladiator. \"Gladiator\" could be (and was) used as an insult throughout the Roman period, and \"Samnite\" doubled the insult, despite the popularity of the Samnite type.\nSilius Italicus wrote, as the games approached their peak, that the degenerate Campanians had devised the very worst of precedents, which now threatened the moral fabric of Rome: \"It was their custom to enliven their banquets with bloodshed and to combine with their feasting the horrid sight of armed men [(Samnites)] fighting; often the combatants fell dead above the very cups of the revelers, and the tables were stained with streams of blood. Thus demoralised was Capua.\" Death could be rightly meted out as punishment, or met with equanimity in peace or war, as a gift of fate; but when inflicted as entertainment, with no underlying moral or religious purpose, it could only pollute and demean those who witnessed it.\nThe \"munus\" itself could be interpreted as pious necessity, but its increasing luxury corroded Roman virtue, and created an un-Roman appetite for profligacy and self-indulgence. Caesar's 46 BC \"ludi\" were mere entertainment for political gain, a waste of lives and of money that would have been better doled out to his legionary veterans. Yet for Seneca, and for Marcus Aurelius\u2014both professed Stoics\u2014the degradation of gladiators in the \"munus\" highlighted their Stoic virtues: their unconditional obedience to their master and to fate, and equanimity in the face of death. Having \"neither hope nor illusions\", the gladiator could transcend his own debased nature, and disempower death itself by meeting it face to face. Courage, dignity, altruism and loyalty were morally redemptive; Lucian idealised this principle in his story of Sisinnes, who voluntarily fought as a gladiator, earned 10,000 drachmas and used it to buy freedom for his friend, Toxaris. Seneca had a lower opinion of the mob's un-Stoical appetite for \"ludi meridiani\": \"Man [is]...now slaughtered for jest and sport; and those whom it used to be unholy to train for the purpose of inflicting and enduring wounds are thrust forth exposed and defenceless.\"\nThese accounts seek a higher moral meaning from the \"munus\", but Ovid's very detailed (though satirical) instructions for seduction in the amphitheatre suggest that the spectacles could generate a potent and dangerously sexual atmosphere. Augustan seating prescriptions placed women\u2014excepting the Vestals, who were legally inviolate\u2014as far as possible from the action of the arena floor; or tried to. There remained the thrilling possibility of clandestine sexual transgression by high-caste spectators and their heroes of the arena. Such assignations were a source for gossip and satire but some became unforgivably public:\nWhat was the youthful charm that so fired Eppia? What hooked her? What did she see in him to make her put up with being called \"the gladiator's moll\"? Her poppet, her Sergius, was no chicken, with a dud arm that prompted hope of early retirement. Besides his face looked a proper mess, helmet-scarred, a great wart on his nose, an unpleasant discharge always trickling from one eye. But he was a gladiator. That word makes the whole breed seem handsome, and made her prefer him to her children and country, her sister, her husband. Steel is what they fall in love with.\nEppia\u2014a senator's wife\u2013and her Sergius eloped to Egypt, where he deserted her. Most gladiators would have aimed lower. Two wall \"graffiti\" in Pompeii describe Celadus the Thraex as \"the sigh of the girls\" and \"the glory of the girls\"\u2014which may or may not have been Celadus' own wishful thinking.\nIn the later Imperial era, Servius Maurus Honoratus uses the same disparaging term as Cicero\u2014\"bustuarius\"\u2014for gladiators. Tertullian used it somewhat differently\u2014all victims of the arena were sacrificial in his eyes\u2014and expressed the paradox of the \"arenarii\" as a class, from a Christian viewpoint:\nOn the one and the same account they glorify them and they degrade and diminish them; yes, further, they openly condemn them to disgrace and civil degradation; they keep them religiously excluded from council chamber, rostrum, senate, knighthood, and every other kind of office and a good many distinctions. The perversity of it! They love whom they lower; they despise whom they approve; the art they glorify, the artist they disgrace.\nIn Roman art and culture.\nIn this new Play, I attempted to follow the old custom of mine, of making a fresh trial; I brought it on again. In the first Act I pleased; when in the meantime a rumor spread that gladiators were about to be exhibited; the populace flock together, make a tumult, clamor aloud, and fight for their places: meantime, I was unable to maintain my place.\nImages of gladiators were found throughout the Republic and Empire, among all classes. Walls in the 2nd century BC \"Agora of the Italians\" at Delos were decorated with paintings of gladiators. Mosaics dating from the 2nd through 4th centuries AD have been invaluable in the reconstruction of combat and its rules, gladiator types and the development of the \"munus\". Throughout the Roman world, ceramics, lamps, gems and jewellery, mosaics, reliefs, wall paintings and statuary offer evidence, sometimes the best evidence, of the clothing, props, equipment, names, events, prevalence and rules of gladiatorial combat. Earlier periods provide only occasional, perhaps exceptional examples. The Gladiator Mosaic in the Galleria Borghese displays several gladiator types, and the Bignor Roman Villa mosaic from Provincial Britain shows Cupids as gladiators. Souvenir ceramics were produced depicting named gladiators in combat; similar images of higher quality, were available on more expensive articles in high quality ceramic, glass or silver.\nSome of the best preserved gladiator graffiti are from Pompeii and Herculaneum, in public areas including Pompeii's Forum and amphitheater, and in the private residences of the upper, middle and lower classes. They clearly show how gladiator \"munera\" pervaded Pompeiian culture; they provide information pertaining to particular gladiators, and sometimes include their names, status as slaves or freeborn volunteers, and their match records.\nPliny the Elder gives vivid examples of the popularity of gladiator portraiture in Antium and an artistic treat laid on by an adoptive aristocrat for the solidly plebeian citizens of the Roman Aventine:\nWhen a freedman of Nero was giving a gladiatorial show at Antium, the public porticoes were covered with paintings, so we are told, containing life-like portraits of all the gladiators and assistants. This portraiture of gladiators has been the highest interest in art for many centuries now, but it was Gaius Terentius who began the practice of having pictures made of gladiatorial shows and exhibited in public; in honour of his grandfather who had adopted him he provided thirty pairs of Gladiators in the Forum for three consecutive days, and exhibited a picture of the matches in the Grove of Diana.\nModern reconstructions.\nSome Roman reenactors attempt to recreate Roman gladiator troupes. Some of these groups are part of larger Roman reenactment groups, and others are wholly independent, though they might participate in larger demonstrations of Roman reenacting or historical reenacting in general. These groups usually focus on portraying mock gladiatorial combat in as accurate a manner as possible.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12337", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12337", "title": "Gnucleus", "text": ""}
{"id": "12338", "revid": "37507540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12338", "title": "GMO (disambiguation)", "text": "A GMO is a genetically modified organism.\nGMO may also refer to:\nMusic.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12339", "revid": "305540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12339", "title": "Genetically modified organism", "text": "Organisms whose genetic material has been altered using genetic engineering methods\nA genetically modified organism (GMO) is any organism whose genetic material has been altered using genetic engineering techniques. The exact definition of a genetically modified organism and what constitutes genetic engineering varies, with the most common being an organism altered in a way that \"does not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination\". A wide variety of organisms have been genetically modified (GM), including animals, plants, and microorganisms.\nGenetic modification can include the introduction of new genes or enhancing, altering, or knocking out endogenous genes. In some genetic modifications, genes are transferred within the same species, across species (creating transgenic organisms), and even across kingdoms. Creating a genetically modified organism is a multi-step process. Genetic engineers must isolate the gene they wish to insert into the host organism and combine it with other genetic elements, including a promoter and terminator region and often a selectable marker. A number of techniques are available for inserting the isolated gene into the host genome. Recent advancements using genome editing techniques, notably CRISPR, have made the production of GMOs much simpler. Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen made the first genetically modified organism in 1973, a bacterium resistant to the antibiotic kanamycin. The first genetically modified animal, a mouse, was created in 1974 by Rudolf Jaenisch, and the first plant was produced in 1983. In 1994, the Flavr Savr tomato was released, the first commercialized genetically modified food. The first genetically modified animal to be commercialized was the GloFish (2003) and the first genetically modified animal to be approved for food use was the AquAdvantage salmon in 2015.\nBacteria are the easiest organisms to engineer and have been used for research, food production, industrial protein purification (including drugs), agriculture, and art. There is potential to use them for environmental purposes or as medicine. Fungi have been engineered with much the same goals. Viruses play an important role as vectors for inserting genetic information into other organisms. This use is especially relevant to human gene therapy. There are proposals to remove the virulent genes from viruses to create vaccines. Plants have been engineered for scientific research, to create new colors in plants, deliver vaccines, and to create enhanced crops. Genetically modified crops are publicly the most controversial GMOs, in spite of having the most human health and environmental benefits. Animals are generally much harder to transform and the vast majority are still at the research stage. Mammals are the best model organisms for humans. Livestock is modified with the intention of improving economically important traits such as growth rate, quality of meat, milk composition, disease resistance, and survival. Genetically modified fish are used for scientific research, as pets, and as a food source. Genetic engineering has been proposed as a way to control mosquitos, a vector for many deadly diseases. Although human gene therapy is still relatively new, it has been used to treat genetic disorders such as severe combined immunodeficiency and Leber's congenital amaurosis.\nMany objections have been raised over the development of GMOs, particularly their commercialization. Many of these involve GM crops and whether food produced from them is safe and what impact growing them will have on the environment. Other concerns are the objectivity and rigor of regulatory authorities, contamination of non-genetically modified food, control of the food supply, patenting of life, and the use of intellectual property rights. Although there is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, GM food safety is a leading issue with critics. Gene flow, impact on non-target organisms, and escape are the major environmental concerns. Countries have adopted regulatory measures to deal with these concerns. There are differences in the regulation for the release of GMOs between countries, with some of the most marked differences occurring between the US and Europe. Key issues concerning regulators include whether GM food should be labeled and the status of gene-edited organisms.\nDefinition.\nThe definition of a genetically modified organism (GMO) is not clear and varies widely between countries, international bodies, and other communities. At its broadest, the definition of a GMO can include anything that has had its genes altered, including by nature. Taking a less broad view, it can encompass every organism that has had its genes altered by humans, which would include all crops and livestock. In 1993, the \"Encyclopedia Britannica\" defined genetic engineering as \"any of a wide range of techniques\u00a0... among them artificial insemination, \"in vitro\" fertilization (\"e.g.\", 'test-tube' babies), sperm banks, cloning, and gene manipulation.\" The European Union (EU) included a similarly broad definition in early reviews, specifically mentioning GMOs being produced by \"selective breeding and other means of artificial selection\" These definitions were promptly adjusted with a number of exceptions added as the result of pressure from scientific and farming communities, as well as developments in science. The EU definition later excluded traditional breeding, in vitro fertilization, induction of polyploidy, mutation breeding, and cell fusion techniques that do not use recombinant nucleic acids or a genetically modified organism in the process.\nAnother approach was the definition provided by the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Health Organization, and the European Commission, stating that the organisms must be altered in a way that does \"not occur naturally by mating and/or natural recombination\". Progress in science, such as the discovery of horizontal gene transfer being a relatively common natural phenomenon, further added to the confusion on what \"occurs naturally\", which led to further adjustments and exceptions. There are examples of crops that fit this definition, but are not normally considered GMOs. For example, the grain crop triticale was fully developed in a laboratory in 1930 using various techniques to alter its genome.\nGenetically engineered organism (GEO) can be considered a more precise term compared to GMO when describing organisms' genomes that have been directly manipulated with biotechnology. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety used the synonym \"living modified organism\" (\"LMO\") in 2000 and defined it as \"any living organism that possesses a novel combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology.\" Modern biotechnology is further defined as \"In vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and direct injection of nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family.\"\nOriginally, the term GMO was not commonly used by scientists to describe genetically engineered organisms until after usage of GMO became common in popular media. The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) considers GMOs to be plants or animals with heritable changes introduced by genetic engineering or traditional methods, while GEO specifically refers to organisms with genes introduced, eliminated, or rearranged using molecular biology, particularly recombinant DNA techniques, such as transgenesis.\nThe definitions focus on the process more than the product, which means there could be GMOS and non-GMOs with very similar genotypes and phenotypes. This has led scientists to label it as a scientifically meaningless category, saying that it is impossible to group all the different types of GMOs under one common definition. It has also caused issues for organic institutions and groups looking to ban GMOs. It also poses problems as new processes are developed. The current definitions came in before genome editing became popular and there is some confusion as to whether they are GMOs. The EU has adjudged that they are changing their GMO definition to include \"organisms obtained by mutagenesis\", but has excluded those \"obtained by means of certain mutagenesis techniques, namely those which have conventionally been used in a number of applications and have a long safety record\" from regulation. This refers to traditional random mutagenesis (radiation/chemical mutation breeding) and would not exclude \"new techniques\" (especially those that have emerged since the adoption of the GMO directive) like gene editing. In contrast the USDA has ruled that gene edited organisms are not considered GMOs.\nEven greater inconsistency and confusion is associated with various \"Non-GMO\" or \"GMO-free\" labeling schemes in food marketing, where even products such as water or salt, which do not contain any organic substances and genetic material (and thus cannot be genetically modified by definition), are being labeled to create an impression of being \"more healthy\".\nProduction.\nCreating a genetically modified organism (GMO) is a multi-step process. Genetic engineers must isolate the gene they wish to insert into the host organism. This gene can be taken from a cell or artificially synthesized. If the chosen gene or the donor organism's genome has been well studied it may already be accessible from a genetic library. The gene is then combined with other genetic elements, including a promoter and terminator region and a selectable marker.\nA number of techniques are available for inserting the isolated gene into the host genome. Bacteria can be induced to take up foreign DNA, usually by exposed heat shock or electroporation. DNA is generally inserted into animal cells using microinjection, where it can be injected through the cell's nuclear envelope directly into the nucleus, or through the use of viral vectors. In plants the DNA is often inserted using \"Agrobacterium\"-mediated recombination, biolistics or electroporation.\nAs only a single cell is transformed with genetic material, the organism must be regenerated from that single cell. In plants this is accomplished through tissue culture. In animals it is necessary to ensure that the inserted DNA is present in the embryonic stem cells. Further testing using PCR, Southern hybridization, and DNA sequencing is conducted to confirm that an organism contains the new gene.\nTraditionally the new genetic material was inserted randomly within the host genome. Gene targeting techniques, which creates double-stranded breaks and takes advantage on the cells natural homologous recombination repair systems, have been developed to target insertion to exact locations. Genome editing uses artificially engineered nucleases that create breaks at specific points. There are four families of engineered nucleases: meganucleases, zinc finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and the Cas9-guideRNA system (adapted from CRISPR). TALEN and CRISPR are the two most commonly used and each has its own advantages. TALENs have greater target specificity, while CRISPR is easier to design and more efficient.\nHistory.\nHumans have domesticated plants and animals since around 12,000 BCE, using selective breeding or artificial selection (as contrasted with natural selection). The process of selective breeding, in which organisms with desired traits (and thus with the desired genes) are used to breed the next generation and organisms lacking the trait are not bred, is a precursor to the modern concept of genetic modification. Various advancements in genetics allowed humans to directly alter the DNA and therefore genes of organisms. In 1972, Paul Berg created the first recombinant DNA molecule when he combined DNA from a monkey virus with that of the lambda virus.\nHerbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen made the first genetically modified organism in 1973. They took a gene from a bacterium that provided resistance to the antibiotic kanamycin, inserted it into a plasmid and then induced other bacteria to incorporate the plasmid. The bacteria that had successfully incorporated the plasmid was then able to survive in the presence of kanamycin. Boyer and Cohen expressed other genes in bacteria. This included genes from the toad \"Xenopus laevis\" in 1974, creating the first GMO expressing a gene from an organism of a different kingdom.\nIn 1974, Rudolf Jaenisch created a transgenic mouse by introducing foreign DNA into its embryo, making it the world's first transgenic animal. However it took another eight years before transgenic mice were developed that passed the transgene to their offspring. Genetically modified mice were created in 1984 that carried cloned oncogenes, predisposing them to developing cancer. Mice with genes removed (termed a knockout mouse) were created in 1989. The first transgenic livestock were produced in 1985 and the first animal to synthesize transgenic proteins in their milk were mice in 1987. The mice were engineered to produce human tissue plasminogen activator, a protein involved in breaking down blood clots.\nIn 1983, the first genetically engineered plant was developed by Michael W. Bevan, Richard B. Flavell and Mary-Dell Chilton. They infected tobacco with \"Agrobacterium\" transformed with an antibiotic resistance gene and through tissue culture techniques were able to grow a new plant containing the resistance gene. The gene gun was invented in 1987, allowing transformation of plants not susceptible to \"Agrobacterium\" infection. In 2000, Vitamin A-enriched golden rice was the first plant developed with increased nutrient value.\nIn 1976, Genentech, the first genetic engineering company was founded by Herbert Boyer and Robert Swanson; a year later, the company produced a human protein (somatostatin) in \"E. coli\". Genentech announced the production of genetically engineered human insulin in 1978. The insulin produced by bacteria, branded Humulin, was approved for release by the Food and Drug Administration in 1982. In 1988, the first human antibodies were produced in plants. In 1987, a strain of \"Pseudomonas syringae\" became the first genetically modified organism to be released into the environment when a strawberry and potato field in California were sprayed with it.\nThe first genetically modified crop, an antibiotic-resistant tobacco plant, was produced in 1982. China was the first country to commercialize transgenic plants, introducing a virus-resistant tobacco in 1992. In 1994, Calgene attained approval to commercially release the Flavr Savr tomato, the first genetically modified food. Also in 1994, the European Union approved tobacco engineered to be resistant to the herbicide bromoxynil, making it the first genetically engineered crop commercialized in Europe. An insect resistant Potato was approved for release in the US in 1995, and by 1996 approval had been granted to commercially grow 8 transgenic crops and one flower crop (carnation) in 6 countries plus the EU.\nIn 2010, scientists at the J. Craig Venter Institute announced that they had created the first synthetic bacterial genome. They named it Synthia and it was the world's first synthetic life form.\nThe first genetically modified animal to be commercialized was the GloFish, a Zebra fish with a fluorescent gene added that allows it to glow in the dark under ultraviolet light. It was released to the US market in 2003. In 2015, AquAdvantage salmon became the first genetically modified animal to be approved for food use. Approval is for fish raised in Panama and sold in the US. The salmon were transformed with a growth hormone-regulating gene from a Pacific Chinook salmon and a promoter from an ocean pout enabling it to grow year-round instead of only during spring and summer.\nBacteria.\nBacteria were the first organisms to be genetically modified in the laboratory, due to the relative ease of modifying their chromosomes. This ease made them important tools for the creation of other GMOs. Genes and other genetic information from a wide range of organisms can be added to a plasmid and inserted into bacteria for storage and modification. Bacteria are cheap, easy to grow, clonal, multiply quickly and can be stored at \u221280\u00a0\u00b0C almost indefinitely. Once a gene is isolated it can be stored inside the bacteria, providing an unlimited supply for research. A large number of custom plasmids make manipulating DNA extracted from bacteria relatively easy.\nTheir ease of use has made them great tools for scientists looking to study gene function and evolution. The simplest model organisms come from bacteria, with most of our early understanding of molecular biology coming from studying \"Escherichia coli\". Scientists can easily manipulate and combine genes within the bacteria to create novel or disrupted proteins and observe the effect this has on various molecular systems. Researchers have combined the genes from bacteria and archaea, leading to insights on how these two diverged in the past. In the field of synthetic biology, they have been used to test various synthetic approaches, from synthesizing genomes to creating novel nucleotides.\nBacteria have been used in the production of food for a long time, and specific strains have been developed and selected for that work on an industrial scale. They can be used to produce enzymes, amino acids, flavorings, and other compounds used in food production. With the advent of genetic engineering, new genetic changes can easily be introduced into these bacteria. Most food-producing bacteria are lactic acid bacteria, and this is where the majority of research into genetically engineering food-producing bacteria has gone. The bacteria can be modified to operate more efficiently, reduce toxic byproduct production, increase output, create improved compounds, and remove unnecessary pathways. Food products from genetically modified bacteria include alpha-amylase, which converts starch to simple sugars, chymosin, which clots milk protein for cheese making, and pectinesterase, which improves fruit juice clarity. The majority are produced in the US and even though regulations are in place to allow production in Europe, as of 2015 no food products derived from bacteria are currently available there.\nGenetically modified bacteria are used to produce large amounts of proteins for industrial use. The bacteria are generally grown to a large volume before the gene encoding the protein is activated. The bacteria are then harvested and the desired protein purified from them. The high cost of extraction and purification has meant that only high value products have been produced at an industrial scale. The majority of these products are human proteins for use in medicine. Many of these proteins are impossible or difficult to obtain via natural methods and they are less likely to be contaminated with pathogens, making them safer. The first medicinal use of GM bacteria was to produce the protein insulin to treat diabetes. Other medicines produced include clotting factors to treat hemophilia, human growth hormone to treat various forms of dwarfism, interferon to treat some cancers, erythropoietin for anemic patients, and tissue plasminogen activator which dissolves blood clots. Outside of medicine they have been used to produce biofuels. There is interest in developing an extracellular expression system within the bacteria to reduce costs and make the production of more products economical.\nWith a greater understanding of the role that the microbiome plays in human health, there is a potential to treat diseases by genetically altering the bacteria to, themselves, be therapeutic agents. Ideas include altering gut bacteria so they destroy harmful bacteria, or using bacteria to replace or increase deficient enzymes or proteins. One research focus is to modify \"Lactobacillus\", bacteria that naturally provide some protection against HIV, with genes that will further enhance this protection. If the bacteria do not form colonies inside the patient, the person must repeatedly ingest the modified bacteria in order to get the required doses. Enabling the bacteria to form a colony could provide a more long-term solution, but could also raise safety concerns as interactions between bacteria and the human body are less well understood than with traditional drugs. There are concerns that horizontal gene transfer to other bacteria could have unknown effects. As of 2018 there are clinical trials underway testing the efficacy and safety of these treatments.\nFor over a century, bacteria have been used in agriculture. Crops have been inoculated with Rhizobia (and more recently \"Azospirillum\") to increase their production or to allow them to be grown outside their original habitat. Application of \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" (Bt) and other bacteria can help protect crops from insect infestation and plant diseases. With advances in genetic engineering, these bacteria have been manipulated for increased efficiency and expanded host range. Markers have also been added to aid in tracing the spread of the bacteria. The bacteria that naturally colonize certain crops have also been modified, in some cases to express the Bt genes responsible for pest resistance. \"Pseudomonas\" strains of bacteria cause frost damage by nucleating water into ice crystals around themselves. This led to the development of ice-minus bacteria, which have the ice-forming genes removed. When applied to crops they can compete with the non-modified bacteria and confer some frost resistance.\nOther uses for genetically modified bacteria include bioremediation, where the bacteria are used to convert pollutants into a less toxic form. Genetic engineering can increase the levels of the enzymes used to degrade a toxin or to make the bacteria more stable under environmental conditions. Bioart has also been created using genetically modified bacteria. In the 1980s artist Jon Davis and geneticist Dana Boyd converted the Germanic symbol for femininity (\u16c9) into binary code and then into a DNA sequence, which was then expressed in \"Escherichia coli\". This was taken a step further in 2012, when a whole book was encoded onto DNA. Paintings have also been produced using bacteria transformed with fluorescent proteins.\nViruses.\nViruses are often modified so they can be used as vectors for inserting genetic information into other organisms. This process is called transduction and if successful the recipient of the introduced DNA becomes a GMO. Different viruses have different efficiencies and capabilities. Researchers can use this to control for various factors; including the target location, insert size, and duration of gene expression. Any dangerous sequences inherent in the virus must be removed, while those that allow the gene to be delivered effectively are retained.\nWhile viral vectors can be used to insert DNA into almost any organism it is especially relevant for its potential in treating human disease. Although primarily still at trial stages, there has been some successes using gene therapy to replace defective genes. This is most evident in curing patients with severe combined immunodeficiency rising from adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA-SCID), although the development of leukemia in some ADA-SCID patients along with the death of Jesse Gelsinger in a 1999 trial set back the development of this approach for many years. In 2009, another breakthrough was achieved when an eight-year-old boy with Leber's congenital amaurosis regained normal eyesight and in 2016 GlaxoSmithKline gained approval to commercialize a gene therapy treatment for ADA-SCID. As of 2018, there are a substantial number of clinical trials underway, including treatments for hemophilia, glioblastoma, chronic granulomatous disease, cystic fibrosis and various cancers.\nThe most common virus used for gene delivery comes from adenoviruses as they can carry up to 7.5 kb of foreign DNA and infect a relatively broad range of host cells, although they have been known to elicit immune responses in the host and only provide short term expression. Other common vectors are adeno-associated viruses, which have lower toxicity and longer-term expression, but can only carry about 4kb of DNA. Herpes simplex viruses make promising vectors, having a carrying capacity of over 30kb and providing long term expression, although they are less efficient at gene delivery than other vectors. The best vectors for long term integration of the gene into the host genome are retroviruses, but their propensity for random integration is problematic. Lentiviruses are a part of the same family as retroviruses with the advantage of infecting both dividing and non-dividing cells, whereas retroviruses only target dividing cells. Other viruses that have been used as vectors include alphaviruses, flaviviruses, measles viruses, rhabdoviruses, Newcastle disease virus, poxviruses, and picornaviruses.\nMost vaccines consist of viruses that have been attenuated, disabled, weakened or killed in some way so that their virulent properties are no longer effective. Genetic engineering could theoretically be used to create viruses with the virulent genes removed. This does not affect the viruses infectivity, invokes a natural immune response and there is no chance that they will regain their virulence function, which can occur with some other vaccines. As such they are generally considered safer and more efficient than conventional vaccines, although concerns remain over non-target infection, potential side effects and horizontal gene transfer to other viruses. Another potential approach is to use vectors to create novel vaccines for diseases that have no vaccines available or the vaccines that do not work effectively, such as AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis. The most effective vaccine against Tuberculosis, the Bacillus Calmette\u2013Gu\u00e9rin (BCG) vaccine, only provides partial protection. A modified vaccine expressing \"a M tuberculosis\" antigen is able to enhance BCG protection. It has been shown to be safe to use at phase II trials, although not as effective as initially hoped. Other vector-based vaccines have already been approved and many more are being developed.\nAnother potential use of genetically modified viruses is to alter them so they can directly treat diseases. This can be through expression of protective proteins or by directly targeting infected cells. In 2004, researchers reported that a genetically modified virus that exploits the selfish behavior of cancer cells might offer an alternative way of killing tumours. Since then, several researchers have developed genetically modified oncolytic viruses that show promise as treatments for various types of cancer. In 2017, researchers genetically modified a virus to express spinach defensin proteins. The virus was injected into orange trees to combat citrus greening disease that had reduced orange production by 70% since 2005.\nNatural viral diseases, such as myxomatosis and rabbit hemorrhagic disease, have been used to help control pest populations. Over time the surviving pests become resistant, leading researchers to look at alternative methods. Genetically modified viruses that make the target animals infertile through immunocontraception have been created in the laboratory as well as others that target the developmental stage of the animal. There are concerns with using this approach regarding virus containment and cross species infection. Sometimes the same virus can be modified for contrasting purposes. Genetic modification of the myxoma virus has been proposed to conserve European wild rabbits in the Iberian peninsula and to help regulate them in Australia. To protect the Iberian species from viral diseases, the myxoma virus was genetically modified to immunize the rabbits, while in Australia the same myxoma virus was genetically modified to lower fertility in the Australian rabbit population.\nOutside of biology scientists have used a genetically modified virus to construct a lithium-ion battery and other nanostructured materials. It is possible to engineer bacteriophages to express modified proteins on their surface and join them up in specific patterns (a technique called phage display). These structures have potential uses for energy storage and generation, biosensing and tissue regeneration with some new materials currently produced including quantum dots, liquid crystals, nanorings and nanofibres. The battery was made by engineering M13 bacteriaophages so they would coat themselves in iron phosphate and then assemble themselves along a carbon nanotube. This created a highly conductive medium for use in a cathode, allowing energy to be transferred quickly. They could be constructed at lower temperatures with non-toxic chemicals, making them more environmentally friendly.\nFungi.\nFungi can be used for many of the same processes as bacteria. For industrial applications, yeasts combine the bacterial advantages of being a single-celled organism that is easy to manipulate and grow with the advanced protein modifications found in eukaryotes. They can be used to produce large complex molecules for use in food, pharmaceuticals, hormones, and steroids. Yeast is important for wine production and as of 2016 two genetically modified yeasts involved in the fermentation of wine have been commercialized in the United States and Canada. One has increased malolactic fermentation efficiency, while the other prevents the production of dangerous ethyl carbamate compounds during fermentation. There have also been advances in the production of biofuel from genetically modified fungi.\nFungi, being the most common pathogens of insects, make attractive biopesticides. Unlike bacteria and viruses they have the advantage of infecting the insects by contact alone, although they are out competed in efficiency by chemical pesticides. Genetic engineering can improve virulence, usually by adding more virulent proteins, increasing infection rate or enhancing spore persistence. Many of the disease carrying vectors are susceptible to entomopathogenic fungi. An attractive target for biological control are mosquitos, vectors for a range of deadly diseases, including malaria, yellow fever and dengue fever. Mosquitos can evolve quickly so it becomes a balancing act of killing them before the \"Plasmodium\" they carry becomes the infectious disease, but not so fast that they become resistant to the fungi. By genetically engineering fungi like \"Metarhizium anisopliae\" and \"Beauveria bassiana\" to delay the development of mosquito infectiousness the selection pressure to evolve resistance is reduced. Another strategy is to add proteins to the fungi that block transmission of malaria or remove the \"Plasmodium\" altogether.\n\"Agaricus bisporus\" the common white button mushroom, has been gene edited to resist browning, giving it a longer shelf life. The process used CRISPR to knock out a gene that encodes polyphenol oxidase. As it didn't introduce any foreign DNA into the organism it was not deemed to be regulated under existing GMO frameworks and as such is the first CRISPR-edited organism to be approved for release. This has intensified debates as to whether gene-edited organisms should be considered genetically modified organisms and how they should be regulated.\nPlants.\nPlants have been engineered for scientific research, to display new flower colors, deliver vaccines, and to create enhanced crops. Many plants are pluripotent, meaning that a single cell from a mature plant can be harvested and under the right conditions can develop into a new plant. This ability can be taken advantage of by genetic engineers; by selecting for cells that have been successfully transformed in an adult plant a new plant can then be grown that contains the transgene in every cell through a process known as tissue culture.\nMuch of the advances in the field of genetic engineering has come from experimentation with tobacco. Major advances in tissue culture and plant cellular mechanisms for a wide range of plants has originated from systems developed in tobacco. It was the first plant to be altered using genetic engineering and is considered a model organism for not only genetic engineering, but a range of other fields. As such the transgenic tools and procedures are well established making tobacco one of the easiest plants to transform. Another major model organism relevant to genetic engineering is \"Arabidopsis thaliana\". Its small genome and short life cycle makes it easy to manipulate and it contains many homologs to important crop species. It was the first plant sequenced, has a host of online resources available and can be transformed by simply dipping a flower in a transformed \"Agrobacterium\" solution.\nIn research, plants are engineered to help discover the functions of certain genes. The simplest way to do this is to remove the gene and see what phenotype develops compared to the wild type form. Any differences are possibly the result of the missing gene. Unlike mutagenisis, genetic engineering allows targeted removal without disrupting other genes in the organism. Some genes are only expressed in certain tissues, so reporter genes, like GUS, can be attached to the gene of interest allowing visualization of the location. Other ways to test a gene is to alter it slightly and then return it to the plant and see if it still has the same effect on phenotype. Other strategies include attaching the gene to a strong promoter and see what happens when it is overexpressed, forcing a gene to be expressed in a different location or at different developmental stages.\nSome genetically modified plants are purely ornamental. They are modified for flower color, fragrance, flower shape and plant architecture. The first genetically modified ornamentals commercialized altered color. Carnations were released in 1997, with the most popular genetically modified organism, a blue rose (actually lavender or mauve) created in 2004. The roses are sold in Japan, the United States, and Canada. Other genetically modified ornamentals include \"Chrysanthemum\" and \"Petunia\". As well as increasing aesthetic value there are plans to develop ornamentals that use less water or are resistant to the cold, which would allow them to be grown outside their natural environments.\nIt has been proposed to genetically modify some plant species threatened by extinction to be resistant to invasive plants and diseases, such as the emerald ash borer in North American and the fungal disease, \"Ceratocystis platani\", in European plane trees. The papaya ringspot virus devastated papaya trees in Hawaii in the twentieth century until transgenic papaya plants were given pathogen-derived resistance. However, genetic modification for conservation in plants remains mainly speculative. A unique concern is that a transgenic species may no longer bear enough resemblance to the original species to truly claim that the original species is being conserved. Instead, the transgenic species may be genetically different enough to be considered a new species, thus diminishing the conservation worth of genetic modification.\nCrops.\nGenetically modified crops are genetically modified plants that are used in agriculture. The first crops developed were used for animal or human food and provide resistance to certain pests, diseases, environmental conditions, spoilage or chemical treatments (e.g. resistance to a herbicide). The second generation of crops aimed to improve the quality, often by altering the nutrient profile. Third generation genetically modified crops could be used for non-food purposes, including the production of pharmaceutical agents, biofuels, and other industrially useful goods, as well as for bioremediation.\nThere are three main aims to agricultural advancement; increased production, improved conditions for agricultural workers and sustainability. GM crops contribute by improving harvests through reducing insect pressure, increasing nutrient value and tolerating different abiotic stresses. Despite this potential, as of 2018, the commercialized crops are limited mostly to cash crops like cotton, soybean, maize and canola and the vast majority of the introduced traits provide either herbicide tolerance or insect resistance. Soybeans accounted for half of all genetically modified crops planted in 2014. Adoption by farmers has been rapid, between 1996 and 2013, the total surface area of land cultivated with GM crops increased by a factor of 100. Geographically though the spread has been uneven, with strong growth in the Americas and parts of Asia and little in Europe and Africa. Its socioeconomic spread has been more even, with approximately 54% of worldwide GM crops grown in developing countries in 2013. Although doubts have been raised, most studies have found growing GM crops to be beneficial to farmers through decreased pesticide use as well as increased crop yield and farm profit.\nThe majority of GM crops have been modified to be resistant to selected herbicides, usually a glyphosate or glufosinate based one. Genetically modified crops engineered to resist herbicides are now more available than conventionally bred resistant varieties; in the USA 93% of soybeans and most of the GM maize grown is glyphosate tolerant. Most currently available genes used to engineer insect resistance come from the \"Bacillus thuringiensis\" bacterium and code for delta endotoxins. A few use the genes that encode for vegetative insecticidal proteins. The only gene commercially used to provide insect protection that does not originate from \"B. thuringiensis\" is the Cowpea trypsin inhibitor (CpTI). CpTI was first approved for use cotton in 1999 and is currently undergoing trials in rice. Less than one percent of GM crops contained other traits, which include providing virus resistance, delaying senescence and altering the plants composition.\nGolden rice is the most well known GM crop that is aimed at increasing nutrient value. It has been engineered with three genes that biosynthesise beta-carotene, a precursor of vitamin A, in the edible parts of rice. It is intended to produce a fortified food to be grown and consumed in areas with a shortage of dietary vitamin A, a deficiency which each year is estimated to kill 670,000 children under the age of 5 and cause an additional 500,000 cases of irreversible childhood blindness. The original golden rice produced 1.6\u03bcg/g of the carotenoids, with further development increasing this 23 times. It gained its first approvals for use as food in 2018.\nPlants and plant cells have been genetically engineered for production of biopharmaceuticals in bioreactors, a process known as pharming. Work has been done with duckweed \"Lemna minor\", the algae \"Chlamydomonas reinhardtii\" and the moss \"Physcomitrella patens\". Biopharmaceuticals produced include cytokines, hormones, antibodies, enzymes and vaccines, most of which are accumulated in the plant seeds. Many drugs also contain natural plant ingredients and the pathways that lead to their production have been genetically altered or transferred to other plant species to produce greater volume. Other options for bioreactors are biopolymers and biofuels. Unlike bacteria, plants can modify the proteins post-translationally, allowing them to make more complex molecules. They also pose less risk of being contaminated. Therapeutics have been cultured in transgenic carrot and tobacco cells, including a drug treatment for Gaucher's disease.\nVaccine production and storage has great potential in transgenic plants. Vaccines are expensive to produce, transport, and administer, so having a system that could produce them locally would allow greater access to poorer and developing areas. As well as purifying vaccines expressed in plants it is also possible to produce edible vaccines in plants. Edible vaccines stimulate the immune system when ingested to protect against certain diseases. Being stored in plants reduces the long-term cost as they can be disseminated without the need for cold storage, don't need to be purified, and have long term stability. Also being housed within plant cells provides some protection from the gut acids upon digestion. However the cost of developing, regulating, and containing transgenic plants is high, leading to most current plant-based vaccine development being applied to veterinary medicine, where the controls are not as strict.\nGenetically modified crops have been proposed as one of the ways to reduce farming-related CO2 emissions due to higher yield, reduced use of pesticides, reduced use of tractor fuel and no tillage. According to a 2021 study, in EU alone widespread adoption of GE crops would reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 33 million tons of CO2 equivalent or 7.5% of total farming-related emissions.\nAnimals.\nThe vast majority of genetically modified animals are at the research stage with the number close to entering the market remaining small. As of 2018 only three genetically modified animals have been approved, all in the USA. A goat and a chicken have been engineered to produce medicines and a salmon has increased its own growth. Despite the differences and difficulties in modifying them, the end aims are much the same as for plants. GM animals are created for research purposes, production of industrial or therapeutic products, agricultural uses, or improving their health. There is also a market for creating genetically modified pets.\nMammals.\nThe process of genetically engineering mammals is slow, tedious, and expensive. However, new technologies are making genetic modifications easier and more precise. The first transgenic mammals were produced by injecting viral DNA into embryos and then implanting the embryos in females. The embryo would develop and it would be hoped that some of the genetic material would be incorporated into the reproductive cells. Then researchers would have to wait until the animal reached breeding age and then offspring would be screened for the presence of the gene in every cell. The development of the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system as a cheap and fast way of directly modifying germ cells, effectively halving the amount of time needed to develop genetically modified mammals.\nMammals are the best models for human disease, making genetic engineered ones vital to the discovery and development of cures and treatments for many serious diseases. Knocking out genes responsible for human genetic disorders allows researchers to study the mechanism of the disease and to test possible cures. Genetically modified mice have been the most common mammals used in biomedical research, as they are cheap and easy to manipulate. Pigs are also a good target as they have a similar body size and anatomical features, physiology, pathophysiological response and diet. Nonhuman primates are the most similar model organisms to humans, but there is less public acceptance towards using them as research animals. In 2009, scientists announced that they had successfully transferred a gene into a primate species (marmosets) for the first time. Their first research target for these marmosets was Parkinson's disease, but they were also considering amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Huntington's disease.\nHuman proteins expressed in mammals are more likely to be similar to their natural counterparts than those expressed in plants or microorganisms. Stable expression has been accomplished in sheep, pigs, rats and other animals. In 2009, the first human biological drug produced from such an animal, a goat, was approved. The drug, ATryn, is an anticoagulant which reduces the probability of blood clots during surgery or childbirth and is extracted from the goat's milk. Human alpha-1-antitrypsin is another protein that has been produced from goats and is used in treating humans with this deficiency. Another medicinal area is in creating pigs with greater capacity for human organ transplants (xenotransplantation). Pigs have been genetically modified so that their organs can no longer carry retroviruses or have modifications to reduce the chance of rejection. Chimeric pigs could carry fully human organs. The first human transplant of a genetically modified pig heart occurred in 2023, and kidney in 2024.&lt;ref name=\"3/21/24nyt\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"3/21/24CNN\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nLivestock are modified with the intention of improving economically important traits such as growth-rate, quality of meat, milk composition, disease resistance and survival. Animals have been engineered to grow faster, be healthier and resist diseases. Modifications have also improved the wool production of sheep and udder health of cows. Goats have been genetically engineered to produce milk with strong spiderweb-like silk proteins in their milk. A GM pig called Enviropig was created with the capability of digesting plant phosphorus more efficiently than conventional pigs. They could reduce water pollution since they excrete 30 to 70% less phosphorus in manure. Dairy cows have been genetically engineered to produce milk that would be the same as human breast milk. This could potentially benefit mothers who cannot produce breast milk but want their children to have breast milk rather than formula. Researchers have also developed a genetically engineered cow that produces allergy-free milk.\nScientists have genetically engineered several organisms, including some mammals, to include green fluorescent protein (GFP), for research purposes. GFP and other similar reporting genes allow easy visualization and localization of the products of the genetic modification. Fluorescent pigs have been bred to study human organ transplants, regenerating ocular photoreceptor cells, and other topics. In 2011, green-fluorescent cats were created to help find therapies for HIV/AIDS and other diseases as feline immunodeficiency virus is related to HIV.\nThere have been suggestions that genetic engineering could be used to bring animals back from extinction. It involves changing the genome of a close living relative to resemble the extinct one and is currently being attempted with the passenger pigeon. Genes associated with the woolly mammoth have been added to the genome of an African Elephant, although the lead researcher says he has no intention of creating live elephants and transferring all the genes and reversing years of genetic evolution is a long way from being feasible. It is more likely that scientists could use this technology to conserve endangered animals by bringing back lost diversity or transferring evolved genetic advantages from adapted organisms to those that are struggling.\nHumans.\nGene therapy uses genetically modified viruses to deliver genes which can cure disease in humans. Although gene therapy is still relatively new, it has had some successes. It has been used to treat genetic disorders such as severe combined immunodeficiency, and Leber's congenital amaurosis. Treatments are also being developed for a range of other currently incurable diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, Parkinson's disease, cancer, diabetes, heart disease and muscular dystrophy. These treatments only effect somatic cells, meaning any changes would not be inheritable. Germline gene therapy results in any change being inheritable, which has raised concerns within the scientific community.\nIn 2015, CRISPR was used to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos. In November 2018, He Jiankui announced that he had edited the genomes of two human embryos, in an attempt to disable the \"CCR5\" gene, which codes for a receptor that HIV uses to enter cells. He said that twin girls, Lulu and Nana, had been born a few weeks earlier and that they carried functional copies of CCR5 along with disabled CCR5 (mosaicism) and were still vulnerable to HIV. The work was widely condemned as unethical, dangerous, and premature.\nFish.\nGenetically modified fish are used for scientific research, as pets and as a food source. Aquaculture is a growing industry, currently providing over half the consumed fish worldwide. Through genetic engineering it is possible to increase growth rates, reduce food intake, remove allergenic properties, increase cold tolerance and provide disease resistance. Fish can also be used to detect aquatic pollution or function as bioreactors.\nSeveral groups have been developing zebrafish to detect pollution by attaching fluorescent proteins to genes activated by the presence of pollutants. The fish will then glow and can be used as environmental sensors. The GloFish is a brand of genetically modified fluorescent zebrafish with bright red, green, and orange fluorescent color. It was originally developed by one of the groups to detect pollution, but is now part of the ornamental fish trade, becoming the first genetically modified animal to become publicly available as a pet when in 2003 it was introduced for sale in the USA.\nGM fish are widely used in basic research in genetics and development. Two species of fish, zebrafish and medaka, are most commonly modified because they have optically clear chorions (membranes in the egg), rapidly develop, and the one-cell embryo is easy to see and microinject with transgenic DNA. Zebrafish are model organisms for developmental processes, regeneration, genetics, behavior, disease mechanisms and toxicity testing. Their transparency allows researchers to observe developmental stages, intestinal functions and tumour growth. The generation of transgenic protocols (whole organism, cell or tissue specific, tagged with reporter genes) has increased the level of information gained by studying these fish.\nGM fish have been developed with promoters driving an over-production of growth hormone for use in the aquaculture industry to increase the speed of development and potentially reduce fishing pressure on wild stocks. This has resulted in dramatic growth enhancement in several species, including salmon, trout and tilapia. AquaBounty Technologies, a biotechnology company, have produced a salmon (called AquAdvantage salmon) that can mature in half the time as wild salmon. It obtained regulatory approval in 2015, the first non-plant GMO food to be commercialized. As of August 2017, GMO salmon is being sold in Canada. Sales in the US started in May 2021.\nInsects.\nIn biological research, transgenic fruit flies (\"Drosophila melanogaster\") are model organisms used to study the effects of genetic changes on development. Fruit flies are often preferred over other animals due to their short life cycle and low maintenance requirements. They also have a relatively simple genome compared to many vertebrates, with typically only one copy of each gene, making phenotypic analysis easy. \"Drosophila\" have been used to study genetics and inheritance, embryonic development, learning, behavior, and aging. The discovery of transposons, in particular the p-element, in \"Drosophila\" provided an early method to add transgenes to their genome, although this has been taken over by more modern gene-editing techniques.\nDue to their significance to human health, scientists are looking at ways to control mosquitoes through genetic engineering. Malaria-resistant mosquitoes have been developed in the laboratory by inserting a gene that reduces the development of the malaria parasite and then use homing endonucleases to rapidly spread that gene throughout the male population (known as a gene drive). This approach has been taken further by using the gene drive to spread a lethal gene. In trials the populations of \"Aedes aegypti\" mosquitoes, the single most important carrier of dengue fever and Zika virus, were reduced by between 80% and by 90%. Another approach is to use a sterile insect technique, whereby males genetically engineered to be sterile out compete viable males, to reduce population numbers.\nOther insect pests that make attractive targets are moths. Diamondback moths cause US$4 to $5 billion of damage each year worldwide. The approach is similar to the sterile technique tested on mosquitoes, where males are transformed with a gene that prevents any females born from reaching maturity. They underwent field trials in 2017. Genetically modified moths have previously been released in field trials. In this case a strain of pink bollworm that were sterilized with radiation were genetically engineered to express a red fluorescent protein making it easier for researchers to monitor them.\nSilkworm, the larvae stage of \"Bombyx mori\", is an economically important insect in sericulture. Scientists are developing strategies to enhance silk quality and quantity. There is also potential to use the silk producing machinery to make other valuable proteins. Proteins currently developed to be expressed by silkworms include; human serum albumin, human collagen \u03b1-chain, mouse monoclonal antibody and N-glycanase. Silkworms have been created that produce spider silk, a stronger but extremely difficult to harvest silk, and even novel silks.\nOther.\nSystems have been developed to create transgenic organisms in a wide variety of other animals. Chickens have been genetically modified for a variety of purposes. This includes studying embryo development, preventing the transmission of bird flu and providing evolutionary insights using reverse engineering to recreate dinosaur-like phenotypes. A GM chicken that produces the drug Kanuma, an enzyme that treats a rare condition, in its egg passed US regulatory approval in 2015. Genetically modified frogs, in particular \"Xenopus laevis\" and \"Xenopus tropicalis\", are used in developmental biology research. GM frogs can also be used as pollution sensors, especially for endocrine disrupting chemicals. There are proposals to use genetic engineering to control cane toads in Australia.\nThe nematode \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" is one of the major model organisms for researching molecular biology. RNA interference (RNAi) was discovered in \"C. elegans\" and could be induced by simply feeding them bacteria modified to express double stranded RNA. It is also relatively easy to produce stable transgenic nematodes and this along with RNAi are the major tools used in studying their genes. The most common use of transgenic nematodes has been studying gene expression and localization by attaching reporter genes. Transgenes can also be combined with RNAi techniques to rescue phenotypes, study gene function, image cell development in real time or control expression for different tissues or developmental stages. Transgenic nematodes have been used to study viruses, toxicology, diseases, and to detect environmental pollutants.\nThe gene responsible for albinism in sea cucumbers has been found and used to engineer white sea cucumbers, a rare delicacy. The technology also opens the way to investigate the genes responsible for some of the cucumbers more unusual traits, including hibernating in summer, eviscerating their intestines, and dissolving their bodies upon death. Flatworms have the ability to regenerate themselves from a single cell. Until 2017 there was no effective way to transform them, which hampered research. By using microinjection and radiation scientists have now created the first genetically modified flatworms. The bristle worm, a marine annelid, has been modified. It is of interest due to its reproductive cycle being synchronized with lunar phases, regeneration capacity and slow evolution rate. Cnidaria such as \"Hydra\" and the sea anemone \"Nematostella vectensis\" are attractive model organisms to study the evolution of immunity and certain developmental processes. Other animals that have been genetically modified include snails, geckos, turtles, crayfish, oysters, shrimp, clams, abalone and sponges.\nRegulation.\nGenetically modified organisms are regulated by government agencies. This applies to research as well as the release of genetically modified organisms, including crops and food. The development of a regulatory framework concerning genetic engineering began in 1975, at Asilomar, California. The Asilomar meeting recommended a set of guidelines regarding the cautious use of recombinant technology and any products resulting from that technology. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety was adopted on 29 January 2000 and entered into force on 11 September 2003. It is an international treaty that governs the transfer, handling, and use of genetically modified organisms. One hundred and fifty-seven countries are members of the Protocol and many use it as a reference point for their own regulations.\nUniversities and research institutes generally have a special committee that is responsible for approving any experiments that involve genetic engineering. Many experiments also need permission from a national regulatory group or legislation. All staff must be trained in the use of GMOs and all laboratories must gain approval from their regulatory agency to work with GMOs. The legislation covering GMOs are often derived from regulations and guidelines in place for the non-GMO version of the organism, although they are more severe. There is a near-universal system for assessing the relative risks associated with GMOs and other agents to laboratory staff and the community. They are assigned to one of four risk categories based on their virulence, the severity of the disease, the mode of transmission, and the availability of preventive measures or treatments. There are four biosafety levels that a laboratory can fall into, ranging from level 1 (which is suitable for working with agents not associated with disease) to level 4 (working with life-threatening agents). Different countries use different nomenclature to describe the levels and can have different requirements for what can be done at each level.\nThere are differences in the regulation for the release of GMOs between countries, with some of the most marked differences occurring between the US and Europe. Regulation varies in a given country depending on the intended use of the products of the genetic engineering. For example, a crop not intended for food use is generally not reviewed by authorities responsible for food safety. Some nations have banned the release of GMOs or restricted their use, and others permit them with widely differing degrees of regulation. In 2016, thirty eight countries officially ban or prohibit the cultivation of GMOs and nine (Algeria, Bhutan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Madagascar, Peru, Russia, Venezuela and Zimbabwe) ban their importation. Most countries that do not allow GMO cultivation do permit research using GMOs. Despite regulation, illegal releases have sometimes occurred, due to weakness of enforcement.\nThe European Union (EU) differentiates between approval for cultivation within the EU and approval for import and processing. While only a few GMOs have been approved for cultivation in the EU a number of GMOs have been approved for import and processing. The cultivation of GMOs has triggered a debate about the market for GMOs in Europe. Depending on the coexistence regulations, incentives for cultivation of GM crops differ. The US policy does not focus on the process as much as other countries, looks at verifiable scientific risks and uses the concept of substantial equivalence. Whether gene edited organisms should be regulated the same as genetically modified organism is debated. USA regulations sees them as separate and does not regulate them under the same conditions, while in Europe a GMO is any organism created using genetic engineering techniques.\nOne of the key issues concerning regulators is whether GM products should be labeled. The European Commission says that mandatory labeling and traceability are needed to allow for informed choice, avoid potential false advertising and facilitate the withdrawal of products if adverse effects on health or the environment are discovered. The American Medical Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science say that absent scientific evidence of harm even voluntary labeling is misleading and will falsely alarm consumers. Labeling of GMO products in the marketplace is required in 64 countries. Labeling can be mandatory up to a threshold GM content level (which varies between countries) or voluntary. In the U.S., the National Bioengineered Food Disclosure Standard (Mandatory Compliance Date: January 1, 2022) requires labeling GM foods. In Canada, labeling of GM food is voluntary, while in Europe all food (including processed food) or feed which contains greater than 0.9% of approved GMOs must be labeled. In 2014, sales of products that had been labeled as non-GMO grew 30 percent to $1.1 billion.\nControversy.\nThere is controversy over GMOs, especially with regard to their release outside laboratory environments. The dispute involves consumers, producers, biotechnology companies, governmental regulators, non-governmental organizations, and scientists. Many of these concerns involve GM crops and whether food produced from them is safe and what impact growing them will have on the environment. These controversies have led to litigation, international trade disputes, and protests, and to restrictive regulation of commercial products in some countries. Most concerns are around the health and environmental effects of GMOs. These include whether they may provoke an allergic reaction, whether the transgenes could transfer to human cells, and whether genes not approved for human consumption could outcross into the food supply.\nThere is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, but that each GM food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction. Nonetheless, members of the public are much less likely than scientists to perceive GM foods as safe. The legal and regulatory status of GM foods varies by country, with some nations banning or restricting them, and others permitting them with widely differing degrees of regulation.\nAs late as the 1990s gene flow into wild populations was thought to be unlikely and rare, and if it were to occur, easily eradicated. It was thought that this would add no additional environmental costs or risks \u2013 no effects were expected other than those already caused by pesticide applications. However, in the decades since, several such examples have been observed. Gene flow between GM crops and compatible plants, along with increased use of broad-spectrum herbicides, can increase the risk of herbicide resistant weed populations. Debate over the extent and consequences of gene flow intensified in 2001 when a paper was published showing transgenes had been found in landrace maize in Mexico, the crop's center of diversity. Gene flow from GM crops to other organisms has been found to generally be lower than what would occur naturally. In order to address some of these concerns some GMOs have been developed with traits to help control their spread. To prevent the genetically modified salmon inadvertently breeding with wild salmon, all the fish raised for food are females, triploid, 99% are reproductively sterile, and raised in areas where escaped salmon could not survive. Bacteria have also been modified to depend on nutrients that cannot be found in nature, and genetic use restriction technology has been developed, though not yet marketed, that causes the second generation of GM plants to be sterile.\nOther environmental and agronomic concerns include a decrease in biodiversity, an increase in secondary pests (non-targeted pests) and evolution of resistant insect pests. In the areas of China and the US with Bt crops the overall biodiversity of insects has increased and the impact of secondary pests has been minimal. Resistance was found to be slow to evolve when best practice strategies were followed. The impact of Bt crops on beneficial non-target organisms became a public issue after a 1999 paper suggested they could be toxic to monarch butterflies. Follow up studies have since shown that the toxicity levels encountered in the field were not high enough to harm the larvae.\nAccusations that scientists are \"playing God\" and other religious issues have been ascribed to the technology from the beginning. With the ability to genetically engineer humans now possible there are ethical concerns over how far this technology should go, or if it should be used at all. Much debate revolves around where the line between treatment and enhancement is and whether the modifications should be inheritable. Other concerns include contamination of the non-genetically modified food supply, the rigor of the regulatory process, consolidation of control of the food supply in companies that make and sell GMOs, exaggeration of the benefits of genetic modification, or concerns over the use of herbicides with glyphosate. Other issues raised include the patenting of life and the use of intellectual property rights.\nThere are large differences in consumer acceptance of GMOs, with Europeans more likely to view GM food negatively than North Americans. GMOs arrived on the scene as the public confidence in food safety, attributed to recent food scares such as Bovine spongiform encephalopathy and other scandals involving government regulation of products in Europe, was low. This along with campaigns run by various non-governmental organizations (NGO) have been very successful in blocking or limiting the use of GM crops. NGOs like the Organic Consumers Association, the Union of Concerned Scientists, Greenpeace and other groups have said that risks have not been adequately identified and managed and that there are unanswered questions regarding the potential long-term impact on human health from food derived from GMOs. They propose mandatory labeling or a moratorium on such products.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12341", "revid": "51041928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12341", "title": "Ghent", "text": "Capital of East Flanders province, Belgium\nGhent ( ; ; historically known as \"Gaunt\" in English) is a city and a municipality in the Flemish Region of Belgium. It is the capital and largest city of the province of East Flanders, and the third largest in the country, after Brussels and Antwerp. It is a port and university city.\nThe city originally started as a settlement at the confluence of the Rivers Scheldt and Leie. In the Late Middle Ages Ghent became one of the largest and richest cities of northern Europe, with some 50,000 people in 1300. After the late 16th century Ghent became a less important city, resulting in an extremely well-preserved historic centre, making Ghent a popular tourist destination.\nThe municipality comprises the city of Ghent proper and the surrounding suburbs of Afsnee, Desteldonk, Drongen, Gentbrugge, Ledeberg, Mariakerke, Mendonk, Oostakker, Sint-Amandsberg, Sint-Denijs-Westrem, Sint-Kruis-Winkel, Wondelgem and Zwijnaarde. With 270,473 inhabitants at the end of 2024, Ghent is Belgium's second largest municipality by number of inhabitants. The metropolitan area, including the outer commuter zone, covers an area of and had a total population of 560,522 as of 1 January 2018, which ranks it as the fourth most populous in Belgium. The current mayor of Ghent is Mathias De Clercq (Open Vld).\nThe ten-day-long Ghent Festival (\"Gentse Feesten\") is held every year and attended by about 1\u20131.5 million visitors.\nHistory.\nArchaeological evidence shows human presence around the confluence of the Scheldt and the Leie going back as far as the Stone Age and the Iron Age.\nMost historians believe that the older name for Ghent, 'Ganda', is derived from the Celtic word \"ganda\", which means 'confluence', or 'river mouth', referring to the Leie river debouching into the Scheldt. Other sources connect its name with an obscure deity named Gontia.\nThere are no written records of the Roman period, but archaeological research confirms that the Ghent area continued to be inhabited.\nWhen the Franks invaded the Roman territories from the end of the 4th century and well into the 5th century, they brought their language with them, and Celtic and Latin were replaced by Old Dutch.\nMiddle Ages.\nAround 650, Saint Amand founded two abbeys in Ghent: St. Peter's (Blandinium) and St. Bavo's Abbey. Around 800, Louis the Pious, son of Charlemagne, appointed Einhard, the biographer of Charlemagne, abbot of both abbeys. The city grew from several nuclei, the abbeys, and a commercial centre. However, in 851 and 879 the city was plundered by Vikings.\nUnder the protection of the County of Flanders the city recovered and flourished from the 11th century, growing to become a small city-state. By the 13th century, Ghent was the biggest city in Europe north of the Alps after Paris; it was bigger than Cologne or Moscow. Up to 65,000 people lived within the city walls. The belfry and the towers of the St. Bavo's Cathedral and St. Nicholas' Church are just a few examples of the skyline of the period.\nThe rivers flowed in an area where much land was periodically flooded. These rich grass 'meersen' (\"water-meadows\": a word related to the English 'marsh') were ideally suited for grazing sheep, the wool of which was used to make cloth. \nDuring the Middle Ages Ghent became the leading European city for the manufacture of cloth. Wool was imported from Scotland and England, although during the Hundred Years' War trade suffered significantly. \nGhent was the birthplace of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.\nEarly modern period.\nThe city recovered in the 15th century when Flanders was united with neighbouring provinces under the Dukes of Burgundy. High taxes led to a rebellion and eventually to the Battle of Gavere in 1453, in which Ghent suffered a terrible defeat at the hands of Philip the Good. Around this time the centre of political and social importance in the Low Countries started to shift from Flanders (Bruges\u2013Ghent) to Brabant (Antwerp\u2013Brussels), although Ghent continued to play an important role. With Bruges, the city led two revolts against Maximilian of Austria, the first monarch of the House of Habsburg to rule Flanders.\nIn 1500, Juana of Castile gave birth to Charles V, who became Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain. Although native to Ghent, he punished the city after the 1539 Revolt of Ghent and obliged the city's nobles to walk in front of the Emperor barefoot with a noose (Dutch: \"strop\") around the neck; since this incident, the people of Ghent have been called \"Stroppendragers\" (noose bearers). St. Bavo's Abbey (not to be confused with the nearby St. Bavo's Cathedral) was abolished, torn down, and replaced with a fortress for Royal Spanish troops. Only a small portion of the abbey was spared demolition.\nThe late 16th and 17th centuries brought devastation because of the Eighty Years' War. The war ended the role of Ghent as a centre of international importance. In 1745, the city was captured by French forces during the War of the Austrian Succession before being returned to the Empire of Austria under the House of Habsburg following the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748. This part of Flanders became known as the Austrian Netherlands until the exile of the French Emperor Napoleon I, the end of the French Revolutionary and later Napoleonic Wars, and the peace treaties arrived at by the Congress of Vienna in 1815.\n19th century.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, Ghent's textile industry flourished again. Lieven Bauwens, having smuggled the industrial and factory machine plans out of England, introduced the first mechanical weaving machine on the European continent in 1800.\nThe Treaty of Ghent, negotiated here and adopted on Christmas Eve 1814, formally ended the War of 1812 between Great Britain and the United States (the North American phase of the Napoleonic Wars). After the Battle of Waterloo, Ghent and Flanders, previously ruled from the House of Habsburg in Vienna as the Austrian Netherlands, became a part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands with the northern Dutch for 15 years. In this period, Ghent established its own university (1816) and a new connection to the sea (1824\u201327).\nAfter the Belgian Revolution, with the loss of port access to the sea for more than a decade, the local economy collapsed, and the first Belgian trade union originated in Ghent. In 1913 there was a world exhibition in Ghent. As a preparation for these festivities, the Sint-Pieters railway station was completed in 1912.\n20th century.\nGhent was occupied by the Germans in both world wars but escaped severe destruction. The life of the people and the German invaders in Ghent during World War I is described by H. Wandt in \"etappenleven te Gent\". In World War II the city was liberated by the British 7th \"Desert Rats\" Armoured Division and local Belgian fighters on 6 September 1944, with the northern suburbs and the industrial area cleared over the following days by the 15th (Scottish) Infantry Division.\nGeography.\nAfter the fusions of municipalities in 1965 and 1977, the city is made up of following sub-municipalities:\nClimate.\nThe climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Ghent has a marine west coast climate, abbreviated \"Cfb\" on climate maps.\nDemographics.\nNationalities.\nGhent is home to many people of foreign origin and immigrants. The 2020 census revealed that 35.5% of the inhabitants had roots outside of Belgium and 15.3% had a non-Belgian nationality. Many neighbourhoods already have a minority-majority population, primarily in the north, east, and west of the city and some pockets in the south. Some examples are Brugse Poort, Dampoort, Rabot, Ledeberg, Nieuw Gent/UZ and the area around Sleepstraat (known for its many Turkish restaurants).\nPolitics.\nThe composition of the 2025 \u2013 2031 city council:\n\"*The party 'Voor Gent' is a local coalition party of Vooruit and Open VLD\"\nCulture and tourism.\nArchitecture.\nMuch of the city's medieval architecture remains intact and is remarkably well preserved and restored. Its centre is a carfree area. Highlights are St. Bavo's Cathedral with the \"Ghent Altarpiece\", the belfry, the Gravensteen castle, and the splendid architecture along the old Graslei harbour. Ghent has established a blend between comfort of living and history; it is not a city-museum. The city of Ghent also houses three b\u00e9guinages and numerous churches including St. Jacob's Church, St. Nicholas' Church, St. Michael's Church and St. Stefanus' Church.\nIn the 19th century Ghent's most famous architect, Louis Roelandt, built the university hall Aula, the opera house, and the main courthouse. Highlights of modern architecture are the university buildings (the \"Boekentoren\" or Book Tower) by Henry Van de Velde. There are also a few theatres from diverse periods.\nThe beguinages, as well as the belfry and adjacent cloth hall, were recognized by UNESCO as World Heritage Sites in 1998 and 1999.\nThe Zebrastraat, a social experiment in which an entirely renovated site unites living, economy, and culture, can also be found in Ghent.\nCampo Santo is a famous Catholic burial site of the nobility and artists.\nOne of the more notable pieces of contemporary architecture in Ghent is De Krook, the new central library and media center, a collaboration between local firm Couss\u00e9e and Goris and Catalan firm RCR Arquitectos.\nMuseums.\nImportant museums in Ghent are the Museum voor Schone Kunsten (Museum of Fine Arts), with paintings by Hieronymus Bosch, Peter Paul Rubens, and many Flemish masters; the SMAK or Stedelijk Museum voor Actuele Kunst (City Museum for Contemporary Art), with works of the 20th century, including Joseph Beuys and Andy Warhol; and the Design Museum Gent with masterpieces of Victor Horta and Le Corbusier. The Huis van Alijn (House of the Alijn family) was originally a beguinage and is now a museum for folk art where theatre and puppet shows for children are presented. The \"Museum voor Industri\u00eble Archeologie en Textiel\" or MIAT displays the industrial strength of Ghent with recreations of workshops and stores from the 1800s and original spinning and weaving machines that remain from the time when the building was a weaving mill. The Ghent City Museum (Stadsmuseum, abbreviated STAM), is committed to recording and explaining the city's past and its inhabitants, and to preserving the present for future generations.\nTheatre.\nNTGent is the city theatre of Ghent, a public institution known for its radical productions. The theatre company's home base is in the Royal Dutch Theatre (Koninklijke Nederlandse Schouwburg, or KNS), with a secondary location in the city at Minnemeers. The company also tours extensively.\nRestaurants and culinary traditions.\nIn Ghent and other regions of East Flanders, bakeries sell a donut-shaped bun called a \"mastel\" (plural \"mastellen\"), which is basically a bagel. \"Mastellen\" are also called \"Saint Hubert bread\", because, on the Saint's feast day, which is 3 November, the bakers bring their batches to the early Mass to be blessed. Traditionally, it was thought that blessed mastellen immunized against rabies.\nOther local delicacies are the praline chocolates from local producers such as Leonidas, the cuberdons or 'neuzekes' ('noses'), cone-shaped purple jelly-filled candies (a four-year feud between two local vendors made international news), 'babelutten' ('babblers'), hard butterscotch-like candy, and of course, on the more fiery side, the famous 'Tierenteyn', a hot but refined mustard that has some affinity to French 'Dijon' mustard.\nStoverij is a classic Flemish meat stew, preferably made with a generous addition of brown 'Trappist' (strong abbey beer) and served with French fries. 'Waterzooi' is a local stew originally made from freshwater fish caught in the rivers and creeks of Ghent, but nowadays often made with chicken instead of fish. It is usually served nouvelle-cuisine-style and supplemented by a large pot on the side.\nThe city promotes a meat-free day on Thursdays called \"Donderdag Veggiedag\" with vegetarian food being promoted in public canteens for civil servants and elected councillors, in all city-funded schools, and promotion of vegetarian eating options in town (through the distribution of \"veggie street maps\"). This campaign is linked to the recognition of the detrimental environmental effects of meat production, which the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization has established to represent nearly one-fifth of global greenhouse gas emissions.\nGhent has a very high number of vegetarian restaurants per capita.\nFestivals and other events.\nThe city is host to some big cultural events such as the Ghent Festival, the International Film Festival of Ghent (with the World Soundtrack Awards) and the Gent Festival van Vlaanderen. Also, every five years, an extensive botanical exhibition (\"Gentse Florali\u00ebn\") takes place in Flanders Expo in Ghent, attracting numerous visitors to the city.\nThe Ghent Festival (\"Gentse Feesten\" in Dutch) is an annual festival that lasts for ten days. It has been held for more than 50 years (since 1969) and is attended by about 1\u20131.5 million visitors. It did not take place in 2020 and 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Belgium, being held again in the summer of 2022, after a two-year break.\nThe Festival of Flanders had its 50th celebration in 2008. In Ghent, it opens with the OdeGand City festivities that take place on the second Saturday of September. Some 50 concerts take place in diverse locations throughout the medieval inner city and some 250 international artists perform.\nGhent co-hosted the 2021 World Choir Games together with Antwerp. Organised by the Interkultur Foundation, the World Choir Games is the biggest choral competition and festival in the world.\nGhent has been chosen as the 2024 European Youth Capital by the European Youth Forum.\nParks.\nThe numerous parks in the city can also be considered tourist attractions. Most notably, Ghent boasts a nature reserve (Bourgoyen-Ossemeersen, ) and a recreation park (Blaarmeersen, 87 hectares; 215 acres).\nEconomy.\nThe port of Ghent, in the north of the city, is the third-largest port of Belgium. It is accessed by the Ghent\u2013Terneuzen Canal, which ends near the Dutch port of Terneuzen on the Western Scheldt. The port houses, among others, large companies like ArcelorMittal, Volvo Cars, Volvo Trucks, Volvo Parts, Honda, Yamaha Motor and Stora Enso.\nGhent University and several research-oriented companies, such as Ablynx, Innogenetics, Cropdesign, and Bayer Cropscience, are situated in the central and southern part of the city.\nAs the largest city in East Flanders, Ghent has four large hospitals, numerous schools, and shopping streets. Flanders Expo, the biggest event hall in Flanders and the second biggest in Belgium, is also located in Ghent. Tourism is becoming a major employer in the local area.\nTransport.\nAs one of the largest cities in Belgium, Ghent has a highly developed transport system.\nRoad.\nBy car the city is accessible via two motorways:\nIn addition, Ghent also has two ringways:\nRail.\nFive railway stations can be found in the municipality of Ghent:\nPublic transport.\nGhent has an extensive network of public transport lines, operated by \"De Lijn\".\nTrams.\nSince 6/01/2024, the network contains 4 lines:\nBefore 6/01/2024, the network contained 3 lines:\nBuses.\nSince 6/01/2024, the city bus network contains 11 lines:\nBefore 6/01/2024, the city bus network contained 9 lines:\nApart from the city buses mentioned above, Ghent also has numerous regional bus lines connecting it to towns and villages across the province of East Flanders. All of these buses stop in at least one of the city's regional bus hubs at either Sint-Pieters Station, Dampoort Station, Zuid or Rabot.\nInternational buses connecting Ghent to other European destinations are usually found at the Dampoort Station. A couple of private bus companies such as Eurolines, Megabus and Flixbus operate from the Dampoort bus hub.\nBuses to and from Belgium's first (Brussels Airport) and second airport (Brussels South Charleroi Airport) are operated by Flibco, and can be found at the rear exit of the Sint-Pieters Station.\nCycling.\nGhent has the largest designated cyclist area in Europe, with nearly of cycle paths and more than 700 one-way streets, where bikes are allowed to go against the traffic. It also boasts Belgium's first bicycle boulevard, where cars are considered 'guests' and must stay behind cyclists. In 2013, it began doing on-street surveys of bicycles, adding bicycle parking racks in neighbourhoods where they were needed. In 2017, the city changed traffic circulation patterns to favour cycling. The switch was done over the course of a single weekend, changing traffic circulation on over 80 streets and 2500 road signs. It expanded the car-free zone in the historic city center more than twofold. It also put in radial barriers to car traffic, thus shifting it onto the inner ring road.\nMore cyclists means a higher demand for bicycle parking stations. In 2010, the plans to renovate Gent-Sint-Pieters railway station included 10,000 bicycle parking spots. In 2020, several sections of the underground parking facilities have been built, and the targets have been adjusted to a total of 17,000 parking spots.\nSports.\nIn the Belgian first football division Ghent is represented by K.A.A. Gent, who became Belgian football champions for the first time in its history in 2015. Another Ghent football club is KRC Gent-Zeehaven, playing in the Belgian fourth division. A football match at the 1920 Summer Olympics was held in Ghent.\nThe Six Days of Ghent, a six-day track cycling race, is held annually, taking place in the Kuipke velodrome in Ghent. In road cycling, the city hosts the start and finish of the , the traditional opening race of the cobbled classics season. It also lends its name to another cobbled classic, Gent\u2013Wevelgem, although the race now starts in the nearby city of Deinze.\nThe city hosts an annual athletics IAAF event in the Flanders Sports Arena: the Indoor Flanders meeting where two-time Olympic champion Hicham El Guerrouj set an indoor world record of 3:48.45 in the mile run in 1997.\nThe Flanders Sports Arena was host to the 2015 Davis Cup Final between Belgium and Great Britain.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nGhent was, up until 2021, twinned with 7 different cities (Saint-Rapha\u00ebl in France, Wiesbaden and Melle in Germany, Kanazawa in Japan, Tallinn in Estonia, Mohammedia in Morocco and Nottingham in the United Kingdom), but decided to end its twinning with all of them with the exception of Kanazawa. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12343", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12343", "title": "Guadeloupe", "text": "Overseas department and region of France\nGuadeloupe is an overseas department and region of the French Republic in the Caribbean. It consists of six inhabited islands\u2014Basse-Terre, Grande-Terre, Marie-Galante, La D\u00e9sirade, and two \u00celes des Saintes\u2014as well as many uninhabited islands and outcroppings. It is south of Antigua and Barbuda and Montserrat and north of Dominica. The capital city is Basse-Terre, on the southern west coast of Basse-Terre Island; the most populous city is Les Abymes and the main centre of business is neighbouring Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, both on Grande-Terre Island. It had a population of 395,726 in 2024.\nLike the other overseas departments, it is an integral part of France. As a constituent territory of the European Union (EU) and the eurozone, the euro is its official currency and any EU citizen is free to settle and work there indefinitely, but it is not part of the Schengen Area. It included Saint Barth\u00e9lemy and Saint Martin until 2007, when they were detached from Guadeloupe following a 2003 referendum.\nChristopher Columbus visited Guadeloupe in 1493 and gave the island its name, after Guadalupe, C\u00e1ceres. The native langage is Guadeloupean Creole known as \"Kr\u00e9y\u00f2l Gwadloup\"; the official language is French, spoken by 84% of the population.\nEtymology.\nThe archipelago was called (or 'The Island of Beautiful Waters') by the native Arawak people.\nChristopher Columbus named the island in 1493 after Our Lady of Guadalupe, a shrine to the Virgin Mary venerated in the Spanish town of Guadalupe, Extremadura. When the area became a French colony, the Spanish name was retained \u2013 though altered to French orthography and phonology. The islands are locally known as .\nHistory.\nPre-colonial era.\nThe islands were first populated by Indigenous peoples of the Americas, possibly as far back as 3000 BC. The Arawak people are the first identifiable group, but they were later displaced c.\u20091400 by Kalina-Carib peoples.\nThe Morel site in Le Moule, Grande-Terre, is one of numerous archaeological sites in Guadeloupe where pre-Columbian artefacts have been found, and is now an archaeological park open to the public. A skeleton found at Morel, sometimes known as the \"Woman of Guadeloupe\", caused a scientific furore in the 19th century, when initial reports suggested that it dated from the Miocene - long before modern humans are thought to have evolved. However, after examining the specimen and the \"stone\" that it was embedded in, Georges Cuvier concluded that what had been taken for Miocene stone was a concretion of hardened sand, dating from relatively recent times. Artefacts are still being discovered at the site, and range from 400 BC to 1400 AD.\n15th\u201317th centuries.\nChristopher Columbus was the first European to see Guadeloupe, landing in November 1493 and giving it its current name. Several attempts at colonisation by the Spanish in the 16th century failed due to Native peoples defending their land from outsiders. In 1626, the French, under the trader and adventurer Pierre Belain d'Esnambuc, began to take an interest in Guadeloupe, expelling Spanish settlers. The Compagnie des \u00celes de l'Am\u00e9rique settled in Guadeloupe in 1635, under the direction of the French colonial leaders Charles Li\u00e9nard de L'Olive and Jean du Plessis d'Ossonville; they formally stole the island for France and brought in French farmers to colonise the land. This led to the death of many Indigenous people by disease and violence. By 1640, however, the Compagnie des \u00celes de l'Am\u00e9rique had gone bankrupt, and they thus sold Guadeloupe to Charles Hou\u00ebl du Petit Pr\u00e9 who began plantation agriculture, with the first African slaves arriving in 1650. Slave resistance was immediately widespread, with an open uprising in 1656 lasting several weeks and a simultaneous spate of mass desertions that lasted at least two years until the French compelled indigenous peoples to stop assisting them. Ownership of the island passed to the French West India Company before it was annexed to France in 1674 under the tutelage of their Martinique colony. Institutionalised slavery, enforced by the Code Noir from 1685, led to a booming sugar plantation economy.\n18th\u201319th centuries.\nDuring the Seven Years' War, British forces captured and occupied the islands until the 1763 Treaty of Paris. During that time, Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre became a major harbour, and markets in British America were opened to Guadeloupean sugar, which was traded for foodstuffs and timber. The economy expanded quickly, creating vast wealth for the French colonists. So prosperous was Guadeloupe at the time that, under the 1763 Treaty of Paris, France forfeited its Canadian colonies in exchange for the return of Guadeloupe. Coffee planting began in the late 1720s, also worked by slaves and, by 1775, cocoa had become a major export product as well.\nThe French Revolution brought chaos to Guadeloupe. Under new revolutionary law, freedmen were entitled to equal rights. Taking advantage of the chaotic political situation, Britain captured Guadeloupe in 1794. The French responded by sending an expeditionary force under Victor Hugues, which retook the colony by December and abolished slavery. More than 1,000 French colonists were killed in the aftermath.\nIn 1802, a French expeditionary force under Antoine Richepanse arrived in Guadeloupe, prompting a rebellion led by black officers who had until then been the \"de facto\" rulers of the colony. Richepanse and his troops acted quickly against the rebels, culminating in the Battle of Matouba on 28 May 1802. Realising they had no chance of success, Louis Delgr\u00e8s and his followers committed mass suicide by deliberately exploding their gunpowder stores. A consular decree published on 6 July 1802 discreetly ordered the reestablishment of slavery in Guadeloupe. An insurgency against the French, who officially reestablished slavery in Guadeloupe on 14 May 1803, continued until 1804. In 1810, the British captured the island again, handing it over to Sweden under the 1813 Treaty of Stockholm.\nIn the 1814 Treaty of Paris, Sweden ceded Guadeloupe to France, giving rise to the Guadeloupe Fund. In 1815, the Treaty of Vienna acknowledged French control of Guadeloupe.\nSlavery was abolished in the French Empire in 1848, though the island's landed interests imposed strict regulations on the rights of emancipated slaves to \"support themselves as subsistence farmers, work irregularly, and to change jobs freely\". After 1854, indentured labourers from the French colony of Pondicherry, and, with permission from the British government, India more broadly, were brought in: some 41,000 total. Emancipated slaves had the vote from 1849, but French nationality and the vote were not granted to Indian citizens until 1923, when a long campaign, led by Henry Sidambarom, finally achieved success.\n20th\u201321st centuries.\nIn 1936, F\u00e9lix \u00c9bou\u00e9 became the first black governor of Guadeloupe. During World War II, Guadeloupe initially came under the control of the Vichy government, later joining Free France in 1943. In 1946, the colony of Guadeloupe became an overseas department of France.\nTensions arose in the post-war era over the social structure of Guadeloupe and its relationship with mainland France. The 'Massacre of St Valentine' occurred in 1952, when striking factory workers in Le Moule were shot at by the Compagnies r\u00e9publicaines de s\u00e9curit\u00e9, resulting in four deaths. In May 1967 racial tensions exploded into rioting following a racist attack on a black Guadeloupean, Raphael Balzinc, resulting in eight deaths.\nAn independence movement grew in the 1970s, prompting France to declare Guadeloupe a French region in 1974. The Union populaire pour la lib\u00e9ration de la Guadeloupe (UPLG) campaigned for complete independence, and by the 1980s the situation had turned violent with the actions of groups such as Groupe de lib\u00e9ration arm\u00e9e (GLA) and Alliance r\u00e9volutionnaire cara\u00efbe (ARC).\nGreater autonomy was granted to Guadeloupe in 1982. Through a referendum in 2003, Saint-Martin and Saint Barth\u00e9lemy voted to separate from the administrative jurisdiction of Guadeloupe, this being fully enacted by 2007.\nIn January 2009, labour unions and others known as the Liyannaj Kont Pwofitasyon went on strike for more pay. Strikers were angry with low wages, the high cost of living, high levels of poverty relative to mainland France and levels of unemployment that are amongst the worst in the European Union. The situation quickly escalated, exacerbated by what was seen as an ineffectual response by the French government, turning violent and prompting the deployment of extra police after a union leader (Jacques Bino) was shot and killed. The strike lasted 44 days and had also inspired similar actions on nearby Martinique. President Nicolas Sarkozy later visited the island, promising reform. Tourism suffered greatly during this time and affected the 2010 tourist season as well.\nGeography.\nGuadeloupe is an archipelago of more than 12 islands, as well as islets and rocks situated where the northeastern Caribbean Sea meets the western Atlantic Ocean. It is located in the Leeward Islands in the northern part of the Lesser Antilles, a partly volcanic island arc. To the north lie Antigua and Barbuda and the British Overseas Territory of Montserrat, with Dominica lying to the south.\nThe two main islands are Basse-Terre (west) and Grande-Terre (east), which form a butterfly shape as viewed from above, the two 'wings' of which are separated by the Grand Cul-de-Sac Marin, Rivi\u00e8re Sal\u00e9e and Petit Cul-de-Sac Marin. More than half of Guadeloupe's land surface consists of the 847.8\u00a0km2 (327\u00bc sq. mi.) Basse-Terre. The island is mountainous, containing the peaks of Mount Sans Toucher () and Grande D\u00e9couverte (), culminating in the active volcano La Grande Soufri\u00e8re, the highest mountain peak in the Lesser Antilles with an elevation of . In contrast Grande-Terre is mostly flat, with rocky coasts to the north, irregular hills at the centre, mangrove at the southwest, and white sand beaches sheltered by coral reefs along the southern shore. This is where the main tourist resorts are found.\nMarie-Galante is the third-largest island, followed by La D\u00e9sirade, a north-east slanted limestone plateau, the highest point of which is . To the south lie the \u00celes de Petite-Terre, which are two islands (Terre de Haut and Terre de Bas) totalling 2\u00a0km2 (\u00be sq. mi.).\nLes Saintes is an archipelago of eight islands of which two, Terre-de-Bas and Terre-de-Haut are inhabited. The landscape is similar to that of Basse-Terre, with volcanic hills and irregular shoreline with deep bays.\nThere are numerous other smaller islands.\nGeology.\nBasse-Terre is a volcanic island. The Lesser Antilles are at the outer edge of the Caribbean Plate, and Guadeloupe is part of the outer arc of the Lesser Antilles Volcanic Arc. Many of the islands were formed as a result of the subduction of oceanic crust of the Atlantic Plate under the Caribbean Plate in the Lesser Antilles subduction zone. This process is ongoing and is responsible for volcanic and earthquake activity in the region. Guadeloupe was formed from multiple volcanoes, of which only La Grande Soufri\u00e8re is not extinct. Its last eruption was in 1976, and led to the evacuation of the southern part of Basse-Terre. 73,600 people were displaced before the eruption, although the eventual damage was much less than feared. Some of the drama of the evacuation was captured in the 1977 documentary La Soufri\u00e8re by German filmmaker Werner Herzog.\nK\u2013Ar dating indicates that the three northern massifs on Basse-Terre Island are 2.79\u00a0million years old. Sections of volcanoes collapsed and eroded within the last 650,000 years, after which the Sans Toucher volcano grew in the collapsed area. Volcanoes in the north of Basse-Terre Island mainly produced andesite and basaltic andesite. There are several beaches of dark or \"black\" sand.\nLa D\u00e9sirade, east of the main islands, has a basement from the Mesozoic, overlaid with thick limestones from the Pliocene to Quaternary periods.\nGrande-Terre and Marie-Galante have basements probably composed of volcanic units of Eocene to Oligocene, but there are no visible outcrops. On Grande-Terre, the overlying carbonate platform is 120 metres (400 feet) thick.\nClimate.\nThe islands are part of the Leeward Islands, so called because they are downwind of the prevailing trade winds, which blow out of the northeast. This was significant in the days of sailing ships. Grande-Terre is so named because it is on the eastern, or windward side, exposed to the Atlantic winds. Basse-Terre is so named because it is on the leeward south-west side and sheltered from the winds. Guadeloupe has a tropical climate tempered by maritime influences and the Trade Winds. There are two seasons, the dry season called \"Lent\" from January to June, and the wet season called \"winter\", from July to December.\nTropical cyclones and storm surges.\nLocated in a very exposed region, Guadeloupe and its dependencies have to face many cyclones. The deadliest hurricane to hit Guadeloupe was the Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre hurricane of 1776, which killed at least 6,000 people.\nIn 1989, Hurricane Hugo caused severe damage to the islands of the archipelago and left a deep mark on the memory of the local inhabitants. In 1995, three hurricanes (Iris, Luis and Marilyn) hit the archipelago in less than three weeks. Other notable hurricanes include Okeechobee in 1928, Betsy in 1965, Cleo in 1964, Inez in 1966, and Irma and Maria in 2017.\nFlora.\nWith fertile volcanic soils, heavy rainfall and a warm climate, vegetation on Basse-Terre is lush. Most of the island's forests are on Basse-Terre, containing such species as mahogany, ironwood and chestnut trees. Mangrove swamps line the Sal\u00e9e River. Much of the forest on Grande-Terre has been cleared, with only a few small patches remaining.\nBetween of altitude, the rainforest that covers a large part of the island of Basse-Terre develops. Vegetation there includes the white gum tree, the acomat-boucan or chestnut tree, the marbri or bois-band\u00e9 or the oleander; shrubs and herbaceous plants such as the mountain palm, the balisier or ferns; many epiphytes: bromeliads, philodendrons, orchids and lianas. Above , the humid savannah develops, composed of mosses, lichens, sphagnum or more vigorous plants such as mountain mangrove, high altitude violet or mountain thyme.\nThe dry forest occupies a large part of the islands of Grande-Terre, Marie-Galante, Les Saintes, La D\u00e9sirade and also develops on the leeward coast of Basse-Terre. The coastal forest is more difficult to develop because of the nature of the soil (sandy, rocky), salinity, sunshine and wind and is the environment where the sea grape, the mancenilla (a very toxic tree whose trunk is marked with a red line), the icaquier or the Coconut tree grow. On the cliffs and in the Arid zones are found cacti such as the cactus-cigar (Cereus), the prickly pear, the chestnut cactus, the \"T\u00eate \u00e0 l'anglais\" cactus and the aloes.\nThe Mangrove forest that borders some of Guadalupe's coasts is structured in three levels, from the closest to the sea to the farthest. On the first level are the red mangroves; on the second, about from the sea, the black mangroves form the shrubby mangrove; on the third level the white mangroves form the tall mangrove. Behind the mangrove, where the tide and salt do not penetrate, a swamp forest sometimes develops, unique in Guadeloupe. The representative species of this environment is the Mangrove-medaille.\nFauna.\nFew terrestrial mammals, aside from bats and raccoons, are native to the islands. The introduced Javan mongoose is also present on Guadeloupe. Bird species include the endemic purple-throated carib and the Guadeloupe woodpecker. The waters of the islands support a rich variety of marine life.\nHowever, by studying 43,000 bone remains from six islands in the archipelago, it was found that 50 to 70% of snakes and lizards on the Guadeloupe Islands became extinct after European colonists arrived; they had brought with them mammals such as cats, mongooses, rats, and raccoons, which might have preyed upon the native reptiles.\nEnvironmental preservation.\nIn recent decades, Guadeloupe's natural environments have been affected by hunting and fishing, forest retreat, urbanization and suburbanization. They also suffer from the development of intensive crops (banana and sugar cane, in particular), which reached their peak in the years 1955\u201375. This has led to the following situation: seagrass beds and reefs have degraded by up to 50% around the large islands; mangroves and mantids have almost disappeared in Marie-Galante, Les Saintes and La D\u00e9sirade; the salinity of the fresh water table has increased due to \"the intensity of use of the layer\"; and pollution of agricultural origin (pesticides and nitrogenous compounds).\nIn addition, the ChlEauTerre study, unveiled in March 2018, concludes that 37 different anthropogenic molecules (more than half of which come from residues of now-banned pesticides, such as chlordecone) were found in \"79% of the watersheds analyzed in Grande-Terre and 84% in Basse-Terre.\" A report by the Guadeloupe Water Office notes that in 2019 there is a \"generalized degradation of water bodies.\"\nDespite everything, there is a will to preserve these environments whose vegetation and landscape are preserved in some parts of the islands and constitute a sensitive asset for tourism. These areas are partially protected and classified as ZNIEFF, sometimes with nature reserve status, and several caves are home to protected chiropterans.\nThe Guadalupe National Park was created on 20 February 1989. In 1992, under the auspices of UNESCO, the Biosphere Reserve of the Guadeloupe Archipelago (\"R\u00e9serve de biosph\u00e8re de l'archipel de la Guadeloupe\") was created. As a result, on 8 December 1993, the marine site of Grand Cul-de-sac was listed as a wetland of international importance. The island thus became the overseas department with the most protected areas.\nEarthquakes and tsunamis.\nThe archipelago is crossed by numerous geological faults such as those of la Barre or la Cadoue, while in depth, in front of Moule and La D\u00e9sirade begins the D\u00e9sirade Fault, and between the north of Maria-Galante and the south of Grande-Terre begins the Maria Galante Fault. Because of these geological characteristics, the islands of the department of Guadeloupe are classified in zone III according to the seismic zoning of France and are subject to a specific risk prevention plan.\nThe 1843 earthquake in the Lesser Antilles is, to this day, the most violent earthquake known. It caused the death of more than a thousand people, as well as major damage in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre.\nOn 21 November 2004, the islands of the department, in particular Les Saintes archipelago, were shaken by a violent earthquake that reached a magnitude of 6.3 on the Richter scale and caused the death of one person, as well as extensive material damage.\nWaterfalls.\nGuadeloupe is home to 100 waterfalls and cascades. Some of the most well-known or visited include Acomat Falls (\"Saut de l'Acomat\"), Carbet Falls (\"Chutes du Carbet\"), Crayfish Waterfall (\"Cascade aux \u00c9crevisses\"), and L\u00e9zarde Falls (\"Saut de la L\u00e9zarde\"). All of the waterfalls are located on the island of Basse-Terre.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe population of Guadeloupe was estimated to be 378,561 on 1 January 2024. The population is mainly Afro-Caribbean. European, Indian (Tamil, Telugu, and other South Indians) around 35,617, Lebanese around 9,000,&lt;ref name=\"lorientlejour.com/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Syrians around 10,000, and Chinese are all minorities. There is also a substantial population of Haitians in Guadeloupe who work mainly in construction and as street vendors. Basse-Terre is the political capital; however, the largest city and economic hub is Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre.\nThe population of Guadeloupe has been decreasing by 0.8% per year since 2013. In 2017 the average population density in Guadeloupe was , which is very high in comparison to metropolitan France's average of . One third of the land is devoted to agriculture and all mountains are uninhabitable; this lack of space and shelter makes the population density even higher.\nMajor urban areas.\nThe most populous urban unit (agglomeration) is Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre-Les Abymes, which covers 11 communes and 65% of the population of the department. The three largest urban units are:\nHealth.\nIn 2011, life expectancy at birth was recorded at 77.0 years for males and 83.5 for females.\nMedical centres in Guadeloupe include: University Hospital Centre (CHU) in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, Regional Hospital Centre (CHR) in Basse-Terre, and four hospitals located in Capesterre-Belle-Eau, Pointe-Noire, Bouillante and Saint-Claude.\nThe \"Institut Pasteur de la Guadeloupe\", is located in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre and is responsible for researching environmental hygiene, vaccinations, and the spread of tuberculosis and other mycobacteria.\nImmigration.\nThe relative wealth of Guadeloupe contrasts with the extreme poverty of several islands in the Caribbean region, which makes the community an attractive place for the populations of some of these territories. In addition, other factors, such as political instability and natural disasters, explain this immigration. As early as the 1970s, the first illegal immigrants of Haitian origin arrived in Guadeloupe to meet a need for labour in the agricultural sector; alongside this Haitian immigration, which is more visible because it is more numerous, Guadeloupe has also seen the arrival and settlement of populations from the island of Dominica and the Dominican Republic. In 2005, the prefecture, which represents the State in Guadeloupe, reported figures of between 50,000 and 60,000 foreigners in the department.\nMigration.\nCreated in 1963 by Michel Debr\u00e9, Bumidom's objective was to \"[...] contribute to the solution of demographic problems in the overseas departments\". To this end, its missions were multiple: information for future emigrants, vocational training, family reunification and management of reception centres. At the time, this project was also seen as a means to diminish the influence of the West Indian independence movements, which were gaining strength in the 1960s.\nBetween 1963 and 1981, an estimated 16,562 Guadeloupeans emigrated to metropolitan France through Bumidom. The miniseries Le R\u00eave fran\u00e7ais (The French Dream) sets out to recount some of the consequences of the emigration of West Indians and Reunionese to France.\nAn estimated 50,000 Guadeloupeans and Martinicans participated in the construction of the Panama Canal between 1904 and 1914. In 2014, it was estimated that there were between 60,000 and 70,000 descendants of these West Indians living in Panama. Other waves of migration to North America, especially to Canada, occurred at the beginning of the 20th century.\nGovernance.\nTogether with Martinique, La R\u00e9union, Mayotte and French Guiana, Guadeloupe is one of the overseas departments, being both a region and a department. It is also an outermost region of the European Union. The inhabitants of Guadeloupe are French citizens with full political and legal rights.\nLegislative powers are centred on the separate departmental and regional councils. The elected president of the Departmental Council of Guadeloupe is currently Guy Losbar (1 July 2021); its main areas of responsibility include the management of a number of social and welfare allowances, of junior high school (coll\u00e8ge) buildings and technical staff, and local roads and school and rural buses. The Regional Council of Guadeloupe is a body, elected every six years, consisting of a president (currently Ary Chalus) and eight vice-presidents. The regional council oversees secondary education, regional transportation, economic development, the environment, and some infrastructure, among other things.\nGuadeloupe elects one deputy from one of each of the first, second, third, and fourth constituencies to the National Assembly of France. Three senators are chosen for the Senate of France by indirect election. For electoral purposes, Guadeloupe is divided into two arrondissements (Basse-Terre and Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre), and 21 cantons.\nMost of the French political parties are active in Guadeloupe. In addition there are also regional parties such as the Guadeloupe Communist Party, the Progressive Democratic Party of Guadeloupe, the Guadeloupean Objective, the Pluralist Left, and United Guadeloupe, Solidary and Responsible.\nThe prefecture (regional capital) of Guadeloupe is Basse-Terre. Local services of the state administration are traditionally organised at departmental level, where the prefect represents the government.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFor the purposes of local government, Guadeloupe is divided into 32 communes. Each commune has a municipal council and a mayor. Revenues for the communes come from transfers from the French government, and local taxes. Administrative responsibilities at this level include water management, civil register, and municipal police.\nGeopolitics.\nFrom a geostrategic point of view, Guadeloupe is located in a central part of the Caribbean archipelago between the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. This location in the region allows France to reach a large part of the eastern coast of the American continent. The exclusive economic zone formed by Guadeloupe and Martinique covers just over 126,146 square kilometres (48,705 sq. mi.). In 1980 France established its maritime boundaries in the area by signing a Treaty with Venezuela. This offers France important fishing resources and independence to develop a sovereign policy of underwater research and protection (protection of humpback whales, Cousteau reserve, protection of coral reefs). Because of its geographical position, Guadeloupe allows France to participate in political and diplomatic dialogues at both the regional (Lesser and Greater Antilles) and continental (Latin and North America) levels.\nThe signing of the Regional Convention for the Internationalisation of Enterprise (CRIE), membership of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and membership of the Association of Caribbean States (ACS) are milestones that have enabled Guadeloupe to develop its bilateral or multilateral relations within the framework of international agreements or institutions. The development of bilateral and multilateral economic partnerships with other Caribbean and American states is based on the modernisation of the autonomous port of Guadeloupe and the importance of the Guadeloupe-Polo Caribe international airport.\nSymbols and flags.\nAs a part of France, Guadeloupe uses the French tricolour as its flag and as its anthem. However, a variety of other flags are also used in unofficial or informal contexts as the flag of Guadeloupe, most notably the sun-based flag. Independentists also have their own flag suggested by the People's Union for the Liberation of Guadeloupe.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Guadeloupe depends on tourism, agriculture, light industry and services. It is reliant upon mainland France for large subsidies and imports and public administration is the largest single employer on the islands. Unemployment is especially high among the youth population.\nIn 2017, the Gross domestic product (GDP) of Guadeloupe was \u20ac9.079\u00a0billion, and showed 3.4% growth. The GDP per capita of Guadeloupe was \u20ac23,152. Imports amounted to \u20ac3.019\u00a0billion, and exports to \u20ac1.157\u00a0billion. The main export products are bananas, sugar and rum. Banana exports suffered in 2017 from damages due to Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria.\nTourism.\nTourism is one of the most prominent sources of income, with most visitors coming from France and North America. An increasingly large number of cruise ships visit Guadeloupe, the cruise terminal of which is in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre. The popular British-French television series \"Death in Paradise\" (2011-2025) has helped to increase tourism in Guadeloupe. The show is set in the fictional Caribbean island of \"Saint Marie\", but the main filming for the show is done in the commune of Deshaies, on Basse-Terre Island in Guadaloupe.\nAgriculture.\nThe traditional sugar cane crop is slowly being replaced by other crops, such as bananas (which now supply about 50% of export earnings), eggplant, guinnep, noni, sapotilla, giraumon squash, yam, gourd, plantain, christophene, cocoa, jackfruit, pomegranate, and many varieties of flowers. Other vegetables and root crops are cultivated for local consumption, although Guadeloupe is dependent upon imported food, mainly from the rest of France.\nLight industry.\nOf the various light industries, sugar and rum production, solar energy, cement, furniture and clothing are the most prominent. Most manufactured goods and fuel are imported.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nGuadeloupe's official language is French, which is spoken by nearly all of the population. Most residents also speak Guadeloupean Creole, a French-based creole language.\nGuadeloupean Creole emerged as a result of the need for all ethnic groups (French, African and Amerindian) to be able to understand each other. This language is therefore the result of a mixture created in the 17th century in response to a communicative emergency. At the time of the colony's foundation, a majority of the French population did not speak the standard French language but local dialects and languages, such as Breton and Norman, while the Africans came from a variety of West and Central African ethnic groups and lacked a common language themselves. The Creole language emerged as a lingua franca and ultimately became the native language of much of the population.\nMoreover, Terre-de-Haut and Terre-de-Bas, in the Saintes archipelago, due to their settlement history (Breton, Norman and Poitevin settlers), have their own Creoles which differ from Guadeloupean Creole by their French pronunciations, their particular expressions, their syntax and their sonorities. Although it is not transcribed, these islanders call their Creole \"patois\" or \"language of St. Martin\" and actively ensure its transmission and perpetuation by their descendants in vernacular form.\nA Guadeloupean b\u00e9k\u00e9 first wrote Creole at the end of the 17th century, transcribing it using French orthography.\nAs Guadeloupe is a French department, French is the official language. However, Guadeloupean French (in contact with Creole) has certain linguistic characteristics that differ from those of standard metropolitan French. Recently, a very detailed study of the phonetic aspect of Guadeloupean French has been undertaken (this would be the first study to deal with both the acoustic and the phonological and perceptual aspects of Guadeloupean French in particular and West Indian French in general). It is also concerned with the reading varieties of Guadeloupean French (acrolect, mesolect and basilect).\nIn recent decades there has been a revival of Creole, which has stimulated the appearance of books of short stories and poetry published in Creole and French over the last ten years. In this context, Hector Poullet is a pioneer of Creole-mediated dictation. Creole is also a very colourful language and very philosophical in its expressions and phrases, which, translated literally into French, can be confusing. The representatives of the older generations are not always fluent in French, but in Guadeloupean Creole.\nToday, the question as to whether French and Creole are stable in Guadeloupe, i.e. whether both languages are practiced widely and competently throughout society, remains a subject of active research.\nReligion.\nFigures in 2020 state that 96% of the population was Christian (of these, approximately 86% were Roman Catholic, 8% Protestant and 6% other Christian); of the other 4%, most were not religious. Guadeloupe is in the Catholic diocese of Basse-Terre (et Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre).\nIn 1685, the Black Code announced the Christian religion in its Catholic form as the only authorized religion in the French West Indies, thus excluding Jews and the various Protestant groups from practicing their beliefs, and imposed the forced conversion of the newly arrived slaves and the baptism of the older ones. Guadeloupe adopted the code on 10 December 1685.\nThis was followed by a rapid fashion among the slaves, since this religion offered them a spiritual refuge and allowed them to safeguard some of their African beliefs and customs, thus marking the beginning of a religious syncretism. Since the 1970s, new religions and groups have been 'competing' with the Catholic Church, such as the Evangelical Pentecostal Church, the Seventh-day Adventist Church, the Bible Students or Jehovah's Witnesses, and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons).\nAdministratively, the territory of Guadeloupe is part of the Diocese of Basse-Terre and Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, attached to the Catholic Church in France. The diocese includes the territories of Guadeloupe, St. Barth\u00e9lemy and St. Martin and the number of faithful is estimated at 400,000. In 2020 there were 59 priests active in the diocese. The episcopal see is located in Basse-Terre, in the cathedral of Notre-Dame-de-Guadeloupe.\nHinduism, which accompanied the Indians who came to work in Guadeloupe in the mid-19th century, has expanded since the 1980s. The Indian community has its own tradition that comes from India. It is the may\u00e9 men, a distorted pronunciation of the name of the Tamil Indian goddess Mariamman. There are no less than 400 temples in the archipelago.\nIslam was first Institutionalized in the French West Indies by the 1970s, first in Martinique. According to the president of the Muslim association of Guadeloupe, there are between 2,500 and 3,000 Muslims in the department. The island has two mosques. Judaism has been present in Guadeloupe since the arrival of Dutch settlers expelled from the northeast of present-day Brazil in 1654. There is a synagogue and an Israelite cultural community. Guadeloupeans of Syrian and Lebanese origin practice Catholicism in its Maronite form. Rastafari has been attractive to some young people since the 1970s following its emergence in Jamaica. The quimbois or kenbwa, practiced in Guadeloupe, refer to magical-religious practices derived from Christian and African syncretism.\nLiterature.\nGuadeloupe has always had a rich literary output, with Guadeloupean author Saint-John Perse winning the 1960 Nobel Prize in Literature. Other prominent writers from Guadeloupe or of Guadeloupean descent include Maryse Cond\u00e9, Simone Schwarz-Bart, Myriam Warner-Vieyra, Oruno Lara, Daniel Maximin, Paul Niger, Guy Tirolien and Nicolas-Germain L\u00e9onard.\nMusic.\nMusic and dance are also very popular, and the interaction of African, French and Indian cultures has given birth to some original new forms specific to the archipelago, most notably zouk music. Since the 1970s, Guadeloupean music has increasingly claimed the local language, Guadeloupean Creole as the preferred language of popular music. Islanders enjoy many local dance styles including zouk, zouk-love, compas, as well as the modern international genres such as hip hop, etc.\nTraditional Guadeloupean music includes biguine, kadans, cadence-lypso, and gwo ka. Popular music artists and bands such as Experience 7, Francky Vincent, Kassav' (which included Patrick St-Eloi, and Gilles Floro) embody the more traditional music styles of the island, whilst other musical artists such as the punk band The Bolokos or Tom Frager focus on more international genres such as rock or reggae. Many international festivals take place in Guadeloupe, such as the Creole Blues Festival on Marie-Galante. All the Euro-French forms of art are also ubiquitous, enriched by other communities from Brazil, Dominican Republic, Haiti, India, Lebanon, Syria who have migrated to the islands.\nClassical music has seen a resurgent interest in Guadeloupe. One of the first known composers of African origin was born in Guadeloupe, Le Chevalier de Saint-Georges, a contemporary of Joseph Haydn and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and a celebrated figure in Guadeloupe. Several monuments and cites are dedicated to Saint-Georges in Guadeloupe, and there is an annual music festival, Festival International de Musique Saint-Georges, dedicated in his honour. The festival attracts classical musicians from all over the world and is one of the largest classical music festivals in the Caribbean.Another element of Guadeloupean culture is its dress. A few women (particularly of the older generation) wear a unique style of traditional dress, with many layers of colourful fabric, now only worn on special occasions. On festive occasions they also wore a madras (originally a \"kerchief\" from South India) headscarf tied in many different symbolic ways, each with a different name. The headdress could be tied in the \"bat\" style, or the \"firefighter\" style, as well as the \"Guadeloupean woman\". Jewellery, mainly gold, is also important in the Guadeloupean lady's dress, a product of European, African and Indian inspiration.\nTraditional dress.\nTraditional dress, inherited today, is the result of a long cultural mix involving Africa, Asia and Europe. This cultural mix was initially based on triangular trade and later on a more globalized trade that included importing fabrics from the Orient. trade that included importing fabrics from the Orient. For example, the traditional Guadeloupean costume has Asian influences through the use of madras cloth from India; African and Spanish influences through the use of the headscarf for covering; and French influences through the adoption of the lace petticoat from Brittany.\nThe clothing worn in Guadeloupe has mutated over the centuries and has undergone changes that reflect the social conditions and the evolution of society, from the time of slavery to the present day. During the second half of the 17th century, slaves arriving in Guadeloupe were naked or nearly naked. They were then forced to wear rags or the owner's worn-out clothes, which were quickly discarded, barely concealing their nakedness. Or slaves working in the fields wore the \"three-hole\" dress, made of a vegetable fiber fabric in which three holes were made (two for the arms and one for the head). Under pressure from the church and the authorities, slaves were forced to wear the \"three-hole\" dress.\nUnder pressure from the church and as soon as the Black Code was enforced in 1685, owners were required to provide \"each slave with two suits of cloth or four alders [about ] of cloth a year... art.25\" which only modestly improved their conditions. However, the poor quality of the clothing worn during slavery must be qualified, as it could vary according to the day of the week (daily clothing, Sunday clothing, clothing for special occasions), or according to the status of the slaves employed in the houses.\nIn fact, the latter could be dressed in clothes of different quality according to the job they performed on the property. For example, in the case of the maids, their clothes could be of better quality because they had to reflect the image of success and wealth that their master wanted to project.\nFrom the 17th century onwards, the development of the Creole costume coincided with the desire of slave women to regain their dignity, with the evolution of their employment within the household or Guadeloupean society (specialization in the sewing and dressmaking trades), with the evolution of Guadeloupean society (free women of colour, freed slaves, mulatto women) and with the influence of the European fashionable costume, which the housewife represented.\nAfter the abolition of slavery, the main periods of traditional Guadeloupean dress were the following:\nAs a result of this fusion of African and European dress codes over the centuries, including materials from distant origins, the Guadeloupean wardrobe includes Creole garments such as: the cozy dress or w\u00f2b ti-do, an everyday dress also called \"\u00e0 corps\" because it fits the body like a corset; the skirt-shirt, in ceremonial dress (the shirt is made of very fine batiste trimmed with lace, which stops at the elbows and is buttoned with golden buttons. The skirt, full and very wide in the back with tail, is knotted above the breasts); the bodice dress which is distinguished from the others by the quantity and richness of the fabric used (satin, brocade satin, satin).\nGastronomy.\nGuadeloupean cuisine is a mixture of African, European and Asian influences. It uses first of all agricultural products such as poyo (plantain more commonly called green plantain or ti-nain), bread plantain, okra, cabbage, pigeon peas, cristofine, yam or sweet potato.\nThe sea and rivers provide rays, snappers, octopus (chatou), lambis, burgots (a type of large whelk), sea urchins and ouassous. Orchards provide fruits such as soursop, red jambosier, passion fruit (marakoudja), mango, quenette, and citrus. Condiments sometimes added to dishes are habanero chili, cive (a kind of onion from the country) or roucou seeds that give a red tint to sauces.\nThe cooking, often spicy and seasoned, results from soaking meat or fish for hours before cooking, to enhance its flavour. Typical dishes are: fish blaff, dombr\u00e9s, b\u00e9b\u00e9l\u00e9 (from Marie-Galante), colombo (equivalent to Indian curry) and mat\u00e9t\u00e9 (rice cooked with crab). As for appetizers or snacks, there are morcillas criollas, accras, cassava cakes and bokit.\nAs for desserts, there are blancmange, sorbets or various fruit salads. Pastries include p\u00e2t\u00e9s with jam, tournament d'amour (in Les Saintes), caca b\u0153uf (in Marie-Galante) or sacristain. \"Pain natt\u00e9\", a local brioche bread, is often eaten.\nThere are local productions of candied fruits (elderberry, pineapple, carambola) and jams (guava, banana, coconut). Sorbets such as coconut sherbet or snowball made with crushed ice to which a syrup (mint, grenadine) is added are also consumed. Sweets include coconut sugar, kilibibi and konkada (of Beninese origin).In the category of beverages, the consumption of soft drinks is very important in Guadeloupe, as well as that of a drink locally nicknamed black beer. In addition, it is not uncommon to see vendors of sugar cane juice or coconut water on the roads. Chaudeau is consumed on special occasions (weddings, baptisms, communions) and is a Guadeloupean-style eggnog eaten with a whipped cake (g\u00e9noise). The rum, whose consumption is culturally imbricated in the Guadeloupean society, comes in particular from one of the ten distilleries distributed in the Guadeloupean territory and that produce the rums of Guadeloupe.\nFestivities.\nAt Christmas, families and friends gather during the chant\u00e9 Nwel, an opportunity to sing carols and celebrate. After the vacations, rehearsals begin for the Guadeloupe carnival. Carnival groups parade through the streets every Sunday afternoon until the Carnival festivities in February or March. For example, the groups with skins, the Akiyo group are groups composed only of large percussion and lambi shell instruments. They have the particularity of having no brass instruments in the band, no choreography, they often parade without themed costumes. Since 2014, the Carnival in kabw\u00e8t of Marie-Galante has been registered in the inventory of the intangible heritage of France at UNESCO.\nShrove Tuesday is the big party where carnival groups compete in the main town, Basse-Terre, or in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, for the best costumes, the best music or the best choreography whose theme is imposed by the carnival committees. The next day, on Ash Wednesday, the day that ends the carnival, the mascot king of the carnival nicknamed Vaval is burned, which signals the end of the festivities, everyone parades in black and white (to mark Vaval's mourning), and then the forty days of Lent begin. Most of the population is Catholic and respects this period. But, given the great fondness for festivities, on the \"Thursday of Lent\" a parade is organized in red and black identical to that of Carnival, with groups of musicians preceded by people parading.\nAfter this period of deprivation, the Easter celebrations take place, during which families usually go camping on the beach and eat traditional and very popular dishes based on crabs: mat\u00e9t\u00e9 (rice cooked with crab), calalou (crabs with wooden leaves accompanied by white rice) or dombr\u00e9s with crabs (small balls of flour cooked with crab).\nSport.\nFootball is popular in Guadeloupe, and several notable footballers are of Guadeloupean origin, including Marius Tr\u00e9sor, St\u00e9phane Auvray, Ronald Zubar and his younger brother St\u00e9phane, Miguel Comminges, Dimitri Foulquier, Bernard Lambourde, Anthony Martial, Alexandre Lacazette, Thierry Henry, Lilian Thuram, William Gallas, Layvin Kurzawa, Mikael Silvestre, Thomas Lemar, Mathys Tel, Kingsley Coman and David Regis.\nThe Guadeloupe football team were 2007 CONCACAF Gold Cup semi-finalists, defeated by Mexico.\nBasketball is popular. Best known players from Guadeloupe are the NBA players Rudy Gobert, Micka\u00ebl Pi\u00e9trus, Johan Petro, Rodrigue Beaubois, and Mickael Gelabale.\nSeveral track and field athletes, such as Marie-Jos\u00e9 P\u00e9rec, Patricia Girard-L\u00e9no, Christine Arron, and Wilhem Belocian, are also Guadeloupe natives.\nThe island has produced many world-class fencers. Yannick Borel, Daniel J\u00e9rent, Ysaora Thibus, Anita Blaze, Enzo Lefort and Laura Flessel were all born and raised in Guadeloupe. According to Olympic gold medalist and world champion Yannick Borel, there is a good fencing school and a culture of fencing in Guadeloupe.\nEven though Guadeloupe is part of France, it has its own sports teams. Rugby union is a small but rapidly growing sport in Guadeloupe.\nThe island is internationally known for hosting the Karujet Race\u00a0\u2013 Jet Ski World Championship since 1998. This nine-stage, four-day event attracts competitors from around the world (mostly Caribbeans, Americans, and Europeans). The Karujet, generally made up of seven races around the island, has an established reputation as one of the most difficult championships in which to compete.\nThe Route du Rhum is one of the most prominent nautical French sporting events, occurring every four years.\nBodybuilder Serge Nubret was born in Anse-Bertrand, Grande-Terre, representing the French state in various bodybuilding competitions throughout the 1960s and 1970s including the IFBB's Mr. Olympia contest, taking 3rd place every year from 1972 to 1974, and 2nd place in 1975. Bodybuilder Marie-Laure Mahabir also hails from Guadeloupe.\nThe country has a passion for cycling. It hosted the French Cycling Championships in 2009 and continues to host the Tour de Guadeloupe every year. The V\u00e9lodrome Am\u00e9d\u00e9e D\u00e9traux is the largest velodrome in the Antilles. It has a capacity for 9000 spectators.\nGuadeloupe continues to host the Orange Open de Guadeloupe tennis tournament (since 2011).\nThe Tour of Guadeloupe sailing, which was founded in 1981.\nIn Boxing, Ludovic Proto \u2013 as an amateur, he competed in the 1988 Summer Olympics in the men's light welterweight division. As a professional, he was a former French and European welterweight champion;\nGilbert Del\u00e9 \u2013 as a professional, he was a former French and European light-middleweight champion, then he won the WBA world light-middleweight title in 1991;\nJean-Marc Mormeck \u2013 as a professional, he was a former French light heavyweight champion and two-time unified world cruiserweight champion\u2014held the WBA, WBC, and \"The Ring\" titles twice between 2005 and 2007.\nTransport.\nGuadeloupe is served by a number of airports; most international flights use Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre International Airport. Boats and cruise ships frequent the islands, using the ports at Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre and Basse-Terre.\nOn 9 September 2013 the county government voted in favour of constructing a tramway in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre. The first phase will link northern Abymes to downtown Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre by 2019. The second phase, scheduled for completion in 2023, will extend the line to serve the university.\nEducation.\nThe Guadeloupe academic region includes only the Guadeloupe academy. It employs 9,618 people and its operating budget was \u20ac714.3\u00a0million for 2018\u20132019. The territory has 300 elementary schools, including 1 private kindergarten under contract and 14 private elementary schools under contract. It also has 52 middle schools, including 6 private under contract. And finally, it has 38 high schools, 13 of which are private under contract.\nDuring the 2018\u20132019 school year were enrolled at Guadeloupe Academy:\nThe islands of Guadeloupe are also home to two campuses of the University of the French Antilles, Camp-Jacob in Saint-Claude and Fouillole in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, the latter being the headquarters of the institution. Student residences are located around each campus. Furthermore, a satellite campus dedicated to healthcare is located in the vicinity of the University Hospital Centre of Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, many schools for apprentices are located throughout the archipelago, an Arts and Crafts Centre acting as local school for fine art is located in Bergevin, Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, and, finally, three sites of the regional second chance school are implanted in various high schools.\nInfrastructure.\nEnergy.\nThe island has great potential for solar, wind and marine energy, but by 2018, biomass and coal energy and petroleum hydrocarbons are still the most used.\nThe Energy transition Law (TECV) provides for 50% renewable energy by 2020 in the territory. And the Guadeloupe EPP plans to develop 66 MW of additional biomass capacity between 2018 and 2023, including 43 MW to replace coal.\nFor example, the Albioma Cara\u00efbes (AC) coal-fired power plant will be converted to biomass to help increase the share of renewables in Guadeloupe's energy mix from 20.5% to 35%, thereby mitigating the island's dependence on fossil fuels and reducing acidic air pollution and the production of toxic and bottom ash.\nThis 34 MW power plant, producing 260 GWh/year of electricity in 2018 (i.e. 15% of the island's needs), should reduce 265 000 t of CO2 equivalent/year throughout the chain (\u221287% once converted to biomass compared to the previous situation, coal).\nGuadeloupe has an electricity production plant, in Le Moule, based on the sugar cane agricultural sector, which recovers the residues from sugar cane crushing (bagasse) to produce energy; 12 wind farms, such as in D\u00e9sirade, Le Moule or Marie-Galante; a geothermal power plant in Bouillante, which uses the energy of water vapor produced by volcanic activity (the plant's electricity production ranks it first nationally); a project to harness the energy of waves and ocean currents; photovoltaic installations that contribute to the operation of solar water heaters for homes and to the development of the electric vehicle sector.\nElectricity produced by hydropower, which represents 2.2% of total production, comes from dams built on the beds of certain rivers.\nDrinking water supply.\nThe water distributed by Guadeloupe's drinking water network comes mainly from Basse Terre, 70% from river intakes and 20% from spring catchments. The remaining 10% comes from boreholes tapping the groundwater of Grande Terre and Marie-Galante.\nAccess to water and sanitation is problematic due to the deteriorated state of the network, which causes many losses in the water supply system. For years, water shortages have been recurrent and have forced \"water shifts\", mainly in the municipalities of Grande-Terre, which are the most affected, with consequences for private individuals and agricultural activities.\nAccording to statistics from the Water Office (2020 data), 61% of drinking water production is wasted, i.e., almost 50 million cubic metres (65 million cu. yd.) of water per year, due to pipes in poor condition. In addition, 70% of wastewater treatment plants do not meet standards.\nPolice and crime.\nAlthough Guadeloupe is one of the safest islands in the Caribbean, it was the most violent overseas French department in 2016. The murder rate is significantly higher than that of Paris, at 8.2 per 100,000. The high level of unemployment caused violence and crime to rise, especially in 2009 and 2010, the years following the Great Recession. Residents of Guadeloupe describe the island as a place with little everyday crime, and most violence is caused by the drug trade or domestic disputes. In 2021, additional police officers were deployed to the island in the face of rioting arising out of COVID-19 restrictions.\nNormally, about 2,000 police officers are present on the island including some 760 active National Gendarmerie of the COMGEND (Gendarmerie Command of Guadeloupe) region plus around 260 reservists. The active Gendarmerie include three Mobile Gendarmerie Squadrons (EGM) and a Republican Guard Intervention Platoon (PIGR). The Maritime Gendarmerie deploys the patrol boat \"Violette\" in the territory, which is planned for replacement by a new PCG-NG patrol boat in about 2025\u20132026.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12345", "revid": "28991092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12345", "title": "Demographics of Guadeloupe", "text": "Guadeloupe has a population of 375,693 (2021).\nPopulation.\nAccording to INSEE Guadeloupe had an estimated population of 403,977 on 1 January 2012. Life expectancy at birth is 77.0 years for males, and 83.5 for females (figures for 2011).\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Structure of the population (01.01.2010) (Provisional estimates) (Excluding data for Saint Barth\u00e9lemy and Saint Martin):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.I.2015) (Excluding data for Saint Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my and Saint Martin.): \nVital statistics.\nThe following vital statistics include Saint Martin and Saint Barth\u00e9lemy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguages.\nFrench is the official language, taught in the school system. Antillean Creole French is spoken by a large part of the population, understood by nearly all, and taught in some schools. A 2007 document issued by the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie estimated the population to be 80.2% \"francophone\" and 14.9% \"partially francophone\".\nReligion.\nFigures in 2020 state that 96% of the population is Christian (of these, approximately 86% are Roman Catholic, 8% Protestant and 6% other Christian); of the other 4%, most have no religion, although there is a small number of Hindus, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds and Muslims.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12347", "revid": "30410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12347", "title": "Politics of Guadeloupe", "text": ""}
{"id": "12348", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12348", "title": "Economy of Guadeloupe", "text": ""}
{"id": "12349", "revid": "48724563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12349", "title": "Telecommunications in Guadeloupe", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Guadeloupe refer to telephony, Internet, broadcasting, and related infrastructure in the French overseas department of Guadeloupe. As an overseas territory of France, Guadeloupe follows French telecommunications law and regulation under the authority of the regulator ARCEP (Autorit\u00e9 de r\u00e9gulation des communications \u00e9lectroniques, des postes et de la distribution de la presse).\nRegulation.\nTelecommunications are regulated by ARCEP, which oversees all French territories. In 2024 ARCEP launched procedures for awarding frequencies in the 700 MHz, 900 MHz and 3.4-3.8 GHz bands for operators including Digicel AFG, Free Cara\u00efbe, Orange and Outremer Telecom. Licenses were awarded in February 2025. ARCEP also performs quality-of-service audits. In 2024 it made over 528,000 measurements in Guadeloupe.\nInfrastructure.\nMobile networks.\nMobile service is provided by Orange Cara\u00efbes, Outremer Telecom, Free Cara\u00efbe and Digicel AFG. Coverage for 2G, 3G, 4G and 5G networks is widespread, with Orange ranked highest for quality-of-service in 2024.\nFixed broadband.\nHigh-speed Internet access is provided mainly by Orange Cara\u00efbes, Outremer Telecom and Mediaserv. In 2019 there were about 170,000 broadband subscriptions. nPerf\u2019s 2024 broadband ranking placed Orange and SFR Cara\u00efbe among the top performers.\nDomain name.\nGuadeloupe has its own domain name: .gp.\nRadio.\nThere are emitting in Guadeloupe. In 1997, there were 113,000 radio sets in the region.\nTelevision.\nThere are https:// emitting in Guadeloupe using digital terrestrial television, including 4 local stations.\nIn 1997, there were 118,000 television sets in Guadeloupe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12350", "revid": "10951369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12350", "title": "Transport in Guadeloupe", "text": "As an archipelago, Guadeloupe depends on several systems of public transport. The two islands that make up Guadeloupe proper - Grande-Terre and Basse-Terre - have an extensive road network, while water and air transportation connects to the outer islands as well as international destinations.\nRoad transport.\nGuadeloupe uses right-hand traffic. Of the 2,082\u00a0km of roads in the region, the majority (1,742\u00a0km) are paved and are well-maintained. As Guadeloupe is a French-administered territory, road signs and directions are written in French. The two main islands of Grande-Terre and Basse-Terre are connected by the N1 and N11 highways. Winding roads are common, and in Basse-Terre, the mountain roads have especially sharp turns.\nKaru'lis operates several bus routes across Grande-Terre (including direct services to and around Basse-Terre), and a small route runs on the north-eastern island of La D\u00e9sirade.\nRail transport.\nThere are no public railways in Guadeloupe. A public railway line between Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre and Le Moule (Grande-Terre) was proposed but was later scrapped. Some plantations operate private railways. There exists a tourist railway that is operational (as of 2014) from Beauport, Port Louis to de Poyen. The construction of a tramway was planned with two lines: one between the Abymes and the Memorial in Pointe-\u00e0-P\u00eetre; the other between Baie-Mahault and Gosier. This project was later abandoned due to High-service buses being preferred over the tramway.\nWater transport.\nThe container terminal Port de Jarry, in Pointe-\u00e0-Pitre, is Guadeloupe's primary port for cargo and cruise ship passengers. It handles more than 95% of Guadeloupe's trade. Basse-Terre city contains a smaller sea port which also handles passengers.\nFerries connect Guadeloupe proper to the outer islands of La D\u00e9sirade, Marie-Galante, and \u00celes des Saintes, as well as other Caribbean ports.\nAir transport.\nPointe-\u00e0-Pitre International Airport is the primary gateway for international travel into and out of Guadeloupe. It offers direct and chartered/seasonal flights to South America, the Caribbean, North America and Europe. It is a hub airport for Air Cara\u00efbes."}
{"id": "12352", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12352", "title": "Military of Guadeloupe", "text": ""}
{"id": "12353", "revid": "30700052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12353", "title": "Glagolitic script", "text": "Oldest known Slavic alphabet\nThe Glagolitic script ( , \u2c33\u2c3e\u2c30\u2c33\u2c41\u2c3e\u2c3b\u2c4c\u2c30, \"glagolitsa\") is the oldest known Slavic alphabet. It is generally agreed that it was created in the 9th century for the purpose of translating liturgical texts into Old Church Slavonic by Saint Cyril, a monk from Thessalonica. He and his brother Saint Methodius were sent by the Byzantine Emperor Michael III in 863 to Great Moravia after an invitation from Rastislav of Moravia to spread Christianity there. After the deaths of Cyril and Methodius, their disciples were expelled from Moravia, and they moved to the First Bulgarian Empire instead. The Early Cyrillic alphabet, which was developed gradually in the Preslav Literary School by scribes who incorporated some Glagolitic letters when writing in the Greek alphabet, gradually replaced Glagolitic in that region. Glagolitic remained in use alongside the Latin script in the Kingdom of Croatia and alongside Cyrillic until the 14th century in the Second Bulgarian Empire and the Serbian Empire; in later periods, it was used mainly for cryptographic purposes.\nGlagolitic also spread to the Kievan Rus' and the Kingdom of Bohemia. Although its use declined there in the 12th century, some manuscripts in the territory of the former retained Glagolitic inclusions for centuries. It had also spread to Duklja and Zachlumia in the Western Balkans, from where it reached the March of Verona. There, the Investiture Controversy afforded it refuge from the opposition of Latinizing prelates and allowed it to entrench itself in Istria, from which place it spread to nearby lands. It survived there and as far south as Dalmatia without interruption into the 20th century for Church Slavonic in addition to its use as a secular script in parts of its range, which at times extended into Bosnia, Slavonia, and Carniola, in addition to 14th\u201315th century exclaves in Prague and Krak\u00f3w, and a 16th-century exclave in Putna.\nIts authorship by Cyril was forgotten, having been replaced with an attribution to St. Jerome by the early Benedictine adopters of Istria in a bid to secure the approval of the papacy. The bid was ultimately successful, though sporadic restrictions and repressions from individual bishops continued even after its official recognition by Pope Innocent IV. These had little effect on the vitality of the script, which evolved from its original Rounded Glagolitic form into an Angular Glagolitic form, in addition to a cursive form developed for notary purposes. \nThe Ottoman conquests left the script without most of its continental population, and as a result of the Counter-Reformation its use was restricted in Istria and the Diocese of Zagreb, and the only active printing press with a Glagolitic type was confiscated, leading to a shift towards Latinic and Cyrillic literacy when coupled with the Tridentine requirement that priests be educated at seminaries. The result was its gradual death as a written script in most of its continental range, but also the unusually late survival of medieval scribal tradition for the reproduction of Glagolitic texts in isolated areas like the island of Krk and the Zadar Archipelago. Although the Propaganda Fide would eventually resume printing Glagolitic books, very few titles were published, so the majority of Glagolitic literary works continued to be written and copied by hand well into the 18th century. Of the major European scripts, only the Arabic script is comparable in this regard.\nIn the early 19th century, the policies of the First French Empire and Austrian Empire left the script without legal status, and its last remaining centers of education were abolished, concurrent with the weakening of the script in the few remaining seminaries that used the cursive form in instruction, resulting in a rapid decline. But when the Slavicists discovered the script and established it as the original script devised by Cyril, Glagolitic gained new niche applications in certain intellectual circles, while a small number of priests fought to keep its liturgical use alive, encountering difficulties but eventually succeeding to the point that its area \"expanded\" in the early 20th century.\nLatinic translations and transliterations of the matter of the missal in this period led to its decline in the decades before Vatican II, whose promulgation of the vernacular confined regular use of Glagolitic to a few monasteries and academic institutions, in addition to a small population of enthusiasts, whose numbers grew and shrank with the prevalence of the script in literature, but grew exponentially in pious and nationalist circles in the years leading up to and following Independence of Croatia, and again more broadly with the Internet.\nName and etymology.\nThe word \"glagolitic\" comes from Neo-Latin and Croatian , ultimately deriving from the Old Church Slavonic word (\"glagol\u016d\"), meaning 'utterance' or 'word'. The name / \"glagolitsa\" is thought to have developed in Croatia around the 14th\u00a0century from the word \"glagolity\", which referred to those who used the Slavonic liturgy. The Croatian language portal (based on the work of Vladimir Ani\u0107) notes the etymology of today's word as , that has a historical meaning of celebrating mass in Old Church Slavonic.\nIn the languages now spoken in the places where Glagolitic script was once used, the script is known as (romanized as \"glagolitsa\" or \"glagolica\", depending on which language) in Bulgarian, Macedonian and Russian; (\u0433\u043b\u0430\u0433\u043e\u0459\u0438\u0446\u0430) in Croatian and Serbian; (\"hlaholytsia\") in Ukrainian; (\"hlaholitsa\") in Belarusian; in Czech; in Slovak; in Polish; and in Slovene and Sorbian.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe creation of the characters is popularly attributed to Saints Cyril and Methodius, who may have created them to facilitate the introduction of Christianity. It is believed that the original letters were fitted to Slavic dialects in geographical Macedonia specifically (the Byzantine theme of Thessalonica).\nThe words of that language could not be easily written by using either the Greek or Latin alphabets.\nThe number of letters in the original Glagolitic alphabet is not known, but it might have been close to its presumed Greek model. The 41 letters known today include letters for non-Greek sounds, which might have been added by Saint Cyril, as well as ligatures added in the 12th century under the influence of Cyrillic, as Glagolitic lost its dominance. In later centuries, the number of letters dropped dramatically, to fewer than 30 in modern Croatian and Czech recensions of the Church Slavic language. Twenty-four of the 41 original Glagolitic letters (see table below) probably derive from graphemes of the medieval cursive Greek small alphabet but have been given an ornamental design.\nThe source of the other consonantal letters is unknown. If they were added by Cyril, it is likely that they were taken from an alphabet used for Christian scripture. It is frequently proposed that the letters \"sha\" \u2c1e, \"tsi\" \u2c1c, and \"cherv\" \u2c1d were taken from the letters \"shin\" \u05e9 and \"tsadi\" \u05e6 of the Hebrew alphabet, and that \u2c06 \"zhivete\" derives from Coptic \"janja\" \u03ea. However, Cubberley suggests that if a single prototype were presumed, the most likely source would be Armenian. Several other scripts have been proposed as such single prototypes of the Glagolitic alphabet. A different set of hypotheses assumes that Cyril designed the letters from scratch on the basis of a common principle. Most notably, Georg Tschernochvostoff argued that all the Glagolitic letters were constructed from the Christian symbols cross, circle and triangle. A widely accepted example of deliberate construction are the symmetric letters \"i\" \u2c3b and \"slovo\" \u2c44, which together form the abbreviation \u2c3b\ufe26\u2c44 of the nomen sacrum \u2c3b\u2c44\u2c46\u2c44\u2c4f \"Isus\u044a\" \u2018Jesus\u2019, but a general design principle like in the Canadian syllabics could not be proven. A plausible hypothesis is that \u201cCyril freely invented the Glagolitic letters, sometimes being inspired by theological ideas [\u2026] and sometimes using associations with other scripts he knew\u201d.\nFor writing numbers, the Glagolitic numerals use letters with a numerical value assigned to each based on their native alphabetic order. This differs from Cyrillic numerals, which inherited their numeric value from the corresponding Greek letter (see Greek numerals).\nThe two brothers from Thessaloniki, who were later canonized as Saints Cyril and Methodius, were sent to Great Moravia in 862 by the Byzantine emperor at the request of Prince Rastislav, who wanted to weaken the dependence of his country on East Frankish priests. The Glagolitic alphabet, however it originated, was used between 863 and 885 for government and religious documents and books and at the Great Moravian Academy (\"Ve\u013ekomoravsk\u00e9 u\u010dili\u0161te\") founded by the missionaries, where their followers were educated. The Kiev Missal, found in the 19th century in Jerusalem, was dated to the 10th century.\nIn 885, Pope Stephen V issued a papal bull to restrict spreading and reading Christian services in languages other than Latin or Greek. Around the same time, Svatopluk I, following the interests of the Frankish Empire and its clergy, persecuted the students of Cyril and Methodius, imprisoned and expelled them from Great Moravia.\nIn 886, an East Frankish bishop of Nitra named Wiching banned the script and jailed 200 followers of Methodius, mostly students of the original academy. They were then dispersed or, according to some sources, sold as slaves by the Franks. However, many of them, including Saints Naum, Clement, Angelar, Sava and Gorazd, reached the First Bulgarian Empire and were commissioned by Boris I of Bulgaria to teach and instruct the future clergy of the state in the Slavic language. After the adoption of Christianity in Bulgaria in 865, religious ceremonies and Divine Liturgy were conducted in Greek by clergy sent from the Byzantine Empire, using the Byzantine rite. Fearing growing Byzantine influence and weakening of the state, Boris viewed the introduction of the Slavic alphabet and language into church use as a way to preserve the independence of the Bulgarian Empire from Byzantine Constantinople. As a result of Boris' measures, two academies, one in Ohrid and one in Preslav, were founded.\nSpread of the script.\nFrom there, the students travelled to other places and spread the use of their alphabet. Students of the two apostles who were expelled from Great Moravia in 886, notably Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum, brought the Glagolitic alphabet to the First Bulgarian Empire and were received and accepted officially by Boris I of Bulgaria. This led to the establishment of the two literary schools: the Preslav Literary School and the Ohrid Literary School. Some went to Croatia (Dalmatia), where the squared variant arose and where Glagolitic remained in use for a long time. In 1248, Pope Innocent IV granted the Croatians of southern Dalmatia the unique privilege of using their own language and this script in the Roman Rite liturgy. Formally granted to bishop Philip of Senj, permission to use the Glagolitic liturgy (the Roman Rite conducted in the Slavic language instead of Latin, not the Byzantine rite), actually extended to all Croatian lands, mostly along the Adriatic coast. The Holy See had several Glagolitic missals published in Rome. Authorization for the use of this language was extended to some other Slavic regions between 1886 and 1935. In missals, the Glagolitic script was eventually replaced with the Latin alphabet, but the use of the Slavic language in the Mass continued, until replaced by modern vernacular languages.\nAt the end of the 9th century, one of these students of Methodius \u2013 Saint Naum, one of the founders of the Pliska Literary School (commonly known as the Preslav Literary School, where the Bulgarian capital, along with the school, was transferred to in 893) \u2013 is often credited, at least by supporters of glagolitic precedence, for the \"creation\" or wider adoption of the Cyrillic script, which almost entirely replaced Glagolitic during the Middle Ages. The Cyrillic alphabet is derived from the Greek alphabet used at that time, with some additional letters for sounds peculiar to Slavic languages (like \u27e8\u0448\u27e9, \u27e8\u0446\u27e9, \u27e8\u0447\u27e9, \u27e8\u044a\u27e9, \u27e8\u044c\u27e9, \u27e8\u0463\u27e9), likely derived from the Glagolitic alphabet. The decision by a great assembly of notables summoned by Boris in the year 893 in favor of Cyrillic created an alphabetical difference between the two literary centres of the Bulgarian state in Pliska and Ohrid. In the western part the Glagolitic alphabet remained dominant at first. However, subsequently in the next two centuries, mostly after the fall of the First Bulgarian Empire to the Byzantines, Glagolitic gradually ceased to be used there at all. Nevertheless, particular passages or words written with the Glagolitic alphabet appeared in Bulgarian Cyrillic manuscripts till the end of the 14th century. Some students of the Ohrid academy went to Bohemia where the alphabet was used in the 10th and 11th centuries, along with other scripts. It is not clear whether the Glagolitic alphabet was used in the Duchy of Kopnik before the Wendish Crusade, but it was certainly used in Kievan Rus'. Another use of Glagolitic is presumed in now southern Poland (Duchy of Vistula/White Croats state) and the Transcarpathia region.\nSurvival and use in Croatia.\nIn Croatia, from the 12th century, Glagolitic inscriptions appeared mostly in littoral areas: Istria, Primorje, Kvarner, and Kvarner islands, notably Krk, Cres, and Lo\u0161inj; in Dalmatia, on the islands of Zadar, but there were also findings in inner Lika and Krbava, reaching to Kupa river, and even as far as Me\u0111imurje and Slovenia. \"Hrvoje's Missal\" from 1404 was illuminated in Split, and it is considered one of the most beautiful Croatian Glagolitic books. The 1483 \"Missale Romanum Glagolitice\" was the first printed Croatian Glagolitic book.\nIt was believed that Glagolitsa in Croatia was present only in those areas. But, in 1992, the discovery of Glagolitic inscriptions in churches along the Orljava river in Slavonia totally changed the picture (churches in Brodski Drenovac, Lov\u010di\u0107, and some others), showing that use of the Glagolitic alphabet was spread from Slavonia also.\nSporadic instances aside, Glagolitic survived beyond the 12th century as a primary script in Croatian lands alone, although from there a brief attempt at reintroduction was made in the West Slavic area in the 14th century through the Emmaus Benedictine Monastery in Prague, where it survived well into the 15th century, the last manuscript with Glagolitic script dating to 1450\u20131452. Its use for special applications continued in some Cyrillic areas, for example in the Bologna Psalter (1230\u20131241), the Sinodalna 895 Menaion (1260), the RPK 312 Gospel (13th), the Karakallou Epistolary (13th), the NBKM 933 Triodion (13th), the Skopje 1511 Octoechos (13th), the BRAN 4.9.39 Miscellany (13th), the Hilandar Chrysorrhoas (13th/14th), the Mazurin 1698 Pandects (13th/14th), the Sofia Psalter (1337), the SANU 55 Epistolary (1366\u20131367), the RNB F.\u043f.I.2 Psalter (14th), the \u010cajni\u010de Gospel (late 14th), the Radosav Miscellany (1444\u20131461), the Prague NM IX.F.38 Psalter (18th) and in the initials of many manuscripts of the Prophets with Commentary dating to the late 15th and early 16th centuries from Muscovy and Russia. Most later use in the Cyrillic world was for cryptographic purposes, such as in the Krushedol Miscellany (15th), the RNB F.\u043f.I.48 Prologue (1456), the Piskarev 59 Isaac (1472), the Shchukin 511 Miscellany (1511) and the Hludov Gospel (17th/18th).\nThe early development of the Glagolitic minuscule script alongside the increasingly square majuscule is poorly documented, but a mutual relationship evolved between the two varieties: the majuscule being used primarily for inscriptions and higher liturgical uses, and the minuscule being used in both religious and secular documents. Ignoring the problematic early Slavonian inscriptions, the use of the Glagolitic script at its peak before the Croatian-Ottoman wars corresponded roughly to the area that spoke the Chakavian dialect at the time, in addition to some adjacent Kajkavian regions within the Zagreb bishopric. As a result, vernacular impact on the liturgical language and script largely stems from Chakavian sub-dialects, although South Chakavian speakers mostly used Cyrillic, with Glagolitic only in certain parishes as a high liturgical script until a Glagolitic seminary was opened in Split in the 18th century, aside from a period of time in the parish of Ku\u010di\u0107e-Vini\u0161\u0107e.\nNotable angular majuscule manuscripts written in this period include: parts of \"Glagolita Clozianus\", the Ohrid epistolary, the Vienna folia, the Gr\u0161kovi\u0107 Fragment, the Mihanovi\u0107 Fragment, the First Vrbnik Breviary, the Vrbnik Statute, the Reims Gospel, the Missal of duke Novak, Hrvoje's Missal, and parts of the Kiev Missal.\nNotable minuscule manuscripts include: Greblo's quaresimal, \"Tuma\u010denje od muke\", the Kastav Statute, the Istrian Demarcation, and the Law code of Vinodol.\nDecline in Croatia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Ottoman Empire's repeated incursions into Croatia in the 15th and 16th centuries posed the first major existential threat to the script's survival. The Counter-Reformation, alongside other factors, led to the suppression of Glagolitic in Istria in the 16th\u201317th centuries as well as in the Zagreb archdiocese. The Latinisation of the coastal cities and islands took much longer, where the script continued to be used by the notaries of Krk into the first decade of the 19th century, with education by rural chapters on that island ensuring the survival of the script until well after their abolition by the Napoleon administration in the second decade of the 19th century. Novitiates continued to be educated primarily in the Glagolitic script as late as the third decade of the 19th century. But without centres of education, Latin script and Italian rapidly took over, so that very little was written in the script after the third quarter of the 19th century except for ceremonial purposes, and soon very few could read the cursive script apart from a few scholars.\nBecause knowledge of Glagolitic became rare even in academia, most efforts surrounding Glagolitic manuscripts in the late modern period focused on transliteration. For example, an ongoing project run by the \"Centre for Research in Glagolitism\" of the University of Zadar uses crowdsourcing to speed up the pace of transliterating cursive Glagolitic manuscripts.\nAcademic debates.\nThe exact nature of relationship between the Glagolitic alphabet and the Early Cyrillic alphabet, their order of development, and influence on each other has been a matter of great study, controversy, and dispute in Slavic studies since the 19th century.\nVersions of authorship and name.\nA once common belief was that the Glagolitic was created or used in the 4th century by St. Jerome, hence the alphabet was sometimes named \"Hieronymian\".\nIt has also acrophonically been called \"azbuka\" from the names of its first two letters, on the same model as \"alpha\" + \"beta\" (the same name can also refer to Cyrillic and in some modern languages it simply means \"alphabet\" in general). The Slavs of Great Moravia (present-day Slovakia and Moravia), Hungary, Slovenia and Slavonia were called \"Slov\u011bne\" at that time, which gives rise to the name \"Slovenish\" for the alphabet. Some other, rarer, names for this alphabet are Bukvitsa (from common Slavic word \"bukva\" meaning \"letter\", and a suffix \"-itsa\") and \"Illyrian\" (presumably similar to using the same anachronistic name for the Illyrian (Slavic) language).\nIn the Middle Ages, Glagolitsa was also known as \"St. Jerome's script\" due to a popular mediaeval legend (created by Croatian scribes in the 13th century) ascribing its invention to St. Jerome (342\u2013429). The legend was partly based on the saint's place of birth on the border of Dalmatia and Pannonia. He was viewed as a \"compatriot\" and anachronistically as belonging to the same ethnic group; this helped the spread of the cult of the saint in Dalmatia and was later used to support the idea of the presence of Slavic communities in the Eastern Adriatic Coast from ancient times, but the legend was probably firstly introduced for other reasons, like giving a more solid religious justification for the use of this script and Slavic liturgy. The theory nevertheless gained much popularity and spread to other countries before being resolutely disproven.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Until the end of the 18th century, a strange but widespread opinion dominated that the Glagolitic writing system, which was in use in Dalmatia and Istria along with neighboring islands, including the translation of the Holy Scripture, owe their existence to the famous church father St. Jerome. Knowing him as the author of the Latin Vulgate, considering him \u2013 by his own words, born on the border between Dalmatia and Pannonia (remembering that the Dalmatian borders extended well into Istria at that time) \u2013 presumed to be an Illyrian, the self-styled Slavic intellectuals in Dalmatia very early began to ascribe to him the invention of \"glagolitsa\", possibly with the intention of more successfully defending both Slavic writing and the Slavic holy service against prosecutions and prohibitions from Rome's hierarchy, thus using the opinion of the famous Latin Father of the Church to protect their church rituals which were inherited not from the Greeks Cyril and Methodius but unknown. We do not know who was the first to put in motion this unscientifically-based tradition about Jerome's authorship of the Glagolitic script and translation of the Holy Scripture, but in 1248 this version came to the knowledge of Pope Innocent IV. &lt;...&gt; The belief in Jerome as an inventor of the Glagolitic lasted many centuries, not only in his homeland, i.e. in Dalmatia and Croatia, not only in Rome, due to Slavs living there... but also in the West. In the 14th century, Croatian monks brought the legend to the Czechs, and even the Emperor Charles IV believed them.\u2014\u200a\nThe epoch of traditional attribution of the script to Jerome ended probably in 1812. In modern times, only certain marginal authors share this view, usually \"re-discovering\" one of the already-known mediaeval sources.\nCharacteristics.\nThe phonetic values of many of the letters are thought to have been displaced under Cyrillic influence or to have become confused through the early spread to different dialects, so the original values are not always clear. For instance, the letter \"yu\" \u2c23 is thought to have perhaps originally had the sound /u/ but was displaced by the adoption of the ligature \u2c16 under the influence of later Cyrillic \"o\u0475\", mirroring the Greek \"\u03bf\u03c5\". Other letters were late creations after a Cyrillic model. It should also be noted that \u2c21 corresponds to two different old Cyrillic letters (\u0462 and \ua656), present even in older manuscripts, and not to different later variants of the same Cyrillic letter in different times or places.\nThe following table lists each letter in its modern order, showing its Unicode representation, images of the letter in both the round and angular/squared variant forms, the corresponding modern Cyrillic letter, the approximate sound transcribed with the , the name, and suggestions for its origin. The Old Church Slavonic names follow the scientific transliteration, while the mostly similar Church Slavonic ones follow an approach more familiar to a generic English speaking reader. Several letters have no modern counterpart. The column for the angular variant, sometimes referred to as Croatian Glagolitic, is not complete as some of the letters were not used following the Croatian recension of Old Church Slavonic.\nAlphabet.\nIn older texts, \"uk\" (\u2c16) and three out of four \"yus\"es (\u2c27, \u2c28, \u2c29) also can be written as digraphs, in two separate parts.\nThe order of \"izhe\" (\u2c09, \u2c0a) and \"i\" (\u2c0b) varies from source to source, as does the order of the various forms of \"yus\" (\u2c24, \u2c27, \u2c28, \u2c29). Correspondence between Glagolitic \"izhe\" (\u2c09, \u2c0a) and \"i\" (\u2c0b) with Cyrillic \"\u0418\" and \"\u0406\" is unknown.\nThe Proto-Slavic language did not have the phoneme /f/, and the letters \"fert\" (\u2c17) and \"fita\" (\u2c2a) were used for transcribing words of Greek origin, and so was \"izhitsa\" (\u2c2b) for the Greek upsilon.\nUnicode.\nThe Glagolitic alphabet was added to the Unicode Standard in March 2005 with the release of version 4.1.\nThe Unicode block for Glagolitic is U+2C00\u2013U+2C5F.\nThe Glagolitic combining letters for Glagolitic Supplement block (U+1E000\u2013U+1E02F) was added to the Unicode Standard in June, 2016 with the release of version 9.0:\nPre-Glagolitic Slavic writing systems.\nA hypothetical pre-Glagolitic writing system is typically referred to as \"cherty i rezy\" (strokes and incisions) \u2013 but no material evidence of the existence of any pre-Glagolitic Slavic writing system has been found, except for a few brief and vague references in old chronicles and \"lives of the saints\". All artifacts presented as evidence of pre-Glagolitic Slavic inscriptions have later been identified as texts in known scripts and in known non-Slavic languages, or as fakes. The well-known Chernorizets Hrabar's \"strokes and incisions\" are usually considered to be a reference to a kind of property mark or alternatively fortune-telling signs. Some \"Ruthenian letters\" found in one version of St. Cyril's life are explainable as misspelled \"Syrian letters\" (in Slavic, the roots are very similar: \"rus-\" vs. \"sur-\" or \"syr-\"), etc.\nIn popular culture.\nGlagolitic has been the subject of a number of films, including the 2013 feature film \"\" and a number of short documentaries: \"Glagoljica - hrvatska Atlantida\" (2012), \"\u0421\u0432\u0435\u0449\u0435\u043d\u0430\u0442\u0430 \u0430\u0437\u0431\u0443\u043a\u0430\" (2016), the \"\u0160kolski sat\" episode \"Hrvatski jezik: Klju\u010d i simboli glagoljice\", \"Hrvatska golagoljica\", \"1483. tiskana prva knjiga u Hrvata Rimski glagoljski misal\", \"Senjski glagoljski misal\" and \"Misal Kneza Novaka\".\nTelevision series with Glagolitic include the background of \"Log Horizon season 2\" episode 25.\nGlagolitic is sometimes used in video games as a \"magical\" or \"ancient\" script. In 2007\u20132015 (through '), the Glagolitic script was the writing system used in the world of \"The Witcher\" video game series. In 2011, it was featured in Cateia Games' \"Tales from the Dragon Mountain The Strix\" and then in their '.\nIn 2020, Josip Mihaljevi\u0107 designed a free educational game combining Tetris with Glagolitic letters. A number of other Glagolitic educational games have been released:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIt is also featured on 1 euro cent, 2 euro cent and 5 euro cent coins minted in Croatia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12354", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12354", "title": "Greatest common divisor", "text": "Largest integer that divides given integers\nIn mathematics, the greatest common divisor (GCD), also known as greatest common factor (GCF), of two or more integers, which are not all zero, is the largest positive integer that divides each of the integers. For two integers \"x\", \"y\", the greatest common divisor of \"x\" and \"y\" is denoted formula_1. For example, the GCD of 8 and 12 is 4, that is, gcd(8, 12) = 4.\nIn the name \"greatest common divisor\", the adjective \"greatest\" may be replaced by \"highest\", and the word \"divisor\" may be replaced by \"factor\", so that other names include highest common factor, etc. Historically, other names for the same concept have included greatest common measure.\nThis notion can be extended to polynomials (see \"Polynomial greatest common divisor\") and other commutative rings (see \"\" below).\nOverview.\nDefinition.\nThe \"greatest common divisor\" (GCD) of integers a and b, at least one of which is nonzero, is the greatest positive integer d such that d is a divisor of both a and b; that is, there are integers e and f such that \"a\" = \"de\" and \"b\" = \"df\", and d is the largest such integer. The GCD of a and b is generally denoted gcd(\"a\", \"b\").\nWhen one of \"a\" and \"b\" is zero, the GCD is the absolute value of the nonzero integer: gcd(\"a\", 0) = gcd(0, \"a\") = |\"a\"|. This case is important as the terminating step of the Euclidean algorithm.\nThe above definition is unsuitable for defining gcd(0, 0), since there is no greatest integer \"n\" such that 0 \u00d7 \"n\" = 0. However, zero is its own greatest divisor if \"greatest\" is understood in the context of the divisibility relation, so gcd(0, 0) is commonly defined as 0. This preserves the usual identities for GCD, and in particular B\u00e9zout's identity, namely that gcd(\"a\", \"b\") generates the same ideal as {\"a\", \"b\"}. This convention is followed by many computer algebra systems. Nonetheless, some authors leave gcd(0, 0) undefined.\nThe GCD of a and b is their greatest positive common divisor in the preorder relation of divisibility. This means that the common divisors of a and b are exactly the divisors of their GCD. This is commonly proved by using either Euclid's lemma, the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, or the Euclidean algorithm. This is the meaning of \"greatest\" that is used for the generalizations of the concept of GCD.\nExample.\nThe number 54 can be expressed as a product of two integers in several different ways:\n formula_2\nThus the complete list of \"divisors\" of 54 is 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 18, 27, 54.\nSimilarly, the divisors of 24 are 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 24.\nThe numbers that these two lists have \"in common\" are the \"common divisors\" of 54 and 24, that is,\n formula_3\nOf these, the greatest is 6, so it is the \"greatest common divisor\":\n formula_4\nComputing all divisors of the two numbers in this way is usually not efficient, especially for large numbers that have many divisors. Much more efficient methods are described in \"\".\nCoprime numbers.\nTwo numbers are called relatively prime, or coprime, if their greatest common divisor equals 1. For example, 9 and 28 are coprime.\nA geometric view.\nFor example, a 24-by-60 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of: 1-by-1 squares, 2-by-2 squares, 3-by-3 squares, 4-by-4 squares, 6-by-6 squares or 12-by-12 squares. Therefore, 12 is the greatest common divisor of 24 and 60. A 24-by-60 rectangular area can thus be divided into a grid of 12-by-12 squares, with two squares along one edge (24/12 = 2) and five squares along the other (60/12 = 5).\nApplications.\nReducing fractions.\nThe greatest common divisor is useful for reducing fractions to the lowest terms. For example, gcd(42, 56) = 14, therefore,\n formula_5\nLeast common multiple.\nThe least common multiple of two integers that are not both zero can be computed from their greatest common divisor, by using the relation\n formula_6\nCalculation.\nUsing prime factorizations.\nGreatest common divisors can be computed by determining the prime factorizations of the two numbers and comparing factors. For example, to compute gcd(48, 180), we find the prime factorizations 48\u00a0=\u00a024\u00a0\u00b7\u00a031 and 180\u00a0=\u00a022\u00a0\u00b7\u00a032\u00a0\u00b7\u00a051; the GCD is then 2min(4,2)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a03min(1,2)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a05min(0,1) = 22\u00a0\u00b7\u00a031\u00a0\u00b7\u00a050 =\u00a012 The corresponding LCM is then\n2max(4,2)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a03max(1,2)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a05max(0,1) = \n24\u00a0\u00b7\u00a032\u00a0\u00b7\u00a051 =\u00a0720.\nIn practice, this method is only feasible for small numbers, as computing prime factorizations takes too long.\nEuclid's algorithm.\nThe method introduced by Euclid for computing greatest common divisors is based on the fact that, given two positive integers a and b such that \"a\" &gt; \"b\", the common divisors of a and b are the same as the common divisors of \"a\" \u2013 \"b\" and b.\nSo, Euclid's method for computing the greatest common divisor of two positive integers consists of replacing the larger number with the difference of the numbers, and repeating this until the two numbers are equal: that is their greatest common divisor.\nFor example, to compute gcd(48,18), one proceeds as follows:\n formula_7\nSo gcd(48, 18) = 6.\nThis method can be very slow if one number is much larger than the other. So, the variant that follows is generally preferred.\nEuclidean algorithm.\nA more efficient method is the \"Euclidean algorithm\", a variant in which the difference of the two numbers a and b is replaced by the \"remainder\" of the Euclidean division (also called \"division with remainder\") of a by b.\nDenoting this remainder as \"a\" mod \"b\", the algorithm replaces (\"a\", \"b\") with (\"b\", \"a\" mod \"b\") repeatedly until the pair is (\"d\", 0), where d is the greatest common divisor.\nFor example, to compute gcd(48,18), the computation is as follows:\n formula_8\nThis again gives gcd(48, 18) = 6.\nBinary GCD algorithm.\nThe binary GCD algorithm is a variant of Euclid's algorithm that is specially adapted to the binary representation of the numbers, which is used in most computers. \nThe binary GCD algorithm differs from Euclid's algorithm essentially by dividing by two every even number that is encountered during the computation. Its efficiency results from the fact that, in binary representation, testing parity consists of testing the right-most digit, and dividing by two consists of removing the right-most digit.\nThe method is as follows, starting with \"a\" and \"b\" that are the two positive integers whose GCD is sought.\nStep 1 determines d as the highest power of 2 that divides \"a\" and \"b\", and thus their greatest common divisor. None of the steps changes the set of the odd common divisors of \"a\" and \"b\". This shows that when the algorithm stops, the result is correct. The algorithm stops eventually, since each steps divides at least one of the operands by at least 2. Moreover, the number of divisions by 2 and thus the number of subtractions is at most the total number of digits.\nExample: (\"a\", \"b\", \"d\") = (48, 18, 0) \u2192 (24, 9, 1) \u2192 (12, 9, 1) \u2192 (6, 9, 1) \u2192 (3, 9, 1) \u2192 (3, 3, 1) ; the original GCD is thus the product 6 of 2\"d\" = 21 and \"a\" = \"b\" = 3.\nThe binary GCD algorithm is particularly easy to implement and particularly efficient on binary computers. Its computational complexity is\n formula_10\nThe square in this complexity comes from the fact that division by 2 and subtraction take a time that is proportional to the number of bits of the input.\nThe computational complexity is usually given in terms of the length \"n\" of the input. Here, this length is \"n\" = log \"a\" + log \"b\", and the complexity is thus\n formula_11.\nLehmer's GCD algorithm.\nLehmer's algorithm is based on the observation that the initial quotients produced by Euclid's algorithm can be determined based on only the first few digits; this is useful for numbers that are larger than a computer word. In essence, one extracts initial digits, typically forming one or two computer words, and runs Euclid's algorithms on these smaller numbers, as long as it is guaranteed that the quotients are the same with those that would be obtained with the original numbers. The quotients are collected into a small 2-by-2 transformation matrix (a matrix of single-word integers) to reduce the original numbers. This process is repeated until numbers are small enough that the binary algorithm (see below) is more efficient.\nThis algorithm improves speed, because it reduces the number of operations on very large numbers, and can use hardware arithmetic for most operations. In fact, most of the quotients are very small, so a fair number of steps of the Euclidean algorithm can be collected in a 2-by-2 matrix of single-word integers. When Lehmer's algorithm encounters a quotient that is too large, it must fall back to one iteration of Euclidean algorithm, with a Euclidean division of large numbers.\nOther methods.\nIf \"a\" and \"b\" are both nonzero, the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\" can be computed by using least common multiple (LCM) of \"a\" and\u00a0\"b\":\n formula_12,\nbut more commonly the LCM is computed from the GCD.\nUsing Thomae's function \"f\",\n formula_13\nwhich generalizes to \"a\" and \"b\" rational numbers or commensurable real numbers.\nKeith Slavin has shown that for odd \"a\" \u2265 1:\n formula_14\nwhich is a function that can be evaluated for complex \"b\". Wolfgang Schramm has shown that\n formula_15\nis an entire function in the variable \"b\" for all positive integers \"a\" where \"c\"\"d\"(\"k\") is Ramanujan's sum.\nComplexity.\nThe computational complexity of the computation of greatest common divisors has been widely studied. If one uses the Euclidean algorithm and the elementary algorithms for multiplication and division, the computation of the greatest common divisor of two integers of at most n bits is \"O\"(\"n\"2). This means that the computation of greatest common divisor has, up to a constant factor, the same complexity as the multiplication.\nHowever, if a fast multiplication algorithm is used, one may modify the Euclidean algorithm for improving the complexity, but the computation of a greatest common divisor becomes slower than the multiplication. More precisely, if the multiplication of two integers of \"n\" bits takes a time of \"T\"(\"n\"), then the fastest known algorithm for greatest common divisor has a complexity \"O\"(\"T\"(\"n\") log \"n\"). This implies that the fastest known algorithm has a complexity of \"O\"(\"n\" (log \"n\")2).\nPrevious complexities are valid for the usual models of computation, specifically multitape Turing machines and random-access machines.\nThe computation of the greatest common divisors belongs thus to the class of problems solvable in quasilinear time. \"A fortiori\", the corresponding decision problem belongs to the class P of problems solvable in polynomial time. The GCD problem is not known to be in NC, and so there is no known way to parallelize it efficiently; nor is it known to be P-complete, which would imply that it is unlikely to be possible to efficiently parallelize GCD computation. Shallcross et al. showed that a related problem (EUGCD, determining the remainder sequence arising during the Euclidean algorithm) is NC-equivalent to the problem of integer linear programming with two variables; if either problem is in NC or is P-complete, the other is as well. Since NC contains NL, it is also unknown whether a space-efficient algorithm for computing the GCD exists, even for nondeterministic Turing machines.\nAlthough the problem is not known to be in NC, parallel algorithms asymptotically faster than the Euclidean algorithm exist; the fastest known deterministic algorithm is by Chor and Goldreich, which (in the CRCW-PRAM model) can solve the problem in \"O\"(\"n\"/log \"n\") time with \"n\"1+\"\u03b5\" processors. Randomized algorithms can solve the problem in \"O\"((log \"n\")2) time on formula_16 processors (this is superpolynomial).\n This formula is often used to compute least common multiples: one first computes the GCD with Euclid's algorithm and then divides the product of the given numbers by their GCD.\nProperties.\nformula_18 where formula_19 is the \"p\"-adic valuation. (sequence in the OEIS)\nProbabilities and expected value.\nIn 1972, James E. Nymann showed that \"k\" integers, chosen independently and uniformly from {1, ..., \"n\"}, are coprime with probability 1/\"\u03b6\"(\"k\") as \"n\" goes to infinity, where \"\u03b6\" refers to the Riemann zeta function. (See coprime for a derivation.) This result was extended in 1987 to show that the probability that \"k\" random integers have greatest common divisor \"d\" is \"d\"\u2212\"k\"/\u03b6(\"k\").\nUsing this information, the expected value of the greatest common divisor function can be seen (informally) to not exist when \"k\" = 2. In this case the probability that the GCD equals \"d\" is \"d\"\u22122/\"\u03b6\"(2), and since \"\u03b6\"(2) = \u03c02/6 we have\n formula_20\nThis last summation is the harmonic series, which diverges. However, when \"k\" \u2265 3, the expected value is well-defined, and by the above argument, it is\n formula_21\nFor \"k\" = 3, this is approximately equal to 1.3684. For \"k\" = 4, it is approximately\u00a01.1106.\nIn commutative rings.\nThe notion of greatest common divisor can more generally be defined for elements of an arbitrary commutative ring, although in general there need not exist one for every pair of elements.\nWith this definition, two elements a and b may very well have several greatest common divisors, or none at all. If R is an integral domain, then any two GCDs of a and b must be associate elements, since by definition either one must divide the other. Indeed, if a GCD exists, any one of its associates is a GCD as well.\nExistence of a GCD is not assured in arbitrary integral domains. However, if R is a unique factorization domain or any other GCD domain, then any two elements have a GCD. If R is a Euclidean domain in which euclidean division is given algorithmically (as is the case for instance when \"R\" = \"F\"[\"X\"] where F is a field, or when R is the ring of Gaussian integers), then greatest common divisors can be computed using a form of the Euclidean algorithm based on the division procedure.\nThe following is an example of an integral domain with two elements that do not have a GCD:\n formula_22\nThe elements 2 and formula_23 are two maximal common divisors (that is, any common divisor which is a multiple of 2 is associated to 2, the same holds for formula_23, but they are not associated, so there is no greatest common divisor of a and\u00a0\"b\".\nCorresponding to the B\u00e9zout property we may, in any commutative ring, consider the collection of elements of the form \"pa\" + \"qb\", where p and q range over the ring. This is the ideal generated by a and b, and is denoted simply (\"a\", \"b\"). In a ring all of whose ideals are principal (a principal ideal domain or PID), this ideal will be identical with the set of multiples of some ring element \"d\"; then this d is a greatest common divisor of a and \"b\". But the ideal (\"a\", \"b\") can be useful even when there is no greatest common divisor of a and \"b\". (Indeed, Ernst Kummer used this ideal as a replacement for a GCD in his treatment of Fermat's Last Theorem, although he envisioned it as the set of multiples of some hypothetical, or \"ideal\", ring element d, whence the ring-theoretic term.)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12357", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12357", "title": "Gazpacho", "text": "Spanish cold soup dish\nGazpacho () or gaspacho (), also called Andalusian gazpacho (from Spanish \"gazpacho andaluz\"), is a cold soup and drink made of raw, blended vegetables. It originated in the southern regions of the Iberian Peninsula and spread into other areas. Gazpacho is widely eaten in Spain and Portugal, particularly in summer, since it is refreshing and cool.\nAlthough there are other recipes called \"gazpacho\", such as \"gazpacho manchego\", the standard usage implies a soup. There are also a number of dishes that are closely related and often considered variants thereof, such as ajoblanco, salmorejo, pipirrana, porra antequerana (closer to a bread soup), and .\nHistory.\nThere are many theories as to the origin of gazpacho, including one that says it was a soup of bread, olive oil, water, vinegar, peas and garlic that arrived in Spain with the Romans. The word \"gazpacho\" may come from the Latin adjective caccabaceus, derived from caccabus (\"cauldron\"), attested in the works of Tertulian, Zeno of Verona and others. This word was applied in ancient Rome to a type of bread very similar to the torta de gazpacho. Once in Spain, it became a part of southern cuisine, particularly in C\u00f3rdoba, Seville or Granada Castilian kingdoms, using stale bread, garlic, olive oil, salt, and vinegar, similar to ajoblanco. During the 19th century, red gazpacho was created when tomatoes were added to the ingredients. This version spread internationally and remains commonly known.\nThere are many modern variations of gazpacho with avocados, cucumbers, parsley, strawberries, watermelon, grapes, meat stock, seafood, and other ingredients instead of tomatoes and bread.\nIngredients and preparation.\nMost gazpacho includes stale bread, tomato, cucumbers, bell peppers, garlic, olive oil, wine vinegar, water, and salt. Northern recipes often include cumin and/or (smoked sweet paprika).\nTraditionally, gazpacho was made by pounding the vegetables in a mortar with a pestle; this more laborious method is still sometimes used as it helps keep the gazpacho cool and avoids the foam and silky consistency of smoothie versions made in blenders or food processors. A traditional way of preparation is to pound garlic cloves in a mortar, add a little soaked stale bread, then olive oil and salt, to make a paste. Next, very ripe tomatoes and vinegar are added to this paste. In the days before refrigeration, the gazpacho was left in an unglazed earthenware pot to cool by evaporation, with the addition of some water.\nGazpacho may be served alone or with garnishes, such as hard-boiled eggs, chopped ham (in the salmorejo variety from C\u00f3rdoba), chopped almonds, cumin crushed with mint, orange segments, finely chopped green bell peppers, onion, tomato or cucumber. In Extremadura, local ham was added to the gazpacho itself rather than as a garnish; this is called . Andalusian sources say that gazpacho should be slightly chilled, but not iced.\nVariations.\nThe ingredients, texture, and thickness of gazpacho vary regionally and between different cooks.\nSimilar cold raw soups such as arjamolho in Portugal, porra antequerana and ajoblanco, are also popular in Andalusia, although not as widespread as gazpacho. Gazpacho and salmorejo are especially similar since they are both tomato-based cold soups that are widely popular in Spain; the main difference between gazpacho and salmorejo is the culinary technique used since gazpacho is a soup whereas salmorejo is an emulsion. In addition, while both dishes share the main ingredients of tomato, olive oil, bread, and garlic, gazpacho can also be prepared with cucumber, peppers, and vinegar, whereas salmorejo cannot.\n\"Gazpacho manchego\", despite its name, is a meat stew, served hot, not a variation on the cold vegetable soup.\nIn Spain.\nThe original recipe using bread, water, vinegar, oil, and salt is traditional in the Iberian Peninsula, perhaps going back to Roman times. Every central and southern region has its own variety. The humble gazpacho became a very deeply rooted food for peasants and shepherds in Spain. The basic gazpacho gave rise to many variants, some also called gazpacho, others not; some authors have tried to classify all these variations. Gazpachos may be classified by colour: the most usual red ones (which contain tomato), white ones (which contain no tomato, but include dried fruits), and green ones (which are white but contain some spices that make them green). These variants have their basic ingredients in common, including garlic paste which works as an emulsifier, bread, olive oil, vinegar and salt. In addition to the traditional ingredients, red fruits such as strawberries, melon, etc., may be added, making the gazpacho a bit sweeter. Gazpacho may be served as a starter, main dish, or tapa.\nArranque rote\u00f1o.\nA popular variation comes from the town of Rota in the province of C\u00e1diz. During times of drought, there was not enough water to make gazpacho; thus, arranque has the same ingredients as gazpacho, but requires less water and bread, making it a sort of cream. Some people add more bread until it takes on the consistency of a dip.\nExtremaduran variations.\nIn Extremadura, gazpachos are a kind of pur\u00e9e or thick gazpacho known as \"cojondongo\", or \"cojondongo del ga\u00f1\u00e1n\", made of breadcrumbs, garlic, oil, and vinegar, then topped with chopped onions, tomato and peppers.\nLa Mancha variations.\nGazpacho manchego, as its name implies, is made in the east region of La Mancha, in Albacete and nearby areas, and is popular in other areas in the center and southwest of the country.\nIt is a meat stew, whose main ingredients are small game animals or birds such as rabbit, hare, quail, or pigeon, and flatbread, and may include garlic, tomatoes, and mushrooms. It is cooked in a cauldron and served hot. Another well-known variant in La Mancha is gazpacho de pastor or galiano.\nSome other hot meat or fish dishes from other regions are called gazpacho (gazpacho jumillano, gazpacho de Yecla, gazpacho de Requena, etc.)\nCastilian variations.\nGazpacho is often eaten during the very hot and dry summers in Castilla y Le\u00f3n. The gazpacho made in La Mora\u00f1a in the province of \u00c1vila has large pieces of vegetables floating in a watery soup.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12359", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12359", "title": "Gopher (disambiguation)", "text": "A gopher, also known as a \"pocket gopher\" (family Geomyidae), is a burrowing rodent native to North America and Central America.\nGopher may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "12361", "revid": "41412902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12361", "title": "Gnome", "text": "Diminutive spirit in Renaissance magic and alchemy\nA gnome () is a mythological creature and diminutive spirit in Renaissance magic and alchemy, introduced by Paracelsus in the 16th century and widely adopted by authors, including those of modern fantasy literature. They are typically depicted as small humanoids who live underground. Gnome characteristics are reinterpreted to suit various storytellers and artists.\nParacelsus's gnome is recognized to have derived from the German miners' legend about or , the \"metallurgical or mineralogical demon\", according to Georg Agricola (1530), also called (literal Latinization of \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\" \n \"mountain manikin\") by Agriocola in a later work (1549), and described by other names such as (sing. ; Latinization of German ). Agricola recorded that according to the legends of that profession, these mining spirits acted as miming and laughing pranksters who sometimes threw pebbles at miners, but could also reward them by depositing a rich vein of silver ore.\nParacelsus also called his gnomes occasionally by these names (\"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\", etc.) in the German publications of his work (1567). Paracelsus claimed gnomes measured 2 spans (18 inches) in height, whereas Agricola had them to be 3 \"dodrans\" (3 spans, 27 inches) tall.\nThe name of the element cobalt descends from , a 16th century German miners' term for unwanted ore (cobalt-zinc ore, or possibly the noxious cobaltite and smaltite), related as mischief perpetrated by the gnome Kobel (cf. ). This \"Kobel\" is a synonym of \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\", technically not the same as kobold, but there is confusion or conflation between them.\nThe terms \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\"/\"Bergm\u00e4nnchen\" or \"Berggeist\" are often used in German publications as the generic, overall term for the mine spirits told in \"miners' legends\" ().\nLawn ornaments crafted as gnomes were introduced during the 19th century, growing in popularity during the 20th century as garden gnomes.\nEtymology.\nThe word comes from Renaissance Latin , (pl. ) which first appears in \"A Book on Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salamanders, and on the Other Spirits\" by Paracelsus, published posthumously in Nysa in 1566.\nThe term may be an original invention of Paracelsus, possibly deriving the term from Latin , itself representing a Greek , approximated by \"\", literally \"earth-dweller\". This is characterized by the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) as a case of \"blunder\", presumably referring to the omission of the \"\u0113\" to arrive at \"gnomus\". However, this conjectural derivation is not substantiated by any known prior attestation in literature, and one commentator suggests the truth will never be known, short of a discovery of correspondence from the author.\nParacelsus.\nParacelsus uses \"Gnomi\" as a synonym of \"Pygm\u00e6i\" and classifies them as earth elementals. He describes them as two spans tall. They are able to move through solid earth, as easily as humans move through air, and hence described as being like a \"spirit\". However the elementals eat, drink and talk (like humans), distinguishing them from spirits.\nAccording to Paracelsus's views, the so-called dwarf () is merely \"monstra\" (deformities) of the earth spirit gnome.\nNote that Paracelsus also frequently resorts to circumlocutions like \"mountain people\" (') or \"mountain manikins\" (\"'\" [\"sic\"]) to denote the \"gnomi\" in the German edition (1567).\nPrecursors.\nThere was a belief in early modern Germany about beings that lurked in the mines, known as (var. , ), equatable to what Paracelsus called \"gnomes\". Paracelsus's contemporary, Georgius Agricola, being a supervisor of mines, collected his well-versed knowledge of this mythical being in his monograph, \"De amantibus subterraneis\" (rect\u00e9 \"De animatibus subterraneis\", 1549). The (corrected) title suggests the subject to be \"subterranean animate beings\". It was regarded as a treatise on the \"Mountain spirit\" ( by the Brothers Grimm, in \"Deutsche Sagen\".\nAgricola is the earliest and probably most reliable source on Berggeist, then known as \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\", etc. Agricola's contemporary Johannes Mathesius, a Lutheran reformist theologian, in \"Sarepta Oder Bergpostill\" (1562) uses these various mine-lore terminology in his German sermon, so that the noxious ore which Agricola called is clarified as that which German miners called (also , ), and a demon the Germans called \"kobel\" was held responsible for the mischief of its existence, according to the preacher. The \"kobel\" demon was also blamed for the \"\" [\"sic\"] or horse's poison (cf. hippomanes, ).\nAgricola.\nAgricola, in his earlier Latin work \"Bermanus, sive, de re metallica\" (first printed 1530, reprinted 1546, etc.), did delve into a limited discussion on the \"metallurgical or mine demon\" () touching on the \"Corona rosacea\" mine disaster (cf. ) and the framework of Psellosian demonology (cf. ). A Latin-German gloss in later editions identify the being he called as code for German ( [\"sic\"], \"mountain manikin\", general term for earth spirit or mine spirit).\nMuch more details were presented in Agricola's later Latin work \"De animatibus subterraneis\" (1549) (cf. ), known as a monograph on (\"mountain spirit\") in the Grimms' \"Deutsche Sagen\". The equivalent German appellations of the demons/spirits were made available by the subsequent gloss published 1563. Agricola here refers to the \"gnome/mine spirit\" by a variety of other terms and phrases, such as (\"mountain manikin\", i.e., ) or Greek/Latin / () .\nThe pertinent gloss, also quoted by Jacob Grimm, states that the more ferocious of the \"underground demons\" () were called in German or \"mountain-devil\", while the milder ones were called . And the \"mine demon\" aka Bergm\u00e4nnlein ( [\"sic\"]) is somehow responsible for depositing rich veins of ore (\")\" (specifically rich silver ore).\nA different entry in the gloss reveals that the \"metallurgical demon\" (\"daemon metallicus\") or \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\" is somehow responsible for leaving a rich vein of ore (), specifically a rich vein of silver.\nAccording to Agricola in (1549), these mountain-cave demons were called by the same name, , in both Greek (i.e. ) and German (i.e. var. ). The Latin form is appended in the margin (pl. , sing. ). They earned such names due to their alleged habits of aping or mimicking humans. They have the penchant to laugh, and pretend to act like they are doing something meaningful, without actually accomplishing anything.\nIn classical Greek literature, () refers to an \"impudent rogue\", or in more modern parlance, \"joker\" or \"trickster\". The chemist J. W. Mellor (1935) had suggested \"mime\".\nThese were otherwise called the , literally translatable into German as , or English as \"mountain manikin\" due to their small stature (about 2 feet). They had the appearance of old age, and dressed like miners, in laced/filleted shirt and leather apron around the loins. Although they may pelt miners with gravel/pebbles they did no real harm, unless they were first provoked.\nAgricola goes on to add there are similar to the beings which the Germans called (singular: ; , var. ), which are amicable demons that are rarely seen, since they have business at their home taking care of livestock. A or is elsewhere explained as not necessarily a mountain spirit, but more generic, and may haunt forests and fields. The Hoovers render these as \"goblins\".\nAgricola finally adds these resemble the (trolls?) as they are called especially by the Swedes, said to shapeshift into the guise of human males and females, and sometimes made to serve men.\nRosenkranz mine, Annaberg.\nPurportedly a mountain demon incident caused 12 fatalities at a mine named Rosenkrans at Anneberg or rather Rosenkranz or Rosenkrone () at Annaberg-Buchholz, in the Ore Mountains () in Saxony. The demon took on the guise of the horse, and killed the twelve men with its breath, according to Agricola.\nDemonology.\nAgricola has a passage in \"Bermanus\" which is quoted by a modern scholar as relevant to the study of his contemporary Paracelsus. The passage contains the line basically repeated by Olaus, as \"there exist in ore-bearing regions six kinds of demon more malicious than the rest\".\nThis is probably misstated or misleading, since \"Bermanus\" cites Psellus, who devised a classification of six demon classes, where clearly it is not all six, but just the fifth class of subterranean demons which are relevant to mining.\nThis demon class is also equatable to Agricola's and () according to commentators.\nIt has also been noted that Agricola distinguished the \"mountain devil\", exemplified by R\u00fcbezahl with the small-statured ; although the popular notion was that R\u00fcbezahl was indeed lord of the gnomes, as told in folktales around the Giant Mountains () region in Silesia, published by 18th century folktale collector Mus\u00e4us.\nAgricola explaining that the \"mine demon\" or somehow deposited \"rich mines\" was mentioned above.\nCobalt ore.\nAgricola knew of certain noxious unwanted ores the German miners called , though he generally referred to it by the Greek term, . This / has conventionally been interpreted as referring to cobalt\u2013zinc ore, but Agricola ascribes to it corrosive dangers to the miners' feet, so modern commentators have suggested a better candidate to be smaltite, a cobalt and nickel arsenide mixture which presents corrosive properties. This ore, which defied being smelted by the metallurgy of that time, may also have been cobaltite, composed of cobalt, arsenic, and sulfur.\nThe presence of this nuisance ore was blamed on the similar-sounding mine spirits, as Mathesius noted in his preaching. The inferred etymology of deriving from , which Mathesius does not quite elocute, was explicitly articulated by Johannes Beckmann in (translated into English as \"The History of Inventions, discoveries and origins\", 1797).\nThe spirit that was possibly the namesake of the ore is characterized as a \"gnome or a goblin\" by science writer Philip Ball. However, 20th century dictionaries had suggested derivation from , for example, Webster's in 1911 which did not distinguish from and lumped them together, and the OED which conjectured that the ore and the spirit / was the same word. An alternative etymology deriving ore from , a type of bucket mentioned by Agricola, has been suggested by Karl M\u00fcller-Fraureuth. Peter Wothers suggests that \"cobalt\" could derive (without connection to Agricola) from \"cobathia\" for noxious smoke.\nOlaus Magnus.\nThe erudite Swedish Olaus Magnus in his (1555) also provides a chapter on \"demons in the mines\". Although Olaus uses the term \"demon\" () and not the uninvented coinage \"gnome\", the accompanying woodcut he provided (reproduced here) has been represented as \"gnome\" in modern reference sources.\nPraetorius.\nJohannes Praetorius in \"Anthropodemus Plutonicus\" (1666) devotes a chapter of considerable length to the beings he calls or \"earth people\", and follows Agricola to a large extent. Thus he considers earth spirits to be of two types, one more evil and sinister looking, the other more benevolent and known as (lit.\u2009'little mountain man') or . He gives the measurement of what he calls the at , perhaps shy of one and a half feet.\nThe mention of \"kobolde\" here as a name for the underground spirit is an unresolved contradiction to Praetorius dedicating a wholly separate chapter on the kobold as house sprite with a separate frontispiece art labeled \"8. Hau\u00dfm\u00e4nner/Kobolde/G\u00fctgen\" for the house spirits.\nFolklore examples.\nThe anecdote of the \"Rosenkranz\" mine localized in Saxony was already given above in . This and other near modern attestations are given in Wolfersdorf's anthology (1968) above.\nGerman lore regarding gnomes or (mine spirits) depicts them as beneficial creatures, at least if they are treated respectfully, and lead miners to rich veins of ore.\nBergm\u00f6nch of Harz and mine light.\nThe silver thaler minted by Duke Henry the Younger of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (first minted 1539) which features a \"wild man\" (see image) was seen to reassert his claim of complete ownership of the local silver and forest resources of the Harz Mountains, probably depicting the supernatural that miners believed led them to the whereabouts of silver ore. Even though the wild man above surface could be a vague supernatural guide, it is pointed out that it must be the burrowing underground which guides miners to exact spots. In the Harz area, it is a or \"mountain monk\" who uses the so-called \"mining light\" ( or ) to guide miners to their quarry or to their exit. Contemporary writing by the priest Hardanus Hake in his \"Bergchronik\" (1583) records the belief that when the Walkenried Abbey operated the mining operation at Wildemann, it was actually being built and run by the or (i.e. gnomes) that assumed the form of monks.\nThe lantern he holds is apparently an ignited lump of tallow (). It is also said that the Bergm\u00f6nch was originally a mine supervisor who begged God to let him continue oversight of mines after death. If ignored it will angrily appear in its giant true form, with eyes as large as cartwheels, his silver lantern measuring a German bushel or .\nCommunication through noises.\nNineteenth-century miners in Bohemia and Hungary reported hearing knocking in the mines. The mining trade there interpreted such noises as warnings from the kobolds to not go in that direction. Although the Hungarian (or Czech) term was not given by the informant, and called \"kobolds\" of these mines, they were stated as the equivalents of the \"Berggeist\" of the Germans.\nNineteenth-century German miners also talked of the , who appeared as small black men, scouting ahead of miners with a hammer, and with their banging sound indicating whether veins of ore, or breaks in the veins called 'faults', and the more knocks, the richer the vein lay ahead.\nThere is also a experiential report of a German mine sprite communicating residents and visiting their house (cf. ).\nSwitzerland.\nThe gnomes of Swiss folklore are also associated with riches of the mines. They are said to have caused the landslide that destroyed the Swiss village of Plurs in 1618 \u2013 the villagers had become wealthy from a local gold mine created by the gnomes, who poured liquid gold down into a vein for the benefit of humans, and were corrupted by this newfound prosperity, which greatly offended the gnomes.\nFolkloristics.\nGrimm discusses the Bergm\u00e4nnlein somewhat under the subsection of Dwarfs (\"Zwerge\"), arguing that the dwarf's \"Nebelkappe\" (known as Tarnkappe in the \"Nibelungenlied\") slipped from being known as a cape or cloak covering the body in earlier times, into being thought of as caps or head coverings in the post-medieval era. As an example, he cites the Bergm\u00e4nnlein wearing a pointed hat, according to Rollenhagen's poem \"Froschmeuseler\".\nAs can be glimpsed by this example, the approach of Grimm's \"\" is to regard the lore of the various \"m\u00e4nnlein\" or specifically \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\" as essentially derivatives of the \"Zwerge\"/\"dvergr\" of pagan Germanic mythologies.\nIn the 1960s there developed a general controversy between this \"mythological school\" and its opponents over how to interpret so-called \"miner's legends\". What sparked the controversy was not over the \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\" type tale per se, but over Grimms' \"Three Miners of Kuttenberg\", who are trapped underground but supernaturally maintain longevity through prayer. Siegfried Kube (1960) argued the tale was based on ancient mythology, i.e., pagan alpine worship. This was countered by Wolfgang Br\u00fcckner (1961) who regarded the tale as inspired by medieval Catholic notion of the purgatory. Whereas Ina-Maria Greverus (1962), presented yet a different view, that it was not based on organized church doctrine, but a world-view and faith in the miner's unique microcosm.\nGreverus at least in her 1962 piece, centered her argument on the \"Berggeist\" (instead of \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\"). Grimm also uses the \"Berggeist\" apparently as a type of \"Zwerg\", but there has been issued a caveat that the meaning of the term \"Berggeist\" according to Grimm may not necessarily coincide with the meaning used by the proletarian Greverus. Gerhard Heilfurth and Greverus's \"Bergbau und Bergmann\" (1967) amply discuss the \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\".\nThe collection of tales under the classification of \"Berggeist\" was already anticipated as far back as Friedrich Wrubel (1883). Later Franz Kirnbauer published \"Bergmanns-Sagen\" (1954), a collection of miner's legends which basically adopted Wrubel's four-part classification, except Wrubel's Part 2 was retitled as one about \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein\".\nIn Karl M\u00fcllenhoff's anthology (1845), legends No. 443 \"Das Gl\u00fcck der Grafen Ranzau\" and No. 444 \"Josias Ranzaus gefeites Schwert\" feature the \"Bergm\u00e4nnlein-m\u00e4nnchen\" or its female form \"Bergfr\u00e4uchen\".\nOther collected works also bear \"Berggeist-sagen\" in the title, such as the collection of legends in Lower Saxony by Wolfersdorf (1968).\nCultural references.\nIn Romanticism and modern fairy tales.\nThe English word is attested from the early 18th century. Gnomes are used in Alexander Pope's \"The Rape of the Lock\". The creatures from this mock-epic are small, celestial creatures that were prudish women in their past lives, and now spend all of eternity looking out for prudish women (in parallel to the guardian angels in Catholic belief). Other uses of the term \"gnome\" remain obscure until the early 19th century, when it is taken up by authors of Romanticist collections of fairy tales and becomes mostly synonymous with the older word \"goblin\".\nPope's stated source, the 1670 French satire \"Comte de Gabalis\" by Nicolas-Pierre-Henri de Montfaucon de Villars, the abbot of Villars, describes gnomes as such:\nThe Earth is filled almost to the center with \"Gnomes\" or \"Pharyes\", a people of small stature, the guardians of treasures, of mines, and of precious stones. They are ingenious, friends of men, and easie to be commandded. They furnish the children of the \"Sages\" with as much money, as they have need of; and never ask any other reward of their services, than the glory of being commanded. The \"Gnomides\" or wives of these \"Gnomes\" or \"Pharyes\", are little, but very handsom; and their habit marvellously curious.\nDe Villars used the term \"gnomide\" to refer to female gnomes (often \"gnomid\" in English translations). Modern fiction instead uses the word \"gnomess\" to refer to female gnomes.\nIn 19th-century fiction, the chthonic gnome became a sort of antithesis to the more airy or luminous fairy. Nathaniel Hawthorne in \"Twice-Told Tales\" (1837) contrasts the two in \"Small enough to be king of the fairies, and ugly enough to be king of the gnomes\" (cited after OED). Similarly, gnomes are contrasted to elves, as in William Cullen Bryant's \"Little People of the Snow\" (1877), which has \"let us have a tale of elves that ride by night, with jingling reins, or gnomes of the mine\" (cited after OED).\nThe Russian composer Mussorgsky produced a movement in his work \"Pictures at an Exhibition\", (1874) named \"Gnomus\" (Latin for \"The Gnome\"). It is written to sound as if a gnome is moving about.\nFranz Hartmann in 1895 satirized materialism in an allegorical tale entitled \"Unter den Gnomen im Untersberg\". The English translation appeared in 1896 as \"Among the Gnomes: An Occult Tale of Adventure in the Untersberg\". In this story, the \"Gnomes\" are still clearly subterranean creatures, guarding treasures of gold within the Untersberg mountain.\nAs a figure of 19th-century fairy tales, the term gnome became largely synonymous with other terms for \"little people\" by the 20th century, such as \"goblin\", \"brownie\", \"leprechaun\" and other instances of the household spirit type, losing its strict association with earth or the underground world.\nDerivative uses.\nGarden gnomes.\nAfter World War II (with early references, in ironic use, from the late 1930s) the diminutive figurines introduced as lawn ornaments during the 19th century came to be known as garden gnomes. The image of the gnome changed further during the 1960s to 1970s, when the first plastic garden gnomes were manufactured. These gnomes followed the style of the 1937 depiction of the seven dwarves in \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" by Disney. This \"Disneyfied\" image of the gnome was built upon by the illustrated children's book classic \"Gnomes\" (1976), in the original Dutch \"Leven en werken van de Kabouter\", by author Wil Huygen and artist Rien Poortvliet, followed in 1981 by The Secret Book of Gnomes. Garden gnomes share a resemblance to the Scandinavian tomte and nisse, and the Swedish term \"tomte\" can be translated as \"gnome\" in English.\nGnome-themed parks.\nSeveral gnome themed entertainment parks exist. Notable ones are:\nGnome parades.\nGnome parades are held annually at Atlanta's Inman Park Festival. Numerous one-off gnome parades have been held, including in Savannah, Georgia (April 2012) and Cleveland, Ohio (May 2011).\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12365", "revid": "31247839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12365", "title": "Googolplex", "text": "Number ten to the power of a googol\nA googolplex is the large number 1010100, that is, 10 raised to the power of a googol. If written out in ordinary decimal notation, it would be 1 followed by a googol (10100) zeroes \u2013 a physically impossible number to write explicitly.\nHistory.\nIn 1920, Edward Kasner's nine-year-old nephew, Milton Sirotta, coined the term \"googol\", which is 10100, and then proposed the further term \"googolplex\" to be \"one, followed by writing zeroes until you get tired\". Kasner decided to adopt a more formal definition because \"different people get tired at different times and it would never do to have Carnera [be] a better mathematician than Dr. Einstein, simply because he had more endurance and could write for longer\". It thus became standardized to 10(10100), which is usually written as 1010100 using the conventional interpretation for serial exponentiation.\nSize.\nA typical book can be printed with one million zeros (around 400 pages with 50 lines per page and 50 zeros per line). Therefore, it requires 1094 such books to print all the zeros of a googolplex (that is, printing a googol zeros).\nIf each book had a mass of 100 grams, all of them would have a total mass of 1093 kilograms. In comparison, Earth's mass is kilograms, the mass of the Milky Way galaxy is estimated at kilograms, and the total mass of all the stars in the observable universe is estimated at .\nTo put this in perspective, the mass of all such books required to write out a googolplex would be vastly greater than the mass of the observable universe by a factor of roughly .\nIn the physical universe.\nIn the PBS science program \"\", , astronomer and television personality Carl Sagan estimated that writing a googolplex in full decimal form (i.e., \"10,000,000,000...\") would be physically impossible, since doing so would require more space than is available in the known universe. Sagan gave an example that if the entire volume of the observable universe is filled with fine dust particles roughly 1.5 micrometers in size (0.0015 millimeters), then the number of different combinations in which the particles could be arranged and numbered would be about one googolplex.\n1097 is a high estimate of the elementary particles existing in the visible universe (not including dark matter), mostly photons and other massless force carriers.\nMod \"n\".\nThe residues (mod \"n\") of a googolplex, starting with mod 1, are:\n0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 4, 4, 0, 1, 0, 1, 4, 3, 4, 10, 0, 1, 10, 9, 0, 4, 12, 13, 16, 0, 16, 10, 4, 24, 10, 5, 0, 1, 18, 25, 28, 10, 28, 16, 0, 1, 4, 24, 12, 10, 36, 9, 16, 4, 0, ... (sequence in the OEIS)\nThis sequence is the same as the sequence of residues (mod \"n\") of a googol up until the 17th position.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12366", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12366", "title": "Graphite", "text": "Crystalline form of carbon\nGraphite () is a crystalline allotrope (form) of the element carbon. It consists of many stacked layers of graphene, typically in excess of hundreds of layers. Graphite occurs naturally and is the most stable form of carbon under standard conditions. Synthetic and natural graphite are consumed on a large scale (1.3million metric tons per year in 2022) for uses in many critical industries including refractories (50%), lithium-ion batteries (18%), foundries (10%), and lubricants (5%), among others (17%). Graphite converts to diamond under extremely high pressure and temperature. Graphite's low cost, thermal and chemical inertness and characteristic conductivity of heat and electricity finds numerous applications in high energy and high temperature processes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes and varieties.\nGraphite can occur naturally or be produced synthetically. Natural graphite is obtained from naturally occurring geologic deposits and synthetic graphite is produced through human activity.\nNatural.\nGraphite occurs naturally in ores that can be classified as either \"amorphous\" (microcrystalline) or \"crystalline\" (flake or lump/chip) which is determined by the ore morphology, crystallinity, and grain size. All naturally occurring graphite deposits are formed from the metamorphism of carbonaceous sedimentary rocks, and the ore type is due to its geologic setting. Coal that has been thermally metamorphosed is the typical source of amorphous graphite. Crystalline flake graphite is mined from carbonaceous metamorphic rocks, while lump or chip graphite is mined from veins which occur in high-grade metamorphic regions. There are serious negative environmental impacts to graphite mining.\nSynthetic.\nSynthetic graphite has high purity and is usually produced by the thermal graphitization of hydrocarbon materials at temperatures in excess of 2,100\u00a0\u00b0C, most commonly through the Acheson process. The high temperatures are maintained for weeks, and are required not only to form the graphite from the precursor carbons but also to vaporize any impurities that may be present, including hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, organics, and metals. The resulting synthetic graphite is highly pure\u2014in excess of 99.9% C purity\u2014but typically has lower density, conductivity and a higher porosity than its natural equivalent. Synthetic graphite can be formed into very large (centimeter-scale) flakes while maintaining its high purity, unlike almost all sources of natural graphite. Synthetic graphite can also be formed by other methods including by chemical vapor deposition from hydrocarbons at temperatures above , by decomposition of thermally unstable carbides, or by crystallization from metal melts supersaturated with carbon.\nResearch.\nResearch and development efforts continue into new methods for the industrial production of graphite for a variety of applications, including lithium-ion batteries, refractories, and foundries, among others. Significant work has been done on graphitizing of traditionally non-graphitizable carbons. A company in New Zealand utilizes forestry waste to produce what they have termed 'biographite' through a process referred to as thermo-catalytic graphitization. Another group in the United States uses a method referred to as photocatalytic graphitization to produce highly crystalline highly pure graphite for lithium-ion batteries and other applications from a variety of carbon sources.\nNatural.\nOccurrence.\nGraphite occurs in metamorphic rocks as a result of the reduction of sedimentary carbon compounds during metamorphism. It also occurs in igneous rocks and in meteorites. Minerals associated with graphite include quartz, calcite, micas and tourmaline. The principal export sources of mined graphite are, in order of tonnage, China, Mexico, Canada, Brazil, and Madagascar. Significant unexploited graphite resources also exist in Colombia's Cordillera Central in the form of graphite-bearing schists.\nIn meteorites, graphite occurs with troilite and silicate minerals. Small graphitic crystals in meteoritic iron are called cliftonite. Some microscopic grains have distinctive isotopic compositions, indicating that they were formed before the Solar System. They are one of about 12 known types of minerals that predate the Solar System and have also been detected in molecular clouds. These minerals were formed in the ejecta when supernovae exploded or low to intermediate-sized stars expelled their outer envelopes late in their lives. Graphite may be the second or third oldest mineral in the Universe.\nStructure.\nGraphite consists of sheets of trigonal planar carbon. The individual layers are called graphene. In each layer, each carbon atom is bonded to three other atoms forming a continuous layer of sp2 bonded carbon hexagons, like a honeycomb lattice with a bond length of 0.142\u00a0nm, and the distance between planes is 0.335\u00a0nm. Bonding between layers is relatively weak van der Waals bonds, which allows the graphene-like layers to be easily separated and to glide past each other. Electrical conductivity perpendicular to the layers is consequently about 1000 times lower.\nThere are two allotropic forms called \"alpha\" (hexagonal) and \"beta\" (rhombohedral), differing in terms of the stacking of the graphene layers: stacking in alpha graphite is ABA, as opposed to ABC stacking in the energetically less stable beta graphite. Rhombohedral graphite cannot occur in pure form. Natural graphite, or commercial natural graphite, contains 5 to 15% rhombohedral graphite and this may be due to intensive milling. The alpha form can be converted to the beta form through shear forces, and the beta form reverts to the alpha form when it is heated to 1300\u00a0\u00b0C for four hours.\nThermodynamics.\nThe equilibrium pressure and temperature conditions for a transition between graphite and diamond is well established theoretically and experimentally. The pressure changes linearly between at and at (the diamond/graphite/liquid triple point).\nHowever, the phases have a wide region about this line where they can coexist. At normal temperature and pressure, and , the stable phase of carbon is graphite, but diamond is metastable and its rate of conversion to graphite is negligible. However, at temperatures above about , diamond rapidly converts to graphite. Rapid conversion of graphite to diamond requires pressures well above the equilibrium line: at , a pressure of is needed.\nOther properties.\nThe acoustic and thermal properties of graphite are highly anisotropic, since phonons propagate quickly along the tightly bound planes, but are slower to travel from one plane to another. Graphite's high thermal stability and electrical and thermal conductivity facilitate its widespread use as electrodes and refractories in high temperature material processing applications. However, in oxygen-containing atmospheres graphite readily oxidizes to form carbon dioxide at temperatures of 700\u00a0\u00b0C and above.\nGraphite is an electrical conductor, hence useful in such applications as arc lamp electrodes. It can conduct electricity due to the vast electron delocalization within the carbon layers (a phenomenon called aromaticity). These valence electrons are free to move, so are able to conduct electricity. However, the electricity is primarily conducted within the plane of the layers. The conductive properties of powdered graphite allow its use as pressure sensor in carbon microphones.\nGraphite and graphite powder are valued in industrial applications for their self-lubricating and dry lubricating properties. However, the use of graphite is limited by its tendency to facilitate pitting corrosion in some stainless steel, and to promote galvanic corrosion between dissimilar metals (due to its electrical conductivity). It is also corrosive to aluminium in the presence of moisture. For this reason, the US Air Force banned its use as a lubricant in aluminium aircraft, and discouraged its use in aluminium-containing automatic weapons. Even graphite pencil marks on aluminium parts may facilitate corrosion. Another high-temperature lubricant, hexagonal boron nitride, has the same molecular structure as graphite. It is sometimes called \"white graphite\", due to its similar properties.\nWhen a large number of crystallographic defects bind its planes together, graphite loses its lubrication properties and becomes what is known as pyrolytic graphite. It is also highly anisotropic, and diamagnetic, thus it will float in mid-air above a strong magnet. (If it is made in a fluidized bed at 1000\u20131300\u00a0\u00b0C then it is isotropic turbostratic, and is used in blood-contacting devices like mechanical heart valves and is called pyrolytic carbon, and is not diamagnetic. Pyrolytic graphite and pyrolytic carbon are often confused but are very different materials.)\nFor a long time graphite has been considered to be hydrophobic. However, recent studies using highly ordered pyrolytic graphite have shown that freshly clean graphite is hydrophilic (contact angle of 70\u00b0 approximately), and it becomes hydrophobic (contact angle of 95\u00b0 approximately) due to airborne pollutants (hydrocarbons) present in the atmosphere. Those contaminants also alter the electric equipotential surface of graphite by creating domains with potential differences of up to 200 mV as measured with kelvin probe force microscopy. Such contaminants can be desorbed by increasing the temperature of graphite to approximately 50\u00a0\u00b0C or higher.\nNatural and crystalline graphites are not often used in pure form as structural materials, due to their shear-planes, brittleness, and inconsistent mechanical properties.\nHistory of use.\nIn the 4th millennium BCE, during the Neolithic Age in southeastern Europe, the Mari\u021ba culture used graphite in a ceramic paint for decorating pottery.\nSometime before 1565 (some sources say as early as 1500), an enormous deposit of graphite was discovered on the approach to Grey Knotts from the hamlet of Seathwaite in Borrowdale parish, Cumbria, England, which the locals found useful for marking sheep. During the reign of Elizabeth I (1558\u20131603), Borrowdale graphite was used as a refractory material to line molds for cannonballs, resulting in rounder, smoother balls that could be fired farther, contributing to the strength of the English navy. This particular deposit of graphite was extremely pure and soft, and could easily be cut into sticks. Because of its military importance, this unique mine and its production were strictly controlled by the Crown.\nDuring the 19th century, graphite's uses greatly expanded to include stove polish, lubricants, paints, crucibles, foundry facings, and pencils, a major factor in the expansion of educational tools during the first great rise of education for the masses. The British Empire controlled most of the world's production (especially from Ceylon), but production from Austrian, German, and American deposits expanded by mid-century. For example, the Dixon Crucible Company of Jersey City, New Jersey, founded by Joseph Dixon and partner Orestes Cleveland in 1845, opened mines in the Lake Ticonderoga district of New York, built a processing plant there, and a factory to manufacture pencils, crucibles and other products in New Jersey, described in the \"Engineering &amp; Mining Journal\" 21 December 1878. The Dixon pencil is still in production.\nThe beginnings of the revolutionary froth flotation process are associated with graphite mining. Included in the \"E&amp;MJ\" article on the Dixon Crucible Company is a sketch of the \"floating tanks\" used in the age-old process of extracting graphite. Because graphite is so light, the mix of graphite and waste was sent through a final series of water tanks where a cleaner graphite \"floated\" off, which left waste to drop out. In an 1877 patent, the two brothers Bessel (Adolph and August) of Dresden, Germany, took this \"floating\" process a step further and added a small amount of oil to the tanks and boiled the mix \u2013 an agitation or frothing step \u2013 to collect the graphite, the first steps toward the future flotation process. Adolph Bessel received the Wohler Medal for the patented process that upgraded the recovery of graphite to 90% from the German deposit. In 1977, the German Society of Mining Engineers and Metallurgists organized a special symposium dedicated to their discovery and, thus, the 100th anniversary of flotation.\nIn the United States, in 1885, Hezekiah Bradford of Philadelphia patented a similar process, but it is uncertain if his process was used successfully in the nearby graphite deposits of Chester County, Pennsylvania, a major producer by the 1890s. The Bessel process was limited in use, primarily because of the abundant cleaner deposits found around the globe, which needed not much more than hand-sorting to gather the pure graphite. The state of the art, c.\u20091900, is described in the Canadian Department of Mines report on graphite mines and mining when Canadian deposits began to become important producers of graphite.\nOther names.\nHistorically, graphite was called black lead or plumbago. Plumbago was commonly used in its massive mineral form. Both of these names arise from confusion with the similar-appearing lead ores, particularly galena. The Latin word for lead, \"plumbum\", gave its name to the English term for this grey metallic-sheened mineral and even to the leadworts or plumbagos, plants with flowers that resemble this colour.\nThe term \"black lead\" usually refers to a powdered or processed graphite, matte black in color.\nAbraham Gottlob Werner coined the name \"graphite\" (\"writing stone\") in 1789. He attempted to clear up the confusion between molybdena, plumbago and black lead after Carl Wilhelm Scheele in 1778 proved that these were at least three different minerals. Scheele's analysis showed that the chemical compounds molybdenum sulfide (molybdenite), lead(II) sulfide (galena) and graphite were three different soft black minerals.\nUses.\nNatural graphite is mostly used for refractories, batteries, steelmaking, expanded graphite, brake linings, foundry facings, and lubricants.\nRefractories.\nThe use of graphite as a refractory (heat-resistant) material began before 1900 with graphite crucibles used to hold molten metal; this is now a minor part of refractories. In the mid-1980s, the carbon-magnesite brick became important, and a bit later the alumina-graphite shape. As of 2017[ [update]] the order of importance is: alumina-graphite shapes, carbon-magnesite brick, Monolithics (gunning and ramming mixes), and then crucibles.\nCrucibles began using very large flake graphite, and carbon-magnesite bricks requiring not quite so large flake graphite; for these and others there is now much more flexibility in the size of flake required, and amorphous graphite is no longer restricted to low-end refractories. Alumina-graphite shapes are used as continuous casting ware, such as nozzles and troughs, to convey the molten steel from ladle to Mold, and carbon magnesite bricks line steel converters and electric-arc furnaces to withstand extreme temperatures. Graphite blocks are also used in parts of blast furnace linings where the high thermal conductivity of the graphite is critical to ensuring adequate cooling of the bottom and hearth of the furnace. High-purity monolithics are often used as a continuous furnace lining instead of carbon-magnesite bricks.\nThe US and European refractories industry had a crisis in 2000\u20132003, with an indifferent market for steel and a declining refractory consumption per tonne of steel underlying firm buyouts and many plant closures. Many of the plant closures resulted from the acquisition of Harbison-Walker Refractories by RHI AG and some plants had their equipment auctioned off. Since much of the lost capacity was for carbon-magnesite brick, graphite consumption within the refractories area moved towards alumina-graphite shapes and Monolithics, and away from the brick. The major source of carbon-magnesite brick is now China. Almost all of the above refractories are used to make steel and account for 75% of refractory consumption; the rest is used by a variety of industries, such as cement.\nAccording to the USGS, US natural graphite consumption in refractories comprised 12,500 tonnes in 2010.\nBatteries.\nThe use of graphite in batteries has increased since the 1970s. Natural and synthetic graphite are used as an anode material to construct electrodes in major battery technologies.\nGraphite is the \"predominant anode material used today in lithium-ion batteries\". Electric-vehicle (EV) batteries contain four basic components: anode, cathode, electrolyte, and separator. While there is much focus on the cathode materials\u2014lithium, nickel, cobalt, manganese, etc., the anode material used in virtually all EV batteries is graphite.\nThe demand for batteries, primarily nickel\u2013metal hydride and lithium-ion batteries, caused a growth in demand for graphite in the late 1980s and early 1990s \u2013 a growth driven by portable electronics, such as portable CD players and power tools. Laptops, mobile phones, tablets, and smartphone products have increased the demand for batteries. Electric-vehicle batteries are anticipated to increase graphite demand. As an example, a lithium-ion battery in a fully electric Nissan Leaf contains nearly 40\u00a0kg of graphite.\nRadioactive graphite removed from nuclear reactors has been investigated as a source of electricity for low-power applications. This waste is rich in carbon-14, which emits electrons through beta decay, so it could potentially be used as the basis for a betavoltaic device. This concept is known as the diamond battery.\nSteelmaking.\nNatural graphite in steelmaking mostly goes into raising the carbon content in molten steel; it can also serve to lubricate the dies used to extrude hot steel. Carbon additives face competitive pricing from alternatives such as synthetic graphite powder, petroleum coke, and other forms of carbon. A carbon raiser is added to increase the carbon content of the steel to a specified level. An estimate based on USGS's graphite consumption statistics indicates that steelmakers in the US used 10,500 tonnes in this fashion in 2005.\nBrake linings.\nNatural amorphous and fine flake graphite are used in brake linings or brake shoes for heavier (nonautomotive) vehicles, and became important with the need to substitute for asbestos. This use has been important for quite some time, but nonasbestos organic (NAO) compositions are beginning to reduce graphite's market share. A brake-lining industry shake-out with some plant closures has not been beneficial, nor has an indifferent automotive market. According to the USGS, US natural graphite consumption in brake linings was 6,510 tonnes in 2005.\nFoundry facings and lubricants.\nA foundry-facing mold wash is a water-based paint of amorphous or fine flake graphite. Painting the inside of a mold with it and letting it dry leaves a fine graphite coat that will ease the separation of the object cast after the hot metal has cooled. Graphite lubricants are specialty items for use at very high or very low temperatures, as forging die lubricant, an antiseize agent, a gear lubricant for mining machinery, and to lubricate locks. Having low-grit graphite, or even better, no-grit graphite (ultra high purity), is highly desirable. It can be used as a dry powder, in water or oil, or as colloidal graphite (a permanent suspension in a liquid). An estimate based on USGS graphite consumption statistics indicates that 2,200 tonnes were used in this fashion in 2005. Metal can also be impregnated into graphite to create a self-lubricating alloy for application in extreme conditions, such as bearings for machines exposed to high or low temperatures.\nEveryday use.\nPencils.\nThe ability to leave marks on paper and other objects gave graphite its name, given in 1789 by German mineralogist Abraham Gottlob Werner. It stems from \"\u03b3\u03c1\u03ac\u03c6\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd (\"graphein\")\", meaning \"to write\" or \"draw\" in Ancient Greek.\nFrom the 16th century, all pencils were made with leads of English natural graphite, but modern pencil lead is most commonly a mix of powdered graphite and clay; it was invented by Nicolas-Jacques Cont\u00e9 in 1795. It is chemically unrelated to the metal lead, whose ores had a similar appearance, hence the continuation of the name. Plumbago is another older term for natural graphite used for drawing, typically as a lump of the mineral without a wood casing. The term plumbago drawing is normally restricted to 17th and 18th-century works, mostly portraits.\nToday, pencils are still a small but significant market for natural graphite. Around 7% of the 1.1\u00a0million tonnes produced in 2011 was used to make pencils. Low-quality amorphous graphite is used and sourced mainly from China.\nIn art, graphite is typically used to create detailed and precise drawings, as it allows for a wide range of values (light to dark) to be achieved. It can also be used to create softer, more subtle lines and shading. Graphite is popular among artists because it is easy to control, easy to erase, and produces a clean, professional look. It is also relatively inexpensive and widely available. Many artists use graphite in conjunction with other media, such as charcoal or ink, to create a range of effects and textures in their work. Graphite of various hardness or softness results in different qualities and tones when used as an artistic medium.\nPinewood derby.\nGraphite is probably the most-used lubricant in pinewood derbies.\nOther uses.\nNatural graphite has found uses in zinc-carbon batteries, electric motor brushes, and various specialized applications. Railroads would often mix powdered graphite with waste oil or linseed oil to create a heat-resistant protective coating for the exposed portions of a steam locomotive's boiler, such as the smokebox or lower part of the firebox. The Scope soldering iron uses a graphite tip as its heating element.\nExpanded graphite.\nExpanded graphite is made by immersing natural flake graphite in a bath of chromic acid, then concentrated sulfuric acid, which forces the crystal lattice planes apart, thus expanding the graphite. The expanded graphite can be used to make graphite foil or used directly as a \"hot top\" compound to insulate molten metal in a ladle or red-hot steel ingots and decrease heat loss, or as firestops fitted around a fire door or in sheet metal collars surrounding plastic pipe (during a fire, the graphite expands and chars to resist fire penetration and spread), or to make high-performance gasket material for high-temperature use. After being made into graphite foil, the foil is machined and assembled into the bipolar plates in fuel cells.\nThe foil is made into heat sinks for laptop computers which keeps them cool while saving weight, and is made into a foil laminate that can be used in valve packings or made into gaskets. Old-style packings are now a minor member of this grouping: fine flake graphite in oils or greases for uses requiring heat resistance. A GAN estimate of current US natural graphite consumption in this end-use is 7,500\u00a0tonnes.\nIntercalated graphite.\nGraphite forms intercalation compounds with some metals and small molecules. In these compounds, the host molecule or atom gets \"sandwiched\" between the graphite layers, resulting in a type of compound with variable stoichiometry. A prominent example of an intercalation compound is potassium graphite, denoted by the formula KC8. Some graphite intercalation compounds are superconductors. The highest transition temperature (by June 2009) \"T\"c = 11.5\u00a0K is achieved in CaC6, and it further increases under applied pressure (15.1\u00a0K at 8\u00a0GPa). Graphite's ability to intercalate lithium ions without significant damage from swelling is what makes it the dominant anode material in lithium-ion batteries.\nMining, beneficiation, and milling.\nGraphite is mined by both open pit and underground methods. Graphite usually needs beneficiation. This may be carried out by hand-picking the pieces of gangue (rock) and hand-screening the product or by crushing the rock and floating out the graphite. Beneficiation by flotation encounters the difficulty that graphite is very soft and \"marks\" (coats) the particles of gangue. This makes the \"marked\" gangue particles float off with the graphite, yielding impure concentrate. There are two ways of obtaining a commercial concentrate or product: repeated regrinding and floating (up to seven times) to purify the concentrate, or by acid leaching (dissolving) the gangue with hydrofluoric acid (for a silicate gangue) or hydrochloric acid (for a carbonate gangue).\nIn milling, the incoming graphite products and concentrates can be ground before being classified (sized or screened), with the coarser flake size fractions (below 8 mesh, 8\u201320 mesh, 20\u201350 mesh) carefully preserved, and then the carbon contents are determined. Some standard blends can be prepared from the different fractions, each with a certain flake size distribution and carbon content. Custom blends can also be made for individual customers who want a certain flake size distribution and carbon content. If flake size is unimportant, the concentrate can be ground more freely. Typical end products include a fine powder for use as a slurry in oil drilling and coatings for foundry molds, carbon raiser in the steel industry (Synthetic graphite powder and powdered petroleum coke can also be used as carbon raiser). Environmental impacts from graphite mills consist of air pollution including fine particulate exposure of workers and also soil contamination from powder spillages leading to heavy metal contamination of soil.\nAccording to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), world production of natural graphite in 2016 was 1,200,000 tonnes, of which the following major exporters are: China (780,000\u00a0t), India (170,000\u00a0t), Brazil (80,000\u00a0t), Turkey (32,000\u00a0t) and North Korea (6,000\u00a0t). Graphite is not currently mined in the United States, but there are many historical mine sites including ones in Alabama, Montana, and in the Adirondacks of NY. Westwater Resources is in the development stages of creating a pilot plant for their Coosa Graphite Mine near Sylacauga, Alabama. U.S. production of synthetic graphite in 2010 was 134,000\u00a0t valued at $1.07\u00a0billion.\nOccupational safety.\nPotential health effects include: \nUnited States.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for graphite exposure in the workplace as a time weighted average (TWA) of 15million particles per cubic foot (1.5\u00a0mg/m3) over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of TWA 2.5\u00a0mg/m3 respirable dust over an 8-hour workday. At levels of 1250\u00a0mg/m3, graphite is immediately dangerous to life and health.\nRecycling.\nThe most common way of recycling graphite occurs when synthetic graphite electrodes are either manufactured and pieces are cut off or lathe turnings are discarded for reuse, or the electrode (or other materials) are used all the way down to the electrode holder. A new electrode replaces the old one, but a sizeable piece of the old electrode remains. This is crushed and sized, and the resulting graphite powder is mostly used to raise the carbon content of molten steel.\nGraphite-containing refractories are sometimes also recycled, but often are not due to their low graphite content: the largest-volume items, such as carbon-magnesite bricks that contain only 15\u201325% graphite, usually contain too little graphite to be worthwhile to recycle. However, some recycled carbon\u2013magnesite brick is used as the basis for furnace-repair materials, and also crushed carbon\u2013magnesite brick is used in slag conditioners.\nWhile crucibles have a high graphite content, the volume of crucibles used and then recycled is very small.\nA high-quality flake graphite product that closely resembles natural flake graphite can be made from steelmaking kish. Kish is a large-volume near-molten waste skimmed from the molten iron feed to a basic oxygen furnace and consists of a mix of graphite (precipitated out of the supersaturated iron), lime-rich slag, and some iron. The iron is recycled on-site, leaving a mixture of graphite and slag. The best recovery process uses hydraulic classification (which utilizes a flow of water to separate minerals by specific gravity: graphite is light and settles nearly last) to get a 70% graphite rough concentrate. Leaching this concentrate with hydrochloric acid gives a 95% graphite product with a flake size ranging from 10 mesh (2\u00a0mm) down.\nHistory of synthetic graphite.\nInvention of a production process.\nIn 1893, Charles Street of Le Carbone discovered a process for making artificial graphite. In the mid-1890s, Edward Goodrich Acheson (1856\u20131931) accidentally invented another way to produce synthetic graphite after synthesizing carborundum (also called silicon carbide). He discovered that overheating carborundum, as opposed to pure carbon, produced almost pure graphite. While studying the effects of high temperature on carborundum, he had found that silicon vaporizes at about , leaving the carbon behind in graphitic carbon. This graphite became valuable as a lubricant.\nAcheson's technique for producing silicon carbide and graphite is named the Acheson process. In 1896, Acheson received a patent for his method of synthesizing graphite, and in 1897 started commercial production. The Acheson Graphite Co. was formed in 1899.\nSynthetic graphite can also be prepared from polyimide and then commercialized.\nScientific research.\nHighly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) is the highest-quality synthetic form of graphite. It is used in scientific research, in particular, as a length standard for the calibration of scanning probe microscopes.\nElectrodes.\nGraphite electrodes carry the electricity that melts scrap iron and steel, and sometimes direct-reduced iron (DRI), in electric arc furnaces, which are the vast majority of steel furnaces. They are made from petroleum coke after it is mixed with coal tar pitch. They are extruded and shaped, then baked to carbonize the binder (pitch). This is finally graphitized by heating it to temperatures approaching , at which the carbon atoms arrange into graphite. They can vary in size up to long and in diameter. An increasing proportion of global steel is made using electric arc furnaces, and the electric arc furnace itself is becoming more efficient, making more steel per tonne of electrode. An estimate based on USGS data indicates that graphite electrode consumption was in 2005.\nElectrolytic aluminium smelting also uses graphitic carbon electrodes. On a much smaller scale, synthetic graphite electrodes are used in electrical discharge machining (EDM), commonly to make injection molds for plastics.\nPowder and scrap.\nThe powder is made by heating powdered petroleum coke above the temperature of graphitization, sometimes with minor modifications. The graphite scrap comes from pieces of unusable electrode material (in the manufacturing stage or after use) and lathe turnings, usually after crushing and sizing. Most synthetic graphite powder goes to carbon raising in steel (competing with natural graphite), with some used in batteries and brake linings. According to the United States Geographical Survey, US synthetic graphite powder and scrap production were in 2001 (latest data).\nIt is possible to create battery-grade graphite by recycling the numerous fines from battery production. The process involves spray drying the fines over petroleum pitch with a binder and cross-linking agent, then drying them.\nNeutron moderator.\nSpecial grades of synthetic graphite also find use as a matrix and neutron moderator within nuclear reactors. Its low neutron cross-section also recommends it for use in proposed fusion reactors. Care must be taken that reactor-grade graphite is free of neutron absorbing materials such as boron, widely used as the seed electrode in commercial graphite deposition systems \u2013 this caused the failure of the Germans' World War II graphite-based nuclear reactors. Since they could not isolate the difficulty they were forced to use far more expensive heavy water moderators. Graphite used for nuclear reactors is often referred to as nuclear graphite. Herbert G. MacPherson, a Berkeley trained physicist at National Carbon, a division of Union Carbide, was key in confirming a conjecture of Leo Szilard that boron impurities even in \"pure\" graphite were responsible for a neutron absorption cross-section in graphite that compromised U-235 chain reactions. McPherson was aware of the presence of impurities in graphite because, with the use of Technicolor in cinematography, the spectra of graphite electrode arcs used in movie projectors required impurities to enhance emission of light in the red region to display warmer skin tones on the screen. Thus, had it not been for color movies, chances are that the first sustained natural U chain reaction would have required a heavy water moderated reactor.\nOther uses.\nGraphite (carbon) fiber and carbon nanotubes are also used in carbon fiber reinforced plastics, and in heat-resistant composites such as reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC). Commercial structures made from carbon fiber graphite composites include fishing rods, golf club shafts, bicycle frames, sports car body panels, the fuselage of the Boeing 787 Dreamliner and pool cue sticks and have been successfully employed in reinforced concrete. The mechanical properties of carbon fiber graphite-reinforced plastic composites and grey cast iron are strongly influenced by the role of graphite in these materials. In this context, the term \"(100%) graphite\" is often loosely used to refer to a pure mixture of carbon reinforcement and resin, while the term \"composite\" is used for composite materials with additional ingredients.\nModern smokeless powder is coated in graphite to prevent the buildup of static charge.\nGraphite has been used in at least three radar absorbent materials. It was mixed with rubber in Sumpf and Schornsteinfeger, which were used on U-boat snorkels to reduce their radar cross section. It was also used in tiles on early F-117 Nighthawk stealth strike fighters.\nGraphite composites are used as absorber for high-energy particles, for example in the Large Hadron Collider beam dump.\nGlassworking tools are often made from graphite since it will not stick to hot molten glass, unlike metal tools and moulds which require coatings or lubricants, which are themselves often graphite-based. Automated glassworking machines make significant use of graphite for handling the molten glass and freshly formed items.\nResearch and innovation.\nGlobally, over 60,000 patent families in graphite technologies were filed from 2012 to 2021. Patents were filed by applicants from over 60 countries and regions. However, graphite-related patent families originated predominantly from just a few countries. China was the top contributor with more than 47,000 patent families, accounting for four in every five graphite patent families filed worldwide in the last decade. Among other leading countries were Japan, the Republic of Korea, the United States and the Russian Federation. Together, these top five countries of applicant origin accounted for 95 percent of global patenting output related to graphite.\nAmong the different graphite sources, flake graphite has the highest number of patent families, with more than 5,600 filed worldwide from 2012 to 2021. Supported by active research from its commercial entities and research institutions, China is the country most actively exploiting flake graphite and has contributed to 85 percent of global patent filings in this area.\nAt the same time, innovations exploring new synthesis methods and uses for artificial graphite are gaining interest worldwide, as countries seek to exploit the superior material qualities associated with this man-made substance and reduce reliance on the natural material. Patenting activity is strongly led by commercial entities, particularly world-renowned battery manufacturers and anode material suppliers, with patenting interest focused on battery anode applications.\nThe exfoliation process for bulk graphite, which involves separating the carbon layers within graphite, has been extensively studied between 2012 and 2021. Specifically, ultrasonic and thermal exfoliation have been the two most popular approaches worldwide, with 4,267 and 2,579 patent families, respectively, significantly more than for either the chemical or electrochemical alternatives.\nGlobal patenting activity relating to ultrasonic exfoliation has decreased over the years, indicating that this low-cost technique has become well established. Thermal exfoliation is a more recent process. Compared to ultrasonic exfoliation, this fast and solvent-free thermal approach has attracted greater commercial interest.\nAs the most widespread anode material for lithium-ion batteries, graphite has drawn significant attention worldwide for use in battery applications. With over 8,000 patent families filed from 2012 to 2021, battery applications were a key driver of global graphite-related inventions. Innovations in this area are led by battery manufacturers or anode suppliers who have amassed sizable patent portfolios focused strongly on battery performance improvements based on graphite anode innovation. Besides industry players, academia and research institutions have been an essential source of innovation in graphite anode technologies.\nGraphite for polymer applications was an innovation hot topic from 2012 to 2021, with over 8,000 patent families recorded worldwide. However, in recent years, in the top countries of applicant origin in this area, including China, Japan and the United States of America (US), patent filings have decreased.\nGraphite for manufacturing ceramics represents another area of intensive research, with over 6,000 patent families registered in the last decade alone. Specifically, graphite for refractory accounted for over one-third of ceramics-related graphite patent families in China and about one-fifth in the rest of the world. Other important graphite applications include high-value ceramic materials such as carbides for specific industries, ranging from electrical and electronics, aerospace and precision engineering to military and nuclear applications.\nCarbon brushes represent a long-explored graphite application area. There have been few inventions in this area over the last decade, with less than 300 patent families filed from 2012 to 2021, very significantly less than between 1992 and 2011.\nBiomedical, sensor, and conductive ink are emerging application areas for graphite that have attracted interest from both academia and commercial entities, including renowned universities and multinational corporations. Typically for an emerging technology area, related patent families were filed by various organizations without any players dominating. As a result, the top applicants have a small number of inventions, unlike in well-explored areas, where they will have strong technology accumulation and large patent portfolios. The innovation focus of these three emerging areas is highly scattered and can be diverse, even for a single applicant. However, recent inventions are seen to leverage the development of graphite nanomaterials, particularly graphite nanocomposites and graphene.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC-BY. Text taken from https://, WIPO. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12367", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12367", "title": "Garry Trudeau", "text": "American cartoonist (born 1948)\nGarretson Beekman Trudeau (born July 21, 1948) is an American cartoonist best known for creating the \"Doonesbury\" comic strip.\nTrudeau won the Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning in 1975, making him the first comic strip artist to win a Pulitzer. He is one of only two comic strip artists to win the award, the other being Berkeley Breathed, whose work was influenced by Trudeau. Trudeau was also the creator and executive producer of the Amazon Studios political comedy series \"Alpha House\".\nEarly life and education.\nTrudeau was born in New York City, the son of Jean Douglas (n\u00e9e Moore, daughter of New York Assembly member Thomas Channing Moore) and Francis Berger Trudeau Jr. He is the great-grandson of Edward Livingston Trudeau, who created Adirondack Cottage Sanitarium for the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis at Saranac Lake, New York. Edward was succeeded by his son Francis and grandson Francis Jr. The latter founded the Trudeau Institute at Saranac Lake, with which Garry Trudeau retains a connection.\nRaised in Saranac Lake, Trudeau attended St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire. He enrolled in Yale University in 1966. As an art major, Trudeau initially focused on painting, but soon discovered a greater interest in the graphic arts. He spent much of his time cartooning and writing for Yale's humor magazine \"The Yale Record\", eventually serving as the magazine's editor-in-chief. At the same time, Trudeau began contributing to the \"Yale Daily News\", which eventually led to the creation of \"Bull Tales\", a comic strip parodying the exploits of Yale quarterback Brian Dowling. This strip was the progenitor of \"Doonesbury\".\nWhile still an undergraduate at Yale, Trudeau published two collections of \"Bull Tales\": \"Bull Tales\" (1969, published by the \"Yale Daily News\") and \"Michael J.\" (1970, published by \"The Yale Record\").\nAs a senior, Trudeau became a member of Scroll and Key. He did postgraduate work at the Yale School of Art, earning a Master of Fine Arts degree in graphic design in 1973. It was there that Trudeau first met photographer David Levinthal, with whom he collaborated on \"Hitler Moves East\", an influential \"graphic chronicle\" of the German invasion of the Soviet Union.\nCreative works.\nSoon after \"Bull Tales\" began running in the Yale student newspaper, the strip caught the attention of the newly formed Universal Press Syndicate. The syndicate's editor, James F. Andrews, recruited Trudeau, changed the strip's name to \"Doonesbury\", and began distributing it following the cartoonist's graduation in 1970. Today \"Doonesbury\" is syndicated to 1,000 daily and Sunday newspapers worldwide and is accessible online in association with \"The Washington Post\".\nIn 1975, Trudeau became the first comic strip artist to win a Pulitzer, traditionally awarded to editorial-page cartoonists. He was also a Pulitzer finalist in 1990, 2004, and 2005. Other awards during this time include the National Cartoonist Society Newspaper Comic Strip Award in 1994, the Reuben Award from the National Cartoonist Society in 1995, the George Orwell Award in 1994, and the Forte dei Marmi Prize for Satire 1990 in Italy,\nAwards received in the 21st century include: The Max &amp; Moritz Award for Best Comic Strip (2006, Germany) the Harvey Award, Best Syndicated Strip (2011), \nthe George Polk Award, Lifetime Achievement (2015), and the National Cartoonist Society's Gold T-Square (2021).\nTrudeau's work has been recognized by fellowships and halls of fame. In 1993, Trudeau was made a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. \nIn 2021, he was inducted into the New York State Writers Hall of Fame, and the Eisner Hall of Fame in 2023.\nWiley Miller, fellow comic-strip artist responsible for \"Non Sequitur\", called him \"far and away the most influential editorial cartoonist in the last 25 years\". A regular graduation speaker, Trudeau has received 37 honorary degrees.\nIn addition to his creating his strip, Trudeau has worked in both theater and television. He was nominated for an Oscar in 1977 in the category of Animated Short Film for \"A Doonesbury Special\", created for NBC in collaboration with John and Faith Hubley. The film won the Cannes Film Festival Jury Prize in 1978. In 1984, with composer Elizabeth Swados, he wrote the book and lyrics for the Broadway musical \"Doonesbury\", for which he was nominated for two Drama Desk Awards. A cast album of the show, recorded for MCA, received a Grammy nomination. Trudeau again collaborated with Swados in 1984, this time on \"Rap Master Ronnie\", a satirical revue about the Reagan Administration that opened off-Broadway at the Village Gate. A filmed version, featuring Jon Cryer, the Smothers Brothers, and Carol Kane, was broadcast on Cinemax in 1988.\nAlso in 1988, Trudeau wrote and co-produced with director Robert Altman HBO's critically acclaimed \"Tanner '88\", a satiric look at that year's presidential election campaign. The show won the gold medal for Best Television Series at the Cannes Television Festival, the British Academy Television Award for Best Foreign Program, and Best Imported Program from the British Broadcasting Press Guild. It earned an Emmy Award, as well as four ACE Award nominations. In 2004, Trudeau reunited with Altman to write and co-produce a sequel mini-series, \"Tanner on Tanner\", for the Sundance Channel.\nIn 1996, \"Newsweek\" and \"The Washington Post\" speculated that Trudeau had written the novel \"Primary Colors\", which was later revealed to have been written by Joe Klein. In February 2000, Trudeau, working with Dotcomix, launched \"Duke2000\", a web-based presidential campaign featuring a real-time, 3-D, streaming-animation version of Duke. Nearly 30 campaign videos were created for the site, and Ambassador Duke was interviewed live by satellite on the \"Today Show, Larry King Live, The Charlie Rose Show\", and dozens of local TV and radio news shows.\nIn 2013, Trudeau created, wrote and co-produced \"Alpha House\", a political sitcom starring John Goodman that revolves around four Republican U.S. Senators who live together in a townhouse on Capitol Hill. Trudeau was inspired to write the show's pilot after reading a 2007 \"New York Times\" article about a real D.C. townhouse shared by New York Senator Chuck Schumer, Illinois Senator Dick Durbin, and California Representative George Miller, all Democrats. The pilot for \"Alpha House\" was produced by Amazon Studios and aired in early 2013. Due to positive response, Amazon picked up the show to develop into a full series, streaming eleven episodes for its first season. On March 31, 2014, Amazon announced that \"Alpha House\" had been renewed. Production began in July 2014, and the entire second season became available for streaming on October 24, 2014.\nWhile writing \"Alpha House\", Trudeau put the daily Doonesbury into rerun mode. On March 3, 2014, the \"Classic Doonesbury\" series began, featuring approximately four weeks of daily strips from each year of the strip's run. He continues to produce new strips for Sundays. Although \"Alpha House\" has not been in production since the end of 2014, Trudeau has not returned to creating daily \"Doonesbury\" strips; new material remains a Sunday-only event.\nTrudeau has contributed to such publications as \"Harper's\", \"Rolling Stone\", \"The New Republic\", \"The New Yorker\", \"New York\", and \"The Washington Post\". From 1990 to 1994, he wrote and drew an occasional column for \"The New York Times\" op-ed page, and was a contributing essayist for \"Time\" magazine from 1996 to 2001.\nBeginning with the Gulf War in 1991, Trudeau has written about military issues extensively. In recognition for his work on injured soldiers, he has been presented with the Commander's Award for Public Service by the Department of the Army, the Commander's Award from Disabled American Veterans, the President's Award for Excellence in the Arts from Vietnam Veterans of America, the Distinguished Public Service Award from the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, the Mental Health Research Advocacy Award from the Yale School of Medicine, and a special citation from the Vet Centers.\nHe received several unit commendations from the field during the Gulf War, and he traveled with the USO to visit troops in Iraq and Afghanistan. From 2005 to 2014, his website hosted http://, a milblog posting over 800 essays by deployed soldiers, returned vets, caregivers, and spouses. For most of the strip's run, Trudeau has eschewed merchandising, but starting in 1998 he teamed up with Starbucks to create \"Doonesbury\" products to raise funds for local literacy programs. The items were offered for sale in Starbucks stores for nearly two years and raised over $1 million. Also for charity, Trudeau licensed the strip to Ben &amp; Jerry's, which created a bestselling sorbet flavor called \"Doonesberry\".\nTrudeau's son Ross, a digital media producer, is also a crossword constructor who has been published in the \"New York Times.\" As part of the ongoing celebrity partnership series, father and son collaborated on a crossword puzzle that was published on May 15, 2018, in the \"Times\".\nTrudeau, formerly a member of Writers Guild of America, East, left and maintained financial core status.\nPrivate life and public appearances.\nTrudeau married Jane Pauley on June 14, 1980; they have three children.\nHe maintains a low personal profile. A rare early appearance on television was as a guest on \"To Tell the Truth\" in 1971, where only one of the three panelists guessed his identity. In 1990, Trudeau appeared on the cover of \"Newsweek\" for \"Inside Doonesbury's Brain\", a story written by Jonathan Alter. This was the first interview Trudeau had given in 17 years.\nTrudeau cooperated extensively with \"Wired\" magazine for a 2000 profile, \"The Revolution Will be Satirized\". He later spoke with the writer of that article, Edward Cone, for a 2004 newspaper column in the Greensboro, North Carolina, \"News &amp; Record\", about the war wounds suffered by the Doonesbury character \"B.D.\", and in 2006 did a Q&amp;A at Cone's personal blog about The Sandbox. Trudeau granted an interview to \"Rolling Stone\" in 2004 in which he discussed his time at Yale, which he entered two years after George W. Bush. He granted another \"Rolling Stone\" interview in 2010. In 2006, \"The Washington Post\" printed an extensive profile of Trudeau by writer Gene Weingarten. He appeared on the \"Charlie Rose\" television program, and at signings for \"The Long Road Home: One Step at a Time\", his \"Doonesbury\" book about B.D.'s struggle with injuries received during the second Gulf War.\nOn August 1, 2016, Trudeau appeared on MSNBC on \"The Rachel Maddow Show\". He was brought on to discuss his prediction about Donald Trump's plans to run for president almost three decades earlier. Maddow presented cartoon strips from as far back as 1987. Trudeau was on her show to promote his new book \"Yuge\", which covers 30 years of Trump appearing in \"Doonesbury\". On November 7, 2016, Trudeau appeared on \"Fresh Air\" with Terry Gross to discuss \"Yuge\". On the \"CBS News Sunday Morning\" broadcast of December 2, 2018, he was featured and was interviewed by his wife, Jane Pauley.\nAppraisals and controversies.\nEric Alterman, writing in \"The Nation\", called \"Doonesbury\" \"one of the great intellectual/artistic accomplishments of the past half-century, irrespective of category\".\nTrudeau has also attracted criticism both for the comic strip and for his own opinions. In 1985, responding to changes after his 1983\u20131984 hiatus in \"Doonesbury\", readers of \"The Saturday Review\" voted Trudeau one of the \"Most Overrated People in American Arts and Letters\", stating that after his hiatus, his comic strip was \"predictable, mean-spirited, and not as funny as before.\" Trudeau's acceptance speech on the occasion of receiving a Polk Award in 2015 for lifetime achievement stirred controversy. In the speech, Trudeau criticized the cartoonists of \"Charlie Hebdo\"\u2014some of whom had recently been killed by terrorists after publishing anti-Muslim cartoons \u2014for \"punching downward... attacking a powerless, disenfranchised minority with crude, vulgar drawings closer to graffiti than cartoons\", and thereby wandering \"into the realm of hate speech\" with cartoons of Muhammad. Writing in \"The Atlantic\", in which Trudeau had published his speech, political commentator David Frum criticized what he called Trudeau's \"moral theory\" that calls for identifying \"the bearer of privilege\", then holding \"the privilege-bearer responsible\".\nCollections.\nMost of Trudeau's original drawings for Doonesbury, along with letters, notebooks, and other archival materials, are in the collection of the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University. Original drawings are also in the collections of the Library of Congress; the Smithsonian Institute's Museum of American History; the National Portrait Gallery; the National Museum of Health and Medicine; and the Billy Ireland Cartoon Library and Museum at Ohio State University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12369", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12369", "title": "Guild", "text": "Association of artisans or merchants\nA guild (, ) is an professional association of artisans and merchants who oversee the practice of their craft/trade in a particular territory. The word derived from medieval Europe where guilds were probably at their most extensive, but it has been used to describe similar groups before and after that period and in other parts of the world. Typically the key \"privilege\" was that only guild members were allowed to sell their goods or practice their skill within a city. There might be controls on minimum or maximum prices, hours of trading, numbers of apprentices, and many other things. Critics argued that these rules reduced free competition, but defenders maintained that they protected professional standards.\nEarly history.\nNaram-Sin of Akkad (c.\u20092254\u20132218 BC), grandson of Sargon of Akkad who had unified Sumeria and Assyria into the Akkadian Empire, promulgated common Mesopotamian standards for length, area, volume, weight, time, and shekels, which were used by artisan guilds in each city. Code of Hammurabi Law 234 (c.\u20091755\u20131750 BC) stipulated a 2-shekel wage for each 60-gur (300-bushel) vessel constructed in an employment contract between a shipbuilder and a ship-owner. Law 275 stipulated a ferry rate of 3-gerah per day on a charterparty between a ship charterer and a shipmaster. Law 276 stipulated a 2&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442-gerah per day freight rate on a contract of affreightment between a charterer and shipmaster, while Law 277 stipulated a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446-shekel per day freight rate for a 60-gur vessel.\n\"collegium\" or \"corpus\" were a type of guild active in Ancient Rome times. Although a \"collegium\" was any association or corporation that acted as a legal entity, many were organised groups of merchants who specialised in a particular craft and whose membership of the group was voluntary. One such example is the \"corpus naviculariorum\", a collegium of merchant mariners based at Rome's La Ostia port. The Roman guilds failed to survive the collapse of the Roman Empire.\nMiddle ages and early modern period.\nRole.\nEvolving from earlier fraternity groups for protective or religious purposes, also called guilds, merchant and craft guilds developed into structured organizations that regulated trade, upheld product quality and protected members\u2019 economic interests becoming more common across Europe during the High Middle Ages as urban economies became more specialized. Merchant guilds dominated commercial activity and urban governance in many towns. The craft guilds transmitted skills through formal systems of apprenticeship, journeymanship and mastery, and oversaw the production of goods ranging from textiles and metalwork to glassmaking and baking. In major cities such as Florence, Paris, Barcelona, and the German free cities, guilds became central to economic and civic life, often numbering in the dozens or even hundreds.\nGuilds also fulfilled important social and political functions. Many exercised influence within municipal governments, especially in the prosperous cities of Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries, where they sometimes challenged patrician elites. They maintained welfare funds for sick or elderly members, supported widows and orphans, organized feasts, and reinforced communal religious life. Their authority rested on charters or letters patent granting them legal privileges, including monopolies on production within their locality and the right to enforce professional standards. These privileges often restricted entry into skilled trades and shaped urban societies around tightly controlled economic hierarchies.\nWomen's Participation.\nWomen's participation in medieval guilds was diverse and often constrained: while guild membership granted economic and social opportunities, most craft and trade guilds were male-dominated, typically allowing women to enter only through marriage or as widows or daughters of masters and generally excluding them from guild offices. Nonetheless, evidence from England and the Continent shows that women did engage widely in guild life\u2014London silkwomen could inherit property and run businesses, and \u00c9tienne Boileau\u2019s \"Livre des m\u00e9tiers\" records several Parisian guilds as female monopolies, with others open to women such as surgeons and glass-blowers. In Rouen women had participated as full-fledged masters in 7 of the city's 112 guilds since the 13th century. In cities like Rouen and Cologne, women held full master status in select guilds and dominated certain trades, though restrictions persisted, especially in medical guilds, where religious and secular authorities often opposed female practitioners. Historiographical debates, notably following Alice Clark\u2019s 1919 study, highlight contrasting interpretations of whether medieval guild structures ultimately empowered women or, increasingly in the early modern era, limited their economic roles.\nHistorians disagree sharply on whether women\u2019s participation in guilds declined during the early modern period: while Alice Clark\u2019s \u201cdecline thesis\u201d argues that women became economically marginalized in the 17th century, later scholarship counters that domestic life did not dictate women\u2019s labor and that women remained active in markets, crafts, and wage work. Research by Clare Crowston highlights that women in several trades\u2014such as linen drapers, hemp merchants, seamstresses, and flower sellers\u2014formed independent guilds and in some regions gained expanded rights, as seen in 17th- and 18th-century Paris, Rouen, Dijon, and Nantes. However, in parts of Germany, historians like Merry Wiesner document a real decline driven by economic specialization and cultural norms, with guilds increasingly restricting women\u2019s roles and barring their employment, a pattern reinforced by Ogilvie\u2019s work. Despite these regional contrasts, exclusively female guilds proliferated in the 17th century\u2014especially in Paris, Rouen, and Cologne, where some guilds had been predominantly female since medieval times.\nFall of the Guilds.\nEnlightenment thinkers such as Adam Smith argued that guild monopolies inhibited free trade, innovation, and technological progress. As centralized nation-states expanded their authority, new systems of patents and economic regulation weakened guild control. The French Revolution accelerated this decline with the abolition of guilds in 1791, and most European countries gradually followed during the 18th and 19th centuries as industrialization made guild-based production less viable. Historians continue to debate the economic impact of guilds: some regard them as monopolistic and rent-seeking, while others argue they facilitated training, quality control, and technological adaptation.\nGuilds outside Europe.\nOutside Europe, guild-like organizations of artisans and merchants developed in a variety of forms:\nModern guilds.\nProfessional organizations replicate guild structure and operation. Professions such as architecture, engineering, geology, and land surveying require varying lengths of apprenticeships before one can gain a \"professional\" certification. These certifications hold great legal weight: most states make them a prerequisite to practicing there.\nThough most guilds died off by the middle of the nineteenth century, quasi-guilds persist today, primarily in the fields of law, medicine, engineering, and academia. Paralleling or soon after the fall of guilds in Britain and in the United States professional associations began to form. In America a number of interested parties sought to emulate the model of apprenticeship which European guilds of the Middle Ages had honed to achieve their ends of establishing exclusivity in trades as well as the English concept of a gentleman which had come to be associated with higher income and craftsmanship\nLicensing and accreditation practices which typically result from the lobbying of professional associations constitute the modern equivalent of a 'guild-privilege', albeit in contrast to guilds of the Middle Ages which held a letters patent which explicitly granted them monopolies on the provision of services, today's quasi-guild privileges are subtler, more complex, and less \"directly\" restrictive to consumers in their nature.\nNevertheless, it can be argued quasi-guild privileges are in many cases designed not just to serve some notion of public good, but to facilitate the establishing and maintaining of exclusivity in a field of work.\nThere are often subtle dichotomies present in attempting to answer the question of whether modern licensing and accreditation practices are intended to serve the public good, however it be defined. For medieval guilds this dichotomy is exemplified by differing explanations of the same phenomena; of limiting work hours among guild members. Sheilagh Ogilvie argues that this was intended to mitigate competition among guild members, while Dorothy Terry argues this was to prevent guild members from working late into the night while tired and when lighting is poor and therefore producing low quality work. In modern times, while licensing practices are usually argued to in some way protect members of the public (e.g. by ensuring quality standards), it usually can also be argued that these practices have been engineered to limit the number of 'outsiders' who gain entrance to a given field.\nAs argued by Paul Starr and Ronald Hamowy, both of whose focus is on the development of medicine in America, the tying of medical licensing practices to universities was a process intended to do more than protect the public from 'quackery', but was engineered to be unnecessarily prolonged, inefficient, and a costly process so as to deter 'outsiders' from getting into the field, thereby enhancing the prestige and earning power of medical professionals.\nThe university system in general continues to serve as a basis upon which modern quasi-guilds operate in the form of professionalism. 'Universitas' in the Middle Ages meant a society of masters who had the capacity for self-governance, and this term was adopted by students and teachers who came together in the twelfth century to form scholars guilds. Though guilds mostly died off by the middle of the nineteenth century, the scholars guild persisted due to its peripheral nature to an industrialized economy. In the words of Elliot Krause,\"The university and scholars' guilds held onto their power over membership, training, and workplace because early capitalism was not interested in it (there was no product that the capitalist wished to produce)...the cultural prestige of knowledge itself helped keep the scholars' guild and the university alive while all other guilds failed.\"\n- Elliot Krause, \"The Death of Guilds\" (1996)Though in theory anyone can start a college, the 'privilege' in this case is the linking of federal aid to accreditation. While accreditation of a university is entirely optional, attending an accredited university is a prerequisite to receiving federal aid, and this has a powerful influence on limiting consumer options in the field of education as it provides a mechanism to limit entrepreneurial 'outsiders' from entering the field of education. George Leef and Roxana Burris study the accreditation system for which they observe is 'highly collegial' and potentially bias in the fact that accreditation review is performed by members of schools who will in turn be reviewed by many of the same people who they have reviewed. They further question the effectiveness of the methods involved in accreditation,\"Although accreditation is usually justified as a means of giving students and parents an assurance of educational quality, it is important to note that the accreditors do not endeavor to assess the quality of individual programs or departments... The accreditation system is not based on an evaluation of the results of an institution, but rather upon an evaluation of its inputs and processes. If the inputs and processes look good, acceptable educational quality is assumed. It is as if an organization decided which automobiles would be allowed to be sold by checking to make sure that each car model had tires, doors, an engine and so forth and had been assembled by workers with proper training\u2014but without actually driving any cars\"\n- George C. Leef and Roxana D. Burris, \"Can College Accreditation Live Up To Its Promise?\"Taken in the context of guilds, it can be argued that the purpose of accreditation is to provide a mechanism for members of the scholars guild to protect itself, both by limiting outsiders from entering the field and by enforcing established norms onto one another. Contriving means to limit the number of outsiders who gain an entrance to a field (exclusivity) and to enforce work norms among members were both distinguishing feature of guilds in the Middle Ages.\nQuasi-guilds in the information economy.\nIn 1998, Thomas W. Malone championed a modern variant of the guild structure for independent contractors and remote workers. Insurance including any professional legal liability, intellectual capital protections, an ethical code perhaps enforced by peer pressure and software, and other benefits of a strong association of producers of knowledge, benefit from economies of scale, and may prevent cut-throat competition that leads to inferior services undercutting prices. As with historical guilds, such a structure will resist foreign competition.\nThe open-source-software movement has from time to time explored a guild-like structure to unite against competition from Microsoft, e.g. Advogato assigns journeyer and master ranks to those committing to work only or mostly on free software.\nPatents loosely serve as a form of guild privilege in that they restrict potential newcomers to a field of service. The idea of a patent being applied to intangibles such as intellectual property has been called to question by various authors. In \"Capital and Ideology\" (2019) Thomas Piketty questions the validity of patents being granted to agricultural corporations who claim to have 'invented' certain GMO seeds. According to Piketty, the falsity of such claims is that the specific breakthrough which allowed for the development of these GMO seeds was in fact only the outcome of generations of \"public\" investment in education and research.\nInternational examples.\nEurope.\nIn many European countries, guilds have experienced a revival as local trade organizations for craftsmen, primarily in traditional skills. They may function as forums for developing competence and are often the local units of a national employer's organisation.\nIn the City of London, the medieval guilds survive as livery companies, all of which play a ceremonial role in the city's many customs as well as having charitable roles. The City of London livery companies maintain strong links with their respective trade, craft or profession, some still retain regulatory, inspection or enforcement roles. The senior members of the City of London Livery Companies (known as liverymen) elect the sheriffs and approve the candidates for the office of Lord Mayor of London. Guilds also survive in many other towns and cities the UK including in Preston, Lancashire, as the Preston Guild Merchant where among other celebrations descendants of burgesses are still admitted into membership. With the City of London livery companies, the UK has over 300 extant guilds and growing.\nIn 1878, the London livery companies established the City and Guilds of London Institute the forerunner of the engineering school (still called City and Guilds College) at Imperial College London. The aim of the City and Guilds of London Institute was the advancement of technical education. \"City and Guilds\" operates as an examining and accreditation body for vocational, managerial and engineering qualifications from entry-level craft and trade skills up to post-doctoral achievement. A separate organisation, the City and Guilds of London Art School has also close ties with the London livery companies and is involved in the training of master craftworkers in stone and wood carving, as well as fine artists.\nIn Germany, there are no longer any \"Z\u00fcnfte\" (or \"Gilden\" \u2013 the terms used were rather different from town to town), nor any restriction of a craft to a privileged corporation. However, guilds continue to exist under another old name, \"Innungen\", as private associations with membership limited to practitioners of particular trades or activities. These associations are corporations under public law, although membership is voluntary; the president normally comes from the ranks of master-craftsmen and is called \"Obermeister\" (\"master-in-chief\"). Journeymen elect their own representative bodies, with their president having the traditional title of \"Altgesell\" (senior journeyman).\nThere are also \"craft chambers\" (\"Handwerkskammern\"), which have less resemblance to ancient guilds in that they are organized for all crafts in a certain region, not just one. Membership is mandatory, and they serve to establish self-governance of the crafts.\nIndia.\nIndia's guilds include the Students Guild, Indian Engineers Guild, and the Safety Guild. Other professional associations include the Indian Medical Association, Indian Engineers, Indian Dental Association, United Nurses Association, etc. Most of them have names containing Union, Association or Society.\nNorth America.\nIn the United States guilds exist in several fields. Often, they are better characterized as labor unions \u2014 for example, The Newspaper Guild is a labor union for journalists and other newspaper workers, with over 30,000 members in North America.\nIn the film and television industry, guild membership is generally a prerequisite for working on major productions in certain capacities. The Screen Actors Guild, Directors Guild of America, Writers Guild of America, East, Writers Guild of America, West and other profession-specific guilds have the ability to exercise strong control in the cinema of the United States as a result of a rigid system of intellectual-property rights and a history of power-brokers also holding guild membership (e.g., DreamWorks Pictures founder Steven Spielberg is a DGA member). These guilds maintain their own contracts with production companies to ensure a certain number of their members are hired for roles in each film or television production, and that their members are paid a minimum of guild \"scale,\" along with other labor protections. These guilds set high standards for membership, and exclude professional actors, writers, etc. who do not abide by the strict rules for competing within the film and television industry in America.\nReal-estate brokerage offers an example of a modern American guild system. Signs of guild behavior in real-estate brokerage include: standard pricing (6% of the home price), strong affiliation among all practitioners, self-regulation (see National Association of Realtors), strong cultural identity (the Realtor brand), little price variation with quality differences, and traditional methods in use by all practitioners. In September 2005 the U.S. Department of Justice filed an antitrust lawsuit against the National Association of Realtors, challenging NAR practices that (the DOJ asserted) prevent competition from practitioners who use different methods. The DOJ and the Federal Trade Commission in 2005 advocated against state laws, supported by NAR, that disadvantage new kinds of brokers. \"U.S. v. National Assoc. of Realtors\", Civil Action No. 05C-5140 (N.D. Ill. Sept. 7, 2005).\nThe practice of law in the United States also exemplifies modern guilds at work. Every state maintains its own bar association, supervised by that state's highest court. The court decides the criteria for entering and staying in the legal profession. In most states, every attorney must become a member of that state's bar association in order to practice law. State laws forbid any person from engaging in the unauthorized practice of law and practicing attorneys are subject to rules of professional conduct that are enforced by the state's supreme court.\nMedical associations comparable to guilds include the state Medical Boards, the American Medical Association, and the American Dental Association. Medical licensing in most states requires specific training, tests and years of low-paid apprenticeship (internship and residency) under harsh working conditions. Even qualified international or out-of-state doctors may not practice without acceptance by the local medical guild (Medical board). Similarly, nurses and physicians' practitioners have their own guilds. A doctor cannot work as a physician's assistant unless (s)he separately trains, tests and apprentices as one.\nAustralia.\nAustralia has several guilds. The most notable of these is The Pharmacy Guild of Australia, created in 1927 as the Federated Pharmaceutical Services Guild of Australia. The Pharmacy Guild serves \"6,000 community pharmacies,\" while also providing training and standards for the country's pharmacists. Australia's other guilds include the Australian Directors Guild, representing the country's directors, documentary makers and animators, the Australian Writers' Guild, the Australian Butcher's Guild, a fraternity of independent butchers which provides links to resources like Australian meat standards and a guide to different beef cuts, and The Artists Guild, a craft guild focusing on female artists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12370", "revid": "16386188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12370", "title": "Googolgon", "text": ""}
{"id": "12371", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12371", "title": "Gas Laws", "text": ""}
{"id": "12372", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12372", "title": "Gradius (video game)", "text": "1985 video game\n is a 1985 horizontally scrolling shooter video game developed and published by Konami for arcades. It is the first installment in the \"Gradius\" series. The player maneuvers a spacecraft known as the Vic Viper that must defend itself from the various alien enemies. The game uses a power-up system called the \"power meter\", based upon collecting capsules to acquire additional weapons.\nThe arcade version of \"Gradius\" was initially released internationally outside Japan under the title of Nemesis, but subsequent home releases have since used the original title. During development, it had the working title Scramble 2, as it was originally intended to be a follow-up to Konami's earlier shooter \"Scramble\" (1981). Home versions were released for various platforms, such as the Nintendo Entertainment System, the MSX home computer, and the PC Engine. It was a major success in 1986, becoming the year's highest-grossing arcade game in London and one of Japan's top five table arcade games, while the Famicom port sold over a million copies in Japan that year. Nintendo released the NES version in arcades for the Nintendo VS. System as \"VS. Gradius\" and PlayChoice-10 in November 1986.\n\"Gradius\" was critically acclaimed for its gameplay and at the time unique power-up system. Along with Namco's \"Xevious\", it is cited as being one of the most important shooter games, having paved the way for many similar games to follow.\nGameplay.\nThe player controls the trans-dimensional spaceship Vic Viper and must battle waves of enemies through various environments. The game became synonymous with the phrase, \"Destroy the core!\", as the standard of boss battles in the \"Gradius\" series involved combat with a giant craft, in the center of which would be situated one to several blue colored spheres. These bosses were designed in such a way that there was a straight passage from the exterior of the giant craft leading directly to one of these cores. The player must fire shots into this passage while avoiding attack patterns from weapon emplacements on the body of the boss. However, small but destructible walls are situated in this passage, impeding the bullet shots from damaging the core, and must be whittled away by repeated well-placed shots. In a way, these tiny walls represent the boss' shielding gauge until its core is finally vulnerable to attack. Some bosses can regenerate these walls. When the core has sustained enough hits, it usually changes color from blue to red, indicating that it is in critical condition and its destruction is imminent. Upon the destruction of a core, a piece of the boss may be put out of commission, seeing that it is no longer powered by a core, or if all of the cores are destroyed, the entire boss is defeated and explodes. Cores are not present on the more organic bosses of \"Gradius\". Such bosses have weak spots in places such as a mouth, head or eye.\nWhen gameplay begins, the Vic Viper is relatively slow and has only a weak gun. This level of capability is generally insufficient for engaging all but the weakest single-hit enemies, but the Vic Viper can gain greater capabilities by collecting and using power-up items. While most arcade games utilize distinct power up-items that each correspond to a specific effect on the player character, \"Gradius\" has a single power-up item. The effect of this power-up item is to advance the currently selected item in a power-up menu that appears at the bottom of the screen. When the desired power-up is highlighted, the player can obtain it by pressing the power-up button, returning the menu to its initial state in which no power-up is highlighted.\nDevelopment.\n\"Gradius\" was the creation of Konami game designer Machiguchi Hiroyasu, and it was the first video game he publicly released. Hiroyasu joined the company in the early 1980s, as a programmer, at a time when Konami was trying to transition from being a producer of medal machines to a videogame developer. Konami assigned him to a small team with the task of producing a game that could establish the company in the videogame market. He asked the team what kind of game they'd like to work on, and they replied that they wanted to make another shooting game. The shoot 'em up genre had seen a resurgence at the time with Namco's \"Xevious\", and the goal of this project became to make a shooter that could surpass Xevious. The project was at first intended to be a follow-up to Konami's earlier game \"Scramble\" (1981); it was titled \"Scramble 2\" and reused many of Scramble's materials and game mechanics.\nDevelopment of \"Gradius\" lasted for about a year, a time filled with anxiety for the production team due to a lack of confidence in creating their first game. Members of the project came up with ideas that were then tested on the arcade monitor to see if they worked. While designing the Option satellites, the team tested over 20 different movement patterns which were whittled down through the process of elimination. The game was produced for the Konami Bubble System 16-bit arcade hardware. Hiroyasu wanted the game to have a visually distinct world with unique enemies and locations, which was something relatively uncommon for shooters at the time. Inspiration for mechanics and story were derived from films such as \"Star Wars: A New Hope\" and \"Lensman\", with the Laser weapon being directly taken from those in \"Lensman\". The idea for a power-meter mechanic stemmed from the team's desire to give players the freedom to select whichever weapons they pleased. Early versions had the player collecting individual pick-up icons, which were cut for not being \"satisfying\" enough; it was instead replaced with a selection bar where players collected capsules to allow access to other weapons, an idea based on the function keys on a keyboard. The Moai enemies were added to pay homage to \"Xevious\" and its Nazca lines as well as giving the game a sense of mystery.\nReleases.\nArcade.\n\"Gradius\" was first released in Japan for Konami's Bubble System, an arcade board which allowed operators to change the software through the use of proprietary \"Bubble Software\" cartridge media based on magnetic bubble memory. The game was distributed as a standard printed circuit board in North America and Europe under the title of \"Nemesis\". The North American version of \"Nemesis\" features a considerably increased difficulty compared to the Japanese and European version. To balance this, the game spawns a fleet of orange enemies when the player loses a life to provide as many power-up capsules as possible to recover as many upgrades as possible. Also the North American version presents a continue feature (but only for three times). The title screen was also updated, showing an in-game reproduction of the promotional artwork behind the logo.\nThe original \"Gradius\" is also included in various compilations such as \"Gradius Deluxe Pack\" for the PlayStation, Sega Saturn and Microsoft Windows, and \"Gradius Collection\" for the PlayStation Portable. Hamster Corporation released the game as part of their \"Arcade Archives\" series for the PlayStation 4 in 2015 and Nintendo Switch in 2020. This particular version was included by Konami in their \"Arcade Classics Anniversary Collection\", released in 2019 for the Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Xbox One and Windows.\nFamicom/NES.\nThe first home conversion of \"Gradius\" was released for Nintendo's Famicom console on April 25, 1986, in Japan. Due to the hardware limitations of the Famicom, many of the level designs were simplified (the Moai stage, for example, lacked the vertical scrolling present in the arcade game), and the maximum amount of options that the player can upgrade to was reduced from four to two. This version added a cheat code that could be entered while the game was paused that granted the player's ship almost all the power-ups. This code appeared again in many later Konami games such as \"Contra\" and \"Life Force\", ultimately becoming known as the Konami Code. The international version for the Nintendo Entertainment System was released in North America in December 1986. It was the first NES game to be released by Konami in the region and, unlike the original arcade game, the title was kept unchanged between regions. It was re-released as part of the Nintendo Classics service on September 19, 2018.\nThe NES version was made available in arcades as a Nintendo VS. System board (under the title of \"VS. Gradius\") and as a PlayChoice-10 cartridge. \"VS. Gradius\" was distributed to arcades by Nintendo. This version was released by Hamster Corporation as part of their \"Arcade Archives\" series for the Nintendo Switch and PlayStation 4 in 2019, distinct from their release of the original arcade version years prior.\nMSX.\nThe MSX version of \"Gradius\" was released on July 25, 1986, in Japan, a few months after the Famicom version. It was also released in Europe under the \"Nemesis\" title. This version changed similar to the Famicom version but adds its slew of exclusive content to make up for the downgrade. A new stage, the bone planet was added between the Inverted Volcano stage and the Antennoid stage, featuring exclusive enemy types. There also four hidden warp zones and the ability to play as the titular ship from \"TwinBee\" if the MSX version of that game is played alongside \"Nemesis\".\nPC Engine.\nThe PC Engine version of \"Gradius\" was released in Japan on November 15, 1991. Released on a 2-Megabit HuCard, it had relatively few omissions compared to the NES and MSX versions and added a Desert Planet stage similar to the Bone Planet stage from the MSX version. Because of the lower resolution of the PC Engine compared to the original arcade hardware, the PC Engine features some slight vertical scrolling.\nOther platforms.\nIn addition to the MSX, \"Gradius\" was also ported to other microcomputers shortly after its release, such as the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 in Europe (as \"Nemesis: The Final Challenge\"), as well as the PC-8801 and X1 in Japan. A port for the X68000 computer was also included in the early models of the computer.\nReception.\nArcade.\nIn Japan, \"Game Machine\" listed \"Gradius\" as the most popular arcade game of June 1985. It went on to be Japan's fifth highest-grossing table arcade game of 1986. In the United Kingdom, \"Nemesis\" was the highest-grossing arcade game of 1986 on London's Electrocoin charts.\nUpon release, the arcade game received positive reviews from \"Computer and Video Games\" and \"Computer Gamer\" magazines.\nPorts.\nThe Famicom version sold over one million copies in Japan during 1986. The home computer port went to number two on the UK sales charts, below \"Feud\". The PC Engine version also topped the UK's PC Engine sales chart in December 1991.\nThe first \"Famitsu\" Best Hit Game Awards gave the Famicom version of \"Gradius\" the award for Best Shooting Game and listed it as the second best Game of the Year (just below \"Dragon Quest\"). \"Computer and Video Games\" reviewed the home computer conversions and awarded it Game of the Month.\n\"GameSpot\" later stated that \"Gradius\" was one of the toughest side-scrolling shooter games available on the NES, second only to \"Contra\". \"IGN\" gave the Wii Virtual Console re-release a 7 out of 10 and has hailed it as one of the greatest classic side-scrolling shooter games.\nLegacy.\n\"Gradius\" spawned several sequels, the first of which was 1986's \"Salamander\". The series has continued into the seventh generation with \"Gradius ReBirth\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12373", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12373", "title": "Gamemaster", "text": "Facilitator role in role-playing games\nA gamemaster (GM; also known as game master, game manager, game moderator, referee, storyteller, or master of ceremonies) is a person who acts as a facilitator, organizer, officiant regarding rules, arbitrator, and moderator for a multiplayer role-playing game. The act performed by a gamemaster is sometimes referred to as \"gamemastering\" or simply \"GM-ing.\"\nThe role of a GM in a traditional tabletop role-playing game (TTRPG) is to weave together the other participants' player-characters' (PCs) stories, control the non-player characters (NPCs), describe or create environments in which the PCs can interact, and solve any player disputes. This basic role is the same in almost all traditional TTRPGs, with minor differences specific to differing rule sets. However, in some indie role-playing games, the GM role significantly differs from the traditional pattern. For example, in Powered by the Apocalypse systems, the other players assist the GM in creating both the NPCs and the details of the campaign setting.\nThe role of a gamemaster in an online game is to enforce the game's rules and provide general customer service. \nGaming systems have their own names for the role of the GM. For example, in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", they are called Dungeon Masters, in the \"World of Darkness\" games, they are called storytellers, and in Powered by the Apocalypse games they are called a variety of names, such as MCs (master of ceremonies).\nGMs are typically hobbyists; however, they are sometimes paid employees or entertainers for hire. This is more common for online games. Paid GMing was very uncommon for TTRPGs before the 2020s.\nHistory and variants of the term.\nIn a role-playing game context, the term \"gamemaster\" was first used by Dave Arneson while developing his game \"Blackmoor\" in 1971, although the first usage in print may have been \"Chivalry &amp; Sorcery\". \nEach gaming system has its own name for the role of the gamemaster, such as \"judge,\" \"narrator,\" \"referee,\" \"director,\" or \"storyteller,\" and these terms not only describe the role of the GM in general but also help define how the game is intended to be run. For example, the most famous of such terms, the \"Dungeon Master\" (or \"DM\") in \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons,\" highlights the game's focus on dungeon crawling. The Storyteller System used in White Wolf Game Studio's storytelling games calls its GM the \"storyteller,\" while the rules- and setting-focused \"Marvel Super Heroes\" role-playing game calls its GM the \"judge.\" The cartoon inspired role-playing game \"Toon\" calls its GM the \"animator.\" Some games apply flavorful names to the GM to fit the genre or setting, such as the Keeper of Arcane Lore (in the occult-themed \"Call of Cthulhu\"), the Hollyhock God (\"Nobilis\", in which the hollyhock represents vanity), the Groundskeeper (in the spooky \"Bluebeard's Bride\"), the Mall Rat (in Visigoths vs. Mall Goths), or the Gaymaster (in LGBTQ-centered \"Thirsty Sword Lesbians\").\nThe term \"gamemaster\" and the role associated with it have been used in the postal gaming hobby since the 1980s. In typical play-by-mail games, players control armies or civilizations and mail their chosen actions to the GM. The GM then mails the updated game state to all players on a regular basis. Usage in a wargaming context includes Guidon Games 1973 ruleset, \"Ironclad\".\nIn traditional tabletop role-playing games.\nThe gamemaster prepares the game session for the players and the characters they play (known as player characters or PCs), describes the events taking place and decides on the outcomes of players' decisions. The gamemaster also keeps track of non-player characters (NPCs) and random encounters, as well as of the general state of the game world. The game session (or \"adventure\") can be metaphorically described as a play, in which the players are the lead actors, and the GM provides the stage, the scenery, the basic plot on which the improvisational script is built, as well as all the bit parts and supporting characters. Gamemasters can also be in charge of RPG board games making the events and setting challenges.\nGMs may choose to run a game based on a published game world, with the maps and history already in place; such game worlds often have pre-written adventures. Alternatively, the GM may build their own world and script their own adventures.\nIn online games.\nIn early virtual worlds, gamemasters served as a moderator or administrator. In MUD game masters were called \"wizards.\" Gamemastering in the form found in traditional role-playing games has also been used in semi-automatic virtual worlds. However, human moderation was sometimes considered unfair or out of context in an otherwise automated world. As online games expanded, gamemaster duties expanded to include being a customer service representative for an online community. A gamemaster in such a game is either an experienced volunteer player or an employee of the game's publisher. They enforce the game's rules by banishing spammers, player killers, cheaters, and hackers and by solving players' problems by providing general customer service. For their tasks they use special tools and characters that allow them to do things like teleport to players, summon items, and browse logs that record players' activities.\n\"World of Warcraft\" has employees of Blizzard Entertainment that serve as gamemasters to help users with various problems in gameplay, chat, and other things like account and billing issues. A gamemaster in this game will communicate with players through chat that has blue text and they will also have a special \"GM\" tag and Blizzard logo in front of their names.\n\"RuneScape\" has more than 500 moderators employed by Jagex to assist players and perform administrative duties in-game and on the site forums. These \"Jagex Moderators\", as they are called, usually have the word \"Mod\" and a gold crown preceding their account names which ordinary players are not permitted to use. The game also has \"Player Moderators\" and \"Forum Moderators\" who are player volunteers helping with moderation, having the ability to mute (block from chatting) other players who violate rules.\nIn \"Helldivers 2\", a third-person shooter by Arrowhead Game Studios, a single employee named Joel Hakalax functions as a game master for the game's colossal playerbase. The game features many real-time events where territory is gained or lost purportedly by the players' performance, which are determined at the discretion of the game master.\nAdditional online games.\nThe now defunct \"America Online\" Online Gaming Forum used to use volunteers selected by applications from its user base. These people were simply referred to as OGFs by other members, and their screennames were indicative of their position (i.e., OGF Moose, etc.). While membership in the Online Gaming Forum had only one real requirement (that is, be a member of AOL), OGFs were given powers quite similar to AOL \"Guides\" and could use them at will to discipline users as they saw appropriate. \"Battleground Europe\", a medium-sized MMOFPS, has a team of \"Game Moderators\", anonymous volunteers who moderate the game. \"Miniconomy\", a smaller text-based MMO, has a team of \"Federals\", experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions. \"Transformice\", an online multiplayer platformer, has a team of volunteer moderators called \"Mods\" who are experienced players that help moderate the game and interactions. \"ARMA 3\", an open-world military tactical shooter, has a \"Zeus\" role that allows any player slotted in that role to place down almost any asset in the game including infantry and vehicles, objectives, intelligence, and score-keeping modules. The Zeus can also modify aspects of the world itself including time, weather, and wildlife to create dynamically progressing stories. \"Neverwinter Nights\" and \"\" are video game adaptations of tabletop role-playing games that are played online with one player acting as a traditional gamemaster.\nIn pervasive games.\nGamemastering, sometimes referred to as Orchestration is used in pervasive games to guide players along a trajectory desired by the game author. To ensure proper gamemastering can take place, four components are needed: some kind of sensory system to the game allowing the game masters to know current events, providing dynamic game information; dynamic and static game information lets game masters make informed decisions; decisions need to be actuated into the game, either through the game system or through manual intervention; and finally a communication structure is needed for both diegetic or non-diegetic communication. Effective gamemastering can require specialized user interfaces that are highly game specific.\nGamemaster simulation.\nCertain sourcebooks simulate the decisions of a gamemaster by various means for either group or solo gaming. \"Dicebreaker\" highlighted that game master \"emulators or oracles allow you to play a game and let dice or cards decide what happens next, instead of a human game master\". With solo games, they noted that \"many systems abstract the duties of running the game into dice rolls and random tables\" while other systems \"shift the focus away from numbers and maths in lieu of an experience akin to a Choose Your Own Adventure book\".\nGenerative artificial intelligence.\nGenerative artificial intelligence (AI), built off of large language models (LLMs), can also be used to simulate the actions of a gamemaster. In 2023, both \"Wired\" and \"Bell of Lost Souls\" highlighted the limitations of using ChatGPT as a dungeon master for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". \"Wired\" commented that \"ChatDM's taste for fantasy was often a bland amalgam of fantasy scenarios harvested from decades of D&amp;D lore and Tolkienesque tropes\" and it struggled \"to maintain a consistent story\". They noted this experience reminded them \"that a good D&amp;D adventure isn't like being told a story by a novelist or storyteller\" as instead \"the narrative unfolds communally around a table\"; however, ChatD&amp;D \"ironically\" might be \"truer to the game's improv-oriented roots\" as the \"more free-form\" nature means neither the players nor the dungeon master have \"a clue as to where the adventure will go\". \"Bell of Lost Souls\" noted \"asking Chat-GPT to accomplish anything creative really highlights the limits of a Large Language Model\" and that while it can produce \"great idea-seeds\", ChatGPT does not understand \"the pacing of a scene in a game, or a story or adventure\". They commented it is \"fantastic at helping you iterate\" and it can take \"a lot of the grunt and guesswork out of the work of ideation\" when working on plot development.\n\"Polygon\", \"Boing Boing\" and \"Wargamer\" reported on a July 2024 research paper, by graduate student Pavlos Sakellaridis, which examined the feasibility of a ChatGPT dungeon master built off of \"The Sunless Citadel\" (2000) adventure module and transcripts from the actual play web series \"Critical Role\". \"Boing Boing\" noted that \"Sakellaridis compared player experiences with both AI and human Dungeon Masters\" \u2013 the results showed \"surprising strengths\" for the AI Dungeon Master and \"while human DMs maintained a slight edge in most categories, the AI excelled at creating immersive environments, scoring 4.13 out of 5 compared to humans' 3.35\". \"Wargamer\" similarly highlighted that the \"results of his tests are interestingly mixed\" with player reports rating the human dungeon master as \"more competent, created better flow and narrative progression, and elicited more positive feelings overall\", however, they \"thought the AI DM was better at creating immersive environments\". \"Wargamer\" commented that \"Artificial Intelligence is a bit of a misnomer for Chat GPT\" since it is a LLM \"so the robo DM's ability to create an immersive environment, in a text-based exchange, doesn't mean that it's imaginative. LLMs have been specifically designed to digest large volumes of copyrighted material down to patterns, and then generate new text that fits into those patterns when prompted\". \"Polygon\" stated that \"the use of generative AI has been a point of repeated contention in the tabletop industry and beyond, with the technology's critics citing its environmental impact and its foundations on exploitative labor from both workers based in the global south and artists whose work is nonconsensually used to train the tech\". \"Polygon\" highlighted that this academic study used \"a complex slurry of variously licensed information, with some sourced from private companies, some sourced from a group of performers, and other materials sourced from volunteers\" and it \"has raised questions about the hazy nature of fan works\" in relation \"to consent in training\" of LLMs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12376", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12376", "title": "GUI/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "12378", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12378", "title": "Gaseous state", "text": ""}
{"id": "12380", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12380", "title": "Gaseous phase", "text": ""}
{"id": "12382", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12382", "title": "Great Lake", "text": ""}
{"id": "12383", "revid": "49696380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12383", "title": "Genetic engineering", "text": "Manipulation of an organism's genome\nGenetic engineering, also called genetic modification or genetic manipulation, is the modification and manipulation of an organism's genes using technology. It is a set of technologies used to change the genetic makeup of cells, including the transfer of genes within and across species boundaries to produce improved or novel organisms. New DNA is obtained by either isolating and copying the genetic material of interest using recombinant DNA methods or by artificially synthesising the DNA. A construct is usually created and used to insert this DNA into the host organism. The first recombinant DNA molecule was designed by Paul Berg in 1972 by combining DNA from the monkey virus SV40 with the lambda virus. As well as inserting genes, the process can be used to remove, or \"knock out\", genes. The new DNA can either be inserted randomly or targeted to a specific part of the genome. \nAn organism that is generated through genetic engineering is considered to be genetically modified (GM), and the resulting entity is a genetically modified organism (GMO). The first GMO was a bacterium generated by Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen in 1973. Rudolf Jaenisch created the first GM animal when he inserted foreign DNA into a mouse in 1974. The first company to focus on genetic engineering, Genentech, was founded in 1976 and began the production of human proteins. Genetically engineered human insulin was produced in 1978, and insulin-producing bacteria were commercialised in 1982. Genetically modified food has been sold since 1994, with the release of the Flavr Savr tomato. The Flavr Savr was engineered to have a longer shelf life, but most current GM crops are modified to increase resistance to insects and herbicides. GloFish, the first GMO designed as a pet, was sold in the United States in December 2003. In 2016, salmon modified with a growth hormone were sold.\nGenetic engineering has been applied in numerous fields, including research, medicine, industrial biotechnology, and agriculture. In research, GMOs are used to study gene function and expression through loss-of-function, gain-of-function, tracking, and expression experiments. By knocking out genes responsible for certain conditions, it is possible to create animal model organisms of human diseases. As well as producing hormones, vaccines, and other drugs, genetic engineering has the potential to cure genetic diseases through gene therapy. Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells are used in industrial genetic engineering. Additionally, mRNA vaccines are made through genetic engineering to prevent infections by viruses such as COVID-19. The same techniques that are used to produce drugs can also have industrial applications, such as producing enzymes for laundry detergent, cheeses, and other products.\nThe rise of commercialised genetically modified crops has provided economic benefit to farmers in many different countries; however, it has also been the source of most of the controversy surrounding the technology. This has been present since its early use; the first field trials were destroyed by anti-GM activists. Although there is a scientific consensus that food derived from GMO crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, critics consider GM food safety a leading concern. Gene flow, impact on non-target organisms, control of the food supply, and intellectual property rights have also been raised as potential issues. These concerns have led to the development of a regulatory framework, which started in 1975. Eventually, this has led to a proposal of an international treaty, the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, which was officially adopted in 2000. Individual countries have developed their own regulatory systems regarding GMOs, with the most marked differences occurring between the United States and Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n IUPAC definition\nGenetic engineering: Process of inserting new genetic information into existing cells in order to modify a specific organism for the purpose of changing its characteristics.\n\"Note\": Adapted from ref.\nOverview.\nGenetic engineering is a process that alters the genetic structure of an organism by either removing or introducing DNA or modifying existing genetic material in situ. Unlike traditional animal and plant breeding, which involves doing multiple crosses and then selecting for the organism with the desired phenotype, genetic engineering takes the gene directly from one organism and delivers it to the other. This is much faster, can be used to insert any genes from any organism (even ones from different domains), and prevents other undesirable genes from also being added.\nGenetic engineering could potentially fix severe genetic disorders in humans by replacing the defective gene with a functioning one. It is an important tool in research that allows the function of specific genes to be studied. Drugs, vaccines, and other products have been harvested from organisms engineered to produce them. Crops have been developed that aid food security by increasing yield, nutritional value, and tolerance to environmental stresses.\nThe DNA can be introduced directly into the host organism or into a cell that is then fused or hybridised with the host. This relies on recombinant nucleic acid techniques to form new combinations of heritable genetic material, followed by the incorporation of that material either indirectly through a vector system or directly through micro-injection, macro-injection, or micro-encapsulation. \nGenetic engineering does not normally include traditional breeding, in vitro fertilisation, induction of polyploidy, mutagenesis, and cell fusion techniques that do not use recombinant nucleic acids or a genetically modified organism in the process. However, some broad definitions of genetic engineering include selective breeding. Cloning and stem cell research, although not considered genetic engineering, are closely related, and genetic engineering can be used within them. Synthetic biology is an emerging discipline that takes genetic engineering a step further by introducing artificially synthesised material into an organism.\nPlants, animals, or microorganisms that have been changed through genetic engineering are termed genetically modified organisms or GMOs. If genetic material from another species is added to the host, the resulting organism is called transgenic. If genetic material from the same species or a species that can naturally breed with the host is used, the resulting organism is called cisgenic. If genetic engineering is used to remove genetic material from the target organism, the resulting organism is termed a knockout organism. In Europe, genetic modification is synonymous, with genetic engineering while within the United States of America and Canada, genetic modification can also be used to refer to more conventional breeding methods.\nHistory.\nHumans have altered the genomes of species for thousands of years through selective breeding, or artificial selection as contrasted with natural selection. More recently, mutation breeding has used exposure to chemicals or radiation to produce a high frequency of random mutations for selective breeding purposes. Genetic engineering, as the direct manipulation of DNA by humans outside breeding and mutations, has only existed since the 1970s. The term \"genetic engineering\" was coined by the Russian-born geneticist Nikolay Timofeev-Ressovsky in his 1934 paper \"The Experimental Production of Mutations\", published in the British journal Biological Reviews. Jack Williamson used the term in his science fiction novel \"Dragon's Island\", published in 1951 \u2013 one year before DNA's role in heredity was confirmed by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase, and two years before James Watson and Francis Crick showed that the DNA molecule has a double-helix structure \u2013 though the general concept of direct genetic manipulation was explored in rudimentary form in Stanley G. Weinbaum's 1936 science fiction story \"Proteus Island\".\nIn 1972, Paul Berg created the first recombinant DNA molecules by combining DNA from the monkey virus SV40 with that of the lambda virus. In 1973, Herbert Boyer and Stanley Cohen created the first transgenic organism by inserting antibiotic resistance genes into the plasmid of an \"Escherichia coli\" bacterium. A year later Rudolf Jaenisch created a transgenic mouse by introducing foreign DNA into its embryo, making it the world's first transgenic animal These achievements led to concerns in the scientific community about potential risks from genetic engineering, which were first discussed in depth at the Asilomar Conference in 1975. One of the main recommendations from this meeting was that government oversight of recombinant DNA research should be established until the technology was deemed safe.\nIn 1976, Genentech, the first genetic engineering company, was founded by Herbert Boyer and Robert Swanson and, a year later, the company produced a human protein (somatostatin) in \"E. coli\". Genentech announced the production of genetically engineered human insulin in 1978. In 1980, the Supreme Court of the United States in the \"Diamond v. Chakrabarty\" case ruled that genetically altered life could be patented. The insulin produced by bacteria was approved for release by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1982.\nIn 1983, a biotech company, Advanced Genetic Sciences (AGS), applied for U.S. government authorisation to perform field tests with the ice-minus strain of \"Pseudomonas syringae\" to protect crops from frost, but environmental groups and protestors delayed the field tests for four years with legal challenges. In 1987, the ice-minus strain of \"P. syringae\" became the first genetically modified organism (GMO) to be released into the environment when a strawberry field and a potato field in California were sprayed with it. Both test fields were attacked by activist groups the night before the tests occurred: \"The world's first trial site attracted the world's first field trasher\".\nThe first field trials of genetically engineered plants occurred in France and the US in 1986, and tobacco plants were engineered to be resistant to herbicides. The People's Republic of China was the first country to commercialise transgenic plants, introducing a virus-resistant tobacco in 1992. In 1994, Calgene received official approval to commercially release the first genetically modified food, the Flavr Savr, a tomato engineered to have a longer shelf life. In 1994, the European Union approved tobacco engineered to be resistant to the herbicide bromoxynil, making it the first genetically engineered crop commercialised in Europe. In 1995, Bt potato was approved safe by the Environmental Protection Agency, after having been approved by the FDA, making it the first pesticide-producing crop to be approved in the US. In 2009, 11 transgenic crops were grown commercially in 25 countries, the largest of which by area grown were the United States, Brazil, Argentina, India, Canada, People's Republic of China, Paraguay, and South Africa.\nIn 2010, scientists at the J. Craig Venter Institute created the first synthetic genome and inserted it into an empty bacterial cell. The resulting bacterium, named Mycoplasma laboratorium, could replicate and produce proteins. Four years later, this was taken a step further when a bacterium was developed that replicated a plasmid containing a unique base pair, creating the first organism engineered to use an expanded genetic alphabet. In 2012, Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier collaborated to develop the CRISPR/Cas9 system, a technique that can be used to easily and specifically alter the genome of almost any organism.\nProcess.\nCreating a GMO is a multi-step process. Genetic engineers must first choose which gene they wish to insert into the organism. This is driven by what the aim is for the resultant organism and is built on earlier research. Genetic screens can be carried out to determine potential genes, and further tests can then be used to identify the most suitable candidates. The development of microarrays, transcriptomics, and genome sequencing has made it much easier to find suitable genes. Luck also plays its part; the Roundup Ready gene was discovered after scientists noticed a bacterium thriving in the presence of the herbicide.\nGene isolation and cloning.\nThe next step is to isolate the candidate gene. The cell containing the gene is opened, and the DNA is purified. The gene is separated by using restriction enzymes to cut the DNA into fragments or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify up the gene segment. These segments can then be extracted through gel electrophoresis. If the chosen gene or the donor organism's genome has been well studied, it may already be accessible from a genetic library. If the DNA sequence is known, but no copies of the gene are available, it can also be artificially synthesised. Once isolated, the gene is ligated into a plasmid that is then inserted into a bacterium. The plasmid is replicated when the bacteria divide, ensuring unlimited copies of the gene are available. The RK2 plasmid is notable for its ability to replicate in a wide variety of single-celled organisms, which makes it suitable as a genetic engineering tool.\nBefore the gene is inserted into the target organism, it must be combined with other genetic elements. These include a promoter and terminator region, which initiate and end transcription. A selectable marker gene is added, which in most cases confers antibiotic resistance, so researchers can easily determine which cells have been successfully transformed. The gene can also be modified at this stage for better expression or effectiveness. These manipulations are carried out using recombinant DNA techniques, such as restriction digests, ligations, and molecular cloning.\nInserting DNA into the host genome.\nThere are a number of techniques used to insert genetic material into the host genome. Some bacteria can naturally take up foreign DNA. This ability can be induced in other bacteria via stress (e.g., thermal or electric shock), which increases the cell membrane's permeability to DNA; up-taken DNA can either integrate with the genome or exist as extrachromosomal DNA. DNA is generally inserted into animal cells using microinjection, where it can be injected through the cell's nuclear envelope directly into the nucleus, or through the use of viral vectors.\nPlant genomes can be engineered by physical methods or by the use of \"Agrobacterium\" for the delivery of sequences hosted in T-DNA binary vectors. In plants, the DNA is often inserted using \"Agrobacterium\"-mediated transformation, taking advantage of the \"Agrobacterium\"s T-DNA sequence that allows natural insertion of genetic material into plant cells. Other methods include biolistics, where particles of gold or tungsten are coated with DNA and then shot into young plant cells, and electroporation, which involves using an electric shock to make the cell membrane permeable to plasmid DNA.\nAs only a single cell is transformed with genetic material, the organism must be regenerated from that single cell. In plants, this is accomplished through the use of tissue culture. In animals, it is necessary to ensure that the inserted DNA is present in the embryonic stem cells. Bacteria consist of a single cell and reproduce clonally, so regeneration is not necessary. Selectable markers are used to easily differentiate transformed from untransformed cells. These markers are usually present in the transgenic organism, although a number of strategies have been developed that can remove the selectable marker from the mature transgenic plant.\nFurther testing using PCR, Southern hybridization, and DNA sequencing is conducted to confirm that an organism contains the new gene. These tests can also confirm the chromosomal location and copy number of the inserted gene. The presence of the gene does not guarantee it will be expressed at appropriate levels in the target tissue so methods that look for and measure the gene products (RNA and protein) are also used. These include northern hybridisation, quantitative RT-PCR, Western blot, immunofluorescence, ELISA, and phenotypic analysis.\nThe new genetic material can be inserted randomly within the host genome or targeted to a specific location. The technique of gene targeting uses homologous recombination to make desired changes to a specific endogenous gene. This tends to occur at a relatively low frequency in plants and animals and generally requires the use of selectable markers. The frequency of gene targeting can be greatly enhanced through genome editing. Genome editing utilizes artificially engineered nucleases that create specific double-stranded breaks at desired locations in the genome, and use the cell's endogenous mechanisms to repair the induced break by the natural processes of homologous recombination and nonhomologous end-joining. There are four families of engineered nucleases: meganucleases, zinc finger nucleases, transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and the Cas9-guideRNA system (adapted from CRISPR). TALEN and CRISPR are the two most commonly used, and each has its own advantages. TALENs have greater target specificity, while CRISPR is easier to design and more efficient. In addition to enhancing gene targeting, engineered nucleases can be used to introduce mutations at endogenous genes that generate a gene knockout.\nApplications.\nGenetic engineering has applications in medicine, research, industry, and agriculture, and can be used on a wide range of plants, animals, and microorganisms. Bacteria, the first organisms to be genetically modified, can have plasmid DNA inserted containing new genes that code for medicines or enzymes that process food and other substrates. Plants have been modified for insect protection, herbicide resistance, virus resistance, enhanced nutrition, tolerance to environmental pressures, and the production of edible vaccines. Most commercialised GMOs are insect-resistant or herbicide-tolerant crop plants. Genetically modified animals have been used for research, model animals, and the production of agricultural or pharmaceutical products. The genetically modified animals include animals with genes knocked out, increased susceptibility to disease, hormones for extra growth, and the ability to express proteins in their milk.\nMedicine.\nGenetic engineering has many applications to medicine that include the manufacturing of drugs, the creation of model animals that mimic human conditions, and gene therapy. One of the earliest uses of genetic engineering was to mass-produce human insulin in bacteria. This application has now been applied to human growth hormones, follicle-stimulating hormones (for treating infertility), human albumin, monoclonal antibodies, antihemophilic factors, vaccines, and many other drugs. Mouse hybridomas, cells fused together to create monoclonal antibodies, have been adapted through genetic engineering to create human monoclonal antibodies. Genetically engineered viruses are being developed that can still confer immunity, but lack the infectious sequences.\nGenetic engineering is also used to create animal models of human diseases. Genetically modified mice are the most common genetically engineered animal model. They have been used to study and model cancer (the oncomouse), obesity, heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, substance abuse, anxiety, aging, and Parkinson's disease. Potential cures can be tested against these mouse models. \nGene therapy is the genetic engineering of humans, generally by replacing defective genes with effective ones. Clinical research using somatic gene therapy has been conducted with several diseases, including X-linked SCID, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), and Parkinson's disease. In 2012, Alipogene tiparvovec became the first gene therapy treatment to be approved for clinical use. In 2015, a virus was used to insert a healthy gene into the skin cells of a boy suffering from a rare skin disease, epidermolysis bullosa, in order to grow, and then graft healthy skin onto 80 percent of the boy's body, which was affected by the illness.\nGermline gene therapy would result in any change being inheritable, which has raised concerns within the scientific community. In 2015, CRISPR was used to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos, leading scientists of major world academies to call for a moratorium on inheritable human genome edits. There are also concerns that the technology could be used not just for treatment, but for enhancement, modification, or alteration of a human beings' appearance, adaptability, intelligence, character, or behavior. The distinction between cure and enhancement can also be difficult to establish. In November 2018, He Jiankui announced that he had edited the genomes of two human embryos, to attempt to disable the \"CCR5\" gene, which codes for a receptor that HIV uses to enter cells. The work was widely condemned as unethical, dangerous, and premature. Currently, germline modification is banned in 40 countries. Scientists who perform this type of research will often let embryos grow for a few days without allowing them to develop into a baby.\nResearchers are altering the genome of pigs to induce the growth of human organs, with the aim of increasing the success of pig-to-human organ transplantation. Scientists are creating \"gene drives\", changing the genomes of mosquitoes to make them immune to malaria, and then looking to spread the genetically altered mosquitoes throughout the mosquito population in the hopes of eliminating the disease.\nResearch.\nGenetic engineering is an important tool for natural scientists, with the creation of transgenic organisms one of the most important tools for the analysis of gene function. Genes and other genetic information from a wide range of organisms can be inserted into bacteria for storage and modification, creating genetically modified bacteria in the process. Bacteria are cheap, easy to grow, clonal, multiply quickly, relatively easy to transform, and can be stored at -80\u00a0\u00b0C almost indefinitely. Once a gene is isolated, it can be stored inside the bacteria, providing an unlimited supply for research.\nOrganisms are genetically engineered to discover the functions of certain genes. This could be the effect on the phenotype of the organism, where the gene is expressed or what other genes it interacts with. These experiments generally involve loss of function, gain of function, tracking, and expression.\nIndustrial.\nOrganisms can have their cells transformed with a gene coding for a useful protein, such as an enzyme, so that they will overexpress the desired protein. Mass quantities of the protein can then be manufactured by growing the transformed organism in bioreactor equipment using industrial fermentation, and then purifying the protein. Some genes do not work well in bacteria, so yeast, insect cells or mammalian cells can also be used. These techniques are used to produce medicines such as insulin, human growth hormone, and vaccines, supplements such as tryptophan, aid in the production of food (chymosin in cheese making) and fuels. Other applications with genetically engineered bacteria could involve making them perform tasks outside their natural cycle, such as making biofuels, cleaning up oil spills, carbon and other toxic waste and detecting arsenic in drinking water. Certain genetically modified microbes can also be used in biomining and bioremediation, due to their ability to extract heavy metals from their environment and incorporate them into compounds that are more easily recoverable.\nIn materials science, a genetically modified virus has been used in a research laboratory as a scaffold for assembling a more environmentally friendly lithium-ion battery. Bacteria have also been engineered to function as sensors by expressing a fluorescent protein under certain environmental conditions.\nAgriculture.\nOne of the best-known and controversial applications of genetic engineering is the creation and use of genetically modified crops or genetically modified livestock to produce genetically modified food. Crops have been developed to increase production, increase tolerance to abiotic stresses, alter the composition of the food, or to produce novel products.\nThe first crops to be released commercially on a large scale provided protection from insect pests or tolerance to herbicides. Fungal and virus resistant crops have also been developed or are in development. This makes the insect and weed management of crops easier and can indirectly increase crop yield. GM crops that directly improve yield by accelerating growth or making the plant more hardy (by improving salt, cold or drought tolerance) are also under development. In 2016 Salmon have been genetically modified with growth hormones to reach normal adult size much faster.\nGMOs have been developed that modify the quality of produce by increasing the nutritional value or providing more industrially useful qualities or quantities. The Amflora potato produces a more industrially useful blend of starches. Soybeans and canola have been genetically modified to produce more healthy oils. The first commercialised GM food was a tomato that had delayed ripening, increasing its shelf life.\nPlants and animals have been engineered to produce materials they do not normally make. Pharming uses crops and animals as bioreactors to produce vaccines, drug intermediates, or the drugs themselves; the useful product is purified from the harvest and then used in the standard pharmaceutical production process. Cows and goats have been engineered to express drugs and other proteins in their milk, and in 2009 the FDA approved a drug produced in goat milk.\nOther applications.\nGenetic engineering has potential applications in conservation and natural area management. Gene transfer through viral vectors has been proposed as a means of controlling invasive species as well as vaccinating threatened fauna from disease. Transgenic trees have been suggested as a way to confer resistance to pathogens in wild populations. With the increasing risks of maladaptation in organisms as a result of climate change and other perturbations, facilitated adaptation through gene tweaking could be one solution to reducing extinction risks. Applications of genetic engineering in conservation are thus far mostly theoretical and have yet to be put into practice.\nGenetic engineering is also being used to create microbial art. Some bacteria have been genetically engineered to create black and white photographs. Novelty items such as lavender-colored carnations, blue roses, and glowing fish, have also been produced through genetic engineering.\nRegulation.\nThe regulation of genetic engineering concerns the approaches taken by governments to assess and manage the risks associated with the development and release of GMOs. The development of a regulatory framework began in 1975, at Asilomar, California. The Asilomar meeting recommended a set of voluntary guidelines regarding the use of recombinant technology. As the technology improved the US established a committee at the Office of Science and Technology, which assigned regulatory approval of GM food to the USDA, FDA and EPA. The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, an international treaty that governs the transfer, handling, and use of GMOs, was adopted on 29 January 2000. One hundred and fifty-seven countries are members of the Protocol, and many use it as a reference point for their own regulations.\nThe legal and regulatory status of GM foods varies by country, with some nations banning or restricting them, and others permitting them with widely differing degrees of regulation. Some countries allow the import of GM food with authorisation, but either do not allow its cultivation (Russia, Norway, Israel) or have provisions for cultivation even though no GM products are yet produced (Japan, South Korea). Most countries that do not allow GMO cultivation do permit research. Some of the most marked differences occur between the US and Europe. The US policy focuses on the product (not the process), only looks at verifiable scientific risks and uses the concept of substantial equivalence. The European Union by contrast has possibly the most stringent GMO regulations in the world. All GMOs, along with irradiated food, are considered \"new food\" and subject to extensive, case-by-case, science-based food evaluation by the European Food Safety Authority. The criteria for authorisation fall in four broad categories: \"safety\", \"freedom of choice\", \"labelling\", and \"traceability\". The level of regulation in other countries that cultivate GMOs lie in between Europe and the United States.\nOne of the key issues concerning regulators is whether GM products should be labeled. The European Commission says that mandatory labeling and traceability are needed to allow for informed choice, avoid potential false advertising and facilitate the withdrawal of products if adverse effects on health or the environment are discovered. The American Medical Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science say that absent scientific evidence of harm even voluntary labeling is misleading and will falsely alarm consumers. Labeling of GMO products in the marketplace is required in 64 countries. Labeling can be mandatory up to a threshold GM content level (which varies between countries) or voluntary. In Canada and the US labeling of GM food is voluntary, while in Europe all food (including processed food) or feed which contains greater than 0.9% of approved GMOs must be labelled.\nControversy.\nCritics have objected to the use of genetic engineering on several grounds, including ethical, ecological and economic concerns. Many of these concerns involve GM crops and whether food produced from them is safe and what impact growing them will have on the environment. These controversies have led to litigation, international trade disputes, and protests, and to restrictive regulation of commercial products in some countries.\nAccusations that scientists are \"playing God\" and other religious issues have been ascribed to the technology from the beginning. Other ethical issues raised include the patenting of life, the use of intellectual property rights, the level of labeling on products, control of the food supply and the objectivity of the regulatory process. Although doubts have been raised, economically most studies have found growing GM crops to be beneficial to farmers.\nGene flow between GM crops and compatible plants, along with increased use of selective herbicides, can increase the risk of \"superweeds\" developing. Other environmental concerns involve potential impacts on non-target organisms, including soil microbes, and an increase in secondary and resistant insect pests. Many of the environmental impacts regarding GM crops may take many years to be understood and are also evident in conventional agriculture practices. With the commercialisation of genetically modified fish there are concerns over what the environmental consequences will be if they escape.\nThere are three main concerns over the safety of genetically modified food: whether they may provoke an allergic reaction; whether the genes could transfer from the food into human cells; and whether the genes not approved for human consumption could outcross to other crops. There is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food, but that each GM food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction. Nonetheless, members of the public are less likely than scientists to perceive GM foods as safe.\nIn popular culture.\nGenetic engineering features in many science fiction stories. Frank Herbert's novel \"The White Plague\" describes the deliberate use of genetic engineering to create a pathogen which specifically kills women. Another of Herbert's creations, the \"Dune\" series of novels, uses genetic engineering to create the powerful Tleilaxu. Few films have informed audiences about genetic engineering, with the exception of the 1978 \"The Boys from Brazil\" and the 1993 \"Jurassic Park\", both of which make use of a lesson, a demonstration, and a clip of scientific film. Genetic engineering methods are weakly represented in film; Michael Clark, writing for the Wellcome Trust, calls the portrayal of genetic engineering and biotechnology \"seriously distorted\" in films such as \"The 6th Day\". In Clark's view, the biotechnology is typically \"given fantastic but visually arresting forms\" while the science is either relegated to the background or fictionalised to suit a young audience.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12384", "revid": "46502487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12384", "title": "Gettysburg Address", "text": "1863 speech by U.S. President Abraham Lincoln\nThe Gettysburg Address is a speech delivered by Abraham Lincoln, the 16th U.S. president, following the Battle of Gettysburg during the American Civil War. The speech has come to be viewed as one of the most famous, enduring, and historically significant speeches in American history.\nLincoln delivered the speech on the afternoon of November 19, 1863, during a formal dedication of Soldiers' National Cemetery, now known as Gettysburg National Cemetery, on the grounds where the Battle of Gettysburg was fought four and a half months earlier, between July 1 and July 3, 1863, in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania. In the battle, Union army soldiers successfully repelled and defeated Confederate forces in what proved to be the Civil War's deadliest and most decisive battle, resulting in more than 50,000 Confederate and Union army casualties in a Union victory that altered the war's course in the Union's favor.\nThe historical and enduring significance and fame of the Gettysburg Address is at least partly attributable to its brevity; it has only 271 words and read in less than two minutes before approximately 15,000 people who had gathered to commemorate the sacrifice of the Union soldiers, over 3,000 of whom were killed during the three-day battle. Lincoln began with a reference to the Declaration of Independence of 1776: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. He said that the Civil War was \"testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure\". Lincoln then extolled the sacrifices of the thousands who died in the Battle of Gettysburg in defense of those principles, and he argued that their sacrifice should elevate the nation's commitment to ensuring the Union prevailed and the nation endured, famously saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDespite the historical significance and fame that the speech ultimately obtained, Lincoln was scheduled to give only brief dedicatory remarks, following the main oration given by the elder statesman Edward Everett. Thus, Lincoln's closing remarks consumed a very small fraction of the day's event, which lasted for several hours. Nor was Lincoln's address immediately recognized as particularly significant. Over time, however, it came to be widely viewed as one of the greatest and most influential statements ever delivered on the American national purpose, and it came to be seen as one of the most prominent examples of the successful use of the English language and rhetoric to advance a political cause. \"The Gettysburg Address did not enter the broader American canon until decades after Lincoln's death, following World War I and the 1922 opening of the Lincoln Memorial, where the speech is etched in marble. As the Gettysburg Address gained in popularity, it became a staple of school textbooks and readers, and the succinctness of the three paragraph oration permitted it to be memorized by generations of American school children,\" the History Channel reported in November 2024.\nBackground.\nIn inviting President Lincoln to speak at the ceremony, David Wills, a member of the committee for the November 19 Consecration of the National Cemetery at Gettysburg, wrote, \"It is the desire that, after the Oration, you, as Chief Executive of the nation, formally set apart these grounds to their sacred use by a few appropriate remarks.\"\nOn November 18, 1863, Lincoln departed Washington, D.C. for Gettysburg, accompanied by three of his cabinet members, William Seward, John Usher, and Montgomery Blair, several foreign officials, his secretary John Nicolay, and his assistant secretary, John Hay. During the trip, Lincoln told Hay that he felt weak. The following morning, on November 19, Lincoln mentioned to Nicolay that he felt dizzy. Hay noted during the speech that Lincoln's face had \"a ghastly color\" and that he was \"sad, mournful, almost haggard\". After the speech, when Lincoln boarded the 6:30pm train to return to Washington, D.C., he was feverish and weak with a severe headache. He was subsequently diagnosed with a mild case of smallpox, which included a vesicular rash. Modern clinicians believe that Lincoln was likely in a prodromal period of smallpox when he delivered the Gettysburg Address.\nLincoln arrived in Gettysburg later that night, just as the city was beginning to fill with large crowds who had arrived to participate in it the following day. Lincoln spent the night in Wills' house, where a large crowd appeared, singing and wanting Lincoln to speak. Lincoln left Wills' house to meet the crowd, but did not deliver any formal remarks, instead speaking briefly and extemporaneously. The crowd then continued on to the house where Lincoln's Secretary of State William Seward was staying that night. Seward spoke to crowd. Later that night, Lincoln wrote and briefly met with Seward before going to sleep around midnight.\nWhile Lincoln's short address proved to be by far the most historically notable that day, and is often held up as an example of English public oratory, Edward Everett's oration was slated to be the main speech of the day. His now seldom read speech was 13,607 words in length, and lasted two hours. During this era, lengthy dedication addresses of cemeteries, like the one delivered by Everett, were very common. The tradition began in 1831 when Justice Joseph Story delivered a lengthy dedication address at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Many of the lengthy addresses of the era linked cemeteries to the mission of the Union.\nText.\nShortly after Everett concluded his lengthy speech, which was well received by the crowd, Lincoln rose and, from the speakers' podium, addressed the crowd for only approximately two minutes. His 271-word speech was ten sentences long.\nDespite the historical significance of Lincoln's speech, modern scholars disagree on the precise wording in Lincoln's speech, and contemporary transcriptions published in newspaper accounts of the event and several of Lincoln's handwritten copies of the address differ slightly in wording, punctuation, and structure. Among these versions, the Bliss version, written by Lincoln after the speech as a favor for a friend, is viewed by many as the standard text. Its text differs, however, from the written versions prepared by Lincoln before and after his speech. But it is the only version which includes Lincoln's signature, and the last version of the speech that he is known to have written. \nThe Bliss version is as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFour score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.\nNow we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battle-field of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this.\nBut, in a larger sense, we can not dedicate\u2014we can not consecrate\u2014we can not hallow\u2014this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us\u2014that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion\u2014that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain\u2014that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom\u2014and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.\n\u2014Abraham Lincoln\nLincoln's sources.\nIn \"Lincoln at Gettysburg\", Garry Wills notes the parallels between Lincoln's speech and Pericles's Funeral Oration during the Peloponnesian War, described by Thucydides. Pericles' speech, like Lincoln's:\nJames M. McPherson notes this connection in his review of Wills's book. Gore Vidal also draws attention to this link in a BBC documentary about oration.\nIn contrast, writer Adam Gopnik, in \"The New Yorker\", notes that Everett's oration was explicitly neoclassical, referring directly to Marathon and Pericles. \"Lincoln's rhetoric is, instead, deliberately Biblical. (It is difficult to find a single obviously classical reference in any of his speeches.) Lincoln had mastered the sound of the King James Bible so completely that he could recast abstract issues of constitutional law in Biblical terms, making the proposition that Texas and New Hampshire should be forever bound by a single post office sound like something right out of Genesis,\" Gopnik wrote.\nWills also observed Lincoln's usage of the imagery of birth, life, and death in the address, during which he referenced the nation as being \"brought forth\", \"conceived\", and saying that it shall not \"perish\". A 1959 thesis by William J. Wolf suggested that the address had a central image of baptism, although Glenn LaFantasie, writing for the \"Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association\", believes that Wolf's position was likely an overstatement. Philip B. Kunhardt Jr. suggests that Lincoln was inspired by the \"Book of Common Prayer\".\nHistorian Allen C. Guelzo and others have suggested that Lincoln's phrase, \"four score and seven\", was an indirect reference to the King James Version of the Bible in which man's lifespan is described as \"threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years\". LaFantasie also connected \"four score and seven years\" with Psalms 90:10, and referred to Lincoln's usage of the phrase \"our fathers\" as \"mindful of the Lord's Prayer\". He also refers to Garry Wills's tracing of spiritual language in the address to the Gospel of Luke.\n\"Government of the people, by the people, for the people\".\nLincoln scholars have several theories about Lincoln's use of the phrase \"government of the people, by the people, for the people\" in the Gettysburg Address. Despite claims to the contrary, there is no evidence that a similar phrase appears in the prologue of John Wycliffe's 1384 English translation of the Bible.\nIn \"A more probable origin of a famous Lincoln phrase\", published in 1901 in \"The American Monthly Review of Reviews\", Unitarian minister John White Chadwick observed that Lincoln's law partner William Herndon was known to have brought Lincoln several sermons by Theodore Parker, an abolitionist minister from Massachusetts, which proved inspiring and influential to Lincoln. Herndon wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I brought with me additional sermons and lectures of Theodore Parker, who was warm in his commendation of Lincoln. One of these was a lecture on \"The Effect of Slavery on the American People\"\u00a0... which I gave to Lincoln, who read and returned it. He liked especially the following expression, which he marked with a pencil, and which he in substance afterwards used in his Gettysburg Address: \"Democracy is direct self-government, over all the people, for all the people, by all the people.\"\nCraig R. Smith, in \"Criticism of Political Rhetoric and Disciplinary Integrity\", suggested that the views of government that Lincoln described in the Gettysburg Address were influenced by Daniel Webster. In his \"Second Reply to Hayne\" speech of January 26, 1830, Webster said, \"Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable!\" Webster described the federal government as, \"made for the people, made by the people, and answerable to the people\", possibly influencing Lincoln's use of \"government of the people, by the people, for the people\". Webster, in turn, may have been influenced by an 1819 speech by John Hobhouse, 1st Baron Broughton, who said, \"I am a man chosen for the people, by the people; and, if elected, I will do no other business than that of the people.\" In Webster's \"Second Reply to Hayne\" speech, he also said, \"This government, Sir, is the independent offspring of the popular will. It is not the creature of State legislatures; nay, more, if the whole truth must be told, the people brought it into existence, established it, and have hitherto supported it, for the very purpose, amongst others, of imposing certain salutary restraints on State sovereignties.\"\nA 2018 article claims that Lincoln was influenced by an 1852 speech by Lajos Kossuth, the leader of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, given before Ohio legislature, that included the phrase, \"The spirit of our age is Democracy. All for the people, and all by the people. Nothing about the people without the people \u2013 That is Democracy!\"\nManuscripts.\nThere are five known manuscript copies of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. Each manuscript is named for the person who received it from Lincoln. Lincoln gave copies to his private secretaries, John Nicolay and John Hay. Both of these drafts were written around the time of his November 19 address, while the other three copies of the address, the Everett, Bancroft, and Bliss copies, were written by Lincoln for charitable purposes after November 19. In part because Lincoln provided a title and signed and dated the Bliss copy, that version has become the standard text of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.\nIn 1874, Nicolay and Hay were appointed custodians of Lincoln's papers by Robert Todd Lincoln, Lincoln's son. After appearing in facsimile in an article written by John Nicolay in 1894, the Nicolay copy was presumably among the papers given to Hay by Nicolay's daughter, Helen, following Nicolay's death in 1901. In 1908, Robert Lincoln began searching for the original copy of the Gettysburg Address, leading to his discovery of a handwritten copy that was part of the bound papers of John Hay, a copy now known as the \"Hay copy\" or \"Hay draft\".\nThe Hay draft differed notably from the version of the Gettysburg Address published by John Nicolay. It was written on a different type of paper, had a different number of words per line and number of lines, and included editorial revisions that were personally made by Lincoln to the speech.\nBoth the Hay and Nicolay copies of the Gettysburg Address are now housed at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., where they are encased in specially designed, temperature-controlled, sealed containers with argon gas designed to protect the documents from oxidation and continued deterioration.\nNicolay copy.\nThe Nicolay copy&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a] is often called the \"first draft\" of the Gettysburg Address because it is believed to be the earliest copy that exists of it. Scholars disagree over whether the Nicolay copy was actually the copy Lincoln used at Gettysburg on November 19. In an 1894 article, which included a facsimile of the this copy, Nicolay, the custodian of Lincoln's papers, wrote that Lincoln brought the first part of the speech written in ink on Executive Mansion stationery, and that he wrote the second page in pencil on lined paper before the ceremonial dedication on November 19. Matching folds are still evident on the two pages, suggesting that it could be the copy that eyewitnesses say Lincoln took from his coat pocket and read from at the ceremony. Others believe that the delivery text has been lost, because some of the words and phrases of the Nicolay copy do not match contemporary transcriptions of Lincoln's original speech. The words \"under God\", for example, are missing in this copy from the phrase \"that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom\u00a0...\" In order for the Nicolay draft to have been the reading copy, either the contemporary transcriptions were inaccurate, or Lincoln would have had to depart from his written text in several instances. This copy of the Gettysburg Address apparently remained in John Nicolay's possession until his death in 1901, when it passed to his friend and colleague John Hay. The Nicolay version was on previously on display as part of the American Treasures exhibition at the Library of Congress.\nHay copy.\nThe Hay copy of the address&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[b] was first announced to the public in 1906, following a search for the original manuscript of the address. It was found among the papers of John Hay. The Hay copy differs somewhat from the manuscript of the address described by Nicolay in his article, and includes several omissions and insertions made by Lincoln, including omissions critical to the basic meaning of the sentence, not simply words that would be added by Lincoln to strengthen or clarify their meaning. In this copy of the address, like the Nicolay copy, the words \"under God\" are not present.\nThe Hay version has been described as \"the most inexplicable\" of the drafts and is sometimes referred to as the \"second draft\". The Hay copy was written by Lincoln either the morning before the event, or shortly after Lincoln's return to Washington, D.C.. Those who believe that it was completed the morning of his address point to the fact that it includes several phrases that are not present in the first draft, which do appear in media coverage of the address and in subsequent copies made by Lincoln. It is probable, they conclude, that, as the Library of Congress includes in an explanatory note accompanying the original copies of the first and second drafts, that this was the version that Lincoln read from when he delivered the address. Lincoln eventually gave this copy of the speech to Hay, whose descendants donated it and the Nicolay copy to the Library of Congress in 1916.\nEverett copy.\nThe Everett copy,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[c] also known as the \"Everett-Keyes copy\", was given to Edward Everett by Lincoln in early 1864, after Everett requested it. Everett collected the speeches at the Gettysburg dedication into a bound volume, which was sold for the benefit of stricken soldiers at New York's Sanitary Commission Fair. The draft Lincoln sent Everett is known as the third autograph copy, and is now held by the Illinois State Library in Springfield, Illinois, where it is displayed in the Treasures Gallery of the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum.\nBancroft copy.\nThe Bancroft copy&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[d] of the Gettysburg Address was written out by Lincoln in February 1864, following the ceremonial dedication, at the request of George Bancroft, a former Secretary of the Navy and historian whose comprehensive ten-volume \"History of the United States\" later led him to be known as the \"father of American History\". Bancroft planned to include this copy of the Gettysburg Address in \"Autograph Leaves of Our Country's Authors\", which he planned to sell at a Soldiers' and Sailors' Sanitary Fair in Baltimore. This copy, known as the fourth copy of the address, was written by Lincoln on both sides of the paper, and it ultimately proved unusable for this purpose, and Bancroft was allowed to keep it. This manuscript is the only one version accompanied by a letter from Lincoln transmitting the manuscript and by the original envelope addressed and franked by Lincoln. The Bancroft copy was held by the Bancroft family for many years, and was later sold to various dealers and purchased by Nicholas and Marguerite Lilly Noyes, who donated it to Cornell University in 1949. The Bancroft copy is now held by the Division of Rare and Manuscript Collections in the Carl A. Kroch Library at Cornell University. This is the only copy among the five that is privately owned.\nBliss copy.\nDiscovering that his fourth written copy could not be used, Lincoln then wrote a fifth and final draft, known as the Bliss copy&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[e] and named for Colonel Alexander Bliss, Bancroft's stepson and publisher of \"Autograph Leaves\". It is the only copy of the address that is signed by Lincoln and the final version of the address that Lincoln is known to have written. Because of the care Lincoln used in preparing the Bliss copy and because this copy includes a title and is signed and dated by Lincoln, it is considered the standard version of the Gettysburg Address and the source for most facsimile reproductions of Lincoln's Gettysburg Address. It is the version that is inscribed on the South wall of the Lincoln Memorial.\nThis draft is now displayed in the Lincoln Room of the White House, a gift of Oscar B. Cintas, former Cuban Ambassador to the United States. Cintas, a wealthy collector of art and manuscripts, purchased the Bliss copy at a public auction in 1949 for $54,000 ($ as of 2024), at that time the highest price ever paid for a document at public auction. Cintas' properties were claimed by the Castro government after the Cuban Revolution in 1959. Cintas, who died in 1957, willed the Gettysburg Address to the American people, provided it would be kept at the White House, where it was transferred in 1959.\nGarry Wills concluded that the Bliss copy \"is stylistically preferable to others in one significant way: Lincoln removed 'here' from 'that cause for which they (here) gave\u00a0...' The seventh 'here' is in all other versions of the speech.\" Wills noted the fact that Lincoln \"was still making such improvements\", suggesting Lincoln was more concerned with a perfected text than with an \"original\" one.\nFrom November 21, 2008, to January 1, 2009, the Albert H. Small Documents Gallery at the Smithsonian Institution National Museum of American History hosted a limited public viewing of the Bliss copy, with the support of then First Lady Laura Bush. The museum also launched an online exhibition and interactive gallery to enable visitors to look more closely at the document.\nAssociated Press report.\nAnother contemporary source of the text is a dispatch by Joseph L. Gilbert, Associated Press, transcribed from the shorthand notes taken by reporter Joseph L. Gilbert. It also differs from the drafted text in a number of minor ways.\nContemporary sources and reaction.\nEyewitness reports vary on Lincoln's performance and delivery of the Gettysburg Address. In 1931, the printed recollections of 87-year-old Mrs. Sarah A. Cooke Myers, who was 19 when she attended the ceremony, suggest a dignified silence followed Lincoln's speech. \"I was close to the President and heard all of the Address, but it seemed short. Then there was an impressive silence like our Menallen Friends Meeting. There was no applause when he stopped speaking.\" According to historian Shelby Foote, after Lincoln's presentation, the applause was delayed, scattered, and \"barely polite\". In contrast, Pennsylvania Governor Andrew Gregg Curtin says, \"He pronounced that speech in a voice that all the multitude heard. The crowd was hushed into silence because the President stood before them\u00a0... It was so Impressive! It was the common remark of everybody. Such a speech, as they said it was!\"\nIn an often repeated legend, Lincoln is said to have turned to his bodyguard Ward Hill Lamon and remarked that his speech, like a bad plow, \"won't scour\". According to Garry Wills, however, this statement largely originates from Lamon's unreliable recollections and is not an accepted fact. In Garry Wills's view, \"[Lincoln] had done what he wanted to do [at Gettysburg]\".\nIn a letter to Lincoln written the day following his address in Gettysburg, Everett praised the President for the speech, saying, \"I should be glad if I could flatter myself that I came as near to the central idea of the occasion, in two hours, as you did in two minutes.\" Lincoln replied that he was glad to know the speech was not a \"total failure\".\nOther public reactions to the speech were divided along partisan lines. The Democratic-leaning \"Chicago Times\" observed, \"The cheek of every American must tingle with shame as he reads the silly, flat and dishwatery utterances of the man who has to be pointed out to intelligent foreigners as the President of the United States.\" The Republican-leaning \"The New York Times\", however, was complimentary of Lincoln's address, and printed the full text. The \"Springfield Republican\" in Springfield, Massachusetts also printed the entire speech, calling it \"a perfect gem\" that was \"deep in feeling, compact in thought and expression, and tasteful and elegant in every word and comma\". The \"Republican\" predicted that Lincoln's brief remarks would \"repay further study as the model speech\".\nIn 2013, on the sesquicentennial of the address, \"The Patriot-News\" in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, retracted its original reporting on the address, which it described as \"silly remarks\" deserving \"the veil of oblivion\", writing further that, \"Seven score and ten years ago, the forefathers of this media institution brought forth to its audience a judgment so flawed, so tainted by hubris, so lacking in the perspective history would bring, that it cannot remain unaddressed in our archives.\u00a0... the \"Patriot &amp; Union\" failed to recognize [the speech's] momentous importance, timeless eloquence, and lasting significance. The \"Patriot-News\" regrets the error.\"\nForeign newspapers also reported critically on Lincoln's address. In London, \"The Times\" reported, \"The ceremony [at Gettysburg] was rendered ludicrous by some of the luckless sallies of that poor President Lincoln.\"\nCongressman Joseph A. Goulden, then an eighteen-year-old school teacher, was present and heard the speech. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps during the Civil War, and was later elected to Congress as a Democrat. Goulden was often asked about the speech, since the passage of time made him one of a dwindling number of individuals who were present for it. He responded that the event and Lincoln's remarks were met favorably, saying that Lincoln's address served as a factor that inspired him to enter military service. Goulden's recollections were summarized in remarks to the House of Representatives in 1914.\nAudio recollections.\nWilliam R. Rathvon is the only known eyewitness of both Lincoln's arrival at Gettysburg and the address itself whose recollections have been recorded in audio format. One year before his death in 1939, Rathvon's reminiscences were recorded on February 12, 1938, at WRUL in Boston, including his reading the address, and a 78 RPM record was pressed. The title of the 78 record was, \"I Heard Lincoln That Day \u2013 William R. Rathvon, TR Productions\". A copy of it was later aired by National Public Radio (NPR) during its \"Quest for Sound\" project in 1999.\nLike most people who were present that day in Gettysburg, the Rathvon family was aware that Lincoln was going to offer some remarks to the assembled crowd. The family went to the town square where the procession formed and proceeded to the cemetery, which was then still under construction. At the head of the procession, Lincoln rode on a gray horse preceded by a military band, the first the young boy in the Rathvon family had ever seen. Rathvon describes Lincoln as so tall and with such long legs that they went almost to the ground; he also mentions the long eloquent speech given by Edward Everett, who Rathvon described as the \"most finished orator of the day\". Rathvon described Lincoln stepping forward \"with a manner serious almost to sadness, gave his brief address\". During Lincoln's delivery, the young Rathvon boy and several others wiggled their way forward through the crowd until they stood within of Lincoln, and looked up into what he described as Lincoln's \"serious face\". Rathvon later said that he listened \"intently to every word the president uttered and heard it clearly\", but \"boylike, I could not recall any of it afterwards\". However, he said, if any of his companions had said anything disparaging about \"old Abe\", there would have been a \"junior Battle of Gettysburg then and there\".\nPhotographs.\nThe only known and confirmed photograph of Lincoln at Gettysburg, was taken by photographer David Bachrach. Lincoln's presence in the photo was identified in 1952 by Josephine Cobb, an archivist who enlarged a mislabeled glass plate negative, which revealed Lincoln's presence in the photo that was then on display at Mathew Brady's collection of photographic plates at the National Archives and Records Administration.\nWhile Lincoln's speech was short and may have precluded multiple pictures of him while speaking, he and the other dignitaries sat for hours during the rest of the program. A popular explanation for the Bachrach photo suggests that Lincoln's brief address, which followed a lengthy two hour speech by Everett, caught photographers by surprise. As a result, they supposedly were able to only take a photo of Lincoln after his speech had ended. This theory, however, has been questioned, since evidence exists suggesting that the photo was possibly taken before the Gettysburg Address and without any intention of photographing Lincoln from such a lengthy distance.\nUsage of \"under God\".\nThe exact phrase \"under God\" does not appear in the Nicolay and Hay drafts. But it does appear in the three later copies held by Everett, Bancroft, and Bliss. This has led some skeptics to question whether the words \"under God\" were included in the remarks Lincoln gave that day. However, at least three reporters telegraphed the text of Lincoln's speech on the day the Address was given with the words \"under God\" included. Historian William E. Barton argues that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every stenographic report, good, bad and indifferent, says 'that the nation shall, under God, have a new birth of freedom.' There was no common source from which all the reporters could have obtained those words but from Lincoln's own lips at the time of delivery. It will not do to say that [Secretary of War] Stanton suggested those words after Lincoln's return to Washington, for the words were telegraphed by at least three reporters on the afternoon of the delivery.\nReporters present for Lincoln's Gettysburg Address included Joseph Gilbert with the Associated Press, Charles Hale with the \"Boston Daily Advertiser\", John R. Young with the \"Philadelphia Press\", and reporters from the \"Cincinnati Commercial\" \"New York Tribune\", and \"The New York Times\". Hale, according to later reports, arrived at the event, and \"had notebook and pencil in hand, [and] took down the slow-spoken words of the President\". \"He took down what he declared was the exact language of Lincoln's address, and his declaration was as good as the oath of a court stenographer. His associates confirmed his testimony, which was received, as it deserved to be, at its face value.\" One explanation is that Lincoln deviated from his prepared text and inserted the phrase when he spoke. Ronald C. White, visiting professor of history at the University of California, Los Angeles and professor of American religious history emeritus at San Francisco Theological Seminary, wrote:\nIt was an uncharacteristically spontaneous revision for a speaker who did not trust extemporaneous speech. Lincoln had added impromptu words in several earlier speeches, but always offered a subsequent apology for the change. In this instance, he did not. And Lincoln included \"under God\" in all three copies of the address he prepared at later dates. \"Under God\" pointed backward and forward: back to \"this nation\", which drew its breath from both political and religious sources, but also forward to a \"new birth\". Lincoln had come to see the Civil War as a ritual of purification. The old Union had to die. The old man had to die. Death became a transition to a new Union and a new humanity.\nPrior to 1860, the phrase \"under God\" was used frequently, usually meaning \"with God's help\".\nPlatform location.\nOutside of both entrances to present-day Gettysburg National Cemetery, there are two historical markers, which read:\nNearby, Nov. 19, 1863, in dedicating the National Cemetery, Abraham Lincoln gave the address which he had written in Washington and revised after his arrival at Gettysburg the evening of November 18.\nDirectly inside the Taneytown Road entrance are the Lincoln Address Memorial and Gettysburg Rostrum, where five U.S. Presidents have spoken. Lincoln, however, was not one of them, and a small metal sign near the speech memorial stirs remains somewhat controversial, reading:\nThe Address was delivered about 300 yards from this spot along the upper Cemetery drive. The site is now marked by the Soldiers' National Monument.\nHolding title as the \"traditional site\", the Soldiers' National Monument has been challenged by platform occupants in the distant past and by more recent photographic analyses. Based upon a pair of photographic analyses, the Gettysburg National Military Park has placed a marker near https://, which states, \"The location [of the platform] was never marked, but is believed to be in Evergreen Cemetery, on the other side of the iron fence.\"\nThis newer marker stands faces the fence, which separates the two adjacent cemeteries, the public Gettysburg National Cemetery and private Evergreen Cemetery. A second endorsement of this as the \"traditional site\", a bronze marker placed by Lincoln's native Kentucky section of the cemetery is nearby.\nAbsent an original and enduring marker, however, the location of the platform has largely been left up to interpretation. Brian Kennell, superintendent of Evergreen Cemetery, endorses the location identified in the photographic evidence as the location where Lincoln stood as he delivered the Gettysburg Address.\nPre-modern.\nColonel W. Yates Selleck, a marshal in the parade on Consecration Day, was seated on the platform when Lincoln gave the address. Selleck marked a map with the position of the platform and described it as \" almost due north of Soldiers' National Monument, from a point in the outer circle of lots where [the] Michigan and New York [burial sections] are separated by a path\". A location which approximates this description is https://.\nIn 1973, retired park historian Frederick Tilberg concluded the Selleck Site is lower than the crest of Cemetery Hill, and that only the crest presents a panoramic view of the battlefield. A spectacular view from the location of the speech was noted by many eyewitnesses, is consistent with the traditional site at the Soldiers' National Monument and other sites on the crest, but is inconsistent with the Selleck Site.\nThe Kentucky Memorial, erected in 1975, is directly adjacent to the Soldiers' National Monument, and states, \"Kentucky honors her son, Abraham Lincoln, who delivered his immortal address at the site now marked by the soldiers' monument.\" With its position at the center of the concentric rings of soldiers' graves and the continuing endorsement of Lincoln's native state the Soldiers' National Monument persists as a credible location for the speech.\nIn November 1863, in a written description of the layout for the Gettysburg National Cemetery, which was then under construction, a correspondent from the \"Cincinnati Daily Commercial\" described the dividing lines between the state grave plots as \"the radii of a common center, where a flag pole is now raised, but where it is proposed to erect a national monument\". With the inclusion of this quotation Tilberg inadvertently verifies a central principle of future photographic analyses\u2014a flagpole, rather than the speakers' platform, occupied the central point of the soldiers' graves. In fact, the precision of the photo-analyses relies upon the coincidence of position between this temporary flag pole and the future monument.\nConfusing to today's tourist, the Kentucky Memorial is contradicted by a newer marker, which was erected nearby by the Gettysburg National Military Park and locates the speakers' platform inside Evergreen Cemetery. Similarly, outdated National Park Service documents, which pinpoint the location as being at Soldiers' National Monument, have not been systematically revised since the placement of the newer marker. Miscellaneous web pages perpetuate the \"Traditional Site.\"\nPhoto analysis.\n2D and optical stereoscopy.\nIn 1982, Senior Park Historian Kathleen Georg Harrison analyzed photographs and proposed the location in Evergreen Cemetery, but she has not published her analysis. Speaking for Harrison without revealing details, two sources characterized her proposed location as \"on or near [the] Brown family vault\" in Evergreen Cemetery.\nIn 1995, William A. Frassanito, a former military intelligence analyst, documented a comprehensive photographic analysis, which places the location of the platform with the position of specific modern headstones in Evergreen Cemetery. According to Frassanito, the extant graves of Israel Yount (died 1892)(), John Koch (died 1913)(), and George E. Kitzmiller (died 1874)() are among those which occupy the location of the 1863 speaker's stand.\n3D photo-rendering and -animation.\nOver a course of many years, Christopher Oakley, an assistant professor of new media at the University of North Carolina at Asheville and his students have labored to produce and relentlessly perfect \"a lifelike virtual 3-D re-creation of Lincoln delivering the Gettysburg Address\" as part of the Virtual Lincoln Project. One result concluded, \"Placing the Platform: Using 3D Technology to Pinpoint Lincoln at Gettysburg\" was presented on November 18, 2022, at the Lincoln Forum XXVII in Gettysburg.\nOakley's model shows the platform straddling the iron fence between the Soldiers' National Cemetery and Evergreen Cemetery. It increases the size of the platform and changes its shape from rectangular, as previous researchers have maintained, to trapezoidal. The speaker's position occupies a portion of the platform over the grounds of the Soldiers' National Cemetery.\nWilliam Frassanito's analysis is based on two of the four photographic perspectives, which were employed by Oakley to validate his 3D model. Frassanito assesses one of his sources, saying, \"This view [by Weaver] was probably not taken from the second-story window of the gatehouse itself.\" Via enlargement of a Gardner photograph (taken from the opposite direction), John J. Richter may have identified a photographer with a camera in this exact window, thereby weakening the contribution of the Weaver photograph to Frassanito's conclusions. Oakley's proprietary 3D model utilizes the position of Weaver's camera as suggested by Richter.\nResolution.\nThe Gettysburg National Military Park marker, consistent with the findings of various historians, identifies the private Evergreen Cemetery, rather than public Soldiers' National Cemetery, as the exact location where Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address. The National Park Service, in its description of Gettysburg National Cemetery, also identifies this as the location where Lincoln spoke that day:\nThe Soldiers' National Monument, long misidentified as the spot from which Lincoln spoke, honors the fallen soldiers. [The location of the speech] was actually on the crown of this hill, a short distance on the other side of the iron fence and inside the Evergreen Cemetery, where President Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg Address to a crowd of some 15,000 people.\nAlthough Lincoln dedicated the Gettysburg National Cemetery, the monument at the center of the cemetery is unrelated to Lincoln or his famous speech. Intended to symbolize Columbia paying tribute to her fallen sons, its appreciation has been commandeered by the thirst for a tidy home for the speech. Freeing the Cemetery and Monument to serve their original purpose, honoring of Union departed, is as unlikely as a resolution to the location controversy and the erection of a public monument to the speech in the exclusively private Evergreen Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nThe importance of the Gettysburg Address in the history of the United States is underscored by its enduring presence in American culture. In addition to its prominent place carved into a stone cella on the south wall of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., the Gettysburg Address is frequently referenced in popular culture, with the implicit expectation that contemporary audiences are already familiar with the words Lincoln used .\nIn the many generations that have passed since the address, it has remained among the most famous speeches in American history and is often taught in classes about history or civics. Lincoln's Gettysburg Address is referenced in another famed oration, Martin Luther King Jr.'s \"I Have a Dream\" speech. \nPhrases from the Gettysburg Address are often used or referenced in other works. The current Constitution of France states that the principle of the French Republic is \"\"gouvernement du peuple, par le peuple et pour le peuple\"\" (\"government of the people, by the people, and for the people\"), a literal translation of Lincoln's words. Sun Yat-Sen's \"Three Principles of the People\" as well as the preamble for the 1947 Constitution of Japan were also inspired from that phrase.\nFollowing Lincoln's assassination, Charles Sumner, a U.S. Senator from Massachusetts from 1851 to 1874, described the enduring significance of the Gettysburg Address, saying, \"That speech, uttered at the field of Gettysburg\u00a0... and now sanctified by the martyrdom of its author,\" is a monumental act. In the modesty of his nature, he said, \"the world will little note, nor long remember what we say here; but it can never forget what they did here.' He was mistaken. The world at once noted what he said, and will never cease to remember it.\"\nIn January 1961, then U.S. president John F. Kennedy tasked his speechwriter Ted Sorensen with studying the Gettysburg Address in an effort to assist Sorensen in authoring Kennedy's inaugural address. Sorensen drew many lessons from the Gettysburg Address, which according to Sorensen included rhetoric devices used by many speechwriters like alliterations, rhymes, repetitions, contrast, and balance.\nIn July 1963, Kennedy referenced the Battle of Gettysburg and Gettysburg Address during his own speech in Gettysburg, saying, \"Five score years ago, the ground on which we here stand shuddered under the clash of arms and was consecrated for all time by the blood of American manhood. Abraham Lincoln, in dedicating this great battlefield, has expressed, in words too eloquent for paraphrase or summary, why this sacrifice was necessary.\"\nIn 2015, the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library Foundation compiled \"Gettysburg Replies: The World Responds to Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address\", a book that challenges leaders to craft 272-word responses celebrating Lincoln, the Gettysburg Address, or a related topic. One reply by Neil deGrasse Tyson, an astrophysicist, described Lincoln's greatest legacy as establishing, the same year of the Gettysburg Address, the National Academy of Sciences, which had the longterm effect of \"setting our Nation on a course of scientifically enlightened governance, without which we all may perish from this Earth\".\nMyths.\nOne myth about the Gettysburg Address is that Lincoln quickly authored the speech on the back of an envelope while on the train en route from Washington, D.C, to Gettysburg the day before the address. This widely held misunderstanding may have originated with \"The Perfect Tribute\", a 1906 book by Mary Raymond Shipman Andrews, which was assigned reading for generations of schoolchildren, sold 600,000 copies, and was twice adapted into a movie.\nOther lesser known claims include Harriet Beecher Stowe's inaccurate assertion that Lincoln composed the address \"in only a few moments\", and statements by industrialist Andrew Carnegie, who wrongly said he personally supplied Lincoln with the pen with which he authored the address.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a https:// (jpg), https:// (jpg). The Library of Congress.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;b https:// (jpg), https:// (jpg). The Library of Congress.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;c https:// (jpg). virtualgettsyburg.com. Retrieved from internet archive 2007-06-14 version on 2007-12-10.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;d https:// (pic), https:// (pic), https:// (pic). Cornell University Library. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;e https:// (jpg), https:// (jpg), https:// (jpg). Illinois Historic Preservation Agency. Retrieved on 2007-12-11.\n Citations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Bibliography \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12385", "revid": "203434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12385", "title": "Genetic code", "text": "Rules by which information encoded within genetic material is translated into proteins\nGenetic code is a set of rules used by living cells to translate information encoded within genetic material (DNA or RNA sequences of nucleotide triplets or codons) into proteins. Translation is accomplished by the ribosome, which links proteinogenic amino acids in an order specified by messenger RNA (mRNA), using transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules to carry amino acids and to read the mRNA three nucleotides at a time. The genetic code is highly similar among all organisms and can be expressed in a simple table with 64 entries.\nThe codons specify which amino acid will be added next during protein biosynthesis. With some exceptions, a three-nucleotide codon in a nucleic acid sequence specifies a single amino acid. The vast majority of genes are encoded with a single scheme (see the RNA codon table). That scheme is often called the canonical or standard genetic code, or simply \"the\" genetic code, though variant codes (such as in mitochondria) exist.\nHistory.\nEfforts to understand how proteins are encoded began after DNA's structure was discovered in 1953. The key discoverers, English biophysicist Francis Crick and American biologist James Watson, working together at the Cavendish Laboratory of the University of Cambridge, hypothesied that information flows from DNA and that there is a link between DNA and proteins. Soviet-American physicist George Gamow was the first to give a workable scheme for protein synthesis from DNA. He postulated that sets of three bases (triplets) must be employed to encode the 20 standard amino acids used by living cells to build proteins, which would allow a maximum of 43 \n 64 amino acids (all permutations of the four bases, read three at a time). He named this DNA\u2013protein interaction (the original genetic code) as the \"diamond code\".\nIn 1954, Gamow created an informal scientific organisation the RNA Tie Club, as suggested by Watson, for scientists of different persuasions who were interested in how proteins were synthesised from genes. However, the club could have only 20 permanent members to represent each of the 20 amino acids; and four additional honorary members to represent the four nucleotides of DNA.\nThe first scientific contribution of the club, later recorded as \"one of the most important unpublished articles in the history of science\" and \"the most famous unpublished paper in the annals of molecular biology\", was made by Crick. Crick presented a type-written paper titled \"On Degenerate Templates and the Adaptor Hypothesis: A Note for the RNA Tie Club\" to the members of the club in January 1955, which \"totally changed the way we thought about protein synthesis\", as Watson recalled. The hypothesis states that the triplet code was not passed on to amino acids as Gamow thought, but carried by a different molecule, an adaptor, that interacts with amino acids. The adaptor was later identified as tRNA.\nCodons.\nThe Crick, Brenner, Barnett and Watts-Tobin experiment first demonstrated that codons consist of three DNA bases.\nMarshall Nirenberg and J. Heinrich Matthaei were the first to reveal the nature of a codon in 1961. They used a cell-free system to translate a poly-uracil RNA sequence (i.e., UUUUU...) and discovered that the polypeptide that they had synthesized consisted of only the amino acid phenylalanine. They thereby deduced that the codon UUU specified the amino acid phenylalanine.\nThis was followed by experiments in Severo Ochoa's laboratory that demonstrated that the poly-adenine RNA sequence (AAAAA...) coded for the polypeptide poly-lysine and that the poly-cytosine RNA sequence (CCCCC...) coded for the polypeptide poly-proline. Therefore, the codon AAA specified the amino acid lysine, and the codon CCC specified the amino acid proline. Using various copolymers most of the remaining codons were then determined.\nSubsequent work by Har Gobind Khorana identified the rest of the genetic code. Shortly thereafter, Robert W. Holley determined the structure of transfer RNA (tRNA), the adapter molecule that facilitates the process of translating RNA into protein. This work was based upon Ochoa's earlier studies, yielding the latter the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1959 for work on the enzymology of RNA synthesis.\nExtending this work, Nirenberg and Philip Leder revealed the code's triplet nature and deciphered its codons. In these experiments, various combinations of mRNA were passed through a filter that contained ribosomes, the components of cells that translate RNA into protein. Unique triplets promoted the binding of specific tRNAs to the ribosome. Leder and Nirenberg were able to determine the sequences of 54 out of 64 codons in their experiments. Khorana, Holley and Nirenberg received the Nobel Prize (1968) for their work.\nThe three stop codons were named by discoverers Richard Epstein and Charles Steinberg. \"Amber\" was named after their friend Harris Bernstein, whose last name means \"amber\" in German. The other two stop codons were named \"ochre\" and \"opal\" in order to keep the \"color names\" theme.\nExpanded genetic codes (synthetic biology).\nIn a broad academic audience, the concept of the evolution of the genetic code from the original and ambiguous genetic code to a well-defined (\"frozen\") code with the repertoire of 20 (+2) canonical amino acids is widely accepted.\nHowever, there are different opinions, concepts, approaches and ideas, which is the best way to change it experimentally. Even models are proposed that predict \"entry points\" for synthetic amino acid invasion of the genetic code.\nSince 2001, 40 non-natural amino acids have been added into proteins by creating a unique codon (recoding) and a corresponding transfer-RNA:aminoacyl\u00a0\u2013 tRNA-synthetase pair to encode it with diverse physicochemical and biological properties in order to be used as a tool to exploring protein structure and function or to create novel or enhanced proteins.\nH. Murakami and M. Sisido extended some codons to have four and five bases. Steven A. Benner constructed a functional 65th (\"in vivo\") codon.\nIn 2015 N. Budisa, D. S\u00f6ll and co-workers reported the full substitution of all 20,899 tryptophan residues (UGG codons) with unnatural thienopyrrole-alanine in the genetic code of the bacterium \"E. coli\".\nIn 2016 the first stable semisynthetic organism was created. It was a (single cell) bacterium with two synthetic bases (called X and Y). The bases survived cell division.\nIn 2017, researchers in South Korea reported that they had engineered a mouse with an extended genetic code that can produce proteins with unnatural amino acids.\nIn May 2019, researchers reported the creation of a new \"Syn61\" strain of the \"E. coli\" bacteria. This strain has a fully synthetic genome that is refactored (all overlaps expanded), recoded (removing the use of three out of 64 codons completely), and further modified to remove the now unnecessary tRNAs and release factors. It is fully viable and grows 1.6\u00d7 slower than its wild-type counterpart \"MDS42\".\nIn 2025, researchers reported a new \"Syn57\" strain, which removes the use of 7 out of 64 codons completely.\nFeatures.\nReading frame.\nA reading frame is defined by the initial triplet of nucleotides from which translation starts. It sets the frame for a run of successive, non-overlapping codons, which is known as an \"open reading frame\" (ORF). For example, the string 5'-AAATGAACG-3' (see figure), if read from the first position, contains the codons AAA, TGA, and ACG ; if read from the second position, it contains the codons AAT and GAA ; and if read from the third position, it contains the codons ATG and AAC. Every sequence can, thus, be read in its 5' \u2192 3' direction in three reading frames, each producing a possibly distinct amino acid sequence: in the given example, Lys (K)-Trp (W)-Thr (T), Asn (N)-Glu (E), or Met (M)-Asn (N), respectively (when translating with the vertebrate mitochondrial code). When DNA is double-stranded, six possible reading frames are defined, three in the forward orientation on one strand and three reverse on the opposite strand. Protein-coding frames are defined by a start codon, usually the first AUG codon in the RNA, (ATG in DNA) sequence.\nIn eukaryotes, open reading frames in exons are often interrupted by introns.\nStart and stop codons.\nTranslation starts with a chain-initiation codon or start codon. The start codon alone is not sufficient to begin the process. Nearby sequences such as the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in \"E. coli\" and initiation factors are also required to start translation. The most common start codon is AUG, which is read as methionine or as formylmethionine (in bacteria, mitochondria, and plastids). Alternative start codons depending on the organism include \"GUG\" or \"UUG\"; these codons normally represent valine and leucine, respectively, but as start codons they are translated as methionine or formylmethionine.\nThe three stop codons have names: UAG is \"amber\", UGA is \"opal\" (sometimes also called \"umber\"), and UAA is \"ochre\". Stop codons are also called \"termination\" or \"nonsense\" codons. They signal release of the nascent polypeptide from the ribosome because no cognate tRNA has anticodons complementary to these stop signals, allowing a release factor to bind to the ribosome instead.\nEffect of mutations.\nDuring the process of DNA replication, errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand. These errors, mutations, can affect an organism's phenotype, especially if they occur within the protein coding sequence of a gene. Error rates are typically 1 error in every 10\u2013100\u00a0million bases\u2014due to the \"proofreading\" ability of DNA polymerases.\nMissense mutations and nonsense mutations are examples of point mutations that can cause genetic diseases such as sickle-cell disease and thalassemia respectively. Clinically important missense mutations generally change the properties of the coded amino acid residue among basic, acidic, polar or non-polar states, whereas nonsense mutations result in a stop codon.\nMutations that disrupt the reading frame sequence by indels (insertions or deletions) of a non-multiple of 3 nucleotide bases are known as frameshift mutations. These mutations usually result in a completely different translation from the original, and likely cause a stop codon to be read, which truncates the protein. These mutations may impair the protein's function and are thus rare in \"in vivo\" protein-coding sequences. One reason inheritance of frameshift mutations is rare is that, if the protein being translated is essential for growth under the selective pressures the organism faces, absence of a functional protein may cause death before the organism becomes viable. Frameshift mutations may result in severe genetic diseases such as Tay\u2013Sachs disease.\nAlthough most mutations that change protein sequences are harmful or neutral, some mutations have benefits. These mutations may enable the mutant organism to withstand particular environmental stresses better than wild type organisms, or reproduce more quickly. In these cases a mutation will tend to become more common in a population through natural selection. Viruses that use RNA as their genetic material have rapid mutation rates, which can be an advantage, since these viruses thereby evolve rapidly, and thus evade the immune system defensive responses. In large populations of asexually reproducing organisms, for example, \"E. coli\", multiple beneficial mutations may co-occur. This phenomenon is called clonal interference and causes competition among the mutations.\nDegeneracy.\nDegeneracy is the redundancy of the genetic code. This term was given by Bernfield and Nirenberg. The genetic code has redundancy but no ambiguity (see the codon tables below for the full correlation). For example, although codons GAA and GAG both specify glutamic acid (redundancy), neither specifies another amino acid (no ambiguity). The codons encoding one amino acid may differ in any of their three positions. For example, the amino acid leucine is specified by YUR or CUN (UUA, UUG, CUU, CUC, CUA, or CUG) codons (difference in the first or third position indicated using IUPAC notation), while the amino acid serine is specified by UCN or AGY (UCA, UCG, UCC, UCU, AGU, or AGC) codons (difference in the first, second, or third position). A practical consequence of redundancy is that errors in the third position of the triplet codon cause only a silent mutation or an error that would not affect the protein because the hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity is maintained by equivalent substitution of amino acids; for example, a codon of NUN (where N = any nucleotide) tends to code for hydrophobic amino acids. NCN yields amino acid residues that are small in size and moderate in hydropathicity; NAN encodes average size hydrophilic residues. The genetic code is so well-structured for hydropathicity that a mathematical analysis (Singular Value Decomposition) of 12 variables (4 nucleotides x 3 positions) yields a remarkable correlation (C = 0.95) for predicting the hydropathicity of the encoded amino acid directly from the triplet nucleotide sequence, \"without translation.\" Note in the table, below, eight amino acids are not affected at all by mutations at the third position of the codon, whereas in the figure above, a mutation at the second position is likely to cause a radical change in the physicochemical properties of the encoded amino acid.\nNevertheless, changes in the first position of the codons are more important than changes in the second position on a global scale. The reason may be that charge reversal (from a positive to a negative charge or vice versa) can only occur upon mutations in the first position of certain codons, but not upon changes in the second position of any codon. Such charge reversal may have dramatic consequences for the structure or function of a protein. This aspect may have been largely underestimated by previous studies.\nCodon usage bias.\nThe frequency of codons, also known as codon usage bias, can vary from species to species with functional implications for the control of translation. The codon varies by organism; for example, most common proline codon in E. coli is CCG, whereas in humans this is the least used proline codon.\nAlternative genetic codes.\nNon-standard amino acids.\nIn some proteins, non-standard amino acids are substituted for standard stop codons, depending on associated signal sequences in the messenger RNA. For example, UGA can code for selenocysteine and UAG can code for pyrrolysine. Selenocysteine came to be seen as the 21st amino acid, and pyrrolysine as the 22nd. Both selenocysteine and pyrrolysine may be present in the same organism. Although the genetic code is normally fixed in an organism, the achaeal prokaryote \"Acetohalobium arabaticum\" can expand its genetic code from 20 to 21 amino acids (by including pyrrolysine) under different conditions of growth.\nVariations.\nThere was originally a simple and widely accepted argument that the genetic code should be universal: namely, that any variation in the genetic code would be lethal to the organism (although Crick had stated that viruses were an exception). This is known as the \"frozen accident\" argument for the universality of the genetic code. However, in his seminal paper on the origins of the genetic code in 1968, Francis Crick still stated that the universality of the genetic code in all organisms was an unproven assumption, and was probably not true in some instances. He predicted that \"The code is universal (the same in all organisms) or nearly so\". The first variation was discovered in 1979, by researchers studying human mitochondrial genes. Many slight variants were discovered thereafter, including various alternative mitochondrial codes. These minor variants for example involve translation of the codon UGA as tryptophan in \"Mycoplasma\" species, and translation of CUG as a serine rather than leucine in yeasts of the \"CTG clade\" (such as \"Candida albicans\"). Because viruses must use the same genetic code as their hosts, modifications to the standard genetic code could interfere with viral protein synthesis or functioning. However, viruses such as totiviruses have adapted to the host's genetic code modification. In bacteria and archaea, GUG and UUG are common start codons. In rare cases, certain proteins may use alternative start codons.\nSurprisingly, variations in the interpretation of the genetic code exist also in human nuclear-encoded genes: In 2016, researchers studying the translation of malate dehydrogenase found that in about 4% of the mRNAs encoding this enzyme the stop codon is naturally used to encode the amino acids tryptophan and arginine. This type of recoding is induced by a high-readthrough stop codon context and it is referred to as \"functional translational readthrough\".\nDespite these differences, all known naturally occurring codes are very similar. The coding mechanism is the same for all organisms: three-base codons, tRNA, ribosomes, single direction reading and translating single codons into single amino acids. The most extreme variations occur in certain ciliates where the meaning of stop codons depends on their position within mRNA. When close to the 3' end they act as terminators while in internal positions they either code for amino acids as in \"Condylostoma magnum\" or trigger ribosomal frameshifting as in \"Euplotes\".\nThe origins and variation of the genetic code, including the mechanisms behind the evolvability of the genetic code, have been widely studied, and some studies have been done experimentally evolving the genetic code of some organisms.\nInference.\nVariant genetic codes used by an organism can be inferred by identifying highly conserved genes encoded in that genome, and comparing its codon usage to the amino acids in homologous proteins of other organisms. For example, the program FACIL infers a genetic code by searching which amino acids in homologous protein domains are most often aligned to every codon. The resulting amino acid (or stop codon) probabilities for each codon are displayed in a genetic code logo.\nAs of January 2022, the most complete survey of genetic codes is done by Shulgina and Eddy, who screened 250,000 prokaryotic genomes using their Codetta tool. This tool uses a similar approach to FACIL with a larger Pfam database. Despite the NCBI already providing 27 translation tables, the authors were able to find new 5 genetic code variations (corroborated by tRNA mutations) and correct several misattributions. Codetta was later used to analyze genetic code change in ciliates.\nOrigin.\nThe genetic code is a key part of the history of life. Under the RNA world hypothesis, self-replicating RNA molecules preceded significant use of proteins. Under the nucleopeptide world hypothesis, significant use of peptides preceded the genetic code and was concurrent with early life's sophisticated use of RNA. Transfer RNA molecules appear to have evolved before modern aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. It is possible that synthetases replaced an earlier system of ribozymes (RNA enzymes), or that amino acids were recognized by unique pockets in the tertiary structure of proto-tRNAs. It is not known why the genetic code only uses L-amino acids and not D-amino acids.\nAny evolutionary model for the code's origin must account for its robustness of encoded proteins to errors during DNA replication and during translation. Many single nucleotide errors are synonymous, and those that are not tend to cause the substitution of a biochemically similar amino acid. Even holding the structure of the code the same such that clusters of codons encode the same amino acid, which amino acids are encoded by which sets of codons is \"one in a million\" with respect to robustness. Biochemically similar amino acids tend to share the same middle nucleotide, while synonymous changes generally happen at the third nucleotide.\nAmino acids that share the same biosynthetic pathway tend to have the same first base in their codons. This could be an evolutionary relic of an early, simpler genetic code with fewer amino acids that later evolved to code a larger set of amino acids. It could also reflect steric and chemical properties that had another effect on the codon during its evolution. Amino acids with similar physical properties also tend to have similar codons, reducing the problems caused by point mutations and mistranslations.\nThree main hypotheses address the origin of the genetic code. Many models belong to one of them or to a hybrid:\nHypotheses have addressed a variety of scenarios:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12386", "revid": "46169755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12386", "title": "Golden ratio", "text": "Number, approximately 1.618\n}}&lt;/math&gt;\nIn mathematics, two quantities are in the golden ratio if their ratio is the same as the ratio of their sum to the larger of the two quantities. Expressed algebraically, for quantities &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is in a golden ratio to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if formula_2 where the Greek letter phi (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) denotes the golden ratio. The constant &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; satisfies the quadratic equation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and is an irrational number with a value of\nformula_3...\nThe golden ratio was called the extreme and mean ratio by Euclid, and the divine proportion by Luca Pacioli; it also goes by other names.\nMathematicians have studied the golden ratio's properties since antiquity. It is the ratio of a regular pentagon's diagonal to its side and thus appears in the construction of the dodecahedron and icosahedron. A golden rectangle\u2014that is, a rectangle with an aspect ratio of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\u2014may be cut into a square and a smaller rectangle with the same aspect ratio. The golden ratio has been used to analyze the proportions of natural objects and artificial systems such as financial markets, in some cases based on dubious fits to data. The golden ratio appears in some patterns in nature, including the spiral arrangement of leaves and other parts of vegetation.\nSome 20th-century artists and architects, including Le Corbusier and Salvador Dal\u00ed, have proportioned their works to approximate the golden ratio, believing it to be aesthetically pleasing. These uses often appear in the form of a golden rectangle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCalculation.\nTwo quantities &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are in the \"golden ratio\" &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if\nformula_4\nThus, if we want to find &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, we may use that the definition above holds for arbitrary &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; thus, we just set &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, in which case &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and we get the equation\n&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nwhich becomes a quadratic equation after multiplying by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_5\nwhich can be rearranged to\nformula_6\nThe quadratic formula yields two solutions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_7 and formula_8\nBecause &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a ratio between positive quantities, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is necessarily the positive root. The negative root is in fact the negative inverse &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which shares many properties with the golden ratio.\nHistory.\nAccording to Mario Livio,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some of the greatest mathematical minds of all ages, from Pythagoras and Euclid in ancient Greece, through the medieval Italian mathematician Leonardo of Pisa and the Renaissance astronomer Johannes Kepler, to present-day scientific figures such as Oxford physicist Roger Penrose, have spent endless hours over this simple ratio and its properties. ... Biologists, artists, musicians, historians, architects, psychologists, and even mystics have pondered and debated the basis of its ubiquity and appeal. In fact, it is probably fair to say that the Golden Ratio has inspired thinkers of all disciplines like no other number in the history of mathematics.\u2014\u200a\nAncient Greek mathematicians first studied the golden ratio because of its frequent appearance in geometry; the division of a line into \"extreme and mean ratio\" (the golden section) is important in the geometry of regular pentagrams and pentagons. According to one story, 5th-century BC mathematician Hippasus discovered that the golden ratio was neither a whole number nor a fraction (it is irrational), surprising Pythagoreans. Euclid's \"Elements\" (c. 300 BC) provides several propositions and their proofs employing the golden ratio, and contains its first known definition which proceeds as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A straight line is said to have been cut in extreme and mean ratio when, as the whole line is to the greater segment, so is the greater to the lesser.\nThe golden ratio was studied peripherally over the next millennium. Abu Kamil (c. 850\u2013930) employed it in his geometric calculations of pentagons and decagons; his writings influenced that of Fibonacci (Leonardo of Pisa) (c. 1170\u20131250), who used the ratio in related geometry problems but did not observe that it was connected to the Fibonacci numbers.\nLuca Pacioli named his book \"Divina proportione\" (1509) after the ratio; the book, largely plagiarized from Piero della Francesca, explored its properties including its appearance in some of the Platonic solids. Leonardo da Vinci, who illustrated Pacioli's book, called the ratio the \"sectio aurea\" ('golden section'). Though it is often said that Pacioli advocated the golden ratio's application to yield pleasing, harmonious proportions, Livio points out that the interpretation has been traced to an error in 1799, and that Pacioli actually advocated the Vitruvian system of rational proportions. Pacioli also saw Catholic religious significance in the ratio, which led to his work's title. 16th-century mathematicians such as Rafael Bombelli solved geometric problems using the ratio.\nGerman mathematician Simon Jacob (d.\u00a01564) noted that ratios of consecutive Fibonacci numbers converge to the golden ratio; this was rediscovered by Johannes Kepler in 1608. The first known decimal approximation of the (inverse) golden ratio was stated as \"about &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\" in 1597 by Michael Maestlin of the University of T\u00fcbingen in a letter to Kepler, his former student. The same year, Kepler wrote to Maestlin of the Kepler triangle, which combines the golden ratio with the Pythagorean theorem. Kepler said of these:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEighteenth-century mathematicians Abraham de Moivre, Nicolaus I Bernoulli, and Leonhard Euler used a golden ratio-based formula which finds the value of a Fibonacci number based on its placement in the sequence; in 1843, this was rediscovered by Jacques Philippe Marie Binet, for whom it was named \"Binet's formula\". Martin Ohm first used the German term \"goldener Schnitt\" ('golden section') to describe the ratio in 1835. James Sully used the equivalent English term in 1875.\nBy 1910, inventor Mark Barr began using the Greek letter phi (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) as a symbol for the golden ratio. It has also been represented by tau (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), the first letter of the ancient Greek \u03c4\u03bf\u03bc\u03ae ('cut' or 'section').\nThe zome construction system, developed by Steve Baer in the late 1960s, is based on the symmetry system of the icosahedron/dodecahedron, and uses the golden ratio ubiquitously. Between 1973 and 1974, Roger Penrose developed Penrose tiling, a pattern related to the golden ratio both in the ratio of areas of its two rhombic tiles and in their relative frequency within the pattern. This gained in interest after Dan Shechtman's Nobel-winning 1982 discovery of quasicrystals with icosahedral symmetry, which were soon afterwards explained through analogies to the Penrose tiling.\nMathematics.\nIrrationality.\nThe golden ratio is an irrational number. Below are two short proofs of irrationality:\nContradiction from an expression in lowest terms.\nThis is a proof by infinite descent. Recall that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;the whole is the longer part plus the shorter part;\nthe whole is to the longer part as the longer part is to the shorter part.\nIf we call the whole &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the longer part &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then the second statement above becomes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nTo say that the golden ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is rational means that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a fraction &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are integers. We may take &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to be in lowest terms and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to be positive. But if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is in lowest terms, then the equally valued &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is in still lower terms. That is a contradiction that follows from the assumption that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is rational.\nBy irrationality of the square root of 5.\nAnother short proof \u2013 perhaps more commonly known \u2013 of the irrationality of the golden ratio makes use of the closure of rational numbers under addition and multiplication. If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is assumed to be rational, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the square root of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, must also be rational. This is a contradiction, as the square roots of all non-square natural numbers are irrational.\nMinimal polynomial.\nSince the golden ratio is a root of a polynomial with rational coefficients, it is an algebraic number. Its minimal polynomial, the polynomial of lowest degree with integer coefficients that has the golden ratio as a root, is formula_9 This quadratic polynomial has two roots, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Because the leading coefficient of this polynomial is 1, both roots are algebraic integers. The golden ratio is also closely related to the polynomial &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which has roots &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe golden ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a fundamental unit of the quadratic field &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, sometimes called the golden field. In this field, any element can be written in the form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, with rational coefficients &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; such a number has norm &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Other units, with norm &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, are the positive and negative powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The quadratic integers in this field, which form a ring, are all numbers of the form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are integers.\nAs the root of a quadratic polynomial, the golden ratio is a constructible number.\nGolden ratio conjugate and powers.\nThe conjugate root to the minimal polynomial &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is\nformula_10\nThe absolute value of this quantity (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) corresponds to the length ratio taken in reverse order (shorter segment length over longer segment length, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nThis illustrates the unique property of the golden ratio among positive numbers, that\nformula_11\nor its inverse,\nformula_12\nThe conjugate and the defining quadratic polynomial relationship lead to decimal values that have their fractional part in common with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_13\nThe sequence of powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; contains these values &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; more generally,\nany power of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is equal to the sum of the two immediately preceding powers:\nformula_14\nAs a result, one can easily decompose any power of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; into a multiple of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and a constant. The multiple and the constant are always adjacent Fibonacci numbers. This leads to another property of the positive powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then:\nformula_15\nContinued fraction and square root.\nThe formula &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be expanded recursively to obtain a simple continued fraction for the golden ratio:\nformula_16\nIt is in fact the simplest form of a continued fraction, alongside its reciprocal form:\nformula_17\nThe convergents of these continued fractions, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, are ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers. The consistently small terms in its continued fraction explain why the approximants converge so slowly. This makes the golden ratio an extreme case of the Hurwitz inequality for Diophantine approximations, which states that for every irrational &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, there are infinitely many distinct fractions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; such that,\nformula_18\nThis means that the constant &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; cannot be improved without excluding the golden ratio. It is, in fact, the smallest number that must be excluded to generate closer approximations of such Lagrange numbers.\nA continued square root form for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be obtained from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, yielding:\nformula_19\nRelationship to Fibonacci and Lucas numbers.\nFibonacci numbers and Lucas numbers have an intricate relationship with the golden ratio. In the Fibonacci sequence, each term formula_20 is equal to the sum of the preceding two terms formula_21 and formula_22, starting with the base sequence &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the 0th and 1st terms formula_23 and formula_24:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (OEIS:\u00a0).\nThe sequence of Lucas numbers (not to be confused with the generalized Lucas sequences, of which this is part) is like the Fibonacci sequence, in that each term formula_25 is the sum of the previous two terms formula_26 and formula_27, however instead starts with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the 0th and 1st terms formula_28 and formula_29:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (OEIS:\u00a0).\nExceptionally, the golden ratio is equal to the limit of the ratios of successive terms in the Fibonacci sequence and sequence of Lucas numbers:\nformula_30\nIn other words, if a Fibonacci and Lucas number is divided by its immediate predecessor in the sequence, the quotient approximates &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For example,\nThese approximations are alternately lower and higher than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and converge to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the Fibonacci and Lucas numbers increase.\nClosed-form expressions for the Fibonacci and Lucas sequences that involve the golden ratio are:\nformula_33\nformula_34\nCombining both formulas above, one obtains a formula for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that involves both Fibonacci and Lucas numbers:\nformula_35\nBetween Fibonacci and Lucas numbers one can deduce &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which simplifies to express the limit of the quotient of Lucas numbers by Fibonacci numbers as equal to the square root of five:\nformula_36\nIndeed, much stronger statements are true:\nformula_37\nSuccessive powers of the golden ratio obey the Fibonacci recurrence, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe reduction to a linear expression can be accomplished in one step by using:\nformula_38\nThis identity allows any polynomial in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to be reduced to a linear expression, as in:\nformula_39\nConsecutive Fibonacci numbers can also be used to obtain a similar formula for the golden ratio, here by infinite summation:\nformula_40\nIn particular, the powers of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; themselves round to Lucas numbers (in order, except for the first two powers, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, are in reverse order):\nformula_41\nand so forth. The Lucas numbers also directly generate powers of the golden ratio; for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_42\nRooted in their interconnecting relationship with the golden ratio is the notion that the sum of \"third\" consecutive Fibonacci numbers equals a Lucas number, that is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; and, importantly, that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nBoth the Fibonacci sequence and the sequence of Lucas numbers can be used to generate approximate forms of the golden spiral (which is a special form of a logarithmic spiral) using quarter-circles with radii from these sequences, differing only slightly from the \"true\" golden logarithmic spiral. \"Fibonacci spiral\" is generally the term used for spirals that approximate golden spirals using Fibonacci number-sequenced squares and quarter-circles.\nGeometry.\nThe golden ratio features prominently in geometry. For example, it is intrinsically involved in the internal symmetry of the pentagon, and extends to form part of the coordinates of the vertices of a regular dodecahedron, as well as those of a regular icosahedron. It features in the Kepler triangle and Penrose tilings too, as well as in various other polytopes.\nConstruction.\nDividing by interior division\nDividing by exterior division\nApplication examples you can see in the articles Pentagon with a given side length, Decagon with given circumcircle and Decagon with a given side length.\nBoth of the above displayed different algorithms produce geometric constructions that determine two aligned line segments where the ratio of the longer one to the shorter one is the golden ratio.\nGolden angle.\nWhen two angles that make a full circle have measures in the golden ratio, the smaller is called the \"golden angle\", with measure &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_43\nThis angle occurs in patterns of plant growth as the optimal spacing of leaf shoots around plant stems so that successive leaves do not block sunlight from the leaves below them.\nPentagonal symmetry system.\nPentagon and pentagram.\nIn a regular pentagon the ratio of a diagonal to a side is the golden ratio, while intersecting diagonals section each other in the golden ratio. The golden ratio properties of a regular pentagon can be confirmed by applying Ptolemy's theorem to the quadrilateral formed by removing one of its vertices. If the quadrilateral's long edge and diagonals are &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and short edges are &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then Ptolemy's theorem gives &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Dividing both sides by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; yields (see above),\nformula_44\nThe diagonal segments of a regular pentagon form a pentagram, or five-pointed star polygon, whose geometry is quintessentially described by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Primarily, each intersection of edges sections other edges in the golden ratio. The ratio of the length of the shorter segment to the segment bounded by the two intersecting edges (that is, a side of the inverted pentagon in the pentagram's center) is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, as the four-color illustration shows.\nPentagonal and pentagrammic geometry permits us to calculate the following values for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_45\nGolden triangle and golden gnomon.\nThe triangle formed by two diagonals and a side of a regular pentagon is called a \"golden triangle\" or \"sublime triangle\". It is an acute isosceles triangle with apex angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and base angles &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Its two equal sides are in the golden ratio to its base. The triangle formed by two sides and a diagonal of a regular pentagon is called a \"golden gnomon\". It is an obtuse isosceles triangle with apex angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and base angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Its base is in the golden ratio to its two equal sides. The pentagon can thus be subdivided into two golden gnomons and a central golden triangle. The five points of a regular pentagram are golden triangles, as are the ten triangles formed by connecting the vertices of a regular decagon to its center point.\nBisecting one of the base angles of the golden triangle subdivides it into a smaller golden triangle and a golden gnomon. Analogously, any acute isosceles triangle can be subdivided into a similar triangle and an obtuse isosceles triangle, but the golden triangle is the only one for which this subdivision is made by the angle bisector, because it is the only isosceles triangle whose base angle is twice its apex angle. The angle bisector of the golden triangle subdivides the side that it meets in the golden ratio, and the areas of the two subdivided pieces are also in the golden ratio.\nIf the apex angle of the golden gnomon is trisected, the trisector again subdivides it into a smaller golden gnomon and a golden triangle. The trisector subdivides the base in the golden ratio, and the two pieces have areas in the golden ratio. Analogously, any obtuse triangle can be subdivided into a similar triangle and an acute isosceles triangle, but the golden gnomon is the only one for which this subdivision is made by the angle trisector, because it is the only isosceles triangle whose apex angle is three times its base angle.\nPenrose tilings.\nThe golden ratio appears prominently in the \"Penrose tiling\", a family of aperiodic tilings of the plane developed by Roger Penrose, inspired by Johannes Kepler's remark that pentagrams, decagons, and other shapes could fill gaps that pentagonal shapes alone leave when tiled together. Several variations of this tiling have been studied, all of whose prototiles exhibit the golden ratio:\nIn triangles and quadrilaterals.\nOdom's construction.\nGeorge Odom found a construction for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; involving an equilateral triangle: if the line segment joining the midpoints of two sides is extended to intersect the circumcircle, then the two midpoints and the point of intersection with the circle are in golden proportion.\nKepler triangle.\nThe \"Kepler triangle\", named after Johannes Kepler, is the unique right triangle with sides in geometric progression:\nformula_46\nThese side lengths are the three Pythagorean means of the two numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The three squares on its sides have areas in the golden geometric progression &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nAmong isosceles triangles, the ratio of inradius to side length is maximized for the triangle formed by two reflected copies of the Kepler triangle, sharing the longer of their two legs. The same isosceles triangle maximizes the ratio of the radius of a semicircle on its base to its perimeter.\nFor a Kepler triangle with smallest side length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the area and acute internal angles are:\nformula_47\nGolden rectangle.\nThe golden ratio proportions the adjacent side lengths of a \"golden rectangle\" in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; ratio. Removing or adding squares from golden rectangles leaves rectangles still proportioned in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; ratio. They can be generated by \"golden spirals\", through successive Fibonacci and Lucas number-sized squares and quarter circles. They feature prominently in the icosahedron as well as in the dodecahedron (see section below for more detail).\nGolden rhombus.\nA \"golden rhombus\" is a rhombus whose diagonals are in proportion to the golden ratio, most commonly &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For a rhombus of such proportions, its acute angle and obtuse angles are:\nformula_48\nThe lengths of its short and long diagonals &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, in terms of side length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are:\nformula_49\nIts area, in terms of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_50\nGolden rhombi form the faces of the rhombic triacontahedron, the two golden rhombohedra, the Bilinski dodecahedron, and the rhombic hexecontahedron.\nVesica piscis.\nIf the two circles defining the vesica piscis are each surrounded by two concentric circles of twice the radius, then the two outer circles are tangent to the two inner circles (at the points formula_51 and formula_52 of the figure). The outer circles also intersect to form a lens, but one with a different angle than the vesica piscis. For these circles, the line segment formula_53 from one of the crossing points formula_54 of the inner circles to the opposite crossing point formula_55 of the outer circles is subdivided in the golden ratio by the point formula_56, the second crossing point of the two inner circles.\nGolden spiral.\nLogarithmic spirals are self-similar spirals where distances covered per turn are in geometric progression. A logarithmic spiral whose radius increases by a factor of the golden ratio for each quarter-turn is called the golden spiral. These spirals can be approximated by quarter-circles that grow by the golden ratio, or their approximations generated from Fibonacci numbers, often depicted inscribed within a spiraling pattern of squares growing in the same ratio. The exact logarithmic spiral form of the golden spiral can be described by the polar equation with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_57\nNot all logarithmic spirals are connected to the golden ratio, and not all spirals that are connected to the golden ratio are the same shape as the golden spiral. For instance, a different logarithmic spiral, encasing a nested sequence of golden isosceles triangles, grows by the golden ratio for each &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that it turns, instead of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; turning angle of the golden spiral. Another variation, called the \"better golden spiral\", grows by the golden ratio for each half-turn, rather than each quarter-turn.\nDodecahedron and icosahedron.\nThe regular dodecahedron and its dual polyhedron the icosahedron are Platonic solids whose dimensions are related to the golden ratio. A dodecahedron has &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; regular pentagonal faces, whereas an icosahedron has &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; equilateral triangles; both have &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; edges.\nFor a dodecahedron of side &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the radius of a circumscribed and inscribed sphere, and midradius are (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, respectively):\nWhile for an icosahedron of side &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the radius of a circumscribed and inscribed sphere, and midradius are:\nThe volume and surface area of the dodecahedron can be expressed in terms of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nAs well as for the icosahedron:\nThese geometric values can be calculated from their Cartesian coordinates, which also can be given using formulas involving &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The coordinates of the dodecahedron are displayed on the figure to the right, while those of the icosahedron are:\nformula_68\nSets of three golden rectangles intersect perpendicularly inside dodecahedra and icosahedra, forming Borromean rings. In dodecahedra, pairs of opposing vertices in golden rectangles meet the centers of pentagonal faces, and in icosahedra, they meet at its vertices. The three golden rectangles together contain all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; vertices of the icosahedron, or equivalently, intersect the centers of all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of the dodecahedron's faces.\nA cube can be inscribed in a regular dodecahedron, with some of the diagonals of the pentagonal faces of the dodecahedron serving as the cube's edges; therefore, the edge lengths are in the golden ratio. The cube's volume is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; times that of the dodecahedron's. In fact, golden rectangles inside a dodecahedron are in golden proportions to an inscribed cube, such that edges of a cube and the long edges of a golden rectangle are themselves in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; ratio. On the other hand, the octahedron, which is the dual polyhedron of the cube, can inscribe an icosahedron, such that an icosahedron's &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; vertices touch the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; edges of an octahedron at points that divide its edges in golden ratio.\nOther properties.\nThe golden ratio's \"decimal expansion\" can be calculated via root-finding methods, such as Newton's method or Halley's method, on the equation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; or on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (to compute &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; first). The time needed to compute &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; digits of the golden ratio using Newton's method is essentially &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the time complexity of multiplying two &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-digit numbers. This is considerably faster than known algorithms for \u03c0 and e. An easily programmed alternative using only integer arithmetic is to calculate two large consecutive Fibonacci numbers and divide them. The ratio of Fibonacci numbers &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, each over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; digits, yields over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; significant digits of the golden ratio. The decimal expansion of the golden ratio &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has been calculated to an accuracy of twenty trillion (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) digits.\nIn the complex plane, the fifth roots of unity &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; (for an integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) satisfying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the vertices of a pentagon. They do not form a ring of quadratic integers, however the sum of any fifth root of unity and its complex conjugate, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, \"is\" a quadratic integer, an element of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Specifically,\nformula_69\nThis also holds for the remaining tenth roots of unity satisfying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_70\nFor the gamma function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the only solutions to the equation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nWhen the golden ratio is used as the base of a numeral system (see golden ratio base, sometimes dubbed \"phinary\" or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\"-nary\"), quadratic integers in the ring &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; \u2013 that is, numbers of the form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; \u2013 have terminating representations, but rational fractions have non-terminating representations.\nThe golden ratio also appears in hyperbolic geometry, as the maximum distance from a point on one side of an ideal triangle to the closer of the other two sides: this distance, the side length of the equilateral triangle formed by the points of tangency of a circle inscribed within the ideal triangle, is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe golden ratio appears in the theory of modular functions as well. For formula_71 let\nformula_72\nThen\nformula_73\nand\nformula_74\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; in the continued fraction should be evaluated as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is invariant under &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a congruence subgroup of the modular group. Also for positive real numbers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\nformula_75\n&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a Pisot\u2013Vijayaraghavan number.\nApplications and observations.\nArchitecture.\nThe Swiss architect Le Corbusier, famous for his contributions to the modern international style, centered his design philosophy on systems of harmony and proportion. Le Corbusier's faith in the mathematical order of the universe was closely bound to the golden ratio and the Fibonacci series, which he described as \"rhythms apparent to the eye and clear in their relations with one another. And these rhythms are at the very root of human activities. They resound in man by an organic inevitability, the same fine inevitability which causes the tracing out of the Golden Section by children, old men, savages and the learned.\"\nLe Corbusier explicitly used the golden ratio in his Modulor system for the scale of architectural proportion. He saw this system as a continuation of the long tradition of Vitruvius, Leonardo da Vinci's \"Vitruvian Man\", the work of Leon Battista Alberti, and others who used the proportions of the human body to improve the appearance and function of architecture.\nIn addition to the golden ratio, Le Corbusier based the system on human measurements, Fibonacci numbers, and the double unit. He took suggestion of the golden ratio in human proportions to an extreme: he sectioned his model human body's height at the navel with the two sections in golden ratio, then subdivided those sections in golden ratio at the knees and throat; he used these golden ratio proportions in the Modulor system. Le Corbusier's 1927 Villa Stein in Garches exemplified the Modulor system's application. The villa's rectangular ground plan, elevation, and inner structure closely approximate golden rectangles.\nAnother Swiss architect, Mario Botta, bases many of his designs on geometric figures. Several private houses he designed in Switzerland are composed of squares and circles, cubes and cylinders. In a house he designed in Origlio, the golden ratio is the proportion between the central section and the side sections of the house.\nArt.\nLeonardo da Vinci's illustrations of polyhedra in Pacioli's \"Divina proportione\" have led some to speculate that he incorporated the golden ratio in his paintings. But the suggestion that his \"Mona Lisa\", for example, employs golden ratio proportions, is not supported by Leonardo's own writings. Similarly, although Leonardo's \"Vitruvian Man\" is often shown in connection with the golden ratio, the proportions of the figure do not actually match it, and the text only mentions whole number ratios.\nSalvador Dal\u00ed, influenced by the works of Matila Ghyka, explicitly used the golden ratio in his masterpiece, \"The Sacrament of the Last Supper\". The dimensions of the canvas are a golden rectangle. A huge dodecahedron, in perspective so that edges appear in golden ratio to one another, is suspended above and behind Jesus and dominates the composition.\nA statistical study on 565 works of art of different great painters, performed in 1999, found that these artists had not used the golden ratio in the size of their canvases. The study concluded that the average ratio of the two sides of the paintings studied is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, with averages for individual artists ranging from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (Goya) to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (Bellini). On the other hand, Pablo Tosto listed over 350 works by well-known artists, including more than 100 which have canvasses with golden rectangle and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; proportions, and others with proportions like &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nBooks and design.\nAccording to Jan Tschichold,\nThere was a time when deviations from the truly beautiful page proportions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the Golden Section were rare. Many books produced between 1550 and 1770 show these proportions exactly, to within half a millimeter.\nAccording to some sources, the golden ratio is used in everyday design, for example in the proportions of playing cards, postcards, posters, light switch plates, and widescreen televisions.\nFlags.\nThe aspect ratio (width to height ratio) of the flag of Togo was intended to be the golden ratio, according to its designer.\nMusic.\nErn\u0151 Lendvai analyzes B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k's works as being based on two opposing systems, that of the golden ratio and the acoustic scale, though other music scholars reject that analysis. French composer Erik Satie used the golden ratio in several of his pieces, including \"Sonneries de la Rose+Croix\". The golden ratio is also apparent in the organization of the sections in the music of Debussy's \"Reflets dans l'eau (Reflections in water)\", from \"Images\" (1st series, 1905), in which \"the sequence of keys is marked out by the intervals 34, 21, 13 and 8, and the main climax sits at the phi position\".\nThe musicologist Roy Howat has observed that the formal boundaries of Debussy's \"La Mer\" correspond exactly to the golden section. Trezise finds the intrinsic evidence \"remarkable\", but cautions that no written or reported evidence suggests that Debussy consciously sought such proportions.\nMusic theorists including Hans Zender and Heinz Bohlen have experimented with the 833 cents scale, a musical scale based on using the golden ratio as its fundamental musical interval. When measured in cents, a logarithmic scale for musical intervals, the golden ratio is approximately 833.09 cents.\nNature.\nJohannes Kepler wrote that \"the image of man and woman stems from the divine proportion. In my opinion, the propagation of plants and the progenitive acts of animals are in the same ratio\".\nThe psychologist Adolf Zeising noted that the golden ratio appeared in phyllotaxis and argued from these patterns in nature that the golden ratio was a universal law. Zeising wrote in 1854 of a universal orthogenetic law of \"striving for beauty and completeness in the realms of both nature and art\".\nHowever, some have argued that many apparent manifestations of the golden ratio in nature, especially in regard to animal dimensions, are fictitious.\nPhysics.\nThe quasi-one-dimensional Ising ferromagnet &lt;chem display=inline&gt;CoNb2O6&lt;/chem&gt; (cobalt niobate) has &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; predicted excitation states (with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; symmetry), that when probed with neutron scattering, showed its lowest two were in golden ratio. Specifically, these quantum phase transitions during spin excitation, which occur at near absolute zero temperature, showed pairs of kinks in its ordered-phase to spin-flips in its paramagnetic phase; revealing, just below its critical field, a spin dynamics with sharp modes at low energies approaching the golden mean.\nOptimization.\nThere is no known general algorithm to arrange a given number of nodes evenly on a sphere, for any of several definitions of even distribution (see, for example, \"Thomson problem\" or \"Tammes problem\"). However, a useful approximation results from dividing the sphere into parallel bands of equal surface area and placing one node in each band at longitudes spaced by a golden section of the circle, i.e. &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This method was used to arrange the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; mirrors of the student-participatory satellite Starshine-3.\nThe golden ratio is a critical element to golden-section search as well.\nDisputed observations.\nExamples of disputed observations of the golden ratio include the following:\nEgyptian pyramids.\nThe Great Pyramid of Giza (also known as the Pyramid of Cheops or Khufu) has been analyzed by pyramidologists as having a doubled Kepler triangle as its cross-section. If this theory were true, the golden ratio would describe the ratio of distances from the midpoint of one of the sides of the pyramid to its apex, and from the same midpoint to the center of the pyramid's base. However, imprecision in measurement caused in part by the removal of the outer surface of the pyramid makes it impossible to distinguish this theory from other numerical theories of the proportions of the pyramid, based on pi or on whole-number ratios. The consensus of modern scholars is that this pyramid's proportions are not based on the golden ratio, because such a basis would be inconsistent both with what is known about Egyptian mathematics from the time of construction of the pyramid, and with Egyptian theories of architecture and proportion used in their other works.\nThe Parthenon.\nThe Parthenon's fa\u00e7ade (c. 432 BC) as well as elements of its fa\u00e7ade and elsewhere are said by some to be circumscribed by golden rectangles. Other scholars deny that the Greeks had any aesthetic association with golden ratio. For example, Keith Devlin says, \"Certainly, the oft repeated assertion that the Parthenon in Athens is based on the golden ratio is not supported by actual measurements. In fact, the entire story about the Greeks and golden ratio seems to be without foundation.\" Midhat J. Gazal\u00e9 affirms that \"It was not until Euclid ... that the golden ratio's mathematical properties were studied.\"\nFrom measurements of 15 temples, 18 monumental tombs, 8 sarcophagi, and 58 grave stelae from the fifth century BC to the second century AD, one researcher concluded that the golden ratio was totally absent from Greek architecture of the classical fifth century BC, and almost absent during the following six centuries.\nLater sources like Vitruvius (first century\u00a0BC) exclusively discuss proportions that can be expressed in whole numbers, i.e. commensurate as opposed to irrational proportions.\nModern art.\nThe Section d'Or ('Golden Section') was a collective of painters, sculptors, poets and critics associated with Cubism and Orphism. Active from 1911 to around 1914, they adopted the name both to highlight that Cubism represented the continuation of a grand tradition, rather than being an isolated movement, and in homage to the mathematical harmony associated with Georges Seurat. (Several authors have claimed that Seurat employed the golden ratio in his paintings, but Seurat's writings and paintings suggest that he employed simple whole-number ratios and any approximation of the golden ratio was coincidental.) The Cubists observed in its harmonies, geometric structuring of motion and form, \"the primacy of idea over nature\", \"an absolute scientific clarity of conception\". However, despite this general interest in mathematical harmony, whether the paintings featured in the celebrated 1912 \"Salon de la Section d'Or\" exhibition used the golden ratio in any compositions is more difficult to determine. Livio, for example, claims that they did not, and Marcel Duchamp said as much in an interview. On the other hand, an analysis suggests that Juan Gris made use of the golden ratio in composing works that were likely, but not definitively, shown at the exhibition. Art historian Daniel Robbins has argued that in addition to referencing the mathematical term, the exhibition's name also refers to the earlier \"Bandeaux d'Or\" group, with which Albert Gleizes and other former members of the Abbaye de Cr\u00e9teil had been involved.\nPiet Mondrian has been said to have used the golden section extensively in his geometrical paintings, though other experts (including critic Yve-Alain Bois) have discredited these claims.\nReferences.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12388", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12388", "title": "Genome", "text": "All genetic material of an organism\nA genome is all the genetic information of an organism or cell. It consists of nucleotide sequences of DNA (or RNA in RNA viruses). The nuclear genome includes protein-coding genes and non-coding genes, other functional regions of the genome such as regulatory sequences (see non-coding DNA), and often a substantial fraction of junk DNA with no evident function. Almost all eukaryotes have mitochondria and a small mitochondrial genome. Algae and plants also contain chloroplasts with a chloroplast genome.\nThe study of the genome is called genomics. The genomes of many organisms have been sequenced and various regions have been annotated. The first genome to be sequenced was that of the virus \u03c6X174 in 1977; the first genome sequence of a prokaryote (\"Haemophilus influenzae\") was published in 1995; the yeast (\"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\") genome was the first eukaryotic genome to be sequenced in 1996. The Human Genome Project was started in October 1990, and the first draft sequences of the human genome were reported in February 2001.\nOrigin of the term.\nThe term \"genome\" was created in 1920 by Hans Winkler, professor of botany at the University of Hamburg, Germany. The website Oxford Dictionaries and the Online Etymology Dictionary suggest the name is a blend of the words \"gene\" and \"chromosome\". However, see omics for a more thorough discussion. A few related \"-ome\" words already existed, such as \"biome\" and \"rhizome\", forming a vocabulary into which \"genome\" fits systematically.\nDefinition.\nThe term \"genome\" usually refers to the DNA (or sometimes RNA) molecules that carry the genetic information in an organism, but sometimes it is uncertain which molecules to include; for example, bacteria usually have one or two large DNA molecules (chromosomes) that contain all of the essential genetic material but they also contain smaller extrachromosomal plasmid molecules that carry important genetic information. In the scientific literature, the term 'genome' usually refers to the large chromosomal DNA molecules in bacteria.\nNuclear genome.\nEukaryotic genomes are even more difficult to define because almost all eukaryotic species contain nuclear chromosomes plus extra DNA molecules in the mitochondria. In addition, algae and plants have chloroplast DNA. Most textbooks make a distinction between the nuclear genome and the organelle (mitochondria and chloroplast) genomes so when they speak of, say, the human genome, they are only referring to the genetic material in the nucleus. This is the most common use of 'genome' in the scientific literature.\nPloidy.\nMost eukaryotes are diploid, meaning that there are two of each chromosome in the nucleus but the 'genome' refers to only one copy of each chromosome. Some eukaryotes have distinctive sex chromosomes, such as the X and Y chromosomes of mammals, so the technical definition of the genome must include both copies of the sex chromosomes. For example, the standard reference genome of humans consists of one copy of each of the 22 autosomes plus one X chromosome and one Y chromosome.\nSequencing and mapping.\nA genome sequence is the complete list of the nucleotides (A, C, G, and T for DNA genomes) that make up all the chromosomes of an individual or a species. Within a species, the vast majority of nucleotides are identical between individuals, but sequencing multiple individuals is necessary to understand the genetic diversity. \nIn 1976, Walter Fiers at the University of Ghent (Belgium) was the first to establish the complete nucleotide sequence of a viral RNA-genome (Bacteriophage MS2). The next year, Fred Sanger completed the first DNA-genome sequence: Phage X174, of 5386 base pairs. The first bacterial genome to be sequenced was that of Haemophilus influenzae, completed by a team at The Institute for Genomic Research in 1995. A few months later, the first eukaryotic genome was completed, with sequences of the 16 chromosomes of budding yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" published as the result of a European-led effort begun in the mid-1980s. The first genome sequence for an archaeon, \"Methanococcus jannaschii\", was completed in 1996, again by The Institute for Genomic Research.\nThe development of new technologies has made genome sequencing dramatically cheaper and easier, and the number of complete genome sequences is growing rapidly. The US National Institutes of Health maintains one of several comprehensive databases of genomic information. Among the thousands of completed genome sequencing projects include those for rice, a mouse, the plant \"Arabidopsis thaliana\", the puffer fish, and the bacteria E. coli. In December 2013, scientists first sequenced the entire \"genome\" of a Neanderthal, an extinct species of humans. The genome was extracted from the toe bone of a 130,000-year-old Neanderthal found in a Siberian cave.\nViral genomes.\nViral genomes can be composed of either RNA or DNA. The genomes of RNA viruses can be either single-stranded RNA or double-stranded RNA, and may contain one or more separate RNA molecules (segments: monopartit or multipartit genome). DNA viruses can have either single-stranded or double-stranded genomes. Most DNA virus genomes are composed of a single, linear molecule of DNA, but some are made up of a circular DNA molecule.\nProkaryotic genomes.\nProkaryotes and eukaryotes have DNA genomes. Archaea and most bacteria have a single circular chromosome, however, some bacterial species have linear or multiple chromosomes. If the DNA is replicated faster than the bacterial cells divide, multiple copies of the chromosome can be present in a single cell, and if the cells divide faster than the DNA can be replicated, multiple replication of the chromosome is initiated before the division occurs, allowing daughter cells to inherit complete genomes and already partially replicated chromosomes. Most prokaryotes have very little repetitive DNA in their genomes. However, some symbiotic bacteria (e.g. \"Serratia symbiotica\") have reduced genomes and a high fraction of pseudogenes: only ~40% of their DNA encodes proteins.\nSome bacteria have auxiliary genetic material, also part of their genome, which is carried in plasmids. For this, the word \"genome\" should not be used as a synonym of \"chromosome\".\nEukaryotic genomes.\nEukaryotic genomes are composed of one or more linear DNA chromosomes. The number of chromosomes varies widely from Jack jumper ants and an asexual nemotode, which each have only one pair, to a fern species that has 720 pairs. It is surprising the amount of DNA that eukaryotic genomes contain compared to other genomes. The amount is even more than what is necessary for DNA protein-coding and noncoding genes because eukaryotic genomes show as much as 64,000-fold variation in their sizes. However, this special characteristic is caused by the presence of repetitive DNA, and transposable elements (TEs).\nA typical human cell has two copies of each of 22 autosomes, one inherited from each parent, plus two sex chromosomes, making it diploid. Gametes, such as ova, sperm, spores, and pollen, are haploid, meaning they carry only one copy of each chromosome. In addition to the chromosomes in the nucleus, organelles such as the chloroplasts and mitochondria have their own DNA. Mitochondria are sometimes said to have their own genome often referred to as the \"mitochondrial genome\". The DNA found within the chloroplast may be referred to as the \"plastome\". Like the bacteria they originated from, mitochondria and chloroplasts have a circular chromosome.\nUnlike prokaryotes where exon-intron organization of protein coding genes exists but is rather exceptional, eukaryotes generally have these features in their genes and their genomes contain variable amounts of repetitive DNA. In mammals and plants, the majority of the genome is composed of repetitive DNA.\nDNA sequencing.\nHigh-throughput technology makes sequencing to assemble new genomes accessible to everyone. Sequence polymorphisms are typically discovered by comparing resequenced isolates to a reference, whereas analyses of coverage depth and mapping topology can provide details regarding structural variations such as chromosomal translocations and segmental duplications.\nCoding sequences.\nDNA sequences that carry the instructions to make proteins are referred to as coding sequences. The proportion of the genome occupied by coding sequences varies widely. A larger genome does not necessarily contain more genes, and the proportion of non-repetitive DNA decreases along with increasing genome size in complex eukaryotes.\nNoncoding sequences.\nNoncoding sequences include introns, sequences for non-coding RNAs, regulatory regions, and repetitive DNA. Noncoding sequences make up 98% of the human genome. There are two categories of repetitive DNA in the genome: tandem repeats and interspersed repeats.\nTandem repeats.\nShort, non-coding sequences that are repeated head-to-tail are called tandem repeats. Microsatellites consisting of 2\u20135 basepair repeats, while minisatellite repeats are 30\u201335 bp. Tandem repeats make up about 4% of the human genome and 9% of the fruit fly genome. Tandem repeats can be functional. For example, telomeres are composed of the tandem repeat TTAGGG in mammals, and they play an important role in protecting the ends of the chromosome.\nIn other cases, expansions in the number of tandem repeats in exons or introns can cause disease. For example, the human gene huntingtin (Htt) typically contains 6\u201329 tandem repeats of the nucleotides CAG (encoding a polyglutamine tract). An expansion to over 36 repeats results in Huntington's disease, a neurodegenerative disease. Twenty human disorders are known to result from similar tandem repeat expansions in various genes. The mechanism by which proteins with expanded polygulatamine tracts cause death of neurons is not fully understood. One possibility is that the proteins fail to fold properly and avoid degradation, instead accumulating in aggregates that also sequester important transcription factors, thereby altering gene expression.\nTandem repeats are usually caused by slippage during replication, unequal crossing-over and gene conversion.\nTransposable elements.\nTransposable elements (TEs) are sequences of DNA with a defined structure that are able to change their location in the genome. TEs are categorized as either as a mechanism that replicates by copy-and-paste or as a mechanism that can be excised from the genome and inserted at a new location. In the human genome, there are three important classes of TEs that make up more than 45% of the human DNA; these classes are The long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs), The interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), and endogenous retroviruses. These elements have a big potential to modify the genetic control in a host organism.\nThe movement of TEs is a driving force of genome evolution in eukaryotes because their insertion can disrupt gene functions, homologous recombination between TEs can produce duplications, and TE can shuffle exons and regulatory sequences to new locations.\nRetrotransposons.\nRetrotransposons are found mostly in eukaryotes but not found in prokaryotes. Retrotransposons form a large portion of the genomes of many eukaryotes. A retrotransposon is a transposable element that transposes through an RNA intermediate. Retrotransposons are composed of DNA, but are transcribed into RNA for transposition, then the RNA transcript is copied back to DNA formation with the help of a specific enzyme called reverse transcriptase. A retrotransposon that carries reverse transcriptase in its sequence can trigger its own transposition but retrotransposons that lack a reverse transcriptase must use reverse transcriptase synthesized by another retrotransposon. Retrotransposons can be transcribed into RNA, which are then duplicated at another site into the genome. Retrotransposons can be divided into long terminal repeats (LTRs) and non-long terminal repeats (Non-LTRs).\nLong terminal repeats (LTRs) are derived from ancient retroviral infections, so they encode proteins related to retroviral proteins including gag (structural proteins of the virus), pol (reverse transcriptase and integrase), pro (protease), and in some cases env (envelope) genes. These genes are flanked by long repeats at both 5' and 3' ends. It has been reported that LTRs consist of the largest fraction in most plant genome and might account for the huge variation in genome size.\nNon-long terminal repeats (Non-LTRs) are classified as long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs), short interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs), and Penelope-like elements (PLEs). In \"Dictyostelium discoideum\", there is another DIRS-like elements belong to Non-LTRs. Non-LTRs are widely spread in eukaryotic genomes.\nLong interspersed elements (LINEs) encode genes for reverse transcriptase and endonuclease, making them autonomous transposable elements. The human genome has around 500,000 LINEs, taking around 17% of the genome.\nShort interspersed elements (SINEs) are usually less than 500 base pairs and are non-autonomous, so they rely on the proteins encoded by LINEs for transposition. The Alu element is the most common SINE found in primates. It is about 350 base pairs and occupies about 11% of the human genome with around 1,500,000 copies.\nDNA transposons.\nDNA transposons encode a transposase enzyme between inverted terminal repeats. When expressed, the transposase recognizes the terminal inverted repeats that flank the transposon and catalyzes its excision and reinsertion in a new site. This cut-and-paste mechanism typically reinserts transposons near their original location (within 100\u00a0kb). DNA transposons are found in bacteria and make up 3% of the human genome and 12% of the genome of the roundworm \"C. elegans\".\nGenome size.\nGenome size is the total number of the DNA base pairs in one copy of a haploid genome. Genome size varies widely across species. Invertebrates have small genomes, this is also correlated to a small number of transposable elements. Fish and Amphibians have intermediate-size genomes, and birds have relatively small genomes but it has been suggested that birds lost a substantial portion of their genomes during the phase of transition to flight.\u00a0 Before this loss, DNA methylation allows the adequate expansion of the genome.\nIn humans, the nuclear genome comprises approximately 3.1 billion nucleotides of DNA, divided into 24 linear molecules, the shortest 45 000 000 nucleotides in length and the longest 248 000 000 nucleotides, each contained in a different chromosome. There is no clear and consistent correlation between morphological complexity and genome size in either prokaryotes or lower eukaryotes. Genome size is largely a function of the expansion and contraction of repetitive DNA elements.\nSince genomes are very complex, one research strategy is to reduce the number of genes in a genome to the bare minimum and still have the organism in question survive. There is experimental work being done on minimal genomes for single cell organisms as well as minimal genomes for multi-cellular organisms (see developmental biology). The work is both \"in vivo\" and \"in silico\".\nGenome size differences due to transposable elements.\nThere are many enormous differences in size in genomes, specially mentioned before in the multicellular eukaryotic genomes. Much of this is due to the differing abundances of transposable elements, which evolve by creating new copies of themselves in the chromosomes. Eukaryote genomes often contain many thousands of copies of these elements, most of which have acquired mutations that make them defective.\nGenomic alterations.\nAll the cells of an organism originate from a single cell, so they are expected to have identical genomes; however, in some cases, differences arise. Both the process of copying DNA during cell division and exposure to environmental mutagens can result in mutations in somatic cells. In some cases, such mutations lead to cancer because they cause cells to divide more quickly and invade surrounding tissues. In certain lymphocytes in the human immune system, V(D)J recombination generates different genomic sequences such that each cell produces a unique antibody or T cell receptors.\nDuring meiosis, diploid cells divide twice to produce haploid germ cells. During this process, recombination results in a reshuffling of the genetic material from homologous chromosomes so each gamete has a unique genome.\nGenome-wide reprogramming.\nGenome-wide reprogramming in mouse primordial germ cells involves epigenetic imprint erasure leading to totipotency. Reprogramming is facilitated by active DNA demethylation, a process that entails the DNA base excision repair pathway. This pathway is employed in the erasure of CpG methylation (5mC) in primordial germ cells. The erasure of 5mC occurs via its conversion to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) driven by high levels of the ten-eleven dioxygenase enzymes TET1 and TET2.\nGenome evolution.\nGenomes are more than the sum of an organism's genes and have traits that may be measured and studied without reference to the details of any particular genes and their products. Researchers compare traits such as karyotype (chromosome number), genome size, gene order, codon usage bias, and GC-content to determine what mechanisms could have produced the great variety of genomes that exist today (for recent overviews, see Brown 2002; Saccone and Pesole 2003; Benfey and Protopapas 2004; Gibson and Muse 2004; Reese 2004; Gregory 2005).\nDuplications play a major role in shaping the genome. Duplication may range from extension of short tandem repeats, to duplication of a cluster of genes, and all the way to duplication of entire chromosomes or even entire genomes. Such duplications are probably fundamental to the creation of genetic novelty.\nHorizontal gene transfer is invoked to explain how there is often an extreme similarity between small portions of the genomes of two organisms that are otherwise very distantly related. Horizontal gene transfer seems to be common among many microbes. Also, eukaryotic cells seem to have experienced a transfer of some genetic material from their chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes to their nuclear chromosomes. Recent empirical data suggest an important role of viruses and sub-viral RNA-networks to represent a main driving role to generate genetic novelty and natural genome editing.\nIn fiction.\nWorks of science fiction illustrate concerns about the availability of genome sequences.\nMichael Crichton's 1990 novel \"Jurassic Park\" and the subsequent film tell the story of a billionaire who creates a theme park of cloned dinosaurs on a remote island, with disastrous outcomes. A geneticist extracts dinosaur DNA from the blood of ancient mosquitoes and fills in the gaps with DNA from modern species to create several species of dinosaurs. A chaos theorist is asked to give his expert opinion on the safety of engineering an ecosystem with the dinosaurs, and he repeatedly warns that the outcomes of the project will be unpredictable and ultimately uncontrollable. These warnings about the perils of using genomic information are a major theme of the book.\nThe 1997 film \"Gattaca\" is set in a futurist society where genomes of children are engineered to contain the most ideal combination of their parents' traits, and metrics such as risk of heart disease and predicted life expectancy are documented for each person based on their genome. People conceived outside of the eugenics program, known as \"In-Valids\" suffer discrimination and are relegated to menial occupations. The protagonist of the film is an In-Valid who works to defy the supposed genetic odds and achieve his dream of working as a space navigator. The film warns against a future where genomic information fuels prejudice and extreme class differences between those who can and cannot afford genetically engineered children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12390", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12390", "title": "Game Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "12391", "revid": "48734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12391", "title": "Guillermo Del Toro", "text": ""}
{"id": "12393", "revid": "15763484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12393", "title": "Gaia philosophy", "text": "Broadly inclusive term\nGaia philosophy (named after Gaia, Greek goddess of the Earth) is a broadly inclusive term for relating concepts about humanity as an effect of the life of this planet.\nThe Gaia hypothesis holds that all organisms on a life-giving planet regulate the biosphere in such a way as to promote its habitability. Gaia concepts draw a connection between the survivability of a species (hence its evolutionary course) and its usefulness to the survival of other species. While there were a number of precursors to Gaia hypothesis, the first scientific form of this idea was proposed as the Gaia hypothesis by James Lovelock, a UK chemist, in 1970. The Gaia hypothesis deals with the concept of biological homeostasis, and claims the resident life forms of a host planet coupled with their environment have acted and act like a single, self-regulating system. This system includes the near-surface rocks, the soil, and the atmosphere. These theories are, however, significant in green politics.\nPredecessors to the Gaia theory.\nThere are some mystical, scientific and religious predecessors to the Gaia philosophy, which had a Gaia-like conceptual basis. Many religious mythologies had a view of Earth as being a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts (e.g. some Native American religions and various forms of shamanism).\nIsaac Newton wrote of the earth, \"Thus this Earth resembles a great animal or rather inanimate vegetable, draws in \u00e6thereall breath for its dayly refreshment &amp; vitall ferment &amp; transpires again with gross exhalations, And according to the condition of all other things living ought to have its times of beginning youth old age &amp; perishing.\"\nPierre Teilhard de Chardin, a paleontologist and geologist, believed that evolution fractally unfolded from cell to organism to planet to solar system and ultimately the whole universe, as we humans see it from our limited perspective. Teilhard later influenced Thomas Berry and many Catholic humanist thinkers of the 20th century.\nLewis Thomas believed that Earth should be viewed as a single cell; he derived this view from Johannes Kepler's view of Earth as a single round organism.\nBuckminster Fuller is generally credited with making the idea respectable in Western scientific circles in the 20th century. Building to some degree on his observations and artifacts, e.g. the Dymaxion map of the Earth he created, others began to ask if there was a way to make the Gaia theory scientifically sound.\nIn 1931, L.G.M. Baas Becking delivered an inaugural lecture about Gaia in the sense of life and earth. \nOberon Zell-Ravenheart in 1970 in an article in \"Green Egg\" Magazine, independently articulated the Gaia Thesis.\nMany believe that these ideas cannot be considered scientific hypotheses; by definition a scientific hypothesis must make testable predictions. As the above claims are not currently testable, they are outside the bounds of current science. This does not mean that these ideas are not theoretically testable. As one can postulate tests that could be applied, given enough time and space, then these ideas should be seen as scientific hypotheses.\nThese are conjectures and perhaps can only be considered as social and maybe political philosophy; they may have implications for theology, or \"thealogy\" as Zell-Ravenheart and Isaac Bonewits put it.\nRange of views.\nAccording to James Kirchner there is a spectrum of Gaia hypotheses, ranging from the undeniable to radical. At one end is the undeniable statement that the organisms on the Earth have radically altered its composition. A stronger position is that the Earth's biosphere effectively acts as if it is a self-organizing system which works in such a way as to keep its systems in some kind of equilibrium that is conducive to life. Today many scientists consider that such a view (and any stronger views) are unlikely to be correct. An even stronger claim is that all lifeforms are part of a single planetary being, called Gaia. In this view, the atmosphere, the seas, the terrestrial crust would be the result of interventions carried out by Gaia, through the coevolving diversity of living organisms.\nThe most extreme form of Gaia theory is that the entire Earth is a single unified organism with a highly intelligent mind that arose as an emergent property of the whole biosphere. In this view, the Earth's biosphere is \"consciously\" manipulating the climate in order to make conditions more conducive to life. Scientists contend that there is no evidence at all to support this last point of view, and it has come about because many people do not understand the concept of homeostasis. Many non-scientists instinctively and incorrectly see homeostasis as a process that requires conscious control.\nThe more speculative versions of Gaia, including versions in which it is believed that the Earth is actually conscious, sentient, and highly intelligent, are usually considered outside the bounds of what is usually considered science.\nGaia in biology and science.\nBuckminster Fuller has been credited as the first to incorporate scientific ideas into a Gaia theory, which he did with his Dymaxion map of the Earth.\nThe first scientifically rigorous theory was the Gaia hypothesis by James Lovelock, a UK chemist.\nA variant of this hypothesis was developed by Lynn Margulis, a microbiologist, in 1979.\nHer version is sometimes called the \"Gaia Theory\" (note uppercase-T). Her model is more limited in scope than the one that Lovelock proposed.\nWhether this sort of system is present on Earth is still open to debate. Some relatively simple homeostatic mechanisms are generally accepted. For example, when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rise, plants are able to grow better and thus remove more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Other biological effects and feedbacks exist, but the extent to which these mechanisms have stabilized and modified the Earth's overall climate is largely not known.\nThe Gaia hypothesis is sometimes viewed from significantly different philosophical perspectives. Some environmentalists view it as an almost conscious process, in which the Earth's ecosystem is literally viewed as a single unified organism. Some evolutionary biologists, on the other hand, view it as an undirected emergent property of the ecosystem: as each individual species pursues its own self-interest, their combined actions tend to have counterbalancing effects on environmental change. Proponents of this view sometimes point to examples of life's actions in the past that have resulted in dramatic change rather than stable equilibrium, such as the conversion of the Earth's atmosphere from a reducing environment to an oxygen-rich one.\nDepending on how strongly the case is stated, the hypothesis conflicts with mainstream neo-Darwinism. Most biologists would accept Daisyworld-style homeostasis as possible, but would certainly not accept the idea that this equates to the whole biosphere acting as one organism.\nA very small number of scientists, and a much larger number of environmental activists, claim that Earth's biosphere is \"consciously\" manipulating the climate in order to make conditions more conducive to life. Scientists contend that there is no evidence to support this belief.\nGaia in the social sciences and politics.\nA social science view of Gaia theory is the role of humans as a keystone species who may be able to accomplish global homeostasis. Whilst a few social scientists who draw inspiration from 'organic' views of society have embraced Gaia philosophy as a way to explain the human-nature interconnections, most professional social scientists are more involved in reflecting upon the way Gaia philosophy is used and engaged with within sub-sections of society. Alan Marshall, in the Department of Social Sciences at Mahidol University, for example, reflects upon the way Gaia philosophy has been used and advocated in various societal settings by environmentalists, spiritualists, managers, economists, and scientists and engineers. As Marshall explains, most social scientists had already given up on systems ideas of society in the 1960s before Gaia philosophy was born under James Lovelock's ideas since such ideas were interpreted as supporting conservatism and traditionalism. Gaia theory also influenced the dynamics of green politics.\nGaia in religion.\nRosemary Radford Ruether, the American feminist scholar and theologian, wrote a book called \"Gaia and God: An Ecofeminist Theology of Earth Healing\".\nA book edited by Allan Hunt Badiner called Dharma Gaia explores the ground where Buddhism and ecology meet through writings by the Dalai Lama, Gary Snyder, Thich Nhat Hanh, Allen Ginsberg, David Abram, Joanna Macy, Robert Aitken, and 25 other Buddhists and ecologists.\nGaianism, an earth-centered philosophical, holistic, and spiritual belief that shares expressions with earth religions and paganism while not identifying exclusively with any specific religion, sprang from the gaia hypothesis.\nCriticism.\nOne of the most problematic issues with referring to Gaia as an organism is its apparent failure to meet the biological criterion of being able to reproduce. Richard Dawkins has asserted that the planet is not the offspring of any parents and is unable to reproduce.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12394", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12394", "title": "Greenhouse gases", "text": ""}
{"id": "12395", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12395", "title": "Greenhouse effect", "text": "Atmospheric heat retention\nThe greenhouse effect occurs when heat-trapping gases in a planet's atmosphere prevent the planet from losing heat to space, raising its surface temperature. Surface heating can happen from an internal heat source (as in the case of Jupiter) or come from an external source, such as a host star. In the case of Earth, the Sun emits shortwave radiation (sunlight) that passes through greenhouse gases to heat the Earth's surface. In response, the Earth's surface emits longwave radiation that is mostly absorbed by greenhouse gases, reducing the rate at which the Earth can cool off.\nWithout the greenhouse effect, the Earth's average surface temperature would be as cold as . This is of course much less than the 20th century average of about . In addition to naturally present greenhouse gases, burning of fossil fuels has increased amounts of carbon dioxide and methane in the atmosphere. As a result, global warming of about has occurred since the Industrial Revolution, with the global average surface temperature increasing at a rate of per decade since 1981.\nAll objects with a temperature above absolute zero emit thermal radiation. The wavelengths of thermal radiation emitted by the Sun and Earth differ because their surface temperatures are different. The Sun has a surface temperature of , so it emits most of its energy as shortwave radiation in near-infrared and visible wavelengths (as sunlight). In contrast, Earth's surface has a much lower temperature, so it emits longwave radiation at mid- and far-infrared wavelengths. A gas is a greenhouse gas if it absorbs longwave radiation. Earth's atmosphere absorbs only 23% of incoming shortwave radiation, but absorbs 90% of the longwave radiation emitted by the surface, thus accumulating energy and warming the Earth's surface.\nThe existence of the greenhouse effect (while not named as such) was proposed as early as 1824 by Joseph Fourier. The argument and the evidence were further strengthened by Claude Pouillet in 1827 and 1838. In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. The term \"greenhouse\" was first applied to this phenomenon by Nils Gustaf Ekholm in 1901.\nDefinition.\nThe \"greenhouse effect\" on Earth is defined as: \"The infrared radiative effect of all infrared absorbing constituents in the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases (GHGs), clouds, and some aerosols absorb terrestrial radiation emitted by the Earth's surface and elsewhere in the atmosphere.\"2232\nThe \"enhanced greenhouse effect\" describes the fact that by increasing the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere (due to human action), the natural greenhouse effect is increased.2232\nTerminology.\nThe term \"greenhouse effect\" comes from an analogy to greenhouses. Both greenhouses and the \"greenhouse effect\" work by retaining heat from sunlight, but the way they retain heat differs. Greenhouses retain heat mainly by blocking convection (the movement of air). In contrast, the greenhouse effect retains heat by restricting radiative transfer through the air and reducing the rate at which thermal radiation is emitted into space.\nHistory of discovery and investigation.\nThe existence of the greenhouse effect, while not named as such, was proposed as early as 1824 by Joseph Fourier. The argument and the evidence were further strengthened by Claude Pouillet in 1827 and 1838. In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote demonstrated that the warming effect of the sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. She concluded that \"An atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature...\"\nJohn Tyndall was the first to measure the infrared absorption and emission of various gases and vapors. From 1859 onwards, he showed that the effect was due to a very small proportion of the atmosphere, with the main gases having no effect, and was largely due to water vapor, though small percentages of hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide had a significant effect. The effect was more fully quantified by Svante Arrhenius in 1896, who made the first quantitative prediction of global warming due to a hypothetical doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide. The term \"greenhouse\" was first applied to this phenomenon by Nils Gustaf Ekholm in 1901.\nMeasurement.\nMatter emits thermal radiation at a rate that is directly proportional to the fourth power of its temperature. Some of the radiation emitted by the Earth's surface is absorbed by greenhouse gases and clouds. Without this absorption, Earth's surface would have an average temperature of . However, because some of the radiation is absorbed, Earth's average surface temperature is around . Thus, the Earth's greenhouse effect may be measured as a \"temperature change\" of .\nThermal radiation is characterized by how much energy it carries, typically in watts per square meter (W/m2). Scientists also measure the greenhouse effect based on how much more longwave thermal radiation leaves the Earth's surface than reaches space. Currently, longwave radiation leaves the surface at an average rate of 398 W/m2, but only 239 W/m2 reaches space. Thus, the Earth's greenhouse effect can also be measured as an \"energy flow change\" of 159 W/m2. The greenhouse effect can be expressed as a fraction (0.40) or percentage (40%) of the longwave thermal radiation that leaves Earth's surface but does not reach space.\nWhether the greenhouse effect is expressed as a change in temperature or as a change in longwave thermal radiation, the same effect is being measured.\nRole in climate change.\nStrengthening of the greenhouse effect through additional greenhouse gases from human activities is known as the \"enhanced greenhouse effect\".2232 As well as being inferred from measurements by ARGO, CERES and other instruments throughout the 21st century,7\u201317 this increase in radiative forcing from human activity has been observed directly, and is attributable mainly to increased atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.\nCO2 is produced by fossil fuel burning and other activities such as cement production and tropical deforestation. Measurements of CO2 from the Mauna Loa Observatory show that concentrations have increased from about 313 parts per million (ppm) in 1960, passing the 400 ppm milestone in 2013. The current observed amount of CO2 exceeds the geological record maxima (\u2248300 ppm) from ice core data.\nOver the past 800,000 years, ice core data shows that carbon dioxide has varied from values as low as 180 ppm to the pre-industrial level of 270 ppm. Paleoclimatologists consider variations in carbon dioxide concentration to be a fundamental factor influencing climate variations over this time scale.\nEnergy balance and temperature.\nIncoming shortwave radiation.\nHotter matter emits shorter wavelengths of radiation. As a result, the Sun emits shortwave radiation as sunlight while the Earth and its atmosphere emit longwave radiation. Sunlight includes ultraviolet, visible light, and near-infrared radiation.\nSunlight is reflected and absorbed by the Earth and its atmosphere. The atmosphere and clouds reflect about 23% and absorb 23%. The surface reflects 7% and absorbs 48%. Overall, Earth reflects about 30% of the incoming sunlight, and absorbs the rest (240 W/m2).\nOutgoing longwave radiation.\nThe Earth and its atmosphere emit \"longwave radiation\", also known as \"thermal infrared\" or \"terrestrial radiation\". Informally, longwave radiation is sometimes called \"thermal radiation\". Outgoing longwave radiation (OLR) is the radiation from Earth and its atmosphere that passes through the atmosphere and into space.\nThe greenhouse effect can be directly seen in graphs of Earth's outgoing longwave radiation as a function of frequency (or wavelength). The area between the curve for longwave radiation emitted by Earth's surface and the curve for outgoing longwave radiation indicates the size of the greenhouse effect.\nDifferent substances are responsible for reducing the radiation energy reaching space at different frequencies; for some frequencies, multiple substances play a role. Carbon dioxide is understood to be responsible for the dip in outgoing radiation (and associated rise in the greenhouse effect) at around 667\u00a0cm\u22121 (equivalent to a wavelength of 15 microns).\nEach layer of the atmosphere with greenhouse gases absorbs some of the longwave radiation being radiated upwards from lower layers. It also emits longwave radiation in all directions, both upwards and downwards, in equilibrium with the amount it has absorbed. This results in less radiative heat loss and more warmth below. Increasing the concentration of the gases increases the amount of absorption and emission, and thereby causing more heat to be retained at the surface and in the layers below.\nEffective temperature.\nThe power of outgoing longwave radiation emitted by a planet corresponds to the \"effective temperature\" of the planet. The effective temperature is the temperature that a planet radiating with a uniform temperature (a blackbody) would need to have in order to radiate the same amount of energy.\nThis concept may be used to compare the amount of longwave radiation emitted to space and the amount of longwave radiation emitted by the surface:\nEarth's surface temperature is often reported in terms of the average near-surface air temperature. This is about , a bit lower than the effective surface temperature. This value is warmer than Earth's overall effective temperature.\nEnergy flux.\nEnergy flux is the rate of energy flow per unit area. Energy flux is expressed in units of W/m2, which is the number of joules of energy that pass through a square meter each second. Most fluxes quoted in high-level discussions of climate are global values, which means they are the total flow of energy over the entire globe, divided by the surface area of the Earth, .\nThe fluxes of radiation arriving at and leaving the Earth are important because radiative transfer is the only process capable of exchanging energy between Earth and the rest of the universe.\nRadiative balance.\nThe temperature of a planet depends on the balance between incoming radiation and outgoing radiation. If incoming radiation exceeds outgoing radiation, a planet will warm. If outgoing radiation exceeds incoming radiation, a planet will cool. A planet will tend towards a state of radiative equilibrium, in which the power of outgoing radiation equals the power of absorbed incoming radiation.\nEarth's energy imbalance is the amount by which the power of incoming sunlight absorbed by Earth's surface or atmosphere exceeds the power of outgoing longwave radiation emitted to space. Energy imbalance is the fundamental measurement that drives surface temperature. A UN presentation says \"The EEI is the most critical number defining the prospects for continued global warming and climate change.\" One study argues, \"The absolute value of EEI represents the most fundamental metric defining the status of global climate change.\"\nEarth's energy imbalance (EEI) was about 0.7 W/m2 in 2015, indicating that Earth as a whole was accumulating thermal energy and is in a process of becoming warmer. By 2024, the longer-term trend had grown to about twice that rate.\nOver 90% of the retained energy goes into warming the oceans, with much smaller amounts going into heating the land, atmosphere, and ice.\nDay and night cycle.\nA simple picture assumes a steady state, but in the real world, the day/night (diurnal) cycle, as well as the seasonal cycle and weather disturbances, complicate matters. Solar heating applies only during daytime. At night the atmosphere cools somewhat, but not greatly because the thermal inertia of the climate system resists changes both day and night, as well as for longer periods. Diurnal temperature changes decrease with height in the atmosphere.\nEffect of lapse rate.\nLapse rate.\nIn the lower portion of the atmosphere, the troposphere, the air temperature decreases (or \"lapses\") with increasing altitude. The rate at which temperature changes with altitude is called the \"lapse rate\".\nOn Earth, the air temperature decreases by about 6.5\u00a0\u00b0C/km (3.6\u00a0\u00b0F per 1000\u00a0ft), on average, although this varies.\nThe temperature lapse is caused by convection. Air warmed by the surface rises. As it rises, air expands and cools. Simultaneously, other air descends, compresses, and warms. This process creates a vertical temperature gradient within the atmosphere.\nThis vertical temperature gradient is essential to the greenhouse effect. If the lapse rate was zero (so that the atmospheric temperature did not vary with altitude and was the same as the surface temperature) then there would be no greenhouse effect (i.e., its value would be zero).\nEmission temperature and altitude.\nGreenhouse gases make the atmosphere near Earth's surface mostly opaque to longwave radiation. The atmosphere only becomes transparent to longwave radiation at higher altitudes, where the air is less dense, there is less water vapor, and reduced pressure broadening of absorption lines limits the wavelengths that gas molecules can absorb.\nFor any given wavelength, the longwave radiation that reaches space is emitted by a particular \"radiating layer\" of the atmosphere. The intensity of the emitted radiation is determined by the weighted average air temperature within that layer. So, for any given wavelength of radiation emitted to space, there is an associated \"effective emission temperature\" (or brightness temperature).\nA given wavelength of radiation may also be said to have an \"effective emission altitude\", which is a weighted average of the altitudes within the radiating layer.\nThe effective emission temperature and altitude vary by wavelength (or frequency). This phenomenon may be seen by examining plots of radiation emitted to space.\nGreenhouse gases and the lapse rate.\nEarth's surface radiates longwave radiation with wavelengths in the range of 4\u2013100 microns. Greenhouse gases that were largely transparent to incoming solar radiation are more absorbent for some wavelengths in this range.\nThe atmosphere near the Earth's surface is largely opaque to longwave radiation and most heat loss from the surface is by evaporation and convection. However radiative energy losses become increasingly important higher in the atmosphere, largely because of the decreasing concentration of water vapor, an important greenhouse gas.\nRather than thinking of longwave radiation headed to space as coming from the surface itself, it is more realistic to think of this outgoing radiation as being emitted by a layer in the mid-troposphere, which is effectively coupled to the surface by a lapse rate. The difference in temperature between these two locations explains the difference between surface emissions and emissions to space, i.e., it explains the greenhouse effect.\nInfrared absorbing constituents in the atmosphere.\nGreenhouse gases.\nA greenhouse gas (GHG) is a gas which contributes to the trapping of heat by impeding the flow of longwave radiation out of a planet's atmosphere. Greenhouse gases contribute most of the greenhouse effect in Earth's energy budget.\nInfrared active gases.\nGases which can absorb and emit longwave radiation are said to be \"infrared active\" and act as greenhouse gases.\nMost gases whose molecules have two different atoms (such as carbon monoxide, CO), and all gases with three or more atoms (including and CO2), are infrared active and act as greenhouse gases. (Technically, this is because when these molecules vibrate, those vibrations modify the molecular dipole moment, or asymmetry in the distribution of electrical charge. See Infrared spectroscopy.)\nGases with only one atom (such as argon, Ar) or with two identical atoms (such as nitrogen, N2, and oxygen, O2) are not infrared active. They are transparent to longwave radiation, and, for practical purposes, do not absorb or emit longwave radiation. (This is because their molecules are symmetrical and so do not have a dipole moment.) Such gases make up more than 99% of the dry atmosphere.\nAbsorption and emission.\nGreenhouse gases absorb and emit longwave radiation within specific ranges of wavelengths (organized as spectral lines or bands).\nWhen greenhouse gases absorb radiation, they distribute the acquired energy to the surrounding air as thermal energy (i.e., kinetic energy of gas molecules). Energy is transferred from greenhouse gas molecules to other molecules via molecular collisions.\nContrary to what is sometimes said, greenhouse gases do not \"re-emit\" photons after they are absorbed. Because each molecule experiences billions of collisions per second, any energy a greenhouse gas molecule receives by absorbing a photon will be redistributed to other molecules before there is a chance for a new photon to be emitted.\nIn a separate process, greenhouse gases emit longwave radiation, at a rate determined by the air temperature. This thermal energy is either absorbed by other greenhouse gas molecules or leaves the atmosphere, cooling it.\nRadiative effects.\n\"Effect on air:\" Air is warmed by latent heat (buoyant water vapor condensing into water droplets and releasing heat), thermals (warm air rising from below), and by sunlight being absorbed in the atmosphere. Air is cooled radiatively, by greenhouse gases and clouds emitting longwave thermal radiation. Within the troposphere, greenhouse gases typically have a net cooling effect on air, emitting more thermal radiation than they absorb. Warming and cooling of air are well balanced, on average, so that the atmosphere maintains a roughly stable average temperature.\n\"Effect on surface cooling:\" Longwave radiation flows both upward and downward due to absorption and emission in the atmosphere. These canceling energy flows reduce radiative surface cooling (net upward radiative energy flow). Latent heat transport and thermals provide non-radiative surface cooling which partially compensates for this reduction, but there is still a net reduction in surface cooling, for a given surface temperature.\n\"Effect on TOA energy balance:\" Greenhouse gases impact the top-of-atmosphere (TOA) energy budget by reducing the flux of longwave radiation emitted to space, for a given surface temperature. Thus, greenhouse gases alter the energy balance at TOA. This means that the surface temperature needs to be higher (than the planet's \"effective temperature\", i.e., the temperature associated with emissions to space), in order for the outgoing energy emitted to space to balance the incoming energy from sunlight. It is important to focus on the top-of-atmosphere (TOA) energy budget (rather than the surface energy budget) when reasoning about the warming effect of greenhouse gases.\nClouds and aerosols.\nClouds and aerosols have both cooling effects, associated with reflecting sunlight back to space, and warming effects, associated with trapping thermal radiation.\nOn average, clouds have a strong net cooling effect. However, the mix of cooling and warming effects varies, depending on detailed characteristics of particular clouds (including their type, height, and optical properties). Thin cirrus clouds can have a net warming effect. Clouds can absorb and emit infrared radiation and thus affect the radiative properties of the atmosphere.\nBasic formulas.\nEffective temperature.\nA given flux of thermal radiation has an associated \"effective radiating temperature\" or \"effective temperature\". Effective temperature is the temperature that a black body (a perfect absorber/emitter) would need to be to emit that much thermal radiation. Thus, the overall effective temperature of a planet is given by\nformula_1\nwhere OLR is the average flux (power per unit area) of outgoing longwave radiation emitted to space and formula_2 is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Similarly, the effective temperature of the surface is given by\nformula_3\nwhere SLR is the average flux of longwave radiation emitted by the surface. (OLR is a conventional abbreviation. SLR is used here to denote the flux of surface-emitted longwave radiation, although there is no standard abbreviation for this.)\nMetrics for the greenhouse effect.\nThe IPCC reports the \"greenhouse effect\", G, as being 159 W m-2, where G is the flux of longwave thermal radiation that leaves the surface minus the flux of outgoing longwave radiation that reaches space:\nformula_4\nAlternatively, the greenhouse effect can be described using the \"normalized greenhouse effect\", g\u0303, defined as\nformula_5\nThe normalized greenhouse effect is \"the fraction of the amount of thermal radiation emitted by the surface that does not reach space\".\nBased on the IPCC numbers, g\u0303 = 0.40. In other words, 40 percent less thermal radiation reaches space than what leaves the surface.\nSometimes the greenhouse effect is quantified as a temperature difference. This temperature difference is closely related to the quantities above.\nWhen the greenhouse effect is expressed as a temperature difference, formula_6, this refers to the effective temperature associated with thermal radiation emissions from the surface minus the effective temperature associated with emissions to space:\nformula_7\nformula_8\nInformal discussions of the greenhouse effect often compare the actual surface temperature to the temperature that the planet would have if there were no greenhouse gases. However, in formal technical discussions, when the size of the greenhouse effect is quantified as a temperature, this is generally done using the above formula. The formula refers to the effective surface temperature rather than the actual surface temperature, and compares the surface with the top of the atmosphere, rather than comparing reality to a hypothetical situation.\nThe temperature difference, formula_6, indicates how much warmer a planet's surface is than the planet's overall effective temperature.\nRadiative balance.\nEarth's top-of-atmosphere (TOA) energy imbalance (EEI) is the amount by which the power of incoming radiation exceeds the power of outgoing radiation:\nformula_10\nwhere ASR is the mean flux of absorbed solar radiation. ASR may be expanded as\nformula_11\nwhere formula_12 is the albedo (reflectivity) of the planet and MSI is the mean solar irradiance incoming at the top of the atmosphere.\nThe radiative equilibrium temperature of a planet can be expressed as\nformula_13\nA planet's temperature will tend to shift towards a state of radiative equilibrium, in which the TOA energy imbalance is zero, i.e., formula_14. When the planet is in radiative equilibrium, the overall effective temperature of the planet is given by\nformula_15\nThus, the concept of radiative equilibrium is important because it indicates what effective temperature a planet will tend towards having.\nIf, in addition to knowing the effective temperature, formula_16, we know the value of the greenhouse effect, then we know the mean (average) surface temperature of the planet.\nThis is why the quantity known as the greenhouse effect is important: it is one of the few quantities that go into determining the planet's mean surface temperature.\nGreenhouse effect and temperature.\nTypically, a planet will be close to radiative equilibrium, with the rates of incoming and outgoing energy being well-balanced. Under such conditions, the planet's equilibrium temperature is determined by the mean solar irradiance and the planetary albedo (how much sunlight is reflected back to space instead of being absorbed).\nThe greenhouse effect measures how much warmer the surface is than the overall effective temperature of the planet. So, the effective surface temperature, formula_17, is, using the definition of formula_6,\nformula_19\nOne could also express the relationship between formula_17 and formula_16 using \"G\" or \"g\u0303\".\nSo, the principle that a larger greenhouse effect corresponds to a higher surface temperature, if everything else (i.e., the factors that determine formula_16) is held fixed, is true as a matter of definition.\nNote that the greenhouse effect influences the temperature of the planet as a whole, in tandem with the planet's tendency to move toward radiative equilibrium.\nMisconceptions.\nThere are sometimes misunderstandings about how the greenhouse effect functions and raises temperatures.\nThe \"surface budget fallacy\" is a common error in thinking. It involves thinking that an increased CO2 concentration could only cause warming by increasing the downward thermal radiation to the surface, as a result of making the atmosphere a better emitter. If the atmosphere near the surface is already nearly opaque to thermal radiation, this would mean that increasing CO2 could not lead to higher temperatures. However, it is a mistake to focus on the surface energy budget rather than the top-of-atmosphere energy budget. Regardless of what happens at the surface, increasing the concentration of CO2 tends to reduce the thermal radiation reaching space (OLR), leading to a TOA energy imbalance that leads to warming. Earlier researchers like Callendar (1938) and Plass (1959) focused on the surface budget, but the work of Manabe in the 1960s clarified the importance of the top-of-atmosphere energy budget.\nAmong those who do not believe in the greenhouse effect, there is a fallacy that the greenhouse effect involves greenhouse gases sending heat from the cool atmosphere to the planet's warm surface, in violation of the second law of thermodynamics. However, this idea reflects a misunderstanding. Radiation heat flow is the \"net energy flow\" after the flows of radiation in both directions have been taken into account. Radiation heat flow occurs in the direction from the surface to the atmosphere and space, as is to be expected given that the surface is warmer than the atmosphere and space. While greenhouse gases emit thermal radiation downward to the surface, this is part of the normal process of radiation heat transfer. The downward thermal radiation simply reduces the upward thermal radiation net energy flow (radiation heat flow), i.e., it reduces cooling.\nSimplified models.\nSimplified models are sometimes used to support understanding of how the greenhouse effect comes about and how this affects surface temperature.\nAtmospheric layer models.\nThe greenhouse effect can be seen to occur in a simplified model in which the air is treated as if it is single uniform layer exchanging radiation with the ground and space. Slightly more complex models add additional layers, or introduce convection.\nEquivalent emission altitude.\nOne simplification is to treat all outgoing longwave radiation as being emitted from an altitude where the air temperature equals the overall effective temperature for planetary emissions, formula_16. Some authors have referred to this altitude as the \"effective radiating level\" (ERL), and suggest that as the CO2 concentration increases, the ERL must rise to maintain the same mass of CO2 above that level.\nThis approach is less accurate than accounting for variation in radiation wavelength by emission altitude. However, it can be useful in supporting a simplified understanding of the greenhouse effect. For instance, it can be used to explain how the greenhouse effect increases as the concentration of greenhouse gases increase.\nEarth's overall equivalent emission altitude has been increasing with a trend of /decade, which is said to be consistent with a global mean surface warming of /decade over the period 1979\u20132011.\nRelated effects on Earth.\nNegative greenhouse effect.\nScientists have observed that, at times, there is a negative greenhouse effect over parts of Antarctica. In a location where there is a strong temperature inversion, so that the air is warmer than the surface, it is possible for the greenhouse effect to be reversed, so that the presence of greenhouse gases increases the rate of radiative cooling to space. In this case, the rate of thermal radiation emission to space is greater than the rate at which thermal radiation is emitted by the surface. Thus, the local value of the greenhouse effect is negative.\nBodies other than Earth.\nIn the Solar System, apart from the Earth, at least two other planets and a moon also have a greenhouse effect.\nVenus.\nThe greenhouse effect on Venus is particularly large, and it brings the surface temperature to as high as . This is due to its very dense atmosphere which consists of about 97% carbon dioxide.\nAlthough Venus is about 30% closer to the Sun, it absorbs (and is warmed by) \"less sunlight\" than Earth, because Venus reflects 77% of incident sunlight while Earth reflects around 30%. In the absence of a greenhouse effect, the surface of Venus would be expected to have a temperature of . Thus, contrary to what one might think, being nearer to the Sun is not a reason why Venus is warmer than Earth.\nDue to its high pressure, the CO2 in the atmosphere of Venus exhibits \"continuum absorption\" (absorption over a broad range of wavelengths) and is not limited to absorption within the bands relevant to its absorption on Earth.\nA runaway greenhouse effect involving carbon dioxide and water vapor has for many years been hypothesized to have occurred on Venus; this idea is still largely accepted. The planet Venus experienced a runaway greenhouse effect, resulting in an atmosphere which is 96% carbon dioxide, and a surface atmospheric pressure roughly the same as found underwater on Earth. Venus may have had water oceans, but they would have boiled off as the mean surface temperature rose to the current .\nMars.\nMars has about 70 times as much carbon dioxide as Earth, but experiences only a small greenhouse effect, about . The greenhouse effect is small due to the lack of water vapor and the overall thinness of the atmosphere.\nThe same radiative transfer calculations that predict warming on Earth accurately explain the temperature on Mars, given its atmospheric composition.\nTitan.\nSaturn's moon Titan has both a greenhouse effect and an anti-greenhouse effect. The presence of nitrogen (N2), methane (CH4), and hydrogen (H2) in the atmosphere contribute to a greenhouse effect, increasing the surface temperature by over the expected temperature of the body without these gases.\nWhile the gases N2 and H2 ordinarily do not absorb infrared radiation, these gases absorb thermal radiation on Titan due to pressure-induced collisions, the large mass and thickness of the atmosphere, and the long wavelengths of the thermal radiation from the cold surface.\nThe existence of a high-altitude haze, which absorbs wavelengths of solar radiation but is transparent to infrared, contribute to an anti-greenhouse effect of approximately .\nThe net result of these two effects is a warming of 21 K \u2212 9 K = , so Titan's surface temperature of is 12 K warmer than it would be if there were no atmosphere.\nEffect of pressure.\nThe relative sizes of the greenhouse effects on different bodies cannot be predicted simply by comparing the amount of greenhouse gases in their atmospheres. This is because factors other than the quantity of these gases also play a role in determining the size of the greenhouse effect.\nOverall atmospheric pressure affects how much thermal radiation each molecule of a greenhouse gas can absorb. High pressure leads to more absorption and low pressure leads to less.\nThis is due to \"pressure broadening\" of spectral lines. When the total atmospheric pressure is higher, collisions between molecules occur at a higher rate. Collisions broaden the width of absorption lines, allowing a greenhouse gas to absorb thermal radiation over a broader range of wavelengths.\nEach molecule in the air near Earth's surface experiences about 7 billion collisions per second. This rate is lower at higher altitudes, where the pressure and temperature are both lower. This means that greenhouse gases are able to absorb more wavelengths in the lower atmosphere than they can in the upper atmosphere.\nOn other planets, pressure broadening means that each molecule of a greenhouse gas is more effective at trapping thermal radiation if the total atmospheric pressure is high (as on Venus), and less effective at trapping thermal radiation if the atmospheric pressure is low (as on Mars).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12396", "revid": "46947198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12396", "title": "Group homomorphism", "text": "Mathematical function between groups that preserves multiplication structure\nIn mathematics, given two groups, (\"G\",\u2217) and (\"H\", \u00b7), a group homomorphism from (\"G\",\u2217) to (\"H\", \u00b7) is a function \"h\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\" such that for all \"u\" and \"v\" in \"G\" it holds that\nformula_1\nwhere the group operation on the left side of the equation is that of \"G\" and on the right side that of \"H\".\nFrom this property, one can deduce that \"h\" maps the identity element \"eG\" of \"G\" to the identity element \"eH\" of \"H\",\nformula_2\nand it also maps inverses to inverses in the sense that \nformula_3\nHence one can say that \"h\" \"is compatible with the group structure\".\nIn areas of mathematics where one considers groups endowed with additional structure, a \"homomorphism\" sometimes means a map which respects not only the group structure (as above) but also the extra structure. For example, a homomorphism of topological groups is often required to be continuous.\nProperties.\nLet formula_4 be the identity element of the (\"H\", \u00b7) group and formula_5, then \nformula_6\nNow by multiplying for the inverse of formula_7 (or applying the cancellation rule) we obtain \nformula_8\nSimilarly,\nformula_9\nTherefore for the uniqueness of the inverse: formula_10.\nImage and kernel.\nWe define the \"kernel of h\" to be the set of elements in \"G\" which are mapped to the identity in \"H\"\n formula_11\nand the \"image of h\" to be\n formula_12\nThe kernel and image of a homomorphism can be interpreted as measuring how close it is to being an isomorphism. The first isomorphism theorem states that the image of a group homomorphism, \"h\"(\"G\") is isomorphic to the quotient group \"G\"/ker \"h\".\nThe kernel of h is a normal subgroup of \"G\". Assume formula_13 and show formula_14 for arbitrary formula_15:\n formula_16\nThe image of h is a subgroup of \"H\".\nThe homomorphism, \"h\", is a \"group monomorphism\"; i.e., \"h\" is injective (one-to-one) if and only if ker(\"h\") \n {\"e\"\"G\"}. Injection directly gives that there is a unique element in the kernel, and, conversely, a unique element in the kernel gives injection:\nformula_17\nCategory of groups.\nIf \"h\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\" and \"k\" : \"H\" \u2192 \"K\" are group homomorphisms, then so is \"k\" \u2218 \"h\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"K\". This shows that the class of all groups, together with group homomorphisms as morphisms, forms a category (specifically the category of groups).\nHomomorphisms of abelian groups.\nIf \"G\" and \"H\" are abelian (i.e., commutative) groups, then the set Hom(\"G\", \"H\") of all group homomorphisms from \"G\" to \"H\" is itself an abelian group: the sum \"h\" + \"k\" of two homomorphisms is defined by\n(\"h\" + \"k\")(\"u\") = \"h\"(\"u\") + \"k\"(\"u\")\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 for all \"u\" in \"G\".\nThe commutativity of \"H\" is needed to prove that \"h\" + \"k\" is again a group homomorphism.\nThe addition of homomorphisms is compatible with the composition of homomorphisms in the following sense: if \"f\" is in Hom(\"K\", \"G\"), \"h\", \"k\" are elements of Hom(\"G\", \"H\"), and \"g\" is in Hom(\"H\", \"L\"), then \n(\"h\" + \"k\") \u2218 \"f\" = (\"h\" \u2218 \"f\") + (\"k\" \u2218 \"f\") \u00a0\u00a0 and \u00a0\u00a0 \"g\" \u2218 (\"h\" + \"k\") = (\"g\" \u2218 \"h\") + (\"g\" \u2218 \"k\").\nSince the composition is associative, this shows that the set End(\"G\") of all endomorphisms of an abelian group forms a ring, the \"endomorphism ring\" of \"G\". For example, the endomorphism ring of the abelian group consisting of the direct sum of \"m\" copies of Z/\"nZ is isomorphic to the ring of \"m\"-by-\"m\" matrices with entries in Z/\"nZ. The above compatibility also shows that the category of all abelian groups with group homomorphisms forms a preadditive category; the existence of direct sums and well-behaved kernels makes this category the prototypical example of an abelian category."}
{"id": "12397", "revid": "44419887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12397", "title": "Group isomorphism", "text": "Bijective group homomorphism\nIn abstract algebra, a group isomorphism is a function between two groups that sets up a bijection between the elements of the groups in a way that respects the given group operations. If there exists an isomorphism between two groups, then the groups are called isomorphic. From the standpoint of group theory, isomorphic groups have the same properties and need not be distinguished.\nDefinition and notation.\nGiven two groups formula_1 and formula_2 a \"group isomorphism\" from formula_1 to formula_4 is a bijective group homomorphism from formula_5 to formula_6 Spelled out, this means that a group isomorphism is a bijective function formula_7 such that for all formula_8 and formula_9 in formula_5 it holds that\nformula_11\nThe two groups formula_1 and formula_4 are isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism from one to the other. This is written\nformula_14\nOften shorter and simpler notations can be used. When the relevant group operations are understood, they are omitted and one writes\nformula_15\nSometimes one can even simply write formula_16 Whether such a notation is possible without confusion or ambiguity depends on context. For example, the equals sign is not very suitable when the groups are both subgroups of the same group. See also the examples.\nConversely, given a group formula_17 a set formula_18 and a bijection formula_19 we can make formula_20 a group formula_4 by defining\nformula_22\nIf formula_23 and formula_24 then the bijection is an automorphism (\"q.v.\").\nIntuitively, group theorists view two isomorphic groups as follows: For every element formula_25 of a group formula_26 there exists an element formula_27 of formula_20 such that formula_27 \"behaves in the same way\" as formula_25 (operates with other elements of the group in the same way as formula_25). For instance, if formula_25 generates formula_26 then so does formula_34 This implies, in particular, that formula_5 and formula_20 are in bijective correspondence. Thus, the definition of an isomorphism is quite natural.\nAn isomorphism of groups may equivalently be defined as an invertible group homomorphism (the inverse function of a bijective group homomorphism is also a group homomorphism).\nExamples.\nIn this section some notable examples of isomorphic groups are listed.\nSome groups can be proven to be isomorphic, relying on the axiom of choice, but the proof does not indicate how to construct a concrete isomorphism. Examples:\nProperties.\nThe kernel of an isomorphism from formula_1 to formula_4 is always {eG}, where eG is the identity of the group formula_1\nIf formula_1 and formula_4 are isomorphic, then formula_5 is abelian if and only if formula_20 is abelian.\nIf formula_66 is an isomorphism from formula_1 to formula_2 then for any formula_69 the order of formula_70 equals the order of formula_71\nIf formula_1 and formula_4 are isomorphic, then formula_1 is a locally finite group if and only if formula_4 is locally finite. \nThe number of distinct groups (up to isomorphism) of order formula_76 is given by sequence A000001 in the OEIS. The first few numbers are 0, 1, 1, 1 and 2 meaning that 4 is the lowest order with more than one group.\nCyclic groups.\nAll cyclic groups of a given order are isomorphic to formula_77 where formula_78 denotes addition modulo formula_79\nLet formula_5 be a cyclic group and formula_76 be the order of formula_82 Letting formula_83 be a generator of formula_5, formula_5 is then equal to formula_86 \nWe will show that\nformula_87\nDefine \nformula_88 so that formula_89 \nClearly, formula_90 is bijective. Then\nformula_91 \nwhich proves that formula_92\nConsequences.\nFrom the definition, it follows that any isomorphism formula_7 will map the identity element of formula_5 to the identity element of formula_18 \nformula_96\nthat it will map inverses to inverses,\nformula_97\nand more generally, formula_76th powers to formula_76th powers,\nformula_100 \nand that the inverse map formula_101 is also a group isomorphism.\nThe relation \"being isomorphic\" is an equivalence relation. If formula_66 is an isomorphism between two groups formula_5 and formula_18 then everything that is true about formula_5 that is only related to the group structure can be translated via formula_66 into a true ditto statement about formula_18 and vice versa.\nAutomorphisms.\nAn isomorphism from a group formula_1 to itself is called an automorphism of the group. Thus it is a bijection formula_109 such that\nformula_110\nThe image under an automorphism of a conjugacy class is always a conjugacy class (the same or another).\nThe composition of two automorphisms is again an automorphism, and with this operation the set of all automorphisms of a group formula_26 denoted by formula_112 itself forms a group, the \"automorphism group\" of formula_82\nFor all abelian groups there is at least the automorphism that replaces the group elements by their inverses. However, in groups where all elements are equal to their inverses this is the trivial automorphism, e.g. in the Klein four-group. For that group all permutations of the three non-identity elements are automorphisms, so the automorphism group is isomorphic to formula_114 (which itself is isomorphic to formula_115).\nIn formula_116 for a prime number formula_117 one non-identity element can be replaced by any other, with corresponding changes in the other elements. The automorphism group is isomorphic to formula_118 For example, for formula_119 multiplying all elements of formula_120 by 3, modulo 7, is an automorphism of order 6 in the automorphism group, because formula_121 while lower powers do not give 1. Thus this automorphism generates formula_122 There is one more automorphism with this property: multiplying all elements of formula_120 by 5, modulo 7. Therefore, these two correspond to the elements 1 and 5 of formula_124 in that order or conversely.\nThe automorphism group of formula_125 is isomorphic to formula_126 because only each of the two elements 1 and 5 generate formula_124 so apart from the identity we can only interchange these.\nThe automorphism group of formula_128 has order 168, as can be found as follows. All 7 non-identity elements play the same role, so we can choose which plays the role of formula_129 Any of the remaining 6 can be chosen to play the role of (0,1,0). This determines which element corresponds to formula_130 For formula_131 we can choose from 4, which determines the rest. Thus we have formula_132 automorphisms. They correspond to those of the Fano plane, of which the 7 points correspond to the 7 non-identity elements. The lines connecting three points correspond to the group operation: formula_133 and formula_134 on one line means formula_135 formula_136 and formula_137 See also general linear group over finite fields.\nFor abelian groups, all non-trivial automorphisms are outer automorphisms.\nNon-abelian groups have a non-trivial inner automorphism group, and possibly also outer automorphisms.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12398", "revid": "19177367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12398", "title": "Geographic information system", "text": "System to capture, manage, and present geographic data\nA geographic information system (GIS) consists of integrated computer hardware and software that store, manage, analyze, edit, output, and visualize geographic data. Much of this often happens within a spatial database; however, this is not essential to meet the definition of a GIS. In a broader sense, one may consider such a system also to include human users and support staff, procedures and workflows, the body of knowledge of relevant concepts and methods, and institutional organizations.\nThe uncounted plural, \"geographic information systems\", also abbreviated GIS, is the most common term for the industry and profession concerned with these systems. The academic discipline that studies these systems and their underlying geographic principles, may also be abbreviated as GIS, but the unambiguous GIScience is more common. GIScience is often considered a subdiscipline of geography within the branch of technical geography.\nGeographic information systems are used in multiple technologies, processes, techniques and methods. They are attached to various operations and numerous applications, that relate to: engineering, planning, management, transport/logistics, insurance, telecommunications, and business, as well as the natural sciences such as forestry, ecology, and Earth science. For this reason, GIS and location intelligence applications are at the foundation of location-enabled services, which rely on geographic analysis and visualization.\nGIS provides the ability to relate previously unrelated information, through the use of location as the \"key index variable\". Locations and extents that are found in the Earth's spacetime are able to be recorded through the date and time of occurrence, along with x, y, and z coordinates; representing, longitude (\"x\"), latitude (\"y\"), and elevation (\"z\"). All Earth-based, spatial\u2013temporal, location and extent references should be relatable to one another, and ultimately, to a \"real\" physical location or extent. This key characteristic of GIS has begun to open new avenues of scientific inquiry and studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory and development.\nWhile digital GIS dates to the mid-1960s, when Roger Tomlinson first coined the phrase \"geographic information system\", many of the geographic concepts and methods that GIS automates date back decades earlier.\nOne of the first known instances in which spatial analysis was used came from the field of epidemiology in the (1832). French cartographer and geographer Charles Picquet created a map outlining the forty-eight\u00a0districts in Paris, using halftone color gradients, to provide a visual representation for the number of reported deaths due to cholera per\u00a0every 1,000\u00a0inhabitants.\nIn 1854, John Snow, an epidemiologist and physician, was able to determine the source of a cholera outbreak in London through the use of spatial analysis. Snow achieved this through plotting the residence of each casualty on a map of the area, as well as the nearby water sources. Once these points were marked, he was able to identify the water source within the cluster that was responsible for the outbreak. This was one of the earliest successful uses of a geographic methodology in pinpointing the source of an outbreak in epidemiology. While the basic elements of topography and theme existed previously in cartography, Snow's map was unique due to his use of cartographic methods, not only to depict, but also to analyze clusters of geographically dependent phenomena.\nThe early\u00a020th\u00a0century saw the development of photozincography, which allowed maps to be split into layers, for example one layer for vegetation and another for water. This was particularly used for printing contours\u00a0\u2013 drawing these was a labour-intensive task but having them on a separate layer meant they could be worked on without the other layers to confuse the draughtsman. This work was initially drawn on glass plates, but later plastic film was introduced, with the advantages of being lighter, using less storage space and being less brittle, among others. When all the layers were finished, they were combined into one image using a large process camera. Once color printing came in, the layers idea was also used for creating separate printing plates for each color. While the use of layers much later became one of the typical features of a contemporary GIS, the photographic process just described is not considered a GIS in itself\u00a0\u2013 as the maps were just images with no database to link them to.\nTwo additional developments are notable in the early days of GIS: Ian McHarg's publication \"Design with Nature\" and its map overlay method and the introduction of a street network into the U.S. Census Bureau's DIME (Dual Independent Map Encoding) system.\nThe first publication detailing the use of computers to facilitate cartography was written by Waldo Tobler in 1959. Further computer hardware development spurred by nuclear weapon research led to more widespread general-purpose computer \"mapping\" applications by the early 1960s.\nIn 1963, the world's first true operational GIS was developed in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, by the federal Department of Forestry and Rural Development. Developed by Roger Tomlinson, it was called the Canada Geographic Information System (CGIS) and was used to store, analyze, and manipulate data collected for the Canada Land Inventory, an effort to determine the land capability for rural Canada by mapping information about soils, agriculture, recreation, wildlife, waterfowl, forestry and land use at a scale of 1:50,000. A rating classification factor was also added to permit analysis.\nCGIS was an improvement over \"computer mapping\" applications as it provided capabilities for data storage, overlay, measurement, and digitizing/scanning. It supported a national coordinate system that spanned the continent, coded lines as arcs having a true embedded topology and it stored the attribute and locational information in separate files. As a result of this, Tomlinson has become known as the \"father of GIS\", particularly for his use of overlays in promoting the spatial analysis of convergent geographic data. CGIS lasted into the 1990s and built a large digital land resource database in Canada. It was developed as a mainframe-based system in support of federal and provincial resource planning and management. Its strength was continent-wide analysis of complex datasets. The CGIS was never available commercially.\nIn\u00a01964, Howard T. Fisher formed the Laboratory for Computer Graphics and Spatial Analysis at the Harvard Graduate School of Design (LCGSA 1965\u20131991), where a number of important theoretical concepts in spatial data handling were developed, and which by the 1970s had distributed seminal software code and systems, such as SYMAP, GRID, and ODYSSEY, to universities, research centers and corporations worldwide. These programs were the first examples of general-purpose GIS software that was not developed for a particular installation, and was very influential on future commercial software, such as Esri ARC/INFO, released in 1983.\nWorking in the Harvard Lab, Tom Waugh developed his vector-based Geographic Information Mapping and Manipulation System (GIMMS) software from 1969. He returned to the University of Edinburgh and this software was sold commercially from 1973. By 1977 it was used at 300 sites worldwide. This can be considered the first globally used GIS which anticipated some key characteristics of the Harvard Odyssey system by nearly five years and ARC/INFO by a decade.\nBy the late 1970s, two public domain GIS systems (MOSS and GRASS GIS) were in development, and by the early 1980s, M&amp;S Computing (later Intergraph) along with Bentley Systems Incorporated for the CAD\u00a0platform, Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI), CARIS\u00a0(Computer Aided Resource Information System), and ERDAS\u00a0(Earth Resource Data Analysis System) emerged as commercial vendors of GIS\u00a0software, successfully incorporating many of the CGIS\u00a0features, combining the first-generation approach to separation of spatial and attribute information with a second-generation approach to organizing attribute data into database structures.\nIn 1986, Mapping Display and Analysis System (MIDAS), the first desktop GIS product, was released for the DOS operating system. This was renamed in 1990 to MapInfo for Windows when it was ported to Windows. This began the process of moving GIS from the research department into the business environment.\nBy the end of the 20th\u00a0century, the rapid growth in various systems had been consolidated and standardized on relatively few platforms and users were beginning to explore viewing GIS\u00a0data over the Internet, requiring data format and transfer standards. More recently, a growing number of free, open-source GIS packages run on a range of operating systems and can be customized to perform specific tasks. The major trend of the 21st century has been the integration of GIS capabilities with other Information technology and Internet infrastructure, such as relational databases, cloud computing, software as a service (SAAS), and mobile computing.\nGIS software.\nThe distinction must be made between a singular \"geographic information system\", which is a single installation of software and data for a particular use, along with associated hardware, staff, and institutions (e.g., the GIS for a particular city government); and \"GIS software\", a general-purpose application program that is intended to be used in many individual geographic information systems in a variety of application domains.16 Starting in the late 1970s, many software packages have been created specifically for GIS applications. Esri's ArcGIS, which includes ArcGIS Pro and the legacy software ArcMap, currently dominates the GIS market. Other examples of GIS include Autodesk and MapInfo Professional and open-source programs such as QGIS, GRASS GIS, MapGuide, and Hadoop-GIS. These and other desktop GIS applications include a full suite of capabilities for entering, managing, analyzing, and visualizing geographic data, and are designed to be used on their own.\nStarting in the late 1990s with the emergence of the Internet, as computer network technology progressed, GIS infrastructure and data began to move to servers, providing another mechanism for providing GIS capabilities.216 This was facilitated by standalone software installed on a server, similar to other server software such as HTTP servers and relational database management systems, enabling clients to have access to GIS data and processing tools without having to install specialized desktop software. These networks are known as distributed GIS. This strategy has been extended through the Internet and development of cloud-based GIS platforms such as ArcGIS Online and GIS-specialized software as a service (SAAS). The use of the Internet to facilitate distributed GIS is known as Internet GIS.\nAn alternative approach is the integration of some or all of these capabilities into other software or information technology architectures. One example is a spatial extension to Object-relational database software, which defines a geometry datatype so that spatial data can be stored in relational tables, and extensions to SQL for spatial analysis operations such as overlay. Another example is the proliferation of geospatial libraries and application programming interfaces (e.g., GDAL, Leaflet, D3.js) that extend programming languages to enable the incorporation of GIS data and processing into custom software, including web mapping sites and location-based services in smartphones.\nGeospatial data management.\nThe core of any GIS is a database that contains Pamela of geographic phenomena, modeling their \"geometry\" (location and shape) and their \"properties\" or \"attributes\". A GIS database may be stored in a variety of forms, such as a collection of separate data files or a single spatially-enabled relational database. Collecting and managing these data usually constitutes the bulk of the time and financial resources of Papa Kofi far more than other aspects such as analysis and mapping.175\nAspects of geographic data.\nGIS uses spatio-temporal (space-time) location as the key index variable for all other information. Just as a relational database containing text or numbers can relate many different tables using common key index variables, GIS can relate otherwise unrelated information by using location as the key index variable. The key is the location and/or extent in space-time.\nAny variable that can be located spatially, and increasingly also temporally, can be referenced using a GIS. Locations or extents in Earth space\u2013time may be recorded as dates/times of occurrence, and x, y, and z coordinates representing, longitude, latitude, and elevation, respectively. These GIS coordinates may represent other quantified systems of temporo-spatial reference (for example, film frame number, stream gage station, highway mile-marker, surveyor benchmark, building address, street intersection, entrance gate, water depth sounding, POS or CAD drawing origin/units). Units applied to recorded temporal-spatial data can vary widely (even when using exactly the same data, see map projections), but all Earth-based spatial\u2013temporal location and extent references should, ideally, be relatable to one another and ultimately to a \"real\" physical location or extent in space\u2013time.\nRelated by accurate spatial information, an incredible variety of real-world and projected past or future data can be analyzed, interpreted and represented. This key characteristic of GIS has begun to open new avenues of scientific inquiry into behaviors and patterns of real-world information that previously had not been systematically correlated.\nData modeling.\nGIS data represents phenomena that exist in the real world, such as roads, land use, elevation, trees, waterways, and states. The most common types of phenomena that are represented in data can be divided into two conceptualizations: discrete objects (e.g., a house, a road) and continuous fields (e.g., rainfall amount or population density). Other types of geographic phenomena, such as events (e.g., location of World War II battles), processes (e.g., extent of suburbanization), and masses (e.g., types of soil in an area) are represented less commonly or indirectly, or are modeled in analysis procedures rather than data.\nTraditionally, there are two broad methods used to store data in a GIS for both kinds of abstractions mapping references: raster images and vector. Points, lines, and polygons represent vector data of mapped location attribute references.\nA new hybrid method of storing data is that of identifying point clouds, which combine three-dimensional points with RGB information at each point, returning a 3D color image. GIS thematic maps then are becoming more and more realistically visually descriptive of what they set out to show or determine.\nData acquisition.\nGIS data acquisition includes several methods for gathering spatial data into a GIS database, which can be grouped into three categories: \"primary data capture\", the direct measurement phenomena in the field (e.g., remote sensing, the global positioning system); \"secondary data capture\", the extraction of information from existing sources that are not in a GIS form, such as paper maps, through digitization; and \"data transfer\", the copying of existing GIS data from external sources such as government agencies and private companies. All of these methods can consume significant time, finances, and other resources.173\nPrimary data capture.\nSurvey data can be directly entered into a GIS from digital data collection systems on survey instruments using a technique called coordinate geometry (COGO). Positions from a global navigation satellite system (GNSS) like the Global Positioning System can also be collected and then imported into a GIS. A current trend in data collection gives users the ability to use field computers with the ability to edit live data using wireless connections or disconnected editing sessions. The current trend is to use applications available on smartphones and PDAs in the form of mobile GIS. This has been enhanced by the availability of low-cost mapping-grade GPS units with decimeter accuracy in real time. This eliminates the need to post process, import, and update the data in the office after fieldwork has been collected. This includes the ability to incorporate positions collected using a laser rangefinder. New technologies also allow users to create maps as well as analysis directly in the field, making projects more efficient and mapping more accurate.\nRemotely sensed data also plays an important role in data collection and consist of sensors attached to a platform. Sensors include cameras, digital scanners and lidar, while platforms usually consist of aircraft and satellites. In England in the mid-1990s, hybrid kite/balloons called helikites first pioneered the use of compact airborne digital cameras as airborne geo-information systems. Aircraft measurement software, accurate to 0.4\u00a0mm, was used to link the photographs and measure the ground. Helikites are inexpensive and gather more accurate data than aircraft. Helikites can be used over roads, railways and towns where unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are banned.\nRecently, aerial data collection has become more accessible with miniature UAVs and drones. For example, the Aeryon Scout was used to map a 50-acre\u00a0area with a ground sample distance of in only 12\u00a0minutes.\nThe majority of digital data currently comes from photo interpretation of aerial photographs. Soft-copy workstations are used to digitize features directly from stereo pairs of digital photographs. These systems allow data to be captured in two and three dimensions, with elevations measured directly from a stereo pair using principles of photogrammetry. Analog aerial photos must be scanned before being entered into a soft-copy system, for high-quality digital cameras this step is skipped.\nSatellite remote sensing provides another important source of spatial data. Here satellites use different sensor packages to passively measure the reflectance from parts of the electromagnetic spectrum or radio waves that were sent out from an active sensor such as radar. Remote sensing collects raster data that can be further processed using different bands to identify objects and classes of interest, such as land cover.\nSecondary data capture.\nThe most common method of data creation is digitization, where a hard copy map or survey plan is transferred into a digital medium through the use of a CAD program, and geo-referencing capabilities. With the wide availability of ortho-rectified imagery (from satellites, aircraft, Helikites and UAVs), heads-up digitizing is becoming the main avenue through which geographic data is extracted. Heads-up digitizing involves the tracing of geographic data directly on top of the aerial imagery instead of by the traditional method of tracing the geographic form on a separate digitizing tablet (heads-down digitizing). Heads-down digitizing, or manual digitizing, uses a special magnetic pen, or stylus, that feeds information into a computer to create an identical, digital map. Some tablets use a mouse-like tool, called a puck, instead of a stylus. The puck has a small window with cross-hairs which allows for greater precision and pinpointing map features. Though heads-up digitizing is more commonly used, heads-down digitizing is still useful for digitizing maps of poor quality.\nExisting data printed on paper or PET film maps can be digitized or scanned to produce digital data. A digitizer produces vector data as an operator traces points, lines, and polygon boundaries from a map. Scanning a map results in raster data that could be further processed to produce vector data.\nWhen data is captured, the user should consider if the data should be captured with either a relative accuracy or absolute accuracy, since this could not only influence how information will be interpreted but also the cost of data capture.\nAfter entering data into a GIS, the data usually requires editing, to remove errors, or further processing. For vector data it must be made \"topologically correct\" before it can be used for some advanced analysis. For example, in a road network, lines must connect with nodes at an intersection. Errors such as undershoots and overshoots must also be removed. For scanned maps, blemishes on the source map may need to be removed from the resulting raster. For example, a fleck of dirt might connect two lines that should not be connected.\nProjections, coordinate systems, and registration.\nThe earth can be represented by various models, each of which may provide a different set of coordinates (e.g., latitude, longitude, elevation) for any given point on the Earth's surface. The simplest model is to assume the earth is a perfect sphere. As more measurements of the earth have accumulated, the models of the earth have become more sophisticated and more accurate. In fact, there are models called datums that apply to different areas of the earth to provide increased accuracy, like North American Datum of 1983 for U.S. measurements, and the World Geodetic System for worldwide measurements.\nThe latitude and longitude on a map made against a local datum may not be the same as one obtained from a GPS receiver. Converting coordinates from one datum to another requires a datum transformation such as a Helmert transformation, although in certain situations a simple translation may be sufficient.\nIn popular GIS software, data projected in latitude/longitude is often represented as a Geographic coordinate system. For example, data in latitude/longitude if the datum is the 'North American Datum of 1983' is denoted by 'GCS North American 1983'.\nData quality.\nWhile no digital model can be a perfect representation of the real world, it is important that GIS data be of a high quality. In keeping with the principle of homomorphism, the data must be close enough to reality so that the results of GIS procedures correctly correspond to the results of real world processes. This means that there is no single standard for data quality, because the necessary degree of quality depends on the scale and purpose of the tasks for which it is to be used. Several elements of data quality are important to GIS data:\nThe degree of similarity between a represented measurement and the actual value; conversely, \"error\" is the amount of difference between them.623 In GIS data, there is concern for accuracy in representations of location (\"positional accuracy\"), property (\"attribute accuracy\"), and time. For example, the US 2020 Census says that the population of Houston on 1 April 2020 was 2,304,580; if it was actually 2,310,674, this would be an error and thus a lack of attribute accuracy.\nThe degree of refinement in a represented value. In a quantitative property, this is the number of significant digits in the measured value.115 An imprecise value is vague or ambiguous, including a range of possible values. For example, if one were to say that the population of Houston on 1 April 2020 was \"about 2.3 million,\" this statement would be imprecise, but likely accurate because the correct value (and many incorrect values) are included. As with accuracy, representations of location, property, and time can all be more or less precise. \"Resolution\" is a commonly used expression of positional precision, especially in raster data sets. Scale is closely related to precision in maps, as it dictates a desirable level of spatial precision, but is problematic in GIS, where a data set can be shown at a variety of display scales (including scales that would not be appropriate for the quality of the data).\nA general acknowledgement of the presence of error and imprecision in geographic data.99 That is, it is a degree of general doubt, given that it is difficult to know exactly how much error is present in a data set, although some form of estimate may be attempted (a confidence interval being such an estimate of uncertainty). This is sometimes used as a collective term for all or most aspects of data quality.\nThe degree to which an aspect (location, property, or time) of a phenomenon is inherently imprecise, rather than the imprecision being in a measured value.103 For example, the spatial extent of the Houston metropolitan area is vague, as there are places on the outskirts of the city that are less connected to the central city (measured by activities such as commuting) than places that are closer. Mathematical tools such as fuzzy set theory are commonly used to manage vagueness in geographic data.\nThe degree to which a data set represents all of the actual features that it purports to include.623 For example, if a layer of \"roads in Houston\" is missing some actual streets, it is incomplete.\nThe most recent point in time at which a data set claims to be an accurate representation of reality. This is a concern for the majority of GIS applications, which attempt to represent the world \"at present,\" in which case older data is of lower quality.\nThe degree to which the representations of the many phenomena in a data set correctly correspond with each other.623 Consistency in topological relationships between spatial objects is an especially important aspect of consistency.117 For example, if all of the lines in a street network were accidentally moved 10 meters to the East, they would be inaccurate but still consistent, because they would still properly connect at each intersection, and network analysis tools such as shortest path would still give correct results.\nThe degree to which the quality of the results of Spatial analysis methods and other processing tools derives from the quality of input data.118 For example, interpolation is a common operation used in many ways in GIS; because it generates estimates of values between known measurements, the results will always be more precise, but less certain (as each estimate has an unknown amount of error).\nThe quality of a dataset is very dependent upon its sources, and the methods used to create it. Land surveyors have been able to provide a high level of positional accuracy using high-end GPS equipment, but GPS locations on the average smartphone are much less accurate. Common datasets such as digital terrain and aerial imagery are available in a wide variety of levels of quality, especially spatial precision. Paper maps, which have been digitized for many years as a data source, can also be of widely varying quality.\nA quantitative analysis of maps brings accuracy issues into focus. The electronic and other equipment used to make measurements for GIS is far more precise than the machines of conventional map analysis. All geographical data are inherently inaccurate, and these inaccuracies will propagate through GIS\u00a0operations in ways that are difficult to predict.\nRaster-to-vector translation.\nData restructuring can be performed by a GIS to convert data into different formats. For example, a GIS may be used to convert a satellite image map to a vector structure by generating lines around all cells with the same classification, while determining the cell spatial relationships, such as adjacency or inclusion.\nMore advanced data processing can occur with image processing, a technique developed in the late\u00a01960s by NASA and the private sector to provide contrast enhancement, false color rendering and a variety of other techniques including use of two dimensional Fourier transforms. Since digital data is collected and stored in various ways, the two data sources may not be entirely compatible. So a GIS must be able to convert geographic data from one structure to another. In so doing, the implicit assumptions behind different ontologies and classifications require analysis. Object ontologies have gained increasing prominence as a consequence of object-oriented programming and sustained work by Barry Smith and co-workers.\nSpatial ETL.\nSpatial ETL tools provide the data processing functionality of traditional extract, transform, load\u00a0(ETL) software, but with a primary focus on the ability to manage spatial data. They provide GIS\u00a0users with the ability to translate data between different standards and proprietary formats, whilst geometrically transforming the data en route. These tools can come in the form of add-ins to existing wider-purpose software such as spreadsheets.\nSpatial analysis.\nGIS spatial analysis is a rapidly changing field, and GIS packages are increasingly including analytical tools as standard built-in facilities, as optional toolsets, as add-ins or 'analysts'. In many instances these are provided by the original software suppliers (commercial vendors or collaborative non-commercial development teams), while in other cases facilities have been developed and are provided by third parties. Furthermore, many products offer software development kits (SDKs), programming languages and language support, scripting facilities and/or special interfaces for developing one's own analytical tools or variants. The increased availability has created a new dimension to business intelligence termed \"spatial intelligence\" which, when openly delivered via intranet, democratizes access to geographic and social network data. Geospatial intelligence, based on GIS spatial analysis, has also become a key element for security. GIS as a whole can be described as conversion to a vectorial representation or to any other digitisation process.\nGeoprocessing is a GIS operation used to manipulate spatial data. A typical geoprocessing operation takes an input dataset, performs an operation on that dataset, and returns the result of the operation as an output dataset. Common geoprocessing operations include geographic feature overlay, feature selection and analysis, topology processing, raster processing, and data conversion. Geoprocessing allows for definition, management, and analysis of information used to form decisions.\nTerrain analysis.\nMany geographic tasks involve the terrain, the shape of the surface of the earth, such as hydrology, earthworks, and biogeography. Thus, terrain data is often a core dataset in a GIS, usually in the form of a raster Digital elevation model (DEM) or a Triangulated irregular network (TIN). A variety of tools are available in most GIS software for analyzing terrain, often by creating derivative datasets that represent a specific aspect of the surface. Some of the most common include:\nMost of these are generated using algorithms that are discrete simplifications of vector calculus. Slope, aspect, and surface curvature in terrain analysis are all derived from neighborhood operations using elevation values of a cell's adjacent neighbours. Each of these is strongly affected by the level of detail in the terrain data, such as the resolution of a DEM, which should be chosen carefully.\nProximity analysis.\nDistance is a key part of solving many geographic tasks, usually due to the friction of distance. Thus, a wide variety of analysis tools have analyze distance in some form, such as buffers, Voronoi or Thiessen polygons, Cost distance analysis, and network analysis.\nData analysis.\nIt is difficult to relate wetlands maps to rainfall amounts recorded at different points such as airports, television stations, and schools. A GIS, however, can be used to depict two- and three-dimensional characteristics of the Earth's surface, subsurface, and atmosphere from information points. For example, a GIS can quickly generate a map with isopleth or contour lines that indicate differing amounts of rainfall. Such a map can be thought of as a rainfall contour map. Many sophisticated methods can estimate the characteristics of surfaces from a limited number of point measurements. A two-dimensional contour map created from the surface modeling of rainfall point measurements may be overlaid and analyzed with any other map in a GIS covering the same area. This GIS derived map can then provide additional information \u2013 such as the viability of water power potential as a renewable energy source. Similarly, GIS can be used to compare other renewable energy resources to find the best geographic potential for a region.\nAdditionally, from a series of three-dimensional points, or digital elevation model, isopleth lines representing elevation contours can be generated, along with slope analysis, shaded relief, and other elevation products. Watersheds can be easily defined for any given reach, by computing all of the areas contiguous and uphill from any given point of interest. Similarly, an expected thalweg of where surface water would want to travel in intermittent and permanent streams can be computed from elevation data in the GIS.\nTopological modeling.\nA GIS can recognize and analyze the spatial relationships that exist within digitally stored spatial data. These topological relationships allow complex spatial modelling and analysis to be performed. Topological relationships between geometric entities traditionally include adjacency (what adjoins what), containment (what encloses what), and proximity (how close something is to something else).\nGeometric networks.\nGeometric networks are linear networks of objects that can be used to represent interconnected features, and to perform special spatial analysis on them. A geometric network is composed of edges, which are connected at junction points, similar to graphs in mathematics and computer science. Just like graphs, networks can have weight and flow assigned to its edges, which can be used to represent various interconnected features more accurately. Geometric networks are often used to model road networks and public utility networks, such as electric, gas, and water networks. Network modeling is also commonly employed in transportation planning, hydrology modeling, and infrastructure modeling.\nCartographic modeling.\nDana Tomlin coined the term \"cartographic modeling\" in his PhD dissertation (1983); he later used it in the title of his book, \"Geographic Information Systems and Cartographic Modeling\" (1990). Cartographic modeling refers to a process where several thematic layers of the same area are produced, processed, and analyzed. Tomlin used raster layers, but the overlay method (see below) can be used more generally. Operations on map layers can be combined into algorithms, and eventually into simulation or optimization models.\nMap overlay.\nThe combination of several spatial datasets (points, lines, or polygons) creates a new output vector dataset, visually similar to stacking several maps of the same region. These overlays are similar to mathematical Venn diagram overlays. A union overlay combines the geographic features and attribute tables of both inputs into a single new output. An intersect overlay defines the area where both inputs overlap and retains a set of attribute fields for each. A symmetric difference overlay defines an output area that includes the total area of both inputs except for the overlapping area.\nData extraction is a GIS process similar to vector overlay, though it can be used in either vector or raster data analysis. Rather than combining the properties and features of both datasets, data extraction involves using a \"clip\" or \"mask\" to extract the features of one data set that fall within the spatial extent of another dataset.\nIn raster data analysis, the overlay of datasets is accomplished through a process known as \"local operation on multiple rasters\" or \"map algebra\", through a function that combines the values of each raster's matrix. This function may weigh some inputs more than others through use of an \"index model\" that reflects the influence of various factors upon a geographic phenomenon.\nGeostatistics.\nGeostatistics is a branch of statistics that deals with field data, spatial data with a continuous index. It provides methods to model spatial correlation, and predict values at arbitrary locations (interpolation).\nWhen phenomena are measured, the observation methods dictate the accuracy of any subsequent analysis. Due to the nature of the data (e.g. traffic patterns in an urban environment; weather patterns over the Pacific Ocean), a constant or dynamic degree of precision is always lost in the measurement. This loss of precision is determined from the scale and distribution of the data collection.\nTo determine the statistical relevance of the analysis, an average is determined so that points (gradients) outside of any immediate measurement can be included to determine their predicted behavior. This is due to the limitations of the applied statistic and data collection methods, and interpolation is required to predict the behavior of particles, points, and locations that are not directly measurable.\nInterpolation is the process by which a surface is created, usually a raster dataset, through the input of data collected at a number of sample points. There are several forms of interpolation, each which treats the data differently, depending on the properties of the data set. In comparing interpolation methods, the first consideration should be whether or not the source data will change (exact or approximate). Next is whether the method is subjective, a human interpretation, or objective. Then there is the nature of transitions between points: are they abrupt or gradual. Finally, there is whether a method is global (it uses the entire data set to form the model), or local where an algorithm is repeated for a small section of terrain.\nInterpolation is a justified measurement because of a spatial autocorrelation principle that recognizes that data collected at any position will have a great similarity to, or influence of those locations within its immediate vicinity.\nDigital elevation models, triangulated irregular networks, edge-finding algorithms, Thiessen polygons, Fourier analysis, (weighted) moving averages, inverse distance weighting, kriging, spline, and trend surface analysis are all mathematical methods to produce interpolative data.\nAddress geocoding.\nGeocoding is interpolating spatial locations (X,Y coordinates) from street addresses or any other spatially referenced data such as ZIP\u00a0Codes, parcel lots and address locations. A reference theme is required to geocode individual addresses, such as a road centerline file with address ranges. The individual address locations have historically been interpolated, or estimated, by examining address ranges along a road segment. These are usually provided in the form of a table or database. The software will then place a dot approximately where that address belongs along the segment of centerline. For example, an address point of 500 will be at the midpoint of a line segment that starts with address\u00a01 and ends with address\u00a01,000. Geocoding can also be applied against actual parcel data, typically from municipal tax maps. In this case, the result of the geocoding will be an actually positioned space as opposed to an interpolated point. This approach is being increasingly used to provide more precise location information.\nReverse geocoding.\nReverse geocoding is the process of returning an estimated street address number as it relates to a given coordinate. For example, a user can click on a road centerline theme (thus providing a coordinate) and have information returned that reflects the estimated house number. This house number is interpolated from a range assigned to that road segment. If the user clicks at the midpoint of a segment that starts with address\u00a01 and ends with\u00a0100, the returned value will be somewhere near 50. Note that reverse geocoding does not return actual addresses, only estimates of what should be there based on the predetermined range.\nMulti-criteria decision analysis.\nCoupled with GIS, multi-criteria decision analysis methods support decision-makers in analysing a set of alternative spatial solutions, such as the most likely ecological habitat for restoration, against multiple criteria, such as vegetation cover or roads. MCDA uses decision rules to aggregate the criteria, which allows the alternative solutions to be ranked or prioritised. GIS MCDA may reduce costs and time involved in identifying potential restoration sites.\nGIS data mining.\nGIS or spatial data mining is the application of data mining methods to spatial data. Data mining, which is the partially automated search for hidden patterns in large databases, offers great potential benefits for applied GIS-based\u00a0decision\u00a0making. Typical applications include environmental monitoring. A characteristic of such applications is that spatial correlation between data measurements require the use of specialized algorithms for more efficient data analysis.\nData output and cartography.\nCartography is the design and production of maps, or visual representations of spatial data. The vast majority of modern cartography is done with the help of computers, usually using GIS but production of quality cartography is also achieved by importing layers into a design program to refine it. Most GIS\u00a0software gives the user substantial control over the appearance of the data.\nCartographic work serves two major functions:\nFirst, it produces graphics on the screen or on paper that convey the results of analysis to the people who make decisions about resources. Wall maps and other graphics can be generated, allowing the viewer to visualize and thereby understand the results of analyses or simulations of potential events. Web Map Servers facilitate distribution of generated maps through web browsers using various implementations of web-based application programming interfaces (AJAX, Java, Flash, etc.).\nSecond, other database information can be generated for further analysis or use. An example would be a list of all addresses within one\u00a0mile (1.6\u00a0km) of a toxic spill.\nAn archeochrome is a new way of displaying spatial data. It is a thematic on a 3D\u00a0map that is applied to a specific building or a part of a building. It is suited to the visual display of heat-loss data.\nTerrain depiction.\nTraditional maps are abstractions of the real world, a sampling of important elements portrayed on a sheet of paper with symbols to represent physical objects. People who use maps must interpret these symbols. Topographic maps show the shape of land surface with contour lines or with shaded relief.\nToday, graphic display techniques such as shading based on altitude in a GIS can make relationships among map elements visible, heightening one's ability to extract and analyze information. For example, two types of data were combined in a GIS to produce a perspective view of a portion of San\u00a0Mateo County, California.\nA GIS was used to register and combine the two images to render the three-dimensional perspective view looking down the San Andreas Fault, using the Thematic Mapper image pixels, but shaded using the elevation of the landforms. The GIS\u00a0display depends on the viewing point of the observer and time of day of the display, to properly render the shadows created by the sun's rays at that latitude, longitude, and time of day.\nWeb mapping.\nThere has been a proliferation of free-to-use and easily accessible mapping software such as the proprietary web applications Google\u00a0Maps and Bing\u00a0Maps, as well as the free and open-source alternative OpenStreetMap. These services give the public access to huge amounts of geographic data, perceived by many users to be as trustworthy and usable as professional information. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, web maps hosted on dashboards were used to rapidly disseminate case data to the general public.\nSome of them, like Google Maps and OpenLayers, expose an application programming interface (API) that enable users to create custom applications. These toolkits commonly offer street maps, aerial/satellite imagery, geocoding, searches, and routing functionality. Web mapping has also uncovered the potential of crowdsourcing geodata in projects like OpenStreetMap, which is a collaborative project to create a free editable map of the world. These mashup projects have been proven to provide a high level of value and benefit to end users outside that possible through traditional geographic information.\nWeb mapping also has drawbacks. Web mapping allows for the creation and distribution of maps by people without proper cartographic training. This has led to maps that ignore cartographic conventions and are potentially misleading, with one study finding that more than half of United States state government COVID-19 dashboards did not follow these conventions.\nUses.\nSince its origin in the 1960s, GIS has been used in an ever-increasing range of applications, corroborating the widespread importance of location and aided by the continuing reduction in the barriers to adopting geospatial technology. The multitude of different uses of GIS can be classified in several ways:\nThe implementation of a GIS is often driven by jurisdictional (such as a city), purpose, or application requirements. Generally, a GIS implementation may be custom-designed for an organization. Hence, a GIS deployment developed for an application, jurisdiction, enterprise, or purpose may not be necessarily interoperable or compatible with a GIS that has been developed for some other application, jurisdiction, enterprise, or purpose.\nGIS is also diverging into location-based services, which allows GPS-enabled mobile devices to display their location in relation to fixed objects (nearest restaurant, gas station, fire hydrant) or mobile objects (friends, children, police\u00a0car), or to relay their position back to a central server for display or other processing.\nGIS is also used in digital marketing and SEO for audience segmentation based on location.\nTopics.\nDisaster response.\n Geospatial disaster response uses geospatial data and tools to help emergency responders, land managers, and scientists respond to disasters. Geospatial data can help save lives, reduce damage, and improve communication. Geospatial data can be used by federal authorities like FEMA to create maps that show the extent of a disaster, the location of people in need, and the location of debris, create models that estimate the number of people at risk and the amount of damage, improve communication between emergency responders, land managers, and scientists, as well as help determine where to allocate resources, such as emergency medical resources or search and rescue teams and plan evacuation routes and identify which areas are most at risk.\nIn the United States, FEMA's Response Geospatial Office is responsible for the agency's capture, analysis and development of GIS products to enhance situational awareness and enable expeditions and effective decision making. The RGO's mission is to support decision makers in understanding the size, scope, and extent of disaster impacts so they can deliver resources to the communities most in need.\nHistory.\nThe use of digital maps generated by GIS has also influenced the development of an academic field known as spatial humanities.\nOther aspects.\nOpen Geospatial Consortium standards.\nThe Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) is an international industry consortium of 384\u00a0companies, government agencies, universities, and individuals participating in a consensus process to develop publicly available geoprocessing specifications. Open interfaces and protocols defined by OpenGIS\u00a0Specifications support interoperable solutions that \"geo-enable\" the Web, wireless and location-based services, and mainstream\u00a0IT, and empower technology developers to make complex spatial information and services accessible and useful with all kinds of applications. Open Geospatial Consortium protocols include Web Map Service, and Web Feature Service.\nGIS\u00a0products are broken down by the\u00a0OGC into two categories, based on how completely and accurately the software follows the OGC\u00a0specifications.\n\"Compliant products\" are software products that comply to OGC's\u00a0OpenGIS\u00a0Specifications. When a product has been tested and certified as compliant through the OGC\u00a0Testing Program, the product is automatically registered as \"compliant\" on this site.\n\"Implementing products\" are software products that implement OpenGIS\u00a0Specifications but have not yet passed a compliance test. Compliance tests are not available for all specifications. Developers can register their products as implementing draft or approved specifications, though OGC\u00a0reserves the right to review and verify each entry.\nAdding the dimension of time.\nThe condition of the Earth's surface, atmosphere, and subsurface can be examined by feeding satellite data into a GIS. GIS\u00a0technology gives researchers the ability to examine the variations in Earth processes over days, months, and years through the use of cartographic visualizations. As an example, the changes in vegetation vigor through a growing season can be animated to determine when drought was most extensive in a particular region. The resulting graphic represents a rough measure of plant health. Working with two variables over time would then allow researchers to detect regional differences in the lag between a decline in rainfall and its effect on vegetation.\nGIS\u00a0technology and the availability of digital data on regional and global scales enable such analyses. The satellite sensor output used to generate a vegetation graphic is produced for example by the advanced very-high-resolution radiometer (AVHRR). This sensor system detects the amounts of energy reflected from the Earth's surface across various bands of the spectrum for surface areas of about . The satellite sensor produces images of a particular location on the Earth twice a day. AVHRR and more recently the moderate-resolution imaging spectroradiometer (MODIS) are only two of many sensor systems used for Earth surface analysis.\nIn addition to the integration of time in environmental studies, GIS is also being explored for its ability to track and model the progress of humans throughout their daily routines. A concrete example of progress in this area is the recent release of time-specific population data by the U.S.\u00a0Census. In this data set, the populations of cities are shown for daytime and evening hours highlighting the pattern of concentration and dispersion generated by North American commuting patterns. The manipulation and generation of data required to produce this data would not have been possible without\u00a0GIS.\nUsing models to project the data held by a GIS\u00a0forward in time have enabled planners to test policy decisions using spatial decision support systems.\nSemantics.\nTools and technologies emerging from the World Wide Web Consortium's Semantic Web are proving useful for data integration problems in information systems. Correspondingly, such technologies have been proposed as a means to facilitate interoperability and data reuse among GIS\u00a0applications and also to enable new analysis mechanisms.\nOntologies are a key component of this semantic approach as they allow a formal, machine-readable specification of the concepts and relationships in a given domain. This in turn allows a GIS to focus on the intended meaning of data rather than its syntax or structure. For example, reasoning that a land cover type classified as \"deciduous needleleaf trees\" in one dataset is a specialization or subset of land cover type \"forest\" in another more roughly classified dataset can help a GIS automatically merge the two datasets under the more general land cover classification. Tentative ontologies have been developed in areas related to GIS\u00a0applications, for example the hydrology ontology developed by the Ordnance Survey in the United Kingdom and the SWEET ontologies developed by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Also, simpler ontologies and semantic metadata standards are being proposed by the W3C Geo Incubator Group to represent geospatial data on the web. GeoSPARQL is a standard developed by the Ordnance Survey, United States Geological Survey, Natural Resources Canada, Australia's Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation and others to support ontology creation and reasoning using well-understood OGC literals (GML, WKT), topological relationships (Simple Features, RCC8, DE-9IM), RDF and the SPARQL database query protocols.\nRecent research results in this area can be seen in the International Conference on Geospatial Semantics and the Terra Cognita \u2013 Directions to the Geospatial Semantic Web workshop at the International Semantic Web Conference.\nSocietal implications.\nWith the popularization of GIS in decision making, scholars have begun to scrutinize the social and political implications of GIS. GIS can also be misused to distort reality for individual and political gain. GIS technologies played a central role during the COVID-19 pandemic by enabling public health agencies and researchers to visualize and monitor disease spread in real time. The \"Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 Dashboard\" became one of the most widely cited GIS applications, demonstrating how web-based spatial data can inform policy and public awareness.\nIt has been argued that the production, distribution, use, and representation of geographic information are largely related with the social context and has the potential to increase citizen trust in government. Other related topics include discussion on copyright, privacy, and censorship. A more optimistic social approach to GIS\u00a0adoption is to use it as a tool for public participation.\nIn education.\nAt the end of the 20th century, GIS began to be recognized as tools that could be used in the classroom. The benefits of GIS in education seem focused on developing spatial cognition, but there is not enough bibliography or statistical data to show the concrete scope of the use of GIS in education around the world, although the expansion has been faster in those countries where the curriculum mentions them.\nGIS seems to provide many advantages in teaching geography because it allows for analysis based on real geographic data and also helps raise research questions from teachers and students in the classroom. It also contributes to improvement in learning by developing spatial and geographical thinking and, in many cases, student motivation.\nCourses in GIS are also offered by educational institutions.\nIn local government.\nGIS is proven as an organization-wide, enterprise and enduring technology that continues to change how local government operates. Government agencies have adopted GIS technology as a method to better manage the following areas of government organization:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12401", "revid": "46629529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12401", "title": "Graph theory", "text": "Area of discrete mathematics\nIn mathematics and computer science, graph theory is the study of \"graphs\", which are mathematical structures used to model pairwise relations between objects. A graph in this context is made up of \"vertices\" (also called \"nodes\" or \"points\") which are connected by \"edges\" (also called \"arcs\", \"links\" or \"lines\"). A distinction is made between undirected graphs, where edges link two vertices symmetrically, and directed graphs, where edges link two vertices asymmetrically. Graphs are one of the principal objects of study in discrete mathematics.\nDefinitions.\nDefinitions in graph theory vary. The following are some of the more basic ways of defining graphs and related mathematical structures.\nGraph.\nIn one restricted but very common sense of the term, a graph is an ordered pair formula_1 comprising:\nTo avoid ambiguity, this type of object may be called an undirected simple graph.\nIn the edge formula_4, the vertices formula_5 and formula_6 are called the endpoints of the edge. The edge is said to join formula_5 and formula_6 and to be incident on formula_5 and on formula_6. A vertex may exist in a graph and not belong to an edge. Under this definition, multiple edges, in which two or more edges connect the same vertices, are not allowed.\nIn one more general sense of the term allowing multiple edges, a graph is an ordered triple formula_11 comprising:\nTo avoid ambiguity, this type of object may be called an undirected multigraph.\nA loop is an edge that joins a vertex to itself. Graphs as defined in the two definitions above cannot have loops, because a loop joining a vertex formula_5 to itself is the edge (for an undirected simple graph) or is incident on (for an undirected multigraph) formula_16 which is not in formula_17. To allow loops, the definitions must be expanded. For undirected simple graphs, the definition of formula_13 should be modified to formula_19. For undirected multigraphs, the definition of formula_20 should be modified to formula_21. To avoid ambiguity, these types of objects may be called undirected simple graph permitting loops and undirected multigraph permitting loops (sometimes also undirected pseudograph), respectively.\nformula_2 and formula_13 are usually taken to be finite, and many of the well-known results are not true (or are rather different) for infinite graphs because many of the arguments fail in the infinite case. Moreover, formula_2 is often assumed to be non-empty, but formula_13 is allowed to be the empty set. The order of a graph is formula_26, its number of vertices. The size of a graph is formula_27, its number of edges. The degree or valency of a vertex is the number of edges that are incident to it, where a loop is counted twice. The degree of a graph is the maximum of the degrees of its vertices.\nIn an undirected simple graph of order \"n\", the maximum degree of each vertex is \"n\" \u2212 1 and the maximum size of the graph is .\nThe edges of an undirected simple graph permitting loops formula_28 induce a symmetric homogeneous relation formula_29 on the vertices of formula_28 that is called the adjacency relation of formula_28. Specifically, for each edge formula_32, its endpoints formula_5 and formula_6 are said to be adjacent to one another, which is denoted formula_35.\nDirected graph.\nA directed graph or digraph is a graph in which edges have orientations.\nIn one restricted but very common sense of the term, a directed graph is an ordered pair formula_1 comprising:\nTo avoid ambiguity, this type of object may be called a directed simple graph. In set theory and graph theory, formula_39 denotes the set of n-tuples of elements of formula_40 that is, ordered sequences of formula_41 elements that are not necessarily distinct.\nIn the edge formula_42 directed from formula_5 to formula_6, the vertices formula_5 and formula_6 are called the \"endpoints\" of the edge, formula_5 the \"tail\" of the edge and formula_6 the \"head\" of the edge. The edge is said to \"join\" formula_5 and formula_6 and to be \"incident\" on formula_5 and on formula_6. A vertex may exist in a graph and not belong to an edge. The edge formula_53 is called the \"inverted edge\" of formula_42. \"Multiple edges\", not allowed under the definition above, are two or more edges with both the same tail and the same head.\nIn one more general sense of the term allowing multiple edges, a directed graph is an ordered triple formula_11 comprising:\nTo avoid ambiguity, this type of object may be called a directed multigraph.\nA \"loop\" is an edge that joins a vertex to itself. Directed graphs as defined in the two definitions above cannot have loops, because a loop joining a vertex formula_5 to itself is the edge (for a directed simple graph) or is incident on (for a directed multigraph) formula_60 which is not in formula_61. So to allow loops the definitions must be expanded. For directed simple graphs, the definition of formula_13 should be modified to formula_63. For directed multigraphs, the definition of formula_20 should be modified to formula_65. To avoid ambiguity, these types of objects may be called precisely a directed simple graph permitting loops and a directed multigraph permitting loops (or a \"quiver\") respectively.\nThe edges of a directed simple graph permitting loops formula_28 is a homogeneous relation ~ on the vertices of formula_28 that is called the \"adjacency relation\" of formula_28. Specifically, for each edge formula_32, its endpoints formula_5 and formula_6 are said to be \"adjacent\" to one another, which is denoted formula_5 ~ formula_6.\nApplications.\nGraphs can be used to model many types of relations and processes in physical, biological, social and information systems. Many practical problems can be represented by graphs. Emphasizing their application to real-world systems, the term \"network\" is sometimes defined to mean a graph in which attributes (e.g. names) are associated with the vertices and edges, and the subject that expresses and understands real-world systems as a network is called network science.\nComputer science.\nWithin computer science, 'causal' and 'non-causal' linked structures are graphs that are used to represent networks of communication, data organization, computational devices, the flow of computation, etc. For instance, the link structure of a website can be represented by a directed graph, in which the vertices(nodes) represent web pages and directed edges represent links from one page to another. A similar approach can be taken to problems in social media, travel, biology, computer chip design, mapping the progression of neuro-degenerative diseases, and many other fields. The development of algorithms to handle graphs is therefore of major interest in computer science. The transformation of graphs is often formalized and represented by graph rewrite systems. Complementary to graph transformation systems focusing on rule-based in-memory manipulation of graphs are graph databases geared towards transaction-safe, persistent storing and querying of graph-structured data.\nLinguistics.\nGraph-theoretic methods, in various forms, have proven particularly useful in linguistics, since natural language often lends itself well to discrete structure. Traditionally, syntax and compositional semantics follow tree-based structures, whose expressive power lies in the principle of compositionality, modeled in a hierarchical graph. More contemporary approaches such as head-driven phrase structure grammar model the syntax of natural language using typed feature structures, which are directed acyclic graphs. \nWithin lexical semantics, especially as applied to computers, modeling word meaning is easier when a given word is understood in terms of related words; semantic networks are therefore important in computational linguistics. Still, other methods in phonology (e.g. optimality theory, which uses lattice graphs) and morphology (e.g. finite-state morphology, using finite-state transducers) are common in the analysis of language as a graph. Indeed, the usefulness of this area of mathematics to linguistics has borne organizations such as http://, as well as various 'Net' projects, such as WordNet, VerbNet, and others.\nPhysics and chemistry.\nGraph theory is also used to study molecules in chemistry and physics. In condensed matter physics, the three-dimensional structure of complicated simulated atomic structures can be studied quantitatively by gathering statistics on graph-theoretic properties related to the topology of the atoms. Also, \"the Feynman graphs and rules of calculation summarize quantum field theory in a form in close contact with the experimental numbers one wants to understand.\" In chemistry a graph makes a natural model for a molecule, where vertices represent atoms and edges bonds. This approach is especially used in computer processing of molecular structures, ranging from chemical editors to database searching. In statistical physics, graphs can represent local connections between interacting parts of a system, as well as the dynamics of a physical process on such\nsystems. Similarly, in computational neuroscience graphs can be used to represent functional connections between brain areas that interact to give rise to various cognitive processes, where the vertices represent different areas of the brain and the edges represent the connections between those areas. Graph theory plays an important role in electrical modeling of electrical networks, here, weights are associated with resistance of the wire segments to obtain electrical properties of network structures. Graphs are also used to represent the micro-scale channels of porous media, in which the vertices represent the pores and the edges represent the smaller channels connecting the pores. Chemical graph theory uses the molecular graph as a means to model molecules.\nGraphs and networks are excellent models to study and understand phase transitions and critical phenomena.\nRemoval of nodes or edges leads to a critical transition where the network breaks into small clusters which is studied as a phase transition. This breakdown is studied via percolation theory.\nSocial sciences.\nGraph theory is also widely used in sociology as a way, for example, to measure actors' prestige or to explore rumor spreading, notably through the use of social network analysis software. Under the umbrella of social networks are many different types of graphs. Acquaintanceship and friendship graphs describe whether people know each other. Influence graphs model whether certain people can influence the behavior of others. Finally, collaboration graphs model whether two people work together in a particular way, such as acting in a movie together.\nBiology.\nLikewise, graph theory is useful in biology and conservation efforts where a vertex can represent regions where certain species exist (or inhabit) and the edges represent migration paths or movement between the regions. This information is important when looking at breeding patterns or tracking the spread of disease, parasites or how changes to the movement can affect other species.\nGraphs are also commonly used in molecular biology and genomics to model and analyse datasets with complex relationships. For example, graph-based methods are often used to 'cluster' cells together into cell-types in single-cell transcriptome analysis. Another use is to model genes or proteins in a pathway and study the relationships between them, such as metabolic pathways and gene regulatory networks. Evolutionary trees, ecological networks, and hierarchical clustering of gene expression patterns are also represented as graph structures. \nGraph theory is also used in connectomics; nervous systems can be seen as a graph, where the nodes are neurons and the edges are the connections between them.\nMathematics.\nIn mathematics, graphs are useful in geometry and certain parts of topology such as knot theory. Algebraic graph theory has close links with group theory. Algebraic graph theory has been applied to many areas including dynamic systems and complexity.\nOther topics.\nA graph structure can be extended by assigning a weight to each edge of the graph. Graphs with weights, or weighted graphs, are used to represent structures in which pairwise connections have some numerical values. For example, if a graph represents a road network, the weights could represent the length of each road. There may be several weights associated with each edge, including distance (as in the previous example), travel time, or monetary cost. Such weighted graphs are commonly used to program GPS's, and travel-planning search engines that compare flight times and costs.\nHistory.\nThe paper written by Leonhard Euler on the Seven Bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg and published in 1736 is regarded as the first paper in the history of graph theory. This paper, as well as the one written by Vandermonde on the \"knight problem,\" carried on with the \"analysis situs\" initiated by Leibniz. Euler's formula relating the number of edges, vertices, and faces of a convex polyhedron was studied and generalized by Cauchy and L'Huilier, and represents the beginning of the branch of mathematics known as topology.\nMore than one century after Euler's paper on the bridges of K\u00f6nigsberg and while Listing was introducing the concept of topology, Cayley was led by an interest in particular analytical forms arising from differential calculus to study a particular class of graphs, the \"trees\". This study had many implications for theoretical chemistry. The techniques he used mainly concern the enumeration of graphs with particular properties. Enumerative graph theory then arose from the results of Cayley and the fundamental results published by P\u00f3lya between 1935 and 1937. These were generalized by De Bruijn in 1959. Cayley linked his results on trees with contemporary studies of chemical composition. The fusion of ideas from mathematics with those from chemistry began what has become part of the standard terminology of graph theory.\nIn particular, the term \"graph\" was introduced by Sylvester in a paper published in 1878 in \"Nature\", where he draws an analogy between \"quantic invariants\" and \"co-variants\" of algebra and molecular diagrams:\n\"[\u2026] Every invariant and co-variant thus becomes expressible by a \"graph\" precisely identical with a Kekul\u00e9an diagram or chemicograph. [\u2026] I give a rule for the geometrical multiplication of graphs, \"i.e.\" for constructing a \"graph\" to the product of in- or co-variants whose separate graphs are given. [\u2026]\" (italics as in the original).\nThe first textbook on graph theory was written by D\u00e9nes K\u0151nig, and published in 1936. Another book by Frank Harary, published in 1969, was \"considered the world over to be the definitive textbook on the subject\", and enabled mathematicians, chemists, electrical engineers and social scientists to talk to each other. Harary donated all of the royalties to fund the P\u00f3lya Prize.\nOne of the most famous and stimulating problems in graph theory is the four color problem: \"Is it true that any map drawn in the plane may have its regions colored with four colors, in such a way that any two regions having a common border have different colors?\" This problem was first posed by Francis Guthrie in 1852 and its first written record is in a letter of De Morgan addressed to Hamilton the same year. Many incorrect proofs have been proposed, including those by Cayley, Kempe, and others. The study and the generalization of this problem by Tait, Heawood, Ramsey and Hadwiger led to the study of the colorings of the graphs embedded on surfaces with arbitrary genus. Tait's reformulation generated a new class of problems, the \"factorization problems\", particularly studied by Petersen and K\u0151nig. The works of Ramsey on colorations and more specially the results obtained by Tur\u00e1n in 1941 was at the origin of another branch of graph theory, \"extremal graph theory\".\nThe four color problem remained unsolved for more than a century. In 1969 Heinrich Heesch published a method for solving the problem using computers. A computer-aided proof produced in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken makes fundamental use of the notion of \"discharging\" developed by Heesch. The proof involved checking the properties of 1,936 configurations by computer, and was not fully accepted at the time due to its complexity. A simpler proof considering only 633 configurations was given twenty years later by Robertson, Seymour, Sanders and Thomas.\nThe autonomous development of topology from 1860 and 1930 fertilized graph theory back through the works of Jordan, Kuratowski and Whitney. Another important factor of common development of graph theory and topology came from the use of the techniques of modern algebra. The first example of such a use comes from the work of the physicist Gustav Kirchhoff, who published in 1845 his Kirchhoff's circuit laws for calculating the voltage and current in electric circuits.\nThe introduction of probabilistic methods in graph theory, especially in the study of Erd\u0151s and R\u00e9nyi of the asymptotic probability of graph connectivity, gave rise to yet another branch, known as \"random graph theory\", which has been a fruitful source of graph-theoretic results.\nRepresentation.\nA graph is an abstraction of relationships that emerge in nature; hence, it cannot be coupled to a certain representation. The way it is represented depends on the degree of convenience such representation provides for a certain application. The most common representations are the visual, in which, usually, vertices are drawn and connected by edges, and the tabular, in which rows of a table provide information about the relationships between the vertices within the graph.\nVisual: Graph drawing.\nGraphs are usually represented visually by drawing a point or circle for every vertex, and drawing a line between two vertices if they are connected by an edge. If the graph is directed, the direction is indicated by drawing an arrow. If the graph is weighted, the weight is added on the arrow.\nA graph drawing should not be confused with the graph itself (the abstract, non-visual structure) as there are several ways to structure the graph drawing. All that matters is which vertices are connected to which others by how many edges and not the exact layout. In practice, it is often difficult to decide if two drawings represent the same graph. Depending on the problem domain some layouts may be better suited and easier to understand than others.\nThe pioneering work of W. T. Tutte was very influential on the subject of graph drawing. Among other achievements, he introduced the use of linear algebraic methods to obtain graph drawings.\nGraph drawing also can be said to encompass problems that deal with the crossing number and its various generalizations. The crossing number of a graph is the minimum number of intersections between edges that a drawing of the graph in the plane must contain. For a planar graph, the crossing number is zero by definition. Drawings on surfaces other than the plane are also studied.\nThere are other techniques to visualize a graph away from vertices and edges, including circle packings, intersection graph, and other visualizations of the adjacency matrix.\nTabular: Graph data structures.\nThe tabular representation lends itself well to computational applications. There are different ways to store graphs in a computer system. The data structure used depends on both the graph structure and the algorithm used for manipulating the graph. Theoretically one can distinguish between list and matrix structures but in concrete applications the best structure is often a combination of both. List structures are often preferred for sparse graphs as they have smaller memory requirements. Matrix structures on the other hand provide faster access for some applications but can consume huge amounts of memory. Implementations of sparse matrix structures that are efficient on modern parallel computer architectures are an object of current investigation.\nList structures include the edge list, an array of pairs of vertices, and the adjacency list, which separately lists the neighbors of each vertex: Much like the edge list, each vertex has a list of which vertices it is adjacent to.\nMatrix structures include the incidence matrix, a matrix of 0's and 1's whose rows represent vertices and whose columns represent edges, and the adjacency matrix, in which both the rows and columns are indexed by vertices. In both cases a 1 indicates two adjacent objects and a 0 indicates two non-adjacent objects. The degree matrix indicates the degree of vertices. The Laplacian matrix is a modified form of the adjacency matrix that incorporates information about the degrees of the vertices, and is useful in some calculations such as Kirchhoff's theorem on the number of spanning trees of a graph.\nThe distance matrix, like the adjacency matrix, has both its rows and columns indexed by vertices, but rather than containing a 0 or a 1 in each cell it contains the length of a shortest path between two vertices.\nProblems.\nEnumeration.\nThere is a large literature on graphical enumeration: the problem of counting graphs meeting specified conditions. Some of this work is found in Harary and Palmer (1973).\nSubgraphs, induced subgraphs, and minors.\nA common problem, called the subgraph isomorphism problem, is finding a fixed graph as a subgraph in a given graph. One reason to be interested in such a question is that many graph properties are \"hereditary\" for subgraphs, which means that a graph has the property if and only if all subgraphs have it too.\nFinding maximal subgraphs of a certain kind is often an NP-complete problem. For example:\nOne special case of subgraph isomorphism is the graph isomorphism problem. It asks whether two graphs are isomorphic. It is not known whether this problem is NP-complete, nor whether it can be solved in polynomial time.\nA similar problem is finding induced subgraphs in a given graph. Again, some important graph properties are hereditary with respect to induced subgraphs, which means that a graph has a property if and only if all induced subgraphs also have it. Finding maximal induced subgraphs of a certain kind is also often NP-complete. For example:\nStill another such problem, the minor containment problem, is to find a fixed graph as a minor of a given graph. A minor or subcontraction of a graph is any graph obtained by taking a subgraph and contracting some (or no) edges. Many graph properties are hereditary for minors, which means that a graph has a property if and only if all minors have it too. For example, Wagner's Theorem states: \nA similar problem, the subdivision containment problem, is to find a fixed graph as a subdivision of a given graph. A subdivision or homeomorphism of a graph is any graph obtained by subdividing some (or no) edges. Subdivision containment is related to graph properties such as planarity. For example, Kuratowski's Theorem states:\nAnother problem in subdivision containment is the Kelmans\u2013Seymour conjecture:\nAnother class of problems has to do with the extent to which various species and generalizations of graphs are determined by their \"point-deleted subgraphs\". For example:\nGraph coloring.\nMany problems and theorems in graph theory have to do with various ways of coloring graphs. Typically, one is interested in coloring a graph so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color, or with other similar restrictions. One may also consider coloring edges (possibly so that no two coincident edges are the same color), or other variations. Among the famous results and conjectures concerning graph coloring are the following:\nSubsumption and unification.\nConstraint modeling theories concern families of directed graphs related by a partial order. In these applications, graphs are ordered by specificity, meaning that more constrained graphs\u2014which are more specific and thus contain a greater amount of information\u2014are subsumed by those that are more general. Operations between graphs include evaluating the direction of a subsumption relationship between two graphs, if any, and computing graph unification. The unification of two argument graphs is defined as the most general graph (or the computation thereof) that is consistent with (i.e. contains all of the information in) the inputs, if such a graph exists; efficient unification algorithms are known.\nFor constraint frameworks which are strictly compositional, graph unification is the sufficient satisfiability and combination function. Well-known applications include automatic theorem proving and modeling the elaboration of linguistic structure.\nNetwork flow.\nThere are numerous problems arising especially from applications that have to do with various notions of flows in networks, for example:\nCovering problems.\nCovering problems in graphs may refer to various set cover problems on subsets of vertices/subgraphs.\nDecomposition problems.\nDecomposition, defined as partitioning the edge set of a graph (with as many vertices as necessary accompanying the edges of each part of the partition), has a wide variety of questions. Often, the problem is to decompose a graph into subgraphs isomorphic to a fixed graph; for instance, decomposing a complete graph into Hamiltonian cycles. Other problems specify a family of graphs into which a given graph should be decomposed, for instance, a family of cycles, or decomposing a complete graph \"K\"\"n\" into \"n\" \u2212 1 specified trees having, respectively, 1, 2, 3, ..., \"n\" \u2212 1 edges.\nSome specific decomposition problems and similar problems that have been studied include:\nGraph classes.\nMany problems involve characterizing the members of various classes of graphs. Some examples of such questions are below:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12405", "revid": "8844476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12405", "title": "Gumby", "text": "1957 American clay animation franchise\nGumby is an American cartoon character and associated media franchise created by Art Clokey. He is a blocky green humanoid made of clay.\nGumby stars in two television series, the film \"\", and other media. Gumby immediately became a famous example of stop-motion clay animation and an American cultural icon, spawning tributes, parodies, and merchandising.\nOverview.\nThe \"Gumby\" franchise follows Gumby's adventures through different environments and historical eras via entering books. His primary sidekick is Pokey, an orange pony. His archnemeses are the Blockheads, a pair of silent, antagonistic, red humanoid figures with cube-shaped heads; one has the letter G on the side of his head, while the other has a J. Their creation was inspired by the trouble-making Katzenjammer Kids. Other characters include Prickle, a yellow fire-breathing dinosaur who sometimes styles himself as a detective with pipe and deerstalker hat like Sherlock Holmes; Goo, a flying blue shapeshifting mermaid who spits blue goo balls; Gumbo and Gumba, Gumby's parents; and Nopey, Gumby's dog whose entire vocabulary is the word \"nope\". The 1988 syndicated series added Gumby's sister Minga, mastodon friend Denali, and chicken friend Tilly.\nHistory.\n1953\u20131969: Origins.\nGumby was created by Art Clokey in the early 1950s after he finished film school at the University of Southern California (USC).\nClokey's first animated film was a 1953 three-minute student film titled \"Gumbasia\", a surreal montage of moving and expanding lumps of clay set to music in a parody of Disney's \"Fantasia\". \"Gumbasia\" was created in the \"kinesthetic\" style taught by Clokey's USC professor Slavko Vorkapi\u0107, described as \"massaging of the eye cells\". Much of Gumby's look and feel was inspired by this technique of camera movements and editing.\nIn 1955, Clokey showed \"Gumbasia\" to film producer Sam Engel, who encouraged him to develop his technique by animating figures into children's stories. On January 29, 1955, Clokey produced and filmed the first pilot episode starring Gumby, titled \"Adventures of Gumby: A Sample\", which never aired.\nThe name \"Gumby\" was derived from the muddy clay found at Clokey's grandparents' farm that his family named \"gumbo\". Gumby's appearance was inspired by a suggestion from Clokey's wife Ruth (n\u00e9e Parkander) that Gumby be based on the Gingerbread Man. Clokey saw the color green as both racially neutral and a symbol of life. Gumby's legs and feet were made wide to pragmatically ensure that the figure would stand erect during stop-motion filming. Gumby's slanted head was based on the hairstyle of Clokey's father, Charles Farrington, in an old photograph.\nThe pilot episode was seen by NBC executive Thomas Warren Sarnoff, who asked Clokey to make another one. The second episode, \"Gumby on the Moon\", became a hit when featured on \"Howdy Doody\", so Sarnoff ordered a series in 1955 titled \"The Gumby Show\". In 1955 and 1956, 25 11-minute episodes aired on NBC. In early episodes, Gumby's voice was provided by Ruth Eggleston, wife of the show's art director Al Eggleston, until 1957, when Dallas McKennon assumed the role. Al Eggleston also invented Pokey, the little orange pony who was Gumby's best friend and was introduced during the earliest episodes.\nBecause of its variety format, \"The Gumby Show\" features Clokey's animations plus interviews and games. During this time, the show had two successive hosts, Robert Nicholson and Pinky Lee.\nIn 1959, \"The Gumby Show\" entered syndication, and more episodes were produced in the 1960s. Production started in Hollywood and in 1960 moved to a larger studio in Glendora, California, where it remained until production ended in 1969. During this time, Gumby was primarily voiced by Norma MacMillan and occasionally by Ginny Tyler. The cartoon shorts introduced new characters, including a blue mermaid named Goo and a yellow dinosaur named Prickle.\nSeveral sources claim that Dick Beals also voiced Gumby in the 1960s series. However, Beals refuted this claim in a 2001 interview.\n1982\u20131989: Revival.\nBeginning in 1982, Gumby was parodied by Eddie Murphy on \"Saturday Night Live\". The sketches depict Gumby as an irascible, cigar-chomping celebrity who is highly demanding of the production executives. Whenever they refuse his demands, Gumby asserts his star status by saying \"I'm \"Gumby\", dammit!\" in an exaggerated Jewish accent. According to Clokey's son Joseph, his father and he \"thought Eddie was a genius in the way he played that character\". In 1987, the original \"Gumby\" shorts were released on home video. In 1988, Gumby appeared in \"The Puppetoon Movie\".\nThis renewed interest led to a new \"Gumby Adventures\" series of 99 seven-minute episodes, produced for television syndication in association with Lorimar-Telepictures in 1988. Dallas McKennon voices Gumby in the new adventures, in which Gumby and his pals travels beyond their toyland setting as a musical band. \"Gumby Adventures\" includes new characters, such as Gumby's little sister Minga, a mastodon named Denali and a chicken named Tilly.\nThe 1988 series includes the 1950s and 1960s shorts with rerecorded voices, and the original music was replaced by Jerry Gerber's synthesizer score. Legal issues prevented Clokey from renewing rights to the original Capitol Records production tracks.\n1990\u20132021: feature film and reruns.\nStarting in 1992, TV channels such as Nickelodeon and Cartoon Network aired reruns of \"Gumby\" episodes. In 1995, Clokey's production company produced an independently released theatrical film, ', as the character's first feature-length adventure, with John R. Dilworth, creator of \"Courage the Cowardly Dog\", as animation consultant. In the film, the villainous Blockheads replace Gumby and his band with robots and kidnap their dog, Lowbelly. It contains homages to science-fiction films such as \"Star Wars\", \"The Terminator\" and '. In 1998, the \"Gumby\" episode \"Robot Rumpus\" was featured on \"Mystery Science Theater 3000\".\nOn March 16, 2007, YouTube announced that all \"Gumby\" episodes would appear in their full-length form on its site, digitally remastered and with their original soundtracks. This deal also extended to other video sites, including AOL. In March 2007, KQED-TV broadcast an hour-long documentary titled \"Gumby Dharma\" in its \"Truly CA\" series. It details Clokey's life and work, and has new animation of Gumby and Pokey. For these sequences, animator Stephen A. Buckley voiced Gumby and Clokey voiced Pokey.\nIn 2012, MeTV began airing \"Gumby\" in its weekend morning animation block until the end of the year.\nIn 2014, the VOD service Kabillion broadcast \"Gumby\".\nIn 2017, a comic series was published that seemingly takes place after the movie. The series was canceled after three issues.\n2022\u2013present: Fox ownership.\nIn February 2022, Fox Entertainment, the TV production division of the Murdoch family's Fox Corporation, announced it had acquired the \"Gumby\" intellectual property from the estate of Art's son, Joseph Clokey, encompassing all rights including \"film, TV and streaming, consumer products, licensing, publishing, and all other categories\", with plans to launch new series across linear and digital platforms, while adding to the classic \"Gumby\" material available on its free streaming platform Tubi. Before Fox took ownership of the series, Gumby made a cameo in the 17th season of \"The Simpsons\" in the episode \"The Girl Who Slept Too Little\".\nIn June 2024, two \"Gumby\" series were announced to be in the works: a 2D children's animated series titled \"Gumby Kids\" and an adult animated series. Both series were to be produced by Bento Box Entertainment.\nReception and legacy.\nIn 1993, \"TV Guide\" named \"Gumby\" the best cartoon series of the 1950s in its issue celebrating 40 years of television.\nBeginning in 1994, the Library of Congress used Gumby as a \"spokescharacter\" for \"Adventures into Books: Gumby's World\", a traveling exhibition promoting the Center for the Book's national reading campaign from 1997 to 2000. By the end of the 1990s, Gumby and Pokey had also appeared in various commercials for Cheerios cereal, with Gumby voiced by Stephen A. Buckley.\nOn August 4, 2006, the Center for Puppetry Arts in Atlanta opened \"Art Clokey's Gumby: The First Fifty Years\". This exhibition featured many of the original puppets and sets, along with screening of Clokey's films. This event was conceived by David Scheve of T.D.A. Animation and Joe Clokey of Premavision, and was one of several exhibits that opened around the country, celebrating the 50th anniversary of \"The Gumby Show\". The children's book \"Gumby Goes to the Sun\" was also published that year to commemorate the anniversary. The book was originally created in the 1980s by Clokey's daughter, Holly Harman (who voiced Gumby's sister, Minga, in the 1988 series).\nIn 2007, the \"Gumby\" comic book series was nominated for two Eisner Awards, Best New Series and Best Publication for a Young Audience, and won the latter. A Gumby graphic novel titled \"Gumby: 50 Shades of Clay\" was released in 2017.\nOn October 12, 2011, a Google Doodle acknowledged Art Clokey's 90th birthday. It was composed of a toy block with a \"G\" and five clay balls in the Google colors. Clicking each ball revealed the Blockheads, Prickle, Goo, Gumby, and Pokey.\nOn December 21, 2019, Eddie Murphy reprised his role while hosting \"Saturday Night Live\" during a sketch on \"Weekend Update\".\nMerchandising.\nThe most prominent of Gumby merchandise is the bendable figure set by Lakeside Toys. Several single packs and multifigure sets were made by Jesco (later Trendmasters), and a 50th-anniversary collection. There are plush dolls, keychains, mugs, a 1988 Colorforms set, a 1995 Trendmasters playset, and a Kubricks set by Medicom. A tribute album, \"Gumby: The Green Album\", produced by Shepard Stern, was released in 1989.\nThe \"Gumby\" images and toys are registered trademarks of Fox Entertainment. Premavision owned the distribution rights to the \"Gumby\" cartoons, having been reverted from previous distributor Warner Bros. Television in 2003, and had licensed the rights to Classic Media until September 30, 2012. At this time, Classic Media was officially acquired by DreamWorks Animation and branded as DreamWorks Classics, which became a subsidiary of NBCUniversal in 2016. As of April 2015, NCircle Entertainment owns home video and digital distribution rights to the cartoons.\nVideo game.\nIn August 2005, the first video game featuring Gumby, \"Gumby vs. the Astrobots\", was released by Namco for the Game Boy Advance. The plot follows the Blockheads and their cohorts, the Astrobots, capturing Pokey, Prickle, Goo, Gumbo, and Gumba and placing them in books. With his friends and parents in trouble, Gumby sets out to rescue them and defeat the Blockheads. The game is a sidescrolling platformer, where Gumby must navigate stages to reach the end, while avoiding enemies and pitfalls, and defeating a number of bosses from the game's various worlds. \"Gumby vs. the Astrobots\" received generally average reviews according to review aggregator Metacritic, with an average score of 63 out of 100, based on four reviews.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12406", "revid": "50593383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12406", "title": "Gioachino Rossini", "text": "Italian opera composer (1792\u20131868)\nGioachino Antonio Rossini (29 February 1792 \u2013 13 November 1868) was an Italian composer of the late Classical and early Romantic eras. He gained fame for his 39 operas, although he also wrote many songs, some chamber music and piano pieces and some sacred music. He set new standards for both comic and serious opera before retiring from large-scale composition while still in his thirties, at the height of his popularity.\nBorn in Pesaro to parents who were both musicians (his father a trumpeter, his mother a singer), Rossini began to compose by the age of twelve and was educated at music school in Bologna. His first opera was performed in Venice in 1810 when he was 18 years old. In 1815 he was engaged to write operas and manage theatres in Naples. In the period 1810\u20131823, he wrote 34 operas for the Italian stage that were performed in Venice, Milan, Ferrara, Naples and elsewhere; this productivity necessitated an almost formulaic approach for some components (such as overtures) and a certain amount of self-borrowing. During this period he produced his most popular works, including the comic operas \"L'italiana in Algeri\", \"Il barbiere di Siviglia\" (known in English as \"The Barber of Seville\") and \"La Cenerentola\", which brought to a peak the \"opera buffa\" tradition he inherited from masters such as Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Domenico Cimarosa and Giovanni Paisiello. He also composed \"opera seria\" works such as \"Tancredi\", \"Otello\" and \"Semiramide\". All of these attracted admiration for their innovation in melody, harmonic and instrumental colour, and dramatic form. In 1824 he was contracted by the Op\u00e9ra in Paris, for which he produced an opera to celebrate the coronation of Charles X, \"Il viaggio a Reims\" (later cannibalised for his first opera in French, \"Le comte Ory\"), revisions of two of his Italian operas, \"Le si\u00e8ge de Corinthe\" and \"Mo\u00efse\", and in 1829 his last opera, \"Guillaume Tell\".\nRossini's withdrawal from opera for the last 40 years of his life has never been fully explained; contributory factors may have been ill-health, the wealth his success had brought him, and the rise of spectacular grand opera under composers such as Giacomo Meyerbeer. From the early 1830s to 1855, when he left Paris and was based in Bologna, Rossini wrote relatively little. On his return to Paris in 1855 he became renowned for his musical salons on Saturdays, regularly attended by musicians and the artistic and fashionable circles of Paris, for which he wrote the entertaining pieces \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse\". Guests included Franz Liszt, Anton Rubinstein, Giuseppe Verdi, Meyerbeer, and Joseph Joachim. Rossini's last major composition was his \"Petite messe solennelle\" (1863).\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nRossini was born on 29 February in 1792 in Pesaro, a town on the Adriatic coast of Italy that was then part of the Papal States. He was the only child of Giuseppe Rossini, a trumpeter and horn player, and his wife Anna, \"n\u00e9e\" Guidarini, a seamstress by trade, daughter of a baker. Giuseppe Rossini was charming but impetuous and feckless; the burden of supporting the family and raising the child fell mainly on Anna, with some help from her mother and mother-in-law. Stendhal, who published a colourful biography of Rossini in 1824, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rossini's portion from his father, was the true native heirship of an Italian: a little music, a little religion, and a volume of Ariosto. The rest of his education was consigned to the legitimate school of southern youth, the society of his mother, the young singing girls of the company, those prima donnas in embryo, and the gossips of every village through which they passed. This was aided and refined by the musical barber and news-loving coffee-house keeper of the Papal village.\nGiuseppe was imprisoned at least twice: first in 1790 for insubordination to local authorities in a dispute about his employment as town trumpeter; and in 1799 and 1800 for republican activism and support of the troops of Napoleon against the Pope's Austrian backers. In 1798, when Rossini was aged six, his mother began a career as a professional singer in comic opera, and for a little over a decade was a considerable success in cities including Trieste and Bologna, before her untrained voice began to fail.\nIn 1802 the family moved to Lugo, near Ravenna, where Rossini received a good basic education in Italian, Latin and arithmetic as well as music. He studied the horn with his father and other music with a priest, Giuseppe Malerbe, whose extensive library contained works by Haydn and Mozart, both little known in Italy at the time, but inspirational to the young Rossini. He was a quick learner, and by the age of twelve, he had composed a set of six sonatas for four stringed instruments, which were performed under the aegis of a rich patron in 1804. Two years later he was admitted to the recently opened Liceo Musicale, Bologna, initially studying singing, cello and piano, and joining the composition class soon afterwards. He wrote some substantial works while a student, including a mass and a cantata, and after two years he was invited to continue his studies. He declined the offer: the strict academic regime of the Liceo had given him a solid compositional technique, but as his biographer Richard Osborne puts it, \"his instinct to continue his education in the real world finally asserted itself\".\nWhile still at the Liceo, Rossini had performed in public as a singer and worked in theatres as a r\u00e9p\u00e9titeur and keyboard soloist. In 1810 at the request of the popular tenor Domenico Mombelli he wrote his first operatic score, a two-act operatic \"dramma serio\", \"Demetrio e Polibio\", to a libretto by Mombelli's wife. It was publicly staged in 1812, after the composer's first successes. Rossini and his parents concluded that his future lay in composing operas. The main operatic centre in northeastern Italy was Venice; under the tutelage of the composer Giovanni Morandi, a family friend, Rossini moved there in late 1810, when he was eighteen.\nFirst operas: 1810\u20131815.\nRossini's first opera to be staged was \"La cambiale di matrimonio\", a one-act comedy, given at the small Teatro San Mois\u00e8 in November 1810. The piece was a great success, and Rossini received what then seemed to him a considerable sum: \"forty \"scudi\" \u2013 an amount I had never seen brought together\". He later described the San Mois\u00e8 as an ideal theatre for a young composer learning his craft \u2013 \"everything tended to facilitate the d\u00e9but of a novice composer\": it had no chorus, and a small company of principals; its main repertoire consisted of one-act comic operas (\"farse\"), staged with modest scenery and minimal rehearsal. Rossini followed the success of his first piece with three more \"farse\" for the house: \"L'inganno felice\" (1812), \"La scala di seta\" (1812), and \"Il signor Bruschino\" (1813).\nRossini maintained his links with Bologna, where in 1811 he had a success directing Haydn's \"The Seasons\", and a failure with his first full-length opera, \"L'equivoco stravagante\". He also worked for opera houses in Ferrara and Rome. In mid-1812 he received a commission from La Scala, Milan, where his two-act comedy \"La pietra del paragone\" ran for fifty-three performances, a considerable run for the time, which brought him not only financial benefits, but exemption from military service and the title of \"maestro di cartello\" \u2013 a composer whose name on advertising posters guaranteed a full house. The following year his first \"opera seria\", \"Tancredi\", did well at La Fenice in Venice, and even better at Ferrara, with a rewritten, tragic ending. The success of \"Tancredi\" made Rossini's name known internationally; productions of the opera followed in London (1820) and New York (1825). Within weeks of \"Tancredi\", Rossini had another box-office success with his comedy \"L'italiana in Algeri\", composed in great haste and premiered in May 1813.\n1814 was a less remarkable year for the rising composer, neither \"Il turco in Italia\" or \"Sigismondo\" pleasing the Milanese or Venetian public, respectively. 1815 marked an important stage in Rossini's career. In May he moved to Naples, to take up the post of director of music for the royal theatres. These included the Teatro di San Carlo, the city's leading opera house; its manager Domenico Barbaia was to be an important influence on the composer's career there.\nNaples and \"Il barbiere\": 1815\u20131820.\nThe musical establishment of Naples was not immediately welcoming to Rossini, who was seen as an intruder into its cherished operatic traditions. The city had once been the operatic capital of Europe; the memory of Cimarosa was revered and Paisiello was still living, but there were no local composers of any stature to follow them, and Rossini quickly won the public and critics round. Rossini's first work for the San Carlo, \"Elisabetta, regina d'Inghilterra\" was a dramma per musica in two acts, in which he reused substantial sections of his earlier works, unfamiliar to the local public. The Rossini scholars Philip Gossett and Patricia Brauner write, \"It is as if Rossini wished to present himself to the Neapolitan public by offering a selection of the best music from operas unlikely to be revived in Naples.\" The new opera was received with tremendous enthusiasm, as was the Neapolitan premiere of \"L'italiana in Algeri\", and Rossini's position in Naples was assured.\nFor the first time, Rossini was able to write regularly for a resident company of first-rate singers and a fine orchestra, with adequate rehearsals, and schedules that made it unnecessary to compose in a rush to meet deadlines. Between 1815 and 1822 he composed eighteen more operas: nine for Naples and nine for opera houses in other cities. In 1816, for the Teatro Argentina in Rome, he composed the opera that was to become his best-known: \"Il barbiere di Siviglia\" (\"The Barber of Seville\"). There was already a popular opera of that title by Paisiello, and Rossini's version was originally given the same title as its hero, \"Almaviva\". Despite an unsuccessful opening night, with mishaps on stage and many pro-Paisiello and anti-Rossini audience members, the opera quickly became a success, and by the time of its first revival, in Bologna a few months later, it was billed by its present Italian title and it rapidly eclipsed Paisiello's setting.\nRossini's operas for the Teatro San Carlo were substantial, mainly serious pieces. His \"Otello\" (1816) provoked Lord Byron to write, \"They have been crucifying \"Othello\" into an opera: music good, but lugubrious \u2013 but as for the words!\" Nonetheless, the piece proved generally popular and held the stage in frequent revivals until it was overshadowed by Verdi's version, seven decades later. Among his other works for the house were \"Mos\u00e8 in Egitto\", based on the biblical story of Moses and the Exodus from Egypt (1818), and \"La donna del lago\", from Sir Walter Scott's poem \"The Lady of the Lake\" (1819). For La Scala he wrote the opera semiseria \"La gazza ladra\" (1817), and for Rome his version of the Cinderella story, \"La Cenerentola\" (1817). In 1817 came the first performance of one of his operas (\"L'Italiana\") at the The\u00e2tre-Italien in Paris; its success led to others of his operas being staged there, and eventually to his contract in Paris from 1824 to 1830.\nRossini kept his personal life as private as possible, but he was known for his susceptibility to singers in the companies he worked with. Among his lovers in his early years were Ester Mombelli (Domenico's daughter) and Maria Marcolini of the Bologna company. By far the most important of these relationships \u2013 both personal and professional \u2013 was with Isabella Colbran, prima donna of the Teatro San Carlo (and former mistress of Barbaia). Rossini had heard her sing in Bologna in 1807, and when he moved to Naples he wrote a succession of important roles for her in \"opere serie\".\nVienna and London: 1820\u20131824.\nBy the early 1820s, Rossini was beginning to tire of Naples. The failure of his operatic tragedy \"Ermione\" the previous year convinced him that he and the Neapolitan audiences had had enough of each other. An insurrection in Naples against the monarchy, though quickly crushed, unsettled Rossini; when Barbaia signed a contract to take the company to Vienna, Rossini was glad to join them, but did not reveal to Barbaia that he had no intention of returning to Naples afterwards. He travelled with Colbran, in March 1822, breaking their journey at Bologna, where they were married in the presence of his parents in a small church in Castenaso a few miles from the city. The bride was thirty-seven, the groom thirty.\nIn Vienna, Rossini received a hero's welcome; his biographers describe it as \"unprecedentedly feverish enthusiasm\", \"Rossini fever\", and \"near hysteria\". The authoritarian chancellor of the Austrian Empire, Metternich, liked Rossini's music, and thought it free of all potential revolutionary or republican associations. He was therefore happy to permit the San Carlo company to perform the composer's operas. In a three-month season they played six of them, to audiences so enthusiastic that Beethoven's assistant, Anton Schindler, described it as \"an idolatrous orgy\".\nWhile in Vienna Rossini heard Beethoven's \"Eroica\" symphony, and was so moved that he determined to meet the reclusive composer. He finally managed to do so, and later described the encounter to many people, including Eduard Hanslick and Richard Wagner. He recalled that although conversation was hampered by Beethoven's deafness and Rossini's ignorance of German, Beethoven made it plain that he thought Rossini's talents were not for serious opera, and that \"above all\" he should \"do more \"Barbiere\"\" \"(Barbers)\".\nAfter the Vienna season Rossini returned to Castenaso to work with his librettist, Gaetano Rossi, on \"Semiramide\", commissioned by La Fenice. It was premiered in February 1823, his last work for the Italian theatre. Colbran starred, but it was clear to everyone that her voice was in serious decline, and \"Semiramide\" ended her career in Italy. The work survived that one major disadvantage, and entered the international operatic repertory, remaining popular throughout the 19th century; in Richard Osborne's words, it brought \"[Rossini's] Italian career to a spectacular close.\"\nIn November 1823 Rossini and Colbran set off for London, where a lucrative contract had been offered. They stopped for four weeks \"en route\" in Paris. Although he was not as feverishly acclaimed by the Parisians as he had been in Vienna, he nevertheless had an exceptionally welcoming reception from the musical establishment and the public. When he attended a performance of \"Il barbiere\" at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien he was applauded, dragged onto the stage, and serenaded by the musicians. A banquet was given for him and his wife, attended by leading French composers and artists, and he found the cultural climate of Paris congenial.\nAt the end of the year Rossini arrived in London, where he was received and made much of by the king, George IV, although the composer was by now unimpressed by royalty and aristocracy. Rossini and Colbran had signed contracts for an opera season at the in the Haymarket. Her vocal shortcomings were a serious liability, and she reluctantly retired from performing. Public opinion was not improved by Rossini's failure to provide a new opera, as promised. The impresario Vincenzo Benelli defaulted on his contract with the composer, but this was not known to the London press and public, who blamed Rossini.\nIn a 2003 biography of the composer, Gaia Servadio comments that Rossini and England were not made for each other. He was prostrated by the Channel crossing and was unlikely to be enthused by the English weather or English cooking. Although his stay in London was financially rewarding \u2013 the British press reported disapprovingly that he had earned over \u00a330,000 \u2013 he was happy to sign a contract at the French embassy in London to return to Paris, where he had felt much more at home.\nParis and final operas: 1824\u20131829.\nRossini's new, and highly remunerative, contract with the French government was negotiated under Louis XVIII, who died in September 1824, soon after Rossini's arrival in Paris. It had been agreed that the composer would produce one grand opera for the Acad\u00e9mie Royale de Musique and either an \"opera buffa\" or an \"opera semiseria\" for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien. He was also to help run the latter theatre and revise one of his earlier works for revival there. The death of the king and the accession of Charles X changed Rossini's plans, and his first new work for Paris was \"Il viaggio a Reims\", an operatic entertainment given in June 1825 to celebrate Charles's coronation. It was Rossini's last opera with an Italian libretto. He permitted only four performances of the piece, intending to reuse the best of the music in a less ephemeral opera. About half the score of \"Le comte Ory\" (1828) is from the earlier work.\nColbran's enforced retirement put a strain on the Rossinis' marriage, leaving her unoccupied while he continued to be the centre of musical attention and constantly in demand. She consoled herself with what Servadio describes as \"a new pleasure in shopping\"; for Rossini, Paris offered continual gourmet delights, as his increasingly rotund shape began to reflect.\nThe first of the four operas Rossini wrote to French librettos were \"Le si\u00e8ge de Corinthe\" (1826) and \"Mo\u00efse et Pharaon\" (1827). Both were substantial reworkings of pieces written for Naples: \"Maometto II\" and \"Mos\u00e8 in Egitto\". Rossini took great care before beginning work on the first, learning to speak French and familiarising himself with traditional French operatic ways of declaiming the language. As well as dropping some of the original music that was in an ornate style unfashionable in Paris, Rossini accommodated local preferences by adding dances, hymn-like numbers and a greater role for the chorus.\nRossini's mother, Anna, died in 1827; he had been devoted to her, and he felt her loss deeply. She and Colbran had never got on well, and Servadio suggests that after Anna died Rossini came to resent the surviving woman in his life.\nIn 1828 Rossini wrote \"Le comte Ory\", his only French-language comic opera. His determination to reuse music from \"Il viaggio a Reims\" caused problems for his librettists, who had to adapt their original plot and write French words to fit existing Italian numbers, but the opera was a success, and was seen in London within six months of the Paris premiere, and in New York in 1831. The following year Rossini wrote his long-awaited French grand opera, \"Guillaume Tell\", based on Friedrich Schiller's 1804 play which drew on the William Tell legend.\nEarly retirement: 1830\u20131855.\n\"Guillaume Tell\" was well received. The orchestra and singers gathered outside Rossini's house after the premiere and performed the rousing finale to the second act in his honour. The newspaper \"Le Globe\" commented that a new era of music had begun. Gaetano Donizetti remarked that the first and last acts of the opera were written by Rossini, but the middle act was written by God. The work was an undoubted success, without being a smash hit; the public took some time in getting to grips with it, and some singers found it too demanding. It nonetheless was produced abroad within months of the premiere, and there was no suspicion that it would be the composer's last opera.\nJointly with \"Semiramide\", \"Guillaume Tell\" is Rossini's longest opera, at three hours and forty-five minutes, and the effort of composing it left him exhausted. Although within a year he was planning an operatic treatment of the Faust story, events and ill health overtook him. After the opening of \"Guillaume Tell\" the Rossinis had left Paris and were staying in Castenaso. Within a year events in Paris had Rossini hurrying back. Charles X was overthrown in a revolution in July 1830, and the new administration, headed by Louis Philippe I, announced radical cutbacks in government spending. Among the cuts was Rossini's lifetime annuity, won after hard negotiation with the previous regime. Attempting to restore the annuity was one of Rossini's reasons for returning. The other was to be with his new mistress, Olympe P\u00e9lissier. He left Colbran in Castenaso; she never returned to Paris and they never lived together again.\nThe reasons for Rossini's withdrawal from opera have been continually discussed during and since his lifetime. Some have supposed that aged thirty-seven and in variable health, having negotiated a sizeable annuity from the French government, and having written thirty-nine operas, he simply planned to retire and kept to that plan. In a 1934 study of the composer, the critic Francis Toye coined the phrase \"The Great Renunciation\", and called Rossini's retirement a \"phenomenon unique in the history of music and difficult to parallel in the whole history of art\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Is there any other artist who thus deliberately, in the very prime of life, renounced that form of artistic production which had made him famous throughout the civilized world?\nThe poet Heine compared Rossini's retirement with Shakespeare's withdrawal from writing: two geniuses recognising when they had accomplished the unsurpassable and not seeking to follow it. Others, then and later, suggested that Rossini had retired because of pique at the successes of Giacomo Meyerbeer and Fromental Hal\u00e9vy in the genre of grand op\u00e9ra. Modern Rossini scholarship has generally discounted such theories, maintaining that Rossini had no intention of renouncing operatic composition, and that circumstances rather than personal choice made \"Guillaume Tell\" his last opera. Gossett and Richard Osborne suggest that illness may have been a major factor in Rossini's retirement. From about this time, Rossini had intermittent bad health, both physical and mental. He had contracted gonorrhoea in earlier years, which later led to painful side-effects, from urethritis to arthritis; he suffered from bouts of debilitating depression, which commentators have linked to several possible causes: cyclothymia, or bipolar disorder, or reaction to his mother's death.\nFor the next twenty-five years following \"Guillaume Tell\" Rossini composed little, although Gossett comments that his comparatively few compositions from the 1830s and 1840s show no falling off in musical inspiration. They include the \"Soir\u00e9es musicales\" (1830\u20131835: a set of twelve songs for solo or duet voices and piano) and his Stabat Mater (begun in 1831 and completed in 1841). After winning his fight with the government over his annuity in 1835 Rossini left Paris and settled in Bologna. His return to Paris in 1843 for medical treatment by Jean Civiale sparked hopes that he might produce a new grand opera \u2013 it was rumoured that Eug\u00e8ne Scribe was preparing a libretto for him about Joan of Arc. The Op\u00e9ra was moved to present a French version of \"Otello\" in 1844 which also included material from some of the composer's earlier operas. It is unclear to what extent \u2013 if at all \u2013 Rossini was involved with this production, which was in the event poorly received. More controversial was the \"pasticcio\" opera of \"Robert Bruce\" (1846), in which Rossini, by then returned to Bologna, closely cooperated by selecting music from his past operas which had not yet been performed in Paris, notably \"La donna del lago\". The Op\u00e9ra sought to present \"Robert\" as a new Rossini opera. But although \"Othello\" could at least claim to be genuine, canonic Rossini, the historian Mark Everist notes that detractors argued that \"Robert\" was simply \"fake goods, and from a bygone era at that\"; he cites Th\u00e9ophile Gautier regretting that \"the lack of unity could have been masked by a superior performance; unfortunately the tradition of Rossini's music was lost at the Op\u00e9ra a long time ago.\"\nThe period after 1835 saw Rossini's formal separation from his wife, who remained at Castenaso (1837), and the death of his father at the age of eighty (1839). In 1845 Colbran became seriously ill, and in September Rossini travelled to visit her; a month later she died. The following year Rossini and P\u00e9lissier were married in Bologna. The events of the Year of Revolution in 1848 led Rossini to move away from the Bologna area, where he felt threatened by insurrection, and to make Florence his base, which it remained until 1855.\nBy the early 1850s Rossini's mental and physical health had deteriorated to the point where his wife and friends feared for his sanity or his life. By the middle of the decade, it was clear that he needed to return to Paris for the most advanced medical care then available. In April 1855 the Rossinis set off for their final journey from Italy to France. Rossini returned to Paris aged sixty-three and made it his home for the rest of his life.\nSins of old age: 1855\u20131868.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI offer these modest songs to my dear wife Olympe as a simple testimony of gratitude for the affectionate, intelligent care which she lavished on me during my overlong and terrible illness.\nDedication of \"Musique anodine\", 1857\nGossett observes that although an account of Rossini's life between 1830 and 1855 makes depressing reading, it is \"no exaggeration to say that, in Paris, Rossini returned to life\". He recovered his health and \"joie de vivre\". Once settled in Paris he maintained two homes: a flat in the rue de la Chauss\u00e9e-d'Antin, a smart central area, and a neo-classical villa built for him in Passy, a commune now absorbed into the city, but then semi-rural. He and his wife established a salon that became internationally famous. The first of their Saturday evening gatherings \u2013 the \"samedi soirs\" \u2013 was held in December 1858, and the last, two months before he died in 1868.\nRossini began composing again. His music from his final decade was not generally intended for public performance, and he did not usually put dates of composition on the manuscripts. Consequently, musicologists have found it difficult to give definite dates for his late works, but the first, or among the first, was the song cycle \"Musique anodine\", dedicated to his wife and presented to her in April 1857. For their weekly salons he produced more than 150 pieces, including songs, solo piano pieces, and chamber works for many different combinations of instruments. He referred to them as his \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse\" \u2013 \"sins of old age\". The salons were held both at Beau S\u00e9jour \u2013 the Passy villa \u2013 and, in the winter, at the Paris flat. Such gatherings were a regular feature of Parisian life \u2013 the writer James Penrose has observed that the well-connected could easily attend different salons almost every night of the week \u2013 but the Rossinis' \"samedi soirs\" quickly became the most sought after: \"an invitation was the city's highest social prize.\" The music, carefully chosen by Rossini, was not only his own but included works by Pergolesi, Haydn and Mozart and modern pieces by some of his guests. Among the composers who attended the salons, and sometimes performed, were Auber, Gounod, Liszt, Rubinstein, Meyerbeer, and Verdi. Rossini liked to call himself a fourth-class pianist, but the many famous pianists who attended the \"samedi soirs\" were dazzled by his playing. Violinists such as Pablo Sarasate and Joseph Joachim and the leading singers of the day were regular guests. In 1860, Wagner visited Rossini via an introduction from Rossini's friend Edmond Michotte who some forty-five years later wrote his account of the genial conversation between the two composers.\nOne of Rossini's few late works intended to be given in public was his \"Petite messe solennelle\", first performed in 1864. In the same year Rossini was made a grand officer of the Legion of Honour by Napoleon III.\nAfter a short illness, and an unsuccessful operation to treat colorectal cancer, Rossini died at Passy on 13 November 1868 at the age of seventy-six. He left Olympe a life interest in his estate, which after her death, ten years later, passed to the Commune of Pesaro for the establishment of a Liceo Musicale, and funded a home for retired opera singers in Paris. After a funeral service attended by more than four thousand people at the church of Sainte-Trinit\u00e9, Paris, Rossini's body was interred at the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery. In 1887 his remains were moved to the basilica of Santa Croce, Florence.\nMusic.\n\"The Code Rossini\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Tous les genres sont bons, hors le genre ennuyeux\".\n Rossini, in a letter of 1868 (citing Voltaire)\nThe writer Julian Budden, noting the formulas adopted early on by Rossini in his career and consistently followed by him thereafter as regards overtures, arias, structures and ensembles, has called them \"the Code Rossini\" in a reference to the Code Napol\u00e9on, the legal system established by the French Emperor. Rossini's overall style may indeed have been influenced more directly by the French: the historian John Rosselli suggests that French rule in Italy at the start of the 19th century meant that \"music had taken on new military qualities of attack, noise and speed \u2013 to be heard in Rossini.\" Rossini's approach to opera was inevitably tempered by changing tastes and audience demands. The formal \"classicist\" libretti of Metastasio which had underpinned late 18th century \"opera seria\" were replaced by subjects more to the taste of the age of Romanticism, with stories demanding stronger characterisation and quicker action; a jobbing composer needed to meet these demands or fail. Rossini's strategies met this reality. A formulaic approach was logistically indispensable for Rossini's career, at least at the start: in the seven years 1812\u20131819, he wrote 27 operas, often at extremely short notice. For \"La Cenerentola\" (1817), for example, he had just over three weeks to write the music before the premi\u00e8re.\nSuch pressures led to a further significant element of Rossini's compositional procedures, not included in Budden's \"Code\", namely, recycling. The composer often transferred a successful overture to subsequent operas: thus the overture to \"La pietra del paragone\" was later used for the \"opera seria\" \"Tancredi\" (1813), and (in the other direction) the overture to \"Aureliano in Palmira\" (1813) ended as (and is today known as) the overture to the comedy \"Il barbiere di Siviglia (The Barber of Seville)\". He also liberally re-employed arias and other sequences in later works. Spike Hughes notes that of the twenty-six numbers of \"Eduardo e Cristina\", produced in Venice in 1817, nineteen were lifted from previous works. \"The audience\u00a0... were remarkably good-humoured \u00a0... and asked slyly why the libretto had been changed since the last performance\". Rossini expressed his disgust when the publisher Giovanni Ricordi issued a complete edition of his works in the 1850s: \"The same pieces will be found several times, for I thought I had the right to remove from my fiascos those pieces which seemed best, to rescue them from shipwreck\u00a0... A fiasco seemed to be good and dead, and now look they've resuscitated them all!\"\nOvertures.\nPhilip Gossett notes that Rossini \"was from the outset a consummate composer of overtures\". His basic formula for these remained constant throughout his career: Gossett characterises them as \"sonata movements without development sections, usually preceded by a slow introduction\" with \"clear melodies, exuberant rhythms [and] simple harmonic structure\" and a \"crescendo\" climax. Richard Taruskin also notes that the second theme is always announced in a woodwind solo, whose \"catchiness\" \"etch[es] a distinct profile in the aural memory\", and that the richness and inventiveness of his handling of the orchestra, even in these early works, marks the start of \"[t]he great nineteenth-century flowering of orchestration.\"\nArias.\nRossini's handling of arias (and duets) in \"cavatina\" style marked a development from the eighteenth-century commonplace of recitative and aria. In the words of Rosselli, in Rossini's hands, \"the aria became an engine for releasing emotion\". Rossini's typical aria structure involved a lyrical introduction (\"cantabile\") and a more intensive, brilliant, conclusion (\"cabaletta\"). This model could be adapted in various ways so as to forward the plot (as opposed to the typical eighteenth-century handling which resulted in the action coming to a halt as the requisite repeats of the \"da capo aria\" were undertaken). For example, they could be punctuated by comments from other characters (a convention known as \"pertichini\"), or the chorus could intervene between the \"cantabile\" and the \"cabaletta\" so as to fire up the soloist. If such developments were not necessarily Rossini's own invention, he nevertheless made them his own by his expert handling of them. A landmark in this context is the \"cavatina\" \"Di tanti palpiti\" from \"Tancredi\", which both Taruskin and Gossett (amongst others) single out as transformative, \"the most famous aria Rossini ever wrote\", with a \"melody that seems to capture the melodic beauty and innocence characteristic of Italian opera.\" Both writers point out the typical Rossinian touch of avoiding an \"expected\" cadence in the aria by a sudden shift from the home key of F to that of A flat (see example); Taruskin notes the implicit pun, as the words talk of returning, but the music moves in a new direction. The influence was lasting; Gossett notes how the Rossinian \"cabaletta\" style continued to inform Italian opera as late as Giuseppe Verdi's \"Aida\" (1871).\nStructure.\nSuch structural integration of the forms of vocal music with the dramatic development of the opera meant a sea-change from the Metastasian primacy of the aria; in Rossini's works, solo arias progressively take up a smaller proportion of the operas, in favour of duets (also typically in \"cantabile-cabaletta\" format) and ensembles.\nDuring the late 18th century, creators of \"opera buffa\" had increasingly developed dramatic integration of the finales of each act. Finales began to \"spread backwards\", taking an ever larger proportion of the act, taking the structure of a musically continuous chain, accompanied throughout by orchestra, of a series of sections, each with its own characteristics of speed and style, mounting to a clamorous and vigorous final scene. In his comic operas Rossini brought this technique to its peak and extended its range far beyond his predecessors. Of the finale to the first act of \"L'italiana in Algeri\", Taruskin writes that \"[r]unning through almost a hundred pages of vocal score in record time, it is the most concentrated single dose of Rossini that there is.\"\nOf greater consequence for the history of opera was Rossini's ability to progress this technique in the genre of \"opera seria\". Gossett in a very detailed analysis of the first-act finale of \"Tancredi\" identifies several elements in Rossini's practice. These include the contrast of \"kinetic\" action sequences, often characterised by orchestral motifs, with \"static\" expressions of emotion, the final \"static\" section in the form of a cabaletta, with all the characters joining in the final cadences. Gossett claims that it is \"from the time of \"Tancredi\" that the cabaletta\u00a0... becomes the obligatory closing section of each musical unit in the operas of Rossini and his contemporaries.\"\nEarly works.\nWith extremely few exceptions, all Rossini's compositions before the \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse\" of his retirement involve the human voice. His very first surviving work (apart from a single song) is however a set of string sonatas for two violins, cello and double-bass, written at the age of 12 when he had barely begun instruction in composition. Tuneful and engaging, they indicate how remote the talented child was from the influence of the advances in musical form evolved by Mozart, Haydn and Beethoven; the accent is on cantabile melody, colour, variation and virtuosity rather than transformational development. These qualities are also evident in Rossini's early operas, especially his \"farse\" (one-act farces), rather than his more formal \"opere serie\". Gossett notes that these early works were written at a time when \"[t]he deposited mantles of Cimarosa and Paisiello were unfilled\" \u2013 these were Rossini's first, and increasingly appreciated, steps in trying them on. The Teatro San Mois\u00e8 in Venice, where his \"farse\" was first performed, and the La Scala Theatre of Milan which premiered his two-act opera \"La pietra del paragone\" (1812), were seeking works in that tradition; Gossett notes that in these operas \"Rossini's musical personality began to take shape\u00a0... many elements emerge that remain throughout his career\" including \"[a] love of sheer sound, of sharp and effective rhythms\". The unusual effect employed in the overture of \"Il signor Bruschino\", (1813) deploying violin bows tapping rhythms on music stands, is an example of such witty originality.\nItaly, 1813\u20131823.\nThe great success in Venice of the premieres of both \"Tancredi\" and the comic opera \"L'italiana in Algeri\" within a few weeks of each other (6 February 1813 and 22 May 1813 respectively) set the seal on Rossini's reputation as the rising opera composer of his generation. From the end of 1813 to mid-1814 he was in Milan creating two new operas for La Scala, \"Aureliano in Palmira\" and \"Il Turco in Italia\". Arsace in \"Aureliano\" was sung by the \"castrato\" Giambattista Velluti; this was the last opera role Rossini wrote for a \"castrato\" singer as the norm became to use contralto voices \u2013 another sign of change in operatic taste. Rumour had it that Rossini was displeased by Velluti's ornamentation of his music; but in fact throughout his Italian period, up to \"Semiramide\" (1823), Rossini's written vocal lines become increasingly florid, and this is more appropriately credited to the composer's own changing style.\nRossini's work in Naples contributed to this stylistic development. The city, which was the cradle of the operas of Cimarosa and Paisiello, had been slow to acknowledge the composer from Pesaro, but Domenico Barbaia invited him in 1815 on a seven-year contract to manage his theatres and compose operas. For the first time, Rossini was able to work over a long period with a company of musicians and singers, including amongst the latter Isabella Colbran, Andrea Nozzari, Giovanni David and others, who as Gossett notes \"all specialized in florid singing\" and \"whose vocal talents left an indelible and not wholly positive mark on Rossini's style\". Rossini's first operas for Naples, \"Elisabetta, regina d'Inghilterra\" and \"La gazzetta\" were both largely recycled from earlier works, but \"Otello\" (1816) is marked not only by its virtuoso vocal lines but by its masterfully integrated last act, with its drama underlined by melody, orchestration and tonal colour; here, in Gossett's opinion \"Rossini came of age as a dramatic artist.\" He further comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The growth of Rossini's style from \"Elisabetta, regina d'Inghilterra\" to \"Zelmira\" and, ultimately, \"Semiramide\", is a direct consequence of th[e] continuity [he experienced in Naples]. Not only did Rossini compose some of his finest operas for Naples, but these operas profoundly affected operatic composition in Italy and made possible the developments that were to lead to Verdi.\nBy now, Rossini's career was arousing interest across Europe. Others came to Italy to study the revival of Italian opera and used its lessons to advance themselves; amongst these was the Berlin-born Giacomo Meyerbeer who arrived in Italy in 1816, a year after Rossini's establishment at Naples, and lived and worked there until following him to Paris in 1825; he used one of Rossini's librettists, Gaetano Rossi, for five of his seven Italian operas, which were produced at Turin, Venice and Milan. In a letter to his brother of September 1818, he includes a detailed critique of \"Otello\" from the point of view of a non-Italian informed observer. He is scathing about the self-borrowings in the first two acts, but concedes that the third act \"so firmly established Rossini's reputation in Venice that even a thousand follies could not rob him of it. But this act is divinely beautiful, and what is so strange is that [its] beauties\u00a0... are blatantly un-Rossinian: outstanding, even passionate recitatives, mysterious accompaniments, lots of local colour.\"\nRossini's contract did not prevent him from undertaking other commissions, and before \"Otello, Il barbiere di Siviglia\", a grand culmination of the \"opera buffa\" tradition, had been premiered in Rome (February 1816). Richard Osborne catalogues its excellencies:\nBeyond the physical impact of\u00a0... Figaro's \"Largo al factotum\", there is Rossini's ear for vocal and instrumental timbres of a peculiar astringency and brilliance, his quick-witted word-setting, and his mastery of large musical forms with their often brilliant and explosive internal variations. Add to that what Verdi called the opera's \"abundance of true musical ideas\", and the reasons for the work's longer-term emergence as Rossini's most popular \"opera buffa\" are not hard to find.\nApart from \"La Cenerentola\" (Rome, 1817), and the \"pen-and-ink sketch\" \"farsa\" \"Adina\" (1818, not performed until 1826), Rossini's other works during his contract with Naples were all in the \"opera seria\" tradition. Amongst the most notable of these, all containing virtuoso singing roles, were \"Mos\u00e8 in Egitto\" (1818), \"La donna del lago\" (1819), \"Maometto II\" (1820) all staged in Naples, and \"Semiramide\", his last opera written for Italy, staged at La Fenice in Venice in 1823. The three versions of the opera semiseria \"Matilde di Shabran\" were written in 1821/1822. Both \"Mos\u00e8\" and \"Maometto II\" were later to undergo significant reconstruction in Paris (see below).\nFrance, 1824\u20131829.\nAlready in 1818, Meyerbeer had heard rumours that Rossini was seeking a lucrative appointment at the Paris Opera \u2013 \"Should [his proposals] be accepted, he will go to the French capital, and we will perhaps experience curious things.\" Some six years were to pass before this prophecy came true.\nIn 1824 Rossini, under a contract with the French government, became director of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien in Paris, where he introduced Meyerbeer's opera \"Il crociato in Egitto\", and for which he wrote \"Il viaggio a Reims\" to celebrate the coronation of Charles X (1825). This was his last opera to an Italian libretto, and was later cannibalised to create his first French opera, \"Le comte Ory\" (1828). A new contract in 1826 meant he could concentrate on productions at the Op\u00e9ra and to this end he substantially revised \"Maometto II\" as \"Le si\u00e8ge de Corinthe\" (1826) and \"Mos\u00e9\" as \"Mo\u00efse et Pharaon\" (1827). Meeting French taste, the works are extended (each by one act), the vocal lines in the revisions are less florid and the dramatic structure is enhanced, with the proportion of arias reduced. One of the most striking additions was the chorus at the end of Act III of \"Mo\u00efse\", with a \"crescendo\" repetition of a diatonic ascending bass line, rising first by a minor third, then by a major third, at each appearance, and a descending chromatic top line, which roused the excitement of audiences.\nRossini's government contract required him to create at least one new \"grand op\u0117ra\", and Rossini settled on the story of William Tell, working closely with the librettist \u00c9tienne de Jouy. The story in particular enabled him to indulge \"an underlying interest in the related genres of folk music, pastoral and the picturesque\". This becomes clear from the overture, which is explicitly programmatic in describing weather, scenery and action, and presents a version of the \"Ranz des Vaches\", the Swiss cowherd's call, which \"undergoes a number of transformations during the opera\" and gives it in Richard Osborne's opinion \"something of the character of a leitmotif\". In the opinion of the music historian Benjamin Walton, Rossini \"saturate[s] the work with local colour to such a degree that there is room for little else.\" Thus, the role of the soloists is significantly reduced compared to other Rossini operas, the hero not even having an aria of his own, whilst the chorus of the Swiss people is consistently in the musical and dramatic foregrounds.\n\"Guillaume Tell\" premiered in August 1829. Rossini also provided for the Op\u00e9ra a shorter, three-act version, which incorporated the \"pas redoubl\u00e9\" (quick march) final section of the overture in its finale; it was first performed in 1831 and became the basis of the Op\u00e9ra's future productions. \"Tell\" was very successful from the start and was frequently revived \u2013 in 1868 the composer was present at its 500th performance at the Op\u00e9ra. The \"Globe\" had reported enthusiastically at its opening that \"a new epoch has opened not only for French opera, but for dramatic music elsewhere\". This was an era, it transpired, in which Rossini was not to participate.\nWithdrawal, 1830\u20131868.\nRossini's contract required him to provide five new works for the Op\u00e9ra over 10 years. After the premi\u00e8re of \"Tell\" he was already considering some opera subjects, including Goethe's \"Faust\", but the only significant works he completed before abandoning Paris in 1836 were the Stabat Mater, written for a private commission in 1831 (later completed and published in 1841), and the collection of salon vocal music \"Soir\u00e9es musicales\" published in 1835. Living in Bologna, he occupied himself teaching singing at the Liceo Musicale, and also created a \"pasticcio\" of \"Tell\", \"Rodolfo di Sterlinga\", for the benefit of the singer Nicola Ivanoff, for which Giuseppe Verdi provided some new arias. Continuing demand in Paris resulted in the production of a \"new\" French version of \"Otello\" in 1844 (with which Rossini was not involved) and a \"new\" opera \"Robert Bruce\" for which Rossini cooperated with Louis Niedermeyer and others to recast music for \"La donna del lago\" and others of his works which were little-known in Paris to fit a new libretto. The success of both of these was qualified, to say the least.\nNot until Rossini returned to Paris in 1855 were there signs of a revival of his musical spirits. A stream of pieces, for voices, choir, piano, and chamber ensembles, written for his soir\u00e9es, the \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse (Sins of old age)\" were issued in thirteen volumes from 1857 to 1868; of these, volumes 4 to 8 comprise \"56 semi-comical piano pieces\u00a0... dedicated to pianists of the fourth class, to which I have the honour of belonging.\" These include a mock funeral march, \"Marche et reminiscences pour mon dernier voyage (March and reminiscences for my last journey).\" Gossett writes of the \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s\" \"Their historical position remains to be assessed but it seems likely that their effect, direct or indirect, on composers like Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns and Erik Satie was significant.\"\nThe most substantial work of Rossini's last decade, the \"Petite messe solennelle\" (1863), was written for small forces (originally voices, two pianos and harmonium), and therefore unsuited to concert hall performance; and as it included women's voices it was unacceptable for church performances at the time. For these reasons, Richard Osborne suggests, the piece has been somewhat overlooked among Rossini's compositions. It is neither especially \"petite\" (little) nor entirely \"solennelle\" (solemn), but is notable for its grace, counterpoint and melody. At the end of the manuscript, the composer wrote:\nDear God, here it is finished, this poor little Mass. Is it sacred music I have written, or damned music? I was born for opera buffa, as you know well. A little technique, a little heart, that's all. Be blessed then, and grant me Paradise.\nInfluence and legacy.\nThe popularity of Rossini's melodies led many contemporary virtuosi to create piano transcriptions or fantasies based on them. Examples include Sigismond Thalberg's fantasy on themes from \"Mo\u00efse\", the sets of variations on \"Non pi\u00f9 mesta\" from \"La Cenerentola\" by Henri Herz, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, Franz H\u00fcnten, Anton Diabelli and Friedrich Burgm\u00fcller, and Liszt's transcriptions of the \"William Tell\" overture (1838) and the \"Soir\u00e9es musicales\".\nThe continuing popularity of his comic operas (and the decline in staging his \"opere serie\"), the overthrow of the singing and staging styles of his period, and the emerging concept of the composer as a \"creative artist\" rather than a craftsman, diminished and distorted Rossini's place in music history even though the forms of Italian opera continued up to the period of verismo to be indebted to his innovations. Rossini's status amongst his contemporary Italian composers is indicated by the \"Messa per Rossini\", a project initiated by Verdi within a few days of Rossini's death, which he and a dozen other composers created in collaboration.\nIf Rossini's principal legacy to Italian opera was in vocal forms and dramatic structure for serious opera, his legacy to French opera was to provide a bridge from opera buffa to the development of \"op\u00e9ra comique\" (and thence, via Jacques Offenbach's \"op\u00e9ras bouffes\" to the genre of operetta). \"Op\u00e9ras comiques\" showing a debt to Rossini's style include Fran\u00e7ois-Adrien Boieldieu's \"La dame blanche\" (1825) and Daniel Auber's \"Fra Diavolo\" (1830), as well as works by Ferdinand H\u00e9rold, Adolphe Adam and Fromental Hal\u00e9vy. Critical of Rossini's style was Hector Berlioz, who wrote of his \"melodic cynicism, his contempt for dramatic and good sense, his endless repetition of a single form of cadence, his eternal puerile crescendo and his brutal bass drum\".\nIt was perhaps inevitable that the formidable reputation which Rossini had built in his lifetime would fade thereafter. In 1886, less than twenty years after the composer's death, Bernard Shaw wrote: \"The once universal Rossini, whose \"Semiramide\" appeared to our greener grandfathers a Ninevesque wonder, came at last to be no longer looked upon as a serious musician.\" In an 1877 review of \"Il barbiere\", he noted that Adelina Patti sang as an encore in the lesson scene \"Home, Sweet Home\" but that \"the opera proved so intolerably wearisome that some of her audience had already displayed their appreciation of the sentiment of the ballad in the most practical way.\"\nIn the early 20th century Rossini received tributes from both Ottorino Respighi, who had orchestrated excerpts from the \"P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse\" both in his ballet \"la boutique fantasque\" (1918) and in his 1925 suite \"Rossiniana\", and from Benjamin Britten, who adapted music by Rossini for two suites, \"Soir\u00e9es musicales\" (Op. 9) in 1937 and \"Matin\u00e9es musicales\" (Op. 24) in 1941. Richard Osborne singles out the three-volume biography of Rossini by Giuseppe Radiciotti (1927\u20131929) as an important turning point towards positive appreciation, which may also have been assisted by the trend of neoclassicism in music. A firm re-evaluation of Rossini's significance began only later in the 20th century in the light of study, and the creation of critical editions, of his works. A prime mover in these developments was the \"Fondazione G. Rossini\" which was created by the city of Pesaro in 1940 using the funds which had been left to the city by the composer. Since 1980 the \"Fondazione\" has supported the annual Rossini Opera Festival in Pesaro.\nIn the 21st century, the Rossini repertoire of opera houses around the world remains dominated by \"Il barbiere\", \"La Cenerentola\" being the second most popular. Several other operas are regularly produced, including \"Le comte Ory\", \"La donna del lago\", \"La gazza ladra\", \"Guillaume Tell\", \"L'italiana in Algeri\", \"La scala di seta\", \"Il turco in Italia\" and \"Il viaggio a Reims\". Other Rossini pieces in the current international repertory, given from time to time, include \"Adina\", \"Armida\", \"Elisabetta regina d'Inghilterra\", \"Ermione\", \"Mos\u00e9 in Egitto\" and \"Tancredi\". The Rossini in Wildbad festival specialises in producing the rarer works. The Operabase performance-listing website records 2,319 performances of 532 productions of Rossini operas in 255 venues across the world in the three years 2017\u20132019. All of Rossini's operas have been recorded.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals and articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLiner notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12407", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12407", "title": "Gibberish", "text": "Nonsensical speech or writing\nGibberish, also known as jibber-jabber or gobbledygook, is speech that is (or appears to be) nonsense: ranging across speech sounds that are not actual words, pseudowords, language games, and specialized jargon that seems nonsensical to outsiders.\n\"Gibberish\" is also used as an imprecation to denigrate or tar ideas or opinions the user disagrees with or finds irksome, a rough equivalent of \"nonsense\", \"folderol\", \"balderdash\", or \"claptrap\". The implication is that the criticized expression or proposition lacks substance or congruence, as opposed to being a differing view.\nThe related word \"jibber-jabber\" refers to rapid talk that is difficult to understand.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"gibberish\" is uncertain. The term was seen in English in the early 16th\u00a0century. It is generally thought to be an onomatopoeia imitative of speech, similar to the words \"jabber\" (to talk rapidly) and \"gibber\" (to speak inarticulately).\nIt may originate from the word \"jib\", which is the Angloromani variant of the Romani language word meaning \"language\" or \"tongue\". To non-speakers, the Anglo-Romany dialect could sound like English mixed with nonsense words, and if those seemingly nonsensical words are referred to as \"jib\" then the term \"gibberish\" could be derived as a descriptor for nonsensical speech.\nSamuel Johnson, in \"A Dictionary of the English Language\", published in 1755, wrote that the word gibberish \"is probably derived from the chymical cant, and originally implied the jargon of Geber and his tribe.\" The theory was that \"gibberish\" came from the name of a famous 8th\u00a0century Muslim alchemist, J\u0101bir ibn Hayy\u0101n, whose name was Latinized as \"Geber\". Thus, \"gibberish\" was a reference to the incomprehensible technical jargon and allegorical coded language used by Jabir and other alchemists. After 1818, editors of Johnson's Dictionary rejected that origin theory.\nA discredited alternative theory asserts that it is derived from the Irish word \"gob\" or \"gab\" (\"mouth\") or from the Irish phrase \"Geab ar ais\" (\"back talk, backward chat\"). The latter Irish etymology was suggested by Daniel Cassidy, whose work has been criticised by linguists and scholars. The terms \"geab\" and \"geabaire\" are certainly Irish words, but the phrase \"geab ar ais\" does not exist, and the word \"gibberish\" exists as a loan-word in Irish as \"gibiris\".\nThe term \"gobbledygook\" was coined by Maury Maverick, a former congressman from Texas and former mayor of San Antonio. When Maverick was chairman of the Smaller War Plants Corporation during World War\u00a0II, he sent a memorandum that said: \"Be short and use plain English. ... Stay off gobbledygook language.\" Maverick defined \"gobbledygook\" as \"talk or writing which is long, pompous, vague, involved, usually with Latinized words.\" The allusion was to a turkey, \"always gobbledygobbling and strutting with ridiculous pomposity.\"\nUse.\nGobbledygook.\nThe term \"gobbledygook\" has a long history of use in politics to deride deliberately obscure statements and complicated but ineffective explanations. The following are a few examples:\nIn acting.\nUsing gibberish whilst acting can be used as an improvisation exercise in theatre arts education.\nIn song.\nThe Italian musical artist Adriano Celentano wrote and performed the song \"Prisencolinensinainciusol\" in gibberish as an intentional mimic of the sound of English to those who are not fluent in the language.\n\"Mary Poppins\" features a song called \"supercalifragilisticexpialidocious,\" a nonsense word whose only purpose is to be the longest word in English, though it is not.\nOther terms and usage.\nThe terms \"officialese\" or \"bureaucratese\" refer to language used by officials or authorities. \"Legalese\" is a closely related concept, referring to language used by lawyers, legislators, and others involved with the law. The language used in these fields may contain complex sentences and specialized jargon or buzzwords, making it difficult for those outside the field to understand. Speakers or writers of officialese or legalese may recognize that it is confusing or even meaningless to outsiders, but view its use as appropriate within their organization or group.\nBafflegab is a synonym, a slang term referring to confusing or a generally unintelligible use of jargon.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12408", "revid": "38355222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12408", "title": "Gnaeus Julius Agricola", "text": "Roman governor and general (40\u201393)\nGnaeus Julius Agricola (; 13 June 40 \u2013 23 August 93) was a Roman general and politician responsible for much of the Roman conquest of Britain. Born to a political family of senatorial rank, Agricola began his military career as a military tribune under governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus. In his subsequent career, he served in a variety of political positions in Rome. In 64, he was appointed quaestor in Asia province. Two years later, he was appointed Plebeian Tribune, and in 68, he was made praetor. During the Year of the Four Emperors in 69, he supported Vespasian, general of the Syrian army, in his bid for the throne.\nWhen Vespasian became emperor, Agricola was made a patrician and appointed governor of Gallia Aquitania. In 77, he was made consul and governor of Britannia. As governor, he completed the conquest of what is today Wales and northern England, and led his army to the far north of Scotland, establishing forts across much of the lowlands. In 85, Agricola was recalled from Britain after an unusually lengthy service by Emperor Domitian. After his return, he retired from military and public life and died in 93. Most of what is known about Agricola and his governorship was written in the \"De vita et moribus Iulii Agricolae\", a primary source, written by Tacitus, Agricola's son-in-law, and detailed archaeological evidence from northern Britain.\nEarly life.\nAgricola was born in the \"colonia\" of Forum Julii, Gallia Narbonensis (now Fr\u00e9jus, France). Agricola's parents were from noted political families of senatorial rank in Roman Gaul. Both of his grandfathers served as imperial governors. His father, Lucius Julius Graecinus, was a \"praetor\" and had become a member of the Roman Senate in the year of Agricola's birth. Graecinus had become distinguished by his interest in philosophy. Between August 40 and January 41, the emperor Caligula ordered his death, because he refused to prosecute the emperor's second cousin Marcus Junius Silanus.\nHis mother was Julia Procilla. The Roman historian Tacitus describes her as \"a lady of singular virtue\" who had a fond affection for her son. Agricola was educated in Massilia (Marseille), and showed what was considered to be an unhealthy interest in philosophy.\nPolitical career.\nHe began his career in Roman public life as a military tribune, and served in Britain under Gaius Suetonius Paulinus from 58 to 62. He was probably attached to the \"Legio II Augusta\", but was chosen to serve on Suetonius's staff and thus almost certainly participated in the suppression of Boudica's uprising in 61.\nReturning from Britain to Rome in 62, he married Domitia Decidiana, a woman of noble birth. Their first child was a son. Agricola was appointed as \"quaestor\" in 64, which he served in the province of Asia under the corrupt proconsul Lucius Salvius Otho Titianus. While he was there, his daughter, Julia Agricola, was born, but his son died shortly afterwards. He was tribune of the plebs in 66 and \"praetor\" in June 68, during which time he was ordered by the Governor of Spain Galba to take an inventory of the temple treasures.\nDuring that time, the emperor Nero was declared a public enemy by the Senate and committed suicide, and the period of civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors began. Galba succeeded Nero, but was murdered in early 69 by Otho, who took the throne. Agricola's mother was murdered on her estate in Liguria by Otho's marauding fleet. Hearing of Vespasian's bid for the empire, Agricola immediately gave him his support. Otho meanwhile committed suicide after being defeated by Vitellius.\nAfter Vespasian had established himself as emperor, Agricola was appointed to the command of the \"Legio XX Valeria Victrix\", stationed in Britain, in place of Marcus Roscius Coelius, who had stirred up a mutiny against the governor, Marcus Vettius Bolanus. Britain had revolted during the year of civil war, and Bolanus was a mild governor. Agricola reimposed discipline on the legion and helped to consolidate Roman rule. In 71, Bolanus was replaced by a more aggressive governor, Quintus Petillius Cerialis, and Agricola was able to display his talents as a commander in campaigns against the Brigantes in northern England.\nWhen his command ended in 73, Agricola was enrolled as a patrician and appointed to govern Gallia Aquitania. There he stayed for almost three years. In 76 or 77, he was recalled to Rome and appointed suffect consul, and betrothed his daughter to Tacitus. The following year, Tacitus and Julia married; Agricola was appointed to the College of Pontiffs, and returned to Britain for a third time, as its governor (\"Legatus Augusti pro praetore\").\nGovernor of Britain.\nArriving in midsummer of 77, Agricola discovered that the Ordovices of north Wales had virtually destroyed the Roman cavalry stationed in their territory. He immediately moved against them and defeated them. His campaign then moved onto Anglesey where he subjugated the entire island. Almost two decades earlier, Governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus had attempted the same but Roman forces had to withdraw in 60 CE because of the outbreak of the Boudican rebellion. \nAgricola also expanded Roman rule north into Caledonia (modern Scotland). In the summer of 79, he pushed his armies to the estuary of the river Taus, usually interpreted as the Firth of Tay, virtually unchallenged, and established some forts. Though their location is left unspecified, the close dating of the fort at Elginhaugh in Midlothian makes it a possible candidate. He established himself as a good administrator by reforming the widely corrupt corn levy as well as through his military successes. He introduced Romanising measures, encouraging communities to build towns on the Roman model and gave a Roman education to sons of native nobility; albeit, as Tacitus notes, for the cynical reason of pacifying the aggressive tribes in Britannia for the servitude of Rome.\nHibernia.\nIn 81, Agricola \"crossed in the first ship\" and defeated peoples unknown to the Romans until then. Tacitus, in Chapter 24 of \"Agricola\", does not tell us what body of water he crossed. Modern scholarship favours either the Firth of Clyde or Firth of Forth. Tacitus also mentions Hibernia, so southwest Scotland is perhaps to be preferred. The text of the \"Agricola\" has been amended here to record the Romans \"crossing into trackless wastes\", referring to the wilds of the Galloway peninsula. Agricola fortified the coast facing Ireland, and Tacitus recalls that his father-in-law often claimed the island could be conquered with a single legion and auxiliaries. He had given refuge to an exiled Irish king whom he hoped he might use as the excuse for conquest. This conquest never happened, but some historians believe the crossing referred to was in fact a small-scale exploratory or punitive expedition to Ireland, though no Roman camps have been identified to confirm such a suggestion.\nIrish legend provides a striking parallel. Tuathal Teachtmhar, a legendary High King, is said to have been exiled from Ireland as a boy, and to have returned from Britain at the head of an army to claim the throne. The traditional date of his return is between 76 and 80, and archaeology has found Roman or Romano-British artefacts in several sites associated with Tuathal.\nThe invasion of Caledonia (Scotland).\nThe following year, Agricola raised a fleet and encircled the tribes beyond the Forth, and the Caledonians rose in great numbers against him. They attacked the camp of the \"Legio IX Hispana\" at night, but Agricola sent in his cavalry and they were put to flight. The Romans responded by pushing further north. Another son was born to Agricola this year, but died before his first birthday.\nIn the summer of 83, Agricola faced the massed armies of the Caledonians, led by Calgacus, at the Battle of Mons Graupius. Tacitus estimates their numbers at more than 30,000. Agricola put his auxiliaries in the front line, keeping the legions in reserve, and relied on close-quarters fighting to make the Caledonians' unpointed slashing swords useless as they were unable to swing them properly or utilise thrusting attacks. Even though the Caledonians were put to rout and therefore lost this battle, two thirds of their army managed to escape and hide in the Highlands or the \"trackless wilds\" as Tacitus calls them. Battle casualties were estimated by Tacitus to be about 10,000 on the Caledonian side and 360 on the Roman side.\nA number of authors have reckoned the battle to have occurred in the Grampian Mounth within sight of the North Sea. In particular, Roy, Surenne, Watt, Hogan and others have advanced notions that the site of the battle may have been Kempstone Hill, Megray Hill or other knolls near the Raedykes Roman camp; these points of high ground are proximate to the Elsick Mounth, an ancient trackway used by Romans and Caledonians for military manoeuvres. However, following the discovery of the Roman camp at Durno in 1975, most scholars now believe that the battle took place on the ground around Bennachie in Aberdeenshire.\nSatisfied with his victory, Agricola extracted hostages from the Caledonian tribes. He may have marched his army to the northern coast of Britain, as evidenced by the probable discovery of a Roman fort at Cawdor (near Inverness).\nHe also instructed the prefect of the fleet to sail around the north coast, confirming (allegedly for the first time) that Britain was in fact an island.\nFindings.\nIn 2019, GUARD Archaeology team led by Iraia Arabaolaza uncovered a marching camp dating to the 1st century AD in Ayr, used by Roman legions during the invasion of Roman General Agricola. According to Arabaolaza, the fire pits were split 30 meters apart into two parallel lines. The findings also included clay-domed ovens and 26 fire pits dated to between 77- 86 AD and 90 AD loaded with burnt material and charcoal contents. Archaeologists suggested that this site had been chosen as a strategic location for the Roman conquest of Ayrshire.\nLater years.\nAgricola was recalled from Britain in 85, after an unusually long tenure as governor of the province. Tacitus claims Domitian ordered his recall because Agricola's successes outshone the emperor's own modest victories in Germany. He re-entered Rome unobtrusively, reporting as ordered to the palace at night. \nThe relationship between Agricola and the emperor is unclear; on the one hand, Agricola was awarded triumphal decorations and a statue (the highest military honours apart from an actual triumph); on the other, Agricola never again held a civil or military post, in spite of his experience and renown. He was offered the governorship of the province of Africa, but declined it, whether due to ill health or (as Tacitus claims) the machinations of Domitian.\nIn 93, Agricola died on his family estates in Gallia Narbonensis aged fifty-three. According to his son-in-law, the Roman historian Tacitus, rumours circulated attributing the death to a poison administered by emperor Domitian, but no positive evidence for this was ever produced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12417", "revid": "37569883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12417", "title": "Guanosine", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nGuanosine (symbol G or Guo) is a purine nucleoside comprising guanine attached to a ribose (ribofuranose) ring via a \u03b2-N9-glycosidic bond. Guanosine can be phosphorylated to become guanosine monophosphate (GMP), cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), guanosine diphosphate (GDP), and guanosine triphosphate (GTP). These forms play important roles in various biochemical processes such as synthesis of nucleic acids and proteins, photosynthesis, muscle contraction, and intracellular signal transduction (cGMP). When guanine is attached by its N9 nitrogen to the C1 carbon of a deoxyribose ring it is known as deoxyguanosine.\nPhysical and chemical properties.\nGuanosine is a white, crystalline powder with no odor and mild saline taste.\nIt is very soluble in acetic acid, slightly soluble in water, insoluble in ethanol, diethyl ether, benzene and chloroform.\nFunctions.\nGuanosine is required for an RNA splicing reaction in mRNA, when a \"self-splicing\" intron removes itself from the mRNA message by cutting at both ends, re-ligating, and leaving just the exons on either side to be translated into protein.\nUses.\nThe antiviral drug acyclovir, often used in herpes treatment, and the anti-HIV drug abacavir, are structurally similar to guanosine. Guanosine was also used to make regadenoson.\nSources.\nGuanosine can be found in pancreas, clover, coffee plant, and pollen of pines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12420", "revid": "49290174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12420", "title": "G\u00f6del's ontological proof", "text": "Logical argument for the existence of God\nG\u00f6del's ontological proof is a formal argument by the mathematician Kurt G\u00f6del (1906\u20131978) for the existence of God. The argument is in a line of development that goes back to Anselm of Canterbury (1033\u20131109). St. Anselm's ontological argument, in its most succinct form, is as follows: \"God, by definition, is that for which no greater can be conceived. God exists in the understanding. If God exists in the understanding, we could imagine Him to be greater by existing in reality. Therefore, God must exist.\" A more elaborate version was given by Gottfried Leibniz (1646\u20131716); this is the version that G\u00f6del studied and attempted to clarify with his ontological argument.\nThe argument uses modal logic, which deals with statements about what is \"necessarily\" true or \"possibly\" true. From the axioms that a property can only be positive if not-having-it is not positive, and that properties implied by a positive property must all also be themselves positive, it concludes that (since positive properties do not involve contradiction) for any positive property, there is possibly a being that instantiates it. It defines God as the being instantiating all positive properties. After defining what it means for a property to be \"the essence\" of something (the one property that necessarily implies all its other properties), it concludes that God's instantiation of all positive properties must be the essence of God. After defining a property of \"necessary existence\" and taking it as an axiom that it is positive, the argument concludes that, since God must have this property, God must exist necessarily.\nHistory.\nG\u00f6del left a fourteen-point outline of his philosophical beliefs in his papers. Points relevant to the ontological proof include:\n4. There are other worlds and rational beings of a different and higher kind.\n5. The world in which we live is not the only one in which we shall live or have lived.\n13. There is a scientific (exact) philosophy and theology, which deals with concepts of the highest abstractness; and this is also most highly fruitful for science.\n14. Religions are, for the most part, bad\u2014but religion is not.\nThe first version of the ontological proof in G\u00f6del's papers is dated \"around 1941\". G\u00f6del is not known to have told anyone about his work on the proof until 1970, when he thought he was dying. In February, he allowed Dana Scott to copy out a version of the proof, which circulated privately. In August 1970, G\u00f6del told Oskar Morgenstern that he was \"satisfied\" with the proof, but Morgenstern recorded in his diary entry for 29 August 1970, that G\u00f6del would not publish because he was afraid that others might think \"that he actually believes in God, whereas he is only engaged in a logical investigation (that is, in showing that such a proof with classical assumptions (completeness, etc.) correspondingly axiomatized, is possible).\" G\u00f6del died January 14, 1978. Another version, slightly different from Scott's, was found in his papers. It was finally published, together with Scott's version, in 1987.\nIn letters to his mother, who was not a churchgoer and had raised Kurt and his brother as freethinkers, G\u00f6del argued at length for a belief in an afterlife. He did the same in an interview with a skeptical Hao Wang, who said: \"I expressed my doubts as G spoke [...] G\u00f6del smiled as he replied to my questions, obviously aware that his answers were not convincing me.\" Wang reports that G\u00f6del's wife, Adele, two days after G\u00f6del's death, told Wang that \"G\u00f6del, although he did not go to church, was religious and read the Bible in bed every Sunday morning.\" In an unmailed answer to a questionnaire, G\u00f6del described his religion as \"baptized Lutheran (but not member of any religious congregation). My belief is \"theistic\", not pantheistic, following Leibniz rather than Spinoza.\"\nOutline.\nThe proof uses modal logic, which distinguishes between \"necessary\" truths and \"contingent\" truths. In the most common semantics for modal logic, many \"possible worlds\" are considered. A truth is \"necessary\" if it is true in all possible worlds. By contrast, if a statement happens to be true in our world, but is false in another world, then it is a \"contingent\" truth. A statement that is true in some world (not necessarily our own) is called a \"possible\" truth.\nFurthermore, the proof uses higher-order (modal) logic because the definition of God employs an explicit quantification over properties.\nFirst, G\u00f6del axiomatizes the notion of a \"positive property\": for each property \"\u03c6\", either \"\u03c6\" or its negation \u00ac\"\u03c6\" must be positive, but not both (axiom 2). If a positive property \"\u03c6\" implies a property \"\u03c8\" in each possible world, then \"\u03c8\" is positive, too (axiom 1). G\u00f6del then argues that each positive property is \"possibly exemplified\", i.e. applies at least to some object in some world (theorem 1). Defining an object to be Godlike if it has all positive properties (definition 1), and requiring that property to be positive itself (axiom 3), G\u00f6del shows that in \"some\" possible world a Godlike object exists (theorem 2), called \"God\" in the following. G\u00f6del proceeds to prove that a Godlike object exists in \"every\" possible world.\nTo this end, he defines \"essences\": if \"x\" is an object in some world, then a property \"\u03c6\" is said to be an essence of \"x\" if \"\u03c6\"(\"x\") is true in that world and if \"\u03c6\" necessarily entails all other properties that \"x\" has in that world (definition 2). Requiring positive properties being positive in every possible world (axiom 4), G\u00f6del can show that Godlikeness is an essence of a Godlike object (theorem 3). Now, \"x\" is said to \"exist necessarily\" if, for every essence \"\u03c6\" of \"x\", there is an element \"y\" with property \"\u03c6\" in every possible world (definition 3). Axiom 5 requires necessary existence to be a positive property.\nHence, it must follow from Godlikeness. Moreover, Godlikeness is an essence of God, since it entails all positive properties, and any non-positive property is the negation of some positive property, so God cannot have any non-positive properties. Since necessary existence is also a positive property (axiom 5), it must be a property of every Godlike object, as every Godlike object has all the positive properties (definition 1). Since any Godlike object is necessarily existent, it follows that any Godlike object in one world is a Godlike object in all worlds, by the definition of necessary existence. Given the existence of a Godlike object in one world, proven above, we may conclude that there is a Godlike object in every possible world, as required (theorem 4). Besides axiom 1-5 and definition 1\u20133, a few other axioms from modal logic were tacitly used in the proof.\nFrom these hypotheses, it is also possible to prove that there is only one God in each world by Leibniz's law, the identity of indiscernibles: two or more objects are identical (the same) if they have all their properties in common, and so, there would only be one object in each world that possesses property G. G\u00f6del did not attempt to do so however, as he purposely limited his proof to the issue of existence, rather than uniqueness.\nArgument.\nThe following is the original argument in symbolic notation, then an explanation of each individual symbol used, and then a translation into English of the full argument.\nOriginal formal argument.\nformula_1\nTranslation of individual symbols.\nCommon notation in symbolic logic:\nModal operators (used in modal logic):\nPrimitive predicate in this argument:\nDerived predicates (defined in terms of other predicates within the argument):\nTranslation of full argument.\nPossible-worlds readings of modal terms have been added in parentheses, i.e., \"in all possible worlds\" for \"necessarily\" and \"in at least one possible world\" for \"possibly\". For completeness, \"in the actual world\" should be added to all sentences that were said \"without\" \"necessarily\" or \"possibly\", but this has been skipped since it might make the text difficult to read.\nCriticism.\nMost criticism of G\u00f6del's proof is aimed at its axioms: as with any proof in any logical system, if the axioms the proof depends on are doubted, then the conclusions can be doubted. It is particularly applicable to G\u00f6del's proof \u2013 because it rests on five axioms, some of which are considered questionable. A proof does not necessitate that the conclusion be correct, but rather that by accepting the axioms, the conclusion follows logically.\nMany philosophers have called the axioms into question. The first layer of criticism is simply that there are no arguments presented that give reasons why the axioms are true. A second layer is that these particular axioms lead to unwelcome conclusions. This line of thought was argued by Jordan Howard Sobel, showing that if the axioms are accepted, they lead to a \"modal collapse\" where every statement that is true is necessarily true, i.e. the sets of necessary, of contingent, and of possible truths all coincide (provided there are accessible worlds at all). According to Robert Koons, Sobel suggested in a 2005 conference paper that G\u00f6del might have welcomed modal collapse.\nThere are suggested amendments to the proof, presented by C. Anthony Anderson, but argued to be refutable by Anderson and Michael Gettings. Sobel's proof of modal collapse has been questioned by Koons, but a counter-defence by Sobel has been given.\nG\u00f6del's proof has also been questioned by Graham Oppy, asking whether many other almost-gods would also be \"proven\" through G\u00f6del's axioms. This counter-argument has been questioned by Gettings, who agrees that the axioms might be questioned, but disagrees that Oppy's particular counter-example can be shown from G\u00f6del's axioms.\nReligious scholar Fr. Robert J. Spitzer accepted G\u00f6del's proof, calling it \"an improvement over the Anselmian Ontological Argument (which does not work).\"\nThere are, however, many more criticisms, most of them focusing on the question of whether these axioms must be rejected to avoid odd conclusions. The broader criticism is that even if the axioms cannot be shown to be false, that does not mean that they are true. Hilbert's famous remark about interchangeability of the primitives' names applies to those in G\u00f6del's ontological axioms (\"positive\", \"god-like\", \"essence\") as well as to those in Hilbert's geometry axioms (\"point\", \"line\", \"plane\"). According to Andr\u00e9 Fuhrmann (2005) it remains to show that the dazzling notion prescribed by traditions and often believed to be essentially mysterious satisfies G\u00f6del's axioms. This is not a mathematical, but a theological task. It is this task which decides which religion's god has been proven to exist.\nComputationally verified versions.\nChristoph Benzm\u00fcller and Bruno Woltzenlogel-Paleo formalized G\u00f6del's proof to a level that is suitable for automated theorem proving or at least computational verification via proof assistants. The effort made headlines in German newspapers. According to the authors of this effort, they were inspired by Melvin Fitting's book.\nIn 2014, they computationally verified G\u00f6del's proof (in the above version). They also proved that this version's axioms are consistent, but imply modal collapse, thus confirming Sobel's 1987 argument. In the same paper, they suspected G\u00f6del's original version of the axioms to be inconsistent, as they failed to prove their consistency.\nIn 2016, they gave an automated proof that the original version implies formula_52, i.e., is inconsistent in every modal logic with a reflexive or symmetric accessibility relation. Moreover, they gave an argument that this version is inconsistent in every logic at all, but failed to duplicate it by automated provers. However, they were able to verify Melvin Fitting's reformulation of the argument and guarantee its consistency.\nIn 2025, Benzm\u00fcller and Dana Scott provided the proofs with Isabelle for Scott's variant of G\u00f6del\u2019s modal ontological argument.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12422", "revid": "1546014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12422", "title": "Lists of gymnasts", "text": "Gymnasts are people who participate in the sport of gymnastics. This sport contains disciplines that include, but are not limited to:\nThis list is of those who are considered to be notable in their chosen discipline.\nSee gymnasium (ancient Greece) for the origin of the word \"gymnast\" from gymnastikos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12424", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12424", "title": "Genetic programming", "text": "Evolving computer programs with techniques analogous to natural genetic processes\nGenetic programming (GP) is an evolutionary algorithm, an artificial intelligence technique mimicking natural evolution, which operates on a population of programs. It applies the genetic operators selection according to a predefined fitness measure, mutation and crossover. \nThe crossover operation involves swapping specified parts of selected pairs (parents) to produce new and different offspring that become part of the new generation of programs. Some programs not selected for reproduction are copied from the current generation to the new generation. Mutation involves substitution of some random part of a program with some other random part of a program. Then the selection and other operations are recursively applied to the new generation of programs.\nTypically, members of each new generation are on average more fit than the members of the previous generation, and the best-of-generation program is often better than the best-of-generation programs from previous generations. Termination of the evolution usually occurs when some individual program reaches a predefined proficiency or fitness level.\nIt may and often does happen that a particular run of the algorithm results in premature convergence to some local maximum which is not a globally optimal or even good solution. Multiple runs (dozens to hundreds) are usually necessary to produce a very good result. It may also be necessary to have a large starting population size and variability of the individuals to avoid pathologies.\nHistory.\nThe first record of the proposal to evolve programs is probably that of Alan Turing in 1950 in \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\". There was a gap of 25 years before the publication of John Holland's 'Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems' laid out the theoretical and empirical foundations of the science. In 1981, Richard Forsyth demonstrated the successful evolution of small programs, represented as trees, to perform classification of crime scene evidence for the UK Home Office.\nAlthough the idea of evolving programs, initially in the computer language Lisp, was current amongst John Holland's students, it was not until they organised the first Genetic Algorithms (GA) conference in Pittsburgh that Nichael Cramer published evolved programs in two specially designed languages, which included the first statement of modern \"tree-based\" Genetic Programming (that is, procedural languages organized in tree-based structures and operated on by suitably defined GA-operators). In 1988, John Koza (also a PhD student of John Holland) patented his invention of a GA for program evolution. This was followed by publication in the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence IJCAI-89.\nKoza followed this with 205 publications on \u201cGenetic Programming\u201d (GP), name coined by David Goldberg, also a PhD student of John Holland. However, it is the series of 4 books by Koza, starting in 1992 with accompanying videos, that really established GP. Subsequently, there was an enormous expansion of the number of publications with the Genetic Programming Bibliography, surpassing 10,000 entries. In 2010, Koza listed 77 results where Genetic Programming was human competitive.\nThe departure of GP from the rigid, fixed-length representations typical of early GA models was not entirely without precedent. Early work on variable-length representations laid the groundwork. One notable example is Messy Genetic Algorithms, which introduced irregular, variable-length chromosomes to address building block disruption and positional bias in standard GAs.\nAnother precursor was robot trajectory programming, where genome representations encoded program instructions for robotic movements\u2014structures inherently variable in length.\nEven earlier, unfixed-length representations were proposed in a doctoral dissertation by Cavicchio, who explored adaptive search using simulated evolution. His work provided foundational ideas for flexible program structures.\nIn 1996, Koza started the annual Genetic Programming conference which was followed in 1998 by the annual EuroGP conference, and the first book in a GP series edited by Koza. 1998 also saw the first GP textbook. GP continued to flourish, leading to the first specialist GP journal and three years later (2003) the annual Genetic Programming Theory and Practice (GPTP) workshop was established by Rick Riolo. Genetic Programming papers continue to be published at a diversity of conferences and associated journals. Today there are nineteen GP books including several for students.\nFoundational work in GP.\nEarly work that set the stage for current genetic programming research topics and applications is diverse, and includes software synthesis and repair, predictive modeling, data mining, financial modeling, soft sensors, design, and image processing. Applications in some areas, such as design, often make use of intermediate representations, such as Fred Gruau's cellular encoding. Industrial uptake has been significant in several areas including finance, the chemical industry, bioinformatics and the steel industry.\nMethods.\nProgram representation.\nGP evolves computer programs, traditionally represented in memory as tree structures. Trees can be easily evaluated in a recursive manner. Every internal node has an operator function and every terminal node has an operand, making mathematical expressions easy to evolve and evaluate. Thus traditionally GP favors the use of programming languages that naturally embody tree structures (for example, Lisp; other functional programming languages are also suitable).\nNon-tree representations have been suggested and successfully implemented, such as linear genetic programming which perhaps suits the more traditional imperative languages. The commercial GP software \"Discipulus\" uses automatic induction of binary machine code (\"AIM\") to achieve better performance. \"\u03bcGP\" uses directed multigraphs to generate programs that fully exploit the syntax of a given assembly language. Multi expression programming uses Three-address code for encoding solutions. Other program representations on which significant research and development have been conducted include programs for stack-based virtual machines, and sequences of integers that are mapped to arbitrary programming languages via grammars. Cartesian genetic programming is another form of GP, which uses a graph representation instead of the usual tree based representation to encode computer programs.\nMost representations have structurally noneffective code (introns). Such non-coding genes may seem to be useless because they have no effect on the performance of any one individual. However, they alter the probabilities of generating different offspring under the variation operators, and thus alter the individual's variational properties.\nExperiments seem to show faster convergence when using program representations that allow such non-coding genes, compared to program representations that do not have any non-coding genes. Instantiations may have both trees with introns and those without; the latter are called canonical trees. Special canonical crossover operators are introduced that maintain the canonical structure of parents in their children.\nInitialisation.\nThe methods for creation of the initial population include:\nSelection.\nSelection is a process whereby certain individuals are selected from the current generation that would serve as parents for the next generation. The individuals are selected probabilistically such that the better performing individuals have a higher chance of getting selected. The most commonly used selection method in GP is tournament selection, although other methods such as fitness proportionate selection, lexicase selection, and others have been demonstrated to perform better for many GP problems.\nElitism, which involves seeding the next generation with the best individual (or best \"n\" individuals) from the current generation, is a technique sometimes employed to avoid regression.\nCrossover.\nIn Genetic Programming two fit individuals are chosen from the population to be parents for one or two children. In tree genetic programming, these parents are represented as inverted lisp like trees, with their root nodes at the top. In subtree crossover in each parent a subtree is randomly chosen. (Highlighted with yellow in the animation.) In the root donating parent (in the animation on the left) the chosen subtree is removed and replaced with a copy of the randomly chosen subtree from the other parent, to give a new child tree.\nSometimes two child crossover is used, in which case the removed subtree (in the animation on the left) is not simply deleted but is copied to a copy of the second parent (here on the right) replacing (in the copy) its randomly chosen subtree. Thus this type of subtree crossover takes two fit trees and generates two child trees.\nThe tree-based approach in Genetic Programming also shares structural and procedural similarities with earlier knowledge-based and topology-oriented crossover methods. Specifically, analogous crossover and homologous crossover, both implemented in robot trajectory planning, exhibit a resemblance to subtree operations in tree GP. These crossover mechanisms were described in the context of heuristic optimisation strategies in robotics.\nReplication.\nSome individuals selected according to fitness criteria do not participate in crossover, but are copied into the next generation, akin to asexual reproduction in the natural world. They may be further subject to mutation.\nMutation.\nThere are many types of mutation in genetic programming. They start from a fit syntactically correct parent and aim to randomly create a syntactically correct child. In the animation\na subtree is randomly chosen (highlighted by yellow). It is removed and replaced by a randomly generated subtree.\nOther mutation operators select a leaf (external node) of the tree and replace it with a randomly chosen leaf. Another mutation is to select at random a function (internal node) and replace it with another function with the same arity (number of inputs). Hoist mutation randomly chooses a subtree and replaces it with a subtree within itself. Thus hoist mutation is guaranteed to make the child smaller. Leaf and same arity function replacement ensure the child is the same size as the parent. Whereas subtree mutation (in the animation) may, depending upon the function and terminal sets, have a bias to either increase or decrease the tree size. Other subtree based mutations try to carefully control the size of the replacement subtree and thus the size of the child tree. \nSimilarly there are many types of linear genetic programming mutation, each of which tries to ensure the mutated child is still syntactically correct.\nApplications.\nGP has been successfully used as an automatic programming tool, a machine learning tool and an automatic problem-solving engine. GP is especially useful in the domains where the exact form of the solution is not known in advance or an approximate solution is acceptable (possibly because finding the exact solution is very difficult). Some of the applications of GP are curve fitting, data modeling, symbolic regression, feature selection, classification, etc. John R. Koza mentions 76 instances where Genetic Programming has been able to produce results that are competitive with human-produced results (called Human-competitive results). Since 2004, the annual Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO) holds Human Competitive Awards (called Humies) competition, where cash awards are presented to human-competitive results produced by any form of genetic and evolutionary computation. GP has won many awards in this competition over the years.\nMeta-genetic programming.\nMeta-genetic programming is the proposed meta-learning technique of evolving a genetic programming system using genetic programming itself. It suggests that chromosomes, crossover, and mutation were themselves evolved, therefore like their real life counterparts should be allowed to change on their own rather than being determined by a human programmer. Meta-GP was formally proposed by J\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber in 1987. Doug Lenat's Eurisko is an earlier effort that may be the same technique. It is a recursive but terminating algorithm, allowing it to avoid infinite recursion. In the \"autoconstructive evolution\" approach to meta-genetic programming, the methods for the production and variation of offspring are encoded within the evolving programs themselves, and programs are executed to produce new programs to be added to the population.\nCritics of this idea often say this approach is overly broad in scope. However, it might be possible to constrain the fitness criterion onto a general class of results, and so obtain an evolved GP that would more efficiently produce results for sub-classes. This might take the form of a meta evolved GP for producing human walking algorithms which is then used to evolve human running, jumping, etc. The fitness criterion applied to the meta GP would simply be one of efficiency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12425", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12425", "title": "Gustav Klimt", "text": "Austrian symbolist painter (1862\u20131918)\nGustav Klimt (14 July 1862 \u2013 6 February 1918) was an Austrian symbolist painter and a founding member of the Vienna Secession movement. His work helped define the Art Nouveau style in Europe. Klimt is known for his paintings, murals, sketches, and other objets d'art. Klimt's primary subject was the female body, and his works are marked by a frank eroticism. Amongst his figurative works, which include allegories and portraits, he painted landscapes. He is best known for \"The Kiss\" and \"Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I.\" Among the artists of the Vienna Secession, Klimt was the most influenced by Japanese art and its methods.\nEarly in his career, he was a successful painter of architectural decorations in a conventional manner. As he began to develop a more personal style, his work was the subject of controversy that culminated when the paintings he completed around 1900 for the ceiling of the Great Hall of the University of Vienna were criticised as pornographic. He subsequently accepted no more public commissions, but achieved a new success with the paintings of his \"golden phase\", many of which include gold leaf. Klimt's work was an important influence on his younger peer Egon Schiele.\nKlimt died in 1918, having suffered from a stroke and pneumonia. Since his death, Klimt's paintings have brought some of the highest prices recorded for individual works of art at auction.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGustav Klimt was born in Baumgarten, near Vienna in the Austrian Empire on 14 July 1862. He was the second of seven children: three boys and four girls. His mother, Anna Klimt (\"n\u00e9e\" Finster), had an unrealised ambition to be a musical performer. His father, Ernst Klimt the Elder, was a gold engraver formerly from a peasant family in Bohemia. All three of their sons, including Klimt's younger brothers Ernst and Georg, displayed artistic talent early on. Klimt's siblings occasionally acted as models for his early works.\nKlimt's father often struggled to find work and Klimt lived in poverty while growing up. Between 1862 and 1884 the family had no fewer than 5 different addresses, forced to move in search of cheaper accommodation. The family's struggles worsened in 1874 when five-year-old Anna died after a long illness. Around the same time, Klara, the eldest child, became mentally disturbed and obsessed with religion. She never recovered, and their mother is believed to have suffered frequent, deep depressions.\nKlimt received a basic education at an ordinary \"B\u00fcrgerschule\", where his drawing ability was recognised as remarkable. At the age of fourteen, he was accepted into the Vienna Kunstgewerbeschule, a school of applied arts and crafts, now the University of Applied Arts Vienna, where he studied architectural painting from 1876 until 1883. He studied under Ferdinand Laufberger and later Julius Victor Berger after Laufberger's death in 1881. Klimt revered Vienna's foremost history painter of the time, Hans Makart, and aspired to replicate his success. Klimt readily accepted the principles of conservative training; his early work may be classified as academic. His professional career began by painting interior murals and ceilings in large public buildings. \nThe \"Company of Artists\".\nIn 1877, Klimt's brother Ernst, who would become an engraver like their father, also enrolled in the Kunstgewerbeschule. Klimt, Ernst, and their friend Franz von Matsch, whom Klimt had met during the entrance examination, soon began working together. By 1880, they had formed a team called the \"K\u00fcnstlercompagnie\", the \"Company of Artists\", and secured numerous commissions. They also helped their teacher in painting murals in the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. Laufberger recommended them to Fellner &amp; Hellmer, a Viennese firm specialising in theatre construction, with whom they were involved in many projects including in Fiume, Reichenberg, Karlsbad and Bucharest.\nAfter leaving the Kunstgewerbeschule in 1883, Ernst, Klimt, and Matsch moved into a joint studio in Vienna to work together on various commissions. This work included ancestral portraits based on engravings for the Romanian royal palace of Pele\u0219 Castle. In 1886 the studio partnership worked on painting decoration in the Karlsbad municipal theatre, notably painting the vaulted ceiling and theatre curtain. The same year they also started work on the ceiling and spandrel murals for the two staircases of the Burgtheater in Vienna. It is for Klimt's contributions to these murals that upon their completion in 1888, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria awarded him the Gold Cross of Merit, the highest artistic honour available in Austria. He was also made an honorary member of the University of Munich and the University of Vienna. Before the demolition of the Old Burgtheater, The Viennese City Council commissioned Klimt to paint a view of its interior. His painting, \"Audience at the Old Burgtheater\", helped him obtain recognition among Vienna's high society and he received public acclaim. In 1890, Klimt became the first recipient of the newly created Kaiserpreis award for this work. \nIn 1892 the \"K\u00fcnstlercompagnie\" experienced continued success and moved into a larger studio in the Josefstadt district. However, later that year Klimt's father died of a stroke, and his brother Ernst died from pericarditis after a heavy cold. Their deaths had a significant impact on Klimt and he now assumed financial responsibility for both of their families. Grief may have impacted Klimt's artistic vision as he produced little work during the following few years. He would soon move towards a new personal style, characteristic of which is the inclusion of Nuda Veritas (\"naked truth\") as a symbolic figure in some of his works, including \"Ancient Greece and Egypt\" (1891), \"Pallas Athene\" (1898) and \"Nuda Veritas\" (1899). Historians believe that with the inclusion of Nuda Veritas, Klimt was denouncing both the Habsburg monarchy and Austrian society, which ignored all political and social problems of that time.\nKlimt met Austrian fashion designer Emilie Louise Fl\u00f6ge in the early 1890s, a sibling of his sister-in-law, Helene Fl\u00f6ge, who had become widowed after Ernst's death. Emilie was to be his lifelong companion and although their relationship was intimate, it likely remained platonic. Klimt's painting, \"The Kiss\" (1907\u201308), is thought to be an image of them as lovers which was painted five years after Klimt's 1902 full-length portrait of her, \"Portrait of Emilie Fl\u00f6ge\". He designed many costumes that she produced and modelled in his works. Klimt had many relationships with women and fathered at least fourteen children. After his death, the legal rights of four of these children were officially recognised.\nIn 1894, Klimt was commissioned to create three paintings, known as the \"Faculty Paintings,\" to decorate the ceiling of the Great Hall of the University of Vienna. Not completed until the turn of the century, his three paintings, \"Philosophy\", \"Medicine\", and \"Jurisprudence\" were criticised for their radical themes and material, and were called \"pornographic\". Klimt had transformed traditional allegory and symbolism into a new language that was more overtly sexual and hence more disturbing to some. The public outcry came from all quarters\u2014political, aesthetic and religious. As a result, the paintings were not displayed on the ceiling of the Great Hall. This was to be the last public commission accepted by the artist. All three paintings were destroyed when retreating German forces burned Schloss Immendorf in May 1945, together with another ten paintings, including \"Schubert at the Piano\", \"Girlfriends\" (or \"Two Women Friends\"), \"Wally\" (portrait), \"The Music (II)\".\nVienna Secession years.\nIn 1897, Klimt became one of the founding members and president of the \"Vienna Secession\" and of the group's periodical, \"Ver Sacrum\" (\"Sacred Spring\"). He remained with the \"Secession\" until 1908. The goals of the group were to provide exhibitions for unconventional young artists, to bring the works of the best foreign artists to Vienna, and to publish its own magazine to showcase the work of members. The group declared no manifesto and did not set out to encourage any particular style\u2014Naturalists, Realists, and Symbolists all coexisted. The government supported their efforts and gave them a lease on public land to erect an exhibition hall. The group's symbol was Pallas Athena, the Greek goddess of just causes, wisdom, and the arts\u2014of whom Klimt painted his radical version in 1898.\nHis \"Nuda Veritas\" (1899) defined his bid to further \"shake up\" the establishment. The starkly naked red-headed woman holds the mirror of truth, while above her is a quotation by Friedrich Schiller in stylised lettering: \"If you cannot please everyone with your deeds and your art, please only a few. To please many is bad.\" In 1902, animated by resentment Klimt wanted to title the painting \"Gold Fish\" (in which a naked woman ostentatiously and maliciously shows her butt), \"To my critics\", but was dissuaded by friends.\nIn 1902, Klimt finished the \"Beethoven Frieze\" for the Fourteenth Vienna Secessionist Exhibition, which was intended to be a celebration of the composer and featured a monumental polychrome sculpture by Max Klinger. Intended for the exhibition only, the frieze was painted directly on the walls with light materials. After the exhibition the painting was preserved, although it was not displayed again until restored in 1986. The face on the Beethoven portrait resembled the composer and Vienna Court Opera director Gustav Mahler.\nIn 1905, dissensions within the \"Secession\" increased, and when the artistic consultant of the Galerie Mietkhe Carl Moll was attacked by colleagues of the \"Secession\" for his work, a strong controversy arose which created a real internal split, led by Klimt. The following year, Klimt formed the group called \"Kunstschau\" (Art Show) or \"Klimt group\", which also included Moll and Otto Wagner, among other important Austrian artists.\nDuring this period Klimt did not confine himself to public commissions. Beginning in the late 1890s he took annual summer holidays with the Fl\u00f6ge family on the shores of Attersee and painted many of his landscapes there, such as \"Schloss by the Water\". These landscapes constitute the only genre aside from figure painting that seriously interested Klimt. In recognition of his intensity, the locals called him \"Waldschrat\" (\"forest demon\"). Klimt's Attersee paintings are characterised by the same refinement of design and emphatic patterning as the figural pieces. Deep space in the Attersee works is flattened so efficiently to a single plane that it is believed that Klimt painted them by using a telescope.\nGolden phase and critical success.\nFrom 1900 Gustav Klimt became famous above all as a \"painter of women\". He created about one large-format portrait of a woman per year, in which he applied the principles of Art Nouveau - flatness, decoration, and gold leaf application. At the same time, he devoted himself to allegories and Old Testament heroines, which he transformed, however, into dangerous \"femmes fatales\". Eros, sexuality and femininity were variously interpreted by him as alluring danger. Life, love, and death can be determined as the important themes of Klimt's work. During the early years of the Secessionist Movement, Klimt began incorporating gold leaf into his paintings, a development that would come to define the start of his so-called \"Golden Phase\". \"Pallas Athena\" (1898) is often considered to be the earliest piece from this period, with \"Judith I\" (1901) being another notable early example. The most iconic works of this period include \"Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I\" (1907), \"The Kiss\" (1907\u201308) and the \"Stoclet Frieze\" (1905\u20131911)\".\" Klimt's golden phase was marked by positive critical reaction and financial success.\nKlimt travelled all over Europe, mainly to present his works on the occasion of international exhibitions, but trips to Venice and Ravenna, both famous for their beautiful mosaics, most likely inspired his gold technique and his Byzantine imagery. In 1904, he collaborated with other artists on the lavish Stoclet Palace, the home of a wealthy Belgian industrialist that was one of the grandest monuments of the Art Nouveau age. Klimt's contributions to the dining room, including both \"Fulfillment\" and \"Expectation\", were some of his finest decorative works, and as he publicly stated, \"probably the ultimate stage of my development of ornament.\"\nIn 1905, Klimt painted \"The Three Ages of Woman\", depicting the cycle of life. He created a painted portrait of Margarete Wittgenstein, Ludwig Wittgenstein's sister, on the occasion of her marriage. Then, between 1907 and 1909, Klimt painted five canvases of society women wrapped in fur. His apparent love of costume is expressed in the many photographs of Fl\u00f6ge modelling clothing he had designed.\nAs he worked and relaxed in his home, Klimt normally wore sandals and a long robe with no undergarments. His simple life was somewhat cloistered, devoted to his art, family, and little else except the Secessionist Movement from which he and many colleagues eventually resigned. He avoided caf\u00e9 society and seldom socialised with other artists. Klimt's fame usually brought patrons to his door and he could afford to be highly selective. His painting method was very deliberate and painstaking at times and he required lengthy sittings by his subjects. Although very active sexually, he kept his affairs discreet and he avoided personal scandal.\nThe artist cultivated close relationships with some of his clients, who were primarily from the assimilated Jewish Viennese Haute bourgeoisie. He cultivated intimate relationships, especially with his models from upper-class circles. He was considered progressive for his time, because he allowed women an active role in sexuality.\nKlimt wrote little about his vision or his methods. He wrote mostly postcards to Fl\u00f6ge and kept no diary. In a rare writing called \"Commentary on a non-existent self-portrait\", he states \"I have never painted a self-portrait. I am less interested in myself as a subject for a painting than I am in other people, above all women... There is nothing special about me. I am a painter who paints day after day from morning to night\u00a0... Whoever wants to know something about me\u00a0... ought to look carefully at my pictures.\"\nIn 1901 Hermann Bahr wrote, in his \"Speech on Klimt\": \"Just as only a lover can reveal to a man what life means to him and develop its innermost significance, I feel the same about these paintings.\"\nFinal years and death.\nIn 1911 Klimt's painting \"Death and Life\" received first prize in the world exhibitions in Rome. He later reworked it in 1915, including changing the background from gold to blue. In 1915 Klimt's mother, Anna, died.\nOn 11 January 1918, Klimt suffered a stroke that paralysed his right side and required hospitalisation. He died in Vienna on 6 February from pneumonia brought about by the Spanish flu, aged 55. He was buried at the Hietzing Cemetery in Hietzing, Vienna. Numerous paintings by him were left unfinished.\nFolios.\nGustav Klimt: \"Das Werk\".\nThe only folio set produced in Klimt's lifetime, \"Das Werk Gustav Klimts\", was published initially by Hugo Othmar Miethke (of Galerie Miethke, Klimt's exclusive gallery in Vienna) from 1908 to 1914 in an edition of 300, supervised personally by the artist. The first thirty-five editions (I-XXXV) each included an original drawing by Klimt, and the next thirty-five editions (XXXVI\u2013LXX) each with a facsimile signature on the title page. Fifty images depicting Klimt's most important paintings (1893\u20131913) were reproduced using collotype lithography and mounted on a heavy, cream-colored wove paper with deckle edges. Thirty-one of the images (ten of which are multi-coloured) are printed on \"Chine-coll\u00e9\". The remaining nineteen are high-quality halftone prints. Each piece was marked with a unique signet\u2014designed by Klimt\u2014which was impressed into the wove paper in gold metallic ink. The prints were issued in groups of ten to subscribers, in unbound black paper folders embossed with Klimt's name. Because of the delicate nature of collotype lithography, as well as the necessity for multi-coloured prints (a feat difficult to reproduce with collotypes), and Klimt's own desire for perfection, the series that was published in mid-1908 was not completed until 1914.\nEach of the fifty prints was categorised among five themes:\nThe monochrome collotypes as well as the halftone works were printed with a variety of coloured inks ranging from sepia to blue and green. Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria was the first to purchase a folio set of \"Das Werk Gustav Klimts\" in 1908.\n\"F\u00fcnfundzwanzig Handzeichnungen - \"Twenty-five Drawings\"\".\n\"F\u00fcnfundzwanzig Handzeichnungen\" (\"Twenty-five Drawings\") was released the year after Klimt's death. Many of the drawings in the collection were erotic in nature and just as polarising as his painted works. Published in Vienna in 1919 by Gilhofer &amp; Ranschburg, the edition of 500 features twenty-five monochrome and two-colour collotype reproductions, nearly indistinguishable from the original works. While the set was released a year after Klimt's death, some art historians suspect he was involved with production planning because of the meticulous nature of the printing (Klimt had overseen the production of the plates for \"Das Werk Gustav Klimts\", making sure each one was to his exact specifications, a level of quality carried through similarly in \"F\u00fcnfundzwanzig Handzeichnungen\"). The first ten editions also each contained an original Klimt drawing.\nMany of the works contained in this volume depict erotic scenes of nude women, some of whom are masturbating alone or are coupled in sapphic embraces. When a number of the original drawings were exhibited to the public, at Galerie Miethke in 1910 and the International Exhibition of Prints and Drawings in Vienna in 1913, they were met by critics and viewers who were hostile towards Klimt's contemporary perspective. There was an audience for Klimt's erotic drawings, however, and fifteen of his drawings were selected by Viennese poet Franz Blei for his translation of Hellenistic satirist Lucian's \"Dialogues of the Courtesans\". The book, limited to 450 copies, provided Klimt with the opportunity to show these more lurid depictions of women and avoided censorship thanks to an audience composed of a small group of (mostly male) affluent patrons.\n\"Gustav Klimt An Aftermath\".\nComposed in 1931 by editor Max Eisler and printed by the Austrian State Printing Office, \"Gustav Klimt An Aftermath\" was intended to complete the lifetime folio \"Das Werk Gustav Klimts\". The folio contains thirty coloured collotypes (fourteen of which are multi-coloured) and follows a similar format found in \"Das Werk Gustav Klimts\", replacing the unique Klimt-designed signets with gold-debossed plate numbers. One hundred and fifty sets were produced in English, with twenty of them (Nos. I\u2013XX) presented as a \"gala edition\" bound in gilt leather. The set contains detailed images from previously released works (Hygeia from the University Mural \"Medicine\", 1901; a section of the third University Mural \"Jurisprudence\", 1903), as well as the unfinished paintings (\"Adam and Eve\", \"Bridal Progress\").\nSelected works.\nDrawings.\nIn 1963, the Albertina museum in Vienna began researching the drawings of Gustav Klimt. The research project \"Gustav Klimt. Die Zeichnungen\", has since been associated with intensive exhibition and publication activities.\nBetween 1980 and 1984 Alice Strobl published the three-volume catalogue raisonn\u00e9, which records and describes all drawings by Gustav Klimt known at the time in chronological order. An additional supplementary volume was published in 1989. In the following year Strobl transferred her work to the art historian and curator Marian Bisanz-Prakken, who had assisted her since 1975 in the determination and classification of the works and who continues the research project to this day. Since 1990, Marian Bisanz-Prakken has redefined, documented, and scientifically processed around 400 further drawings.\nThis makes the Albertina Vienna the only institution in the world that has been examining and scientifically classifying the artist's works for half a century. The research project now includes information on over 4,300 works by Gustav Klimt.\nLegacy.\nInfluence and reception.\nAlready during his lifetime, Klimt influenced other artists, such as the Italian Liberty style artist Galileo Chini (1873\u20131956). Klimt was exhibited at the 1910 Venice Biennale. Chini and Vittorio Zecchin (1878\u20131947) created a number of panels in 1914 for the Venice Hotel Terminus called \"La Primavera\" and \"Mille e una notte\". These were later exhibited in the Boncompagni Ludovisi Decorative Art Museum.\nKlimt's work had a strong influence on the paintings of Egon Schiele, with whom he would collaborate to found the \"Kunsthalle\" (Hall of Art) in 1917, to try to keep local artists from going abroad. Artists who reinterpreted Klimt's work include Slovak artist Rudolf Fila.\nAccording to the writer Frank Whitford: \"Klimt of course, is an important artist\u2014he's a very \"popular\" artist\u2014but in terms of the history of art, he's a very unimportant artist. Although he sums up so much in his work, about the society in which he found himself\u2014in art historical terms his effect was negligible. So he's an artist really in a cul-de-sac.\" \nPosthumous auction history.\nKlimt's paintings have brought some of the highest prices recorded for individual works of art. In November 2003, Klimt's \"Landhaus am Attersee\" sold for US$29,128,000, but that sale was soon eclipsed by prices paid for Willem de Kooning's \"Woman III\" and later Klimt's own \"Adele Bloch-Bauer II\", the latter of which sold for $150 million in 2016. More frequently than paintings, however, the artist's works on paper can be found on the art market. The art market database Artprice lists 67 auction entries for paintings, but 1564 for drawings and watercolours. The most expensive drawing sold so far was \"Reclining Female Nude Facing Left\", which was made between 1914 and 1915 and sold in London in 2008 for \u00a3. However, the majority of the art trade traditionally takes place privately through galleries such as Wienerroither &amp; Kohlbacher, which specialise in the trade with original works by Gustav Klimt and Egon Schiele and regularly present these at monographic exhibitions and international art fairs.\nIn 2006, the 1907 portrait, \"Adele Bloch-Bauer I\", was purchased for the Neue Galerie New York by Ronald Lauder reportedly for US$135 million, surpassing Picasso's 1905 \"Boy With a Pipe\" (sold 5 May 2004 for $104 million), as the highest reported price ever paid for a painting at that time.\nOn 7 August 2006, Christie's auction house announced it was handling the sale of the remaining four works by Klimt that were recovered by Maria Altmann and her co-heirs after their long legal battle against Austria (see \"Republic of Austria v. Altmann\"). Altmann's fight to regain her family's paintings has been the subject of a number of documentary films, including \"Adele's Wish\". Her struggle also became the subject of the dramatic film \"Woman in Gold\", a movie inspired by \"Stealing Klimt\", the documentary featuring Maria Altmann herself. The portrait of \"Adele Bloch-Bauer II\" was sold at auction in November 2006 for $88\u00a0million, the third-highest-priced piece of art at auction at the time. \"The Apple Tree I\" (c. 1912) sold for $33\u00a0million, \"Birch Forest\" (1903) sold for $40.3\u00a0million, and \"Houses in Unterach on Lake Atter\" (1916) sold for $31\u00a0million. Collectively, the five restituted paintings netted more than $327\u00a0million. The painting \"Litzlberg am Attersee\" was auctioned for $40.4\u00a0million in November 2011.\nKlimt's last painting, \"Lady with a Fan\" (\"Dame mit F\u00e4cher\", 1918), was sold by Sotheby's in London on 27 June 2023 for UK\u00a385.3M (US$108.4M) to a Hong Kong collector, the highest-priced artwork ever sold at auction in Europe.\nIn the early 2020s, Klimt's early portrait \"Prince William Nii Nortey Dowuona\" (1897), depicting an Osu prince from what is now Ghana, resurfaced when a couple brought a dirty, poorly framed canvas bearing Klimt's estate stamp to the Wienerroither &amp; Kohlbacher gallery in Vienna, where it was authenticated by art historian Alfred Weidinger, author of the 2007 Klimt catalogue raisonn\u00e9, as a long-lost work by the artist. The painting is believed to have remained in Klimt's studio until it was consigned from his estate to the Samuel Kende auction house in Vienna in 1923 with a starting price of 15,000 crowns, and by 1928 it was recorded as the property of the Jewish collector Ernestine Klein, who, with her husband Felix, had converted Klimt's former studio into a villa before the couple fled Nazi Austria in 1938, after which the work was long considered lost. Following a restitution settlement with Klein's heirs, the cleaned and restored canvas was exhibited publicly at the TEFAF Maastricht art fair in March 2025 by Wienerroither &amp; Kohlbacher with an asking price of \u20ac15 million (about US$16 million), and was widely discussed as an important link between Klimt's early naturalistic portraits and his later decorative style. The portrait was painted after Klimt and his colleague Franz Matsch visited an 1897 \"V\u00f6lkerschau\" (ethnographic \u201chuman zoo\u201d) at Vienna's Tiergarten am Sch\u00fcttel, where Prince William Nii Nortey Dowuona was among some 120 members of the Osu community from the Gold Coast (modern Ghana) displayed to large daily crowds, a context that has prompted renewed critical attention to colonial-era racial exhibitions in Europe. In November 2025, prosecutors in Vienna ordered the painting seized at the request of Hungarian authorities, who alleged that it had been improperly exported from Hungary, adding an ongoing legal dispute over export and restitution law to its provenance history.\nOn 18 November 2025, Klimt's \"Portrait of Elisabeth Lederer\" (1914\u20131916), a full-length portrait of the daughter of his patrons August and Serena Lederer, was sold at Sotheby's in New York from the collection of cosmetics heir Leonard A. Lauder for US$236.4 million after an approximately 20-minute bidding contest among multiple telephone bidders, far exceeding its pre-sale estimate of US$150 million. The price set a new auction record for a work by Klimt, \"a record for any work of art ever sold at Sotheby's\", was reported as the highest price ever achieved for a work of modern art at auction, and made the painting the second most expensive artwork sold at auction, behind Leonardo da Vinci\u2019s \"Salvator Mundi\" (2017).\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1972 the Vienna State Opera presented a new production of \"Salome\", an opera by Oscar Wilde and Richard Strauss, in a Klimt-inspired stage setting and costumes by J\u00fcrgen Rose. This production, directed by Boleslaw Barlog and first conducted by Karl B\u00f6hm, became extremely popular and stayed in the repertoire for nearly fifty years. It was shown in 265 performances and went on tour to Florence, Washington and twice in Japan.\nIn 2006 an Austrian art-house biographical film about Klimt's life, titled \"Klimt\", was released with John Malkovich in the lead role. The 2015 film \"Woman in Gold\", starring Helen Mirren as Maria Altmann, dramatised the legal battle to reclaim \"Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I\" and four other paintings by Klimt that had been looted by the Nazis.\nIn 2008, fashion designer John Galliano cited Klimt as one of his inspirations for the Christian Dior Spring\u2013Summer 2008 haute couture collection, alongside John Singer Sargent\u2019s \"Portrait of Madame X\". The 2013 collection of designer Alexander McQueen was also partially inspired by Klimt.\nGustav Klimt and his work have been the subjects of many collector coins and medals, such as the 100 Euro Painting Gold Coin, issued on 5 November 2003, by the Austrian Mint. The obverse depicts Klimt in his studio with two unfinished paintings on easels.\nTawny Chatmon, an American photographic artist known for her portraits of Black children overlaid with gold leaf and paint, has sought to place Black figures in glittering gold clothing inspired by Klimt's lavish portraits of white Viennese women. Elements of the portrait of \"First Lady Michelle Obama\", by Amy Sherald in 2018, have been noted by art critics to have been influenced by Klimt, in particular \"Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I\". One commentator noted the similarity to fashion designed by Klimt's muse Emilie Louise Fl\u00f6ge.\nCommemoration of the 150th anniversary of birth.\nIn 2012, Vienna marked the 150th anniversary of Gustav Klimt's birth with a city-wide programme of exhibitions across at least ten venues, including major retrospectives at the Wien Museum, the Albertina, and the Leopold Museum. Other institutions such as the Belvedere, Kunsthistorisches Museum, Secession, Theatermuseum, MAK, and K\u00fcnstlerhaus staged special displays ranging from comprehensive surveys of his paintings and drawings to focused presentations of his collaborations and early commissions. The anniversary year also saw the restoration and public opening of Klimt's last studio in Vienna and the inauguration of the Klimt-Zentrum at the Attersee, a new centre offering exhibitions, conferences, and guided tours related to the artist. The Neue Galerie New York also held a \"150th Anniversary Celebration\" exhibition from May to August 2012, featuring paintings, drawings and rare photographs.\nThe Austrian Mint began a five-coin gold series called \"Klimt and His Women\" to coincide with the 150th anniversary of Klimt's birth. The first 50 Euro gold coin was issued on 25 January 2012 and featured a portrait of Klimt on the obverse and a portion of his painting Adele Bloch-Bauer I. The 2013 issue, depicting details of the Stoclet Frieze, was awarded the 2015 Coin of the Year award. The series concluded in 2016 featuring Klimt's most famous work, \"The Kiss\".\nTo mark Klimt's 150th birthday, Austria issued a commemorative stamp on 14 July 2012, while San Marino released a souvenir sheet of stamps with a print run of 70,000.\nGoogle commemorated Klimt's 150th birthday on 14 July 2012 with a Google Doodle depicting his painting \"The Kiss\".\nGustav Klimt Foundation.\nIn 2013, the Gustav Klimt Foundation was set up by Ursula Ucicky, widow of Klimt's illegitimate son Gustav Ucicky, with a mission to \"preserve and disseminate Gustav Klimt's legacy.\" The managing director of the Leopold Museum, Peter Weinh\u00e4upl, was appointed as chairman of the foundation. As a reaction, the museum's director Tobias G. Natter resigned in protest, citing Ucicky's past as a Nazi propaganda filmmaker.\nNazi-looted art: restitution and litigation.\nIn 2000, a government committee recommended that Klimt's \"Lady with Hat and Feather Boa\", in Belvedere Museum in Vienna, be restituted to the heirs of the Jewish family that had owned it before the Nazi Anschluss.\nNational Public Radio reported on 17 January 2006 that \"The Austrian National Gallery is being compelled by a national arbitration board to return five paintings by Gustav Klimt to a Los Angeles-based woman, the heir of a Jewish family that had its art stolen by the Nazis. The paintings are estimated to be worth at least $150\u00a0million.\" This incident, involving Maria Altmann, was subsequently made into the Hollywood movie \"Woman in Gold\", starring Helen Mirren. Later that year, the most notable of the five paintings, 1907's \"Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I\" (also known as \"The Woman in Gold\"), was sold at auction for $135 million (at the time, the highest price ever paid for a single painting). The winning bidder was art collector Ronald S. Lauder, founder of Neue Galerie in New York, where it remains on display.\nIn 2009 the Lentos Art Museum in Linz, Austria restituted Klimt's Portrait of Ria Munk III (Frauenbildnis) to the heirs of Aranka Munk, a Jewish art collector in Vienna who was murdered in the Holocaust. The looted portrait was of her daughter.\nIn 2021 the French minister of culture announced that the only Klimt in France's national collections was Nazi loot which should be restituted to the heirs of the Jewish family that had been persecuted by Nazis. \"Rosebushes Under the Trees\", painted in 1905, had been owned by Nora Stiasi, who had been forced to sell it before being murdered by the Nazis. It is currently hanging in France's Orsay Museum which purchased it from Swiss art dealer Peter Nathan in 1980. A similar painting by Klimt known as \"Apple Trees II\", which was also Nazi loot, was mistakenly returned to the wrong family by the Austrian authorities, and subsequently sold. As of 2018[ [update]], its ownership was still in dispute.\nIn 2023, Ronald S. Lauder agreed to restitute and repurchase Klimt's \"The Black Feather Hat\", which had belonged to Irene Beran, before she fled the Nazis. The painting's provenance was unclear after it left Beran's collection, resurfacing in Stuttgart in connection to the Nazi Friedrich Welz. Beran's mother and former husband Philip were murdered by the Nazis after being deported to the Theresienstadt concentration camp.\nOther Klimts that have been the object of ownership battles owing to a history of Nazi looting include the \"Beethoven Frieze\", \"Water Snakes II\", \"Blooming Meadow\" and \"Portrait of Gertrude Lowe\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12426", "revid": "39769597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12426", "title": "Groucho Marx", "text": "American comedian (1890\u20131977)\nJulius Henry \"Groucho\" Marx (; October 2, 1890 \u2013 August 19, 1977) was an American comedian, actor, writer, and singer who performed in films and vaudeville on television, radio, and the stage. He is considered one of America's greatest comedians.\nMarx made 13 feature films as a team with his brothers, who performed under the name the Marx Brothers, of whom he was the third born. He also had a successful solo career, primarily on radio and television, most notably as the host of the game show \"You Bet Your Life\".\nHis distinctive appearance, carried over from his days in vaudeville, included quirks such as an exaggerated stooped posture, spectacles, cigar, and a thick greasepaint moustache (later a real moustache) and eyebrows.\nEarly life.\nGroucho was born Julius Henry Marx on October 2, 1890, in Manhattan, New York City. Marx stated that he was born in a room above a butcher's shop on East 78th Street, \"Between Lexington and Third\", as he told Dick Cavett in a 1969 television interview. Later in life, in discussing the Brothers' names during his Carnegie Hall concert, Groucho said that he was named after his unemployed uncle Julius, who lived with his family. Groucho 's mother suspected that uncle Julius was rich with a hidden fortune salted away and Groucho believed that he was named after his uncle so he would be remembered in his will. \"His will consisted of a celluloid dicky, an 8 ball and three razor blades. And besides, he owed my father $85, which he never did get from him.\"\nThe Marx children grew up in a turn-of-the-century building at 179 East 93rd Street off Lexington Avenue in a neighborhood now known as Carnegie Hill on the Upper East Side of the borough of Manhattan. His older brother Harpo, in his memoir \"Harpo Speaks\", called the building \"the first real home I knew\". It was populated with European immigrants, mostly artisans. Just across the street were the oldest brownstones in the area, owned by people including the well-connected Loew Brothers and William Orth. The Marx family lived there \"for about 14 years\", Groucho also told Cavett.\nThe Marx family was Jewish. Mother Miene \"Minnie\" Schoenberg, and her family came from Dornum in northern Germany when she was 16 years old. Father Simon \"Sam\" Marx, changed his name from Marrix, was called \"Frenchie\" by his sons throughout his life, because he and his family came from Alsace in France. Minnie's brother was Al Schoenberg, who shortened his name to Al Shean when he went into show business as half of Gallagher and Shean, a noted vaudeville act of the early 20th century. According to Marx, when Shean visited, he would throw the local waifs a few coins so that when he knocked at the door he would be surrounded by adoring fans. Marx and his brothers respected his opinions and asked him on several occasions to write some material for them.\nAlthough Minnie Marx did not have an entertainment industry career, she had intense ambition for her sons to go on the stage like their uncle. While pushing her second son Leonard (Chico Marx) in piano lessons, she found that Julius had a pleasant soprano voice and the ability to remain on key. Julius's early career goal was to become a doctor, but the struggling family's need for additional income forced him out of school at the age of twelve. By that time Julius had become a voracious reader, particularly fond of Horatio Alger and Frank Merriwell.\nAfter a few stabs at entry-level office work and jobs suitable for adolescents, Marx took to the stage as a boy singer with the Gene Leroy Trio, debuting at the Ramona Theatre in Grand Rapids, Michigan, on July 16, 1905. Marx reputedly claimed that he was \"hopelessly average\" as a vaudevillian, but this was typical Marx, wisecracking in his true form. By 1909, Minnie Marx had assembled her sons into an undistinguished vaudeville singing group billed as \"The Four Nightingales\". The brothers Julius, Milton (Gummo Marx) and Arthur (originally Adolph, but Harpo Marx from 1911) and another boy singer, Lou Levy, traveled the U.S. vaudeville circuits to little fanfare. After exhausting their prospects in the East, the family moved to La Grange, Illinois, to play the Midwest.\nSupposedly, after a particularly dispiriting performance in Nacogdoches, Texas, Julius, Milton, and Arthur began cracking jokes onstage for their own amusement. Much to their surprise, the audience liked them better as comedians than as singers. They modified the then-popular Gus Edwards comedy skit \"School Days\" and renamed it \"Fun In Hi Skule\". The Marx Brothers performed variations on this routine for the next seven years.\nFor a time, all the brothers performed using ethnic accents, a common shtick in vaudeville. Leonard, the oldest, developed the Italian accent he used for his entire career, to convince some roving bullies that he was Italian, not Jewish. Arthur, the next oldest, donned a curly red wig and became \"Patsy Brannigan\", a stereotypical Irish character. His discomfort when speaking on stage led to his uncle Al Shean's suggestion that he stop speaking altogether and play the role in mime. Julius's character from \"Fun In Hi Skule\" was an ethnic German, so Julius played him with a typical Teutonic accent. After the sinking of the in 1915, public anti-German sentiment was widespread, and Julius's German character was booed, so he dropped the accent and developed the fast-talking wise-guy character that became his trademark.\nThe Marx Brothers became the biggest comedic stars of the Palace Theatre in New York, which billed itself as the \"Valhalla of Vaudeville\". Brother Chico's deal-making skills resulted in three hit plays on Broadway. No other comedy routine had ever so infected the Broadway circuit. All of this stage work predated their Hollywood career. By the time the brothers made their first movie, they were already major stars with sharply honed skills; and by 1949 when Groucho was relaunched to stardom in television on \"You Bet Your Life\", he had been performing successfully for half a century.\nCareer.\nVaudeville.\nMarx started his career in vaudeville in 1905 when he joined up with an act called The Leroy Trio. He answered a newspaper want ad by a man named Robin Leroy who was looking for a boy to join his group as a singer. Marx was hired along with fellow vaudeville actor Johnny Morris. Through this act, Marx got his first taste of life as a vaudeville performer. In 1909, Marx and his brothers had become a group act, at first called The Three Nightingales and later The Four Nightingales. The brothers' mother, Minnie Marx, was the group's manager, putting them together and booking their shows. The group had a rocky start, performing in less than adequate venues and rarely, if ever, being paid for their performances. Eventually brother Milton (Gummo) left the act to serve in World War I and was replaced by Herbert (Zeppo), and the group became known as the Marx Brothers. Their first successful show was \"Fun In Hi Skule\" (1910).\nMotion pictures.\nMarx made 26 movies, including 13 with his brothers Chico and Harpo. Marx developed a routine as a wisecracking hustler with a distinctive chicken-walking lope, an exaggerated greasepaint moustache and eyebrows and an ever-present cigar, improvising insults to stuffy dowagers (frequently played by Margaret Dumont) and anyone else who stood in his way. As the Marx Brothers, he and his brothers starred in a series of popular stage shows and movies.\nTheir first movie was a silent film made in 1921 that was only shown once, in the Bronx, and is believed to have been destroyed shortly afterward. A decade later, the team made their last two Broadway shows\u2014\"The Cocoanuts\" and \"Animal Crackers\"\u2014into movies. Other successful films were \"Monkey Business\", \"Horse Feathers\", \"Duck Soup\" and \"A Night at the Opera\". One quip from Marx concerned his response to Sam Wood, the director of \"A Night at the Opera\". Furious with the Marx Brothers' ad-libs and antics on the set, Wood yelled in disgust: \"You can't make an actor out of clay.\" Marx responded, \"Nor a director out of Wood.\"\nMarx also worked as a radio comedian and show host. One of his earliest stints was a short-lived series in 1932, \"Flywheel, Shyster and Flywheel,\" costarring Chico. Though most of the scripts and discs were thought to have been destroyed, all but one of the scripts were found in 1988 in the Library of Congress.\nIn 1947, Marx was asked to host a radio quiz program \"You Bet Your Life.\" It was broadcast by ABC and then CBS before moving to NBC. It moved from radio to television on October 5, 1950, and ran for eleven years. It was largely sponsored by DeSoto automobiles and Marx sometimes appeared in the commercials. Filmed before an audience, the show consisted of Marx bantering with the contestants and ad-libbing jokes before briefly quizzing them. The announcer for the show was George Fenneman. The show was responsible for popularizing the phrases \"Say the secret word and the duck will come down and give you fifty dollars\", \"Who's buried in Grant's Tomb?\" and \"What color is the White House?\" (asked to reward a losing contestant a consolation prize).\nThroughout his career Marx introduced a number of memorable songs in films, including \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\" and \"Hello, I Must Be Going\", in \"Animal Crackers\", \"Whatever It Is, I'm Against It\", \"Everyone Says I Love You\" and \"Lydia the Tattooed Lady\". Frank Sinatra, who once quipped that the only thing he could do better than Marx was sing, made a film with Marx and Jane Russell in 1951 entitled \"Double Dynamite\".\nMustache, eyebrows, and walk.\nIn public and off-camera, Harpo and Chico were hard to recognize without their wigs and costumes, and it was almost impossible for fans to recognize Groucho without his trademark eyeglasses, fake eyebrows, and mustache.\nThe greasepaint mustache and eyebrows originated spontaneously prior to a vaudeville performance in the early 1920s when he did not have time to apply the pasted-on mustache he had been using (or, according to his autobiography, simply did not enjoy the removal of the mustache because of the effects of tearing an adhesive bandage off the same patch of skin every night). After applying the greasepaint mustache, a quick glance in the mirror revealed his natural hair eyebrows were too undertoned and did not match the rest of his face, so Marx added the greasepaint to his eyebrows and headed for the stage. The absurdity of the greasepaint was never discussed on-screen, but in a famous scene in \"Duck Soup,\" where both Chicolini (Chico) and Pinky (Harpo) disguise themselves as Groucho, they are briefly seen applying the greasepaint, implicitly answering any question a viewer might have had about where he got his mustache and eyebrows.\nMarx was asked to apply the greasepaint mustache once more for \"You Bet Your Life\" when it came to television, but he refused, opting instead to grow a real one, which he wore for the rest of his life. By this time, his eyesight had weakened enough for him to actually need corrective lenses; before then, his eyeglasses had merely been a stage prop. He debuted this new, and now much-older, appearance in the 1949 film \"Love Happy,\" the Marx Brothers's last film as a comedy team.\nMarx did paint the old character mustache over his real one on a few rare occasions, including a TV sketch with Jackie Gleason on the latter's variety show in the 1960s (in which they performed a variation on the song \"Mister Gallagher and Mister Shean\", co-written by Marx's uncle Al Shean) and the 1968 Otto Preminger film \"Skidoo\". In his late 70s at the time, Marx remarked on his appearance: \"I looked like I was embalmed.\" He played a mob boss called \"God\" and, according to Marx, \"both my performance and the film were God-awful!\"\nThe exaggerated walk, with one hand on the small of his back and his torso bent almost 90 degrees at the waist, was a parody of a fad from the 1880s and 1890s. Fashionable young men of the upper classes would affect a walk with their right hand held fast to the base of their spines, and with a slight lean forward at the waist and a very slight twist toward the right with the left shoulder, allowing the left hand to swing free with the gait. Edmund Morris, in his 1979 biography \"The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt\", describes a young Roosevelt, newly elected to the State Assembly, walking into the House Chamber for the first time in this trendy, affected gait, somewhat to the amusement of the older and more rural members. Marx exaggerated this fad to a marked degree, and the comedic effect was enhanced by how out of date the fashion was by the 1940s and 1950s.\nPersonal life.\nMarx's three marriages ended in divorce. His first wife was chorus girl Ruth Johnson (m. 1920\u20131942). He was 29 and she was 19 at the time of their wedding. The couple had two children, Arthur Marx and Miriam Marx. His second wife was Kay Marvis (m. 1945\u20131951), n\u00e9e Catherine Dittig, former wife of Leo Gorcey. Marx was 54 and Kay was 21 at the time of their marriage. They had a daughter, Melinda Marx, whose daughter Jade Berti was formerly married to Dominic Ruiz, brother of Dina Eastwood. His third wife was actress Eden Hartford (m. 1954\u20131969). He was 63 and she was 24 at the time of their wedding.\nDuring the early 1950s, Marx described his perfect woman: \"Someone who looks like Marilyn Monroe and talks like George S. Kaufman.\"\nMarx was denied membership in an informal symphonietta of friends (including Harpo) organized by Ben Hecht, because he could play only the mandolin. When the group began its first rehearsal at Hecht's home, Marx rushed in and demanded silence from the \"lousy amateurs\". The musicians later discovered him conducting the Los Angeles Symphony Orchestra in a performance of the overture to \"Tannh\u00e4user\" in Hecht's living room, and Marx was allowed to join the symphonietta.\nLater in life, Marx would sometimes note to talk show hosts, not entirely jokingly, that he was unable to actually insult anyone, because the target of his comment would assume that it was a Groucho-esque joke, and would laugh.\nMarx once said he would prefer to be remembered as a writer. Despite his little formal education, he authored several books, including his autobiography, \"Groucho and Me\", (1959) and \"Memoirs of a Mangy Lover\" (1963). He also co-authored the screenplay for the 1937 film \"The King and the Chorus Girl\", in which he did not appear as an actor; this is Marx's only official writing credit for film or television.\nMarx was acquainted with several prominent literary figures including Booth Tarkington, T. S. Eliot, and Carl Sandburg. Much of his personal correspondence with those and other figures is featured in the book \"The Groucho Letters\" (1967) with an introduction and commentary on the letters written by Marx, who donated his letters to the Library of Congress. His daughter Miriam published a collection of his letters to her in 1992 titled \"Love, Groucho.\"\nIn \"Life with Groucho: A Son's Eye View\", Arthur Marx relates that in his latter years, Groucho increasingly referred to himself by the name Hackenbush, referring to the character of that name he played in \"A Day at the Races\".\nMarx made serious efforts to learn to play the guitar. In the 1932 film \"Horse Feathers\", he performs the film's love theme \"Everyone Says I Love You\" for costar Thelma Todd on a Gibson L-5.\nIn July 1937, a United States-vs.-England pro-celebrity tennis doubles match was organized, featuring Marx and Ellsworth Vines playing against Charlie Chaplin and Fred Perry, to open the new clubhouse at the Beverly Hills Tennis Club. Marx appeared on court with twelve rackets and a suitcase, leaving Chaplin\u2014who took tennis seriously\u2014bemused, before he asked what was in it. Marx asked Chaplin what was in his, with Chaplin responding he didn't have one. Marx replied, \"What kind of tennis player are you?\" After playing only a few games, Marx sat on the court and unpacked an elaborate picnic lunch from his suitcase.\nIrving Berlin quipped: \"The world would not be in such a snarl had Marx been Groucho instead of Karl.\" In his book \"The Groucho Phile\", Marx says \"I've been a liberal Democrat all my life\", and \"I frankly find Democrats a better, more sympathetic crowd... I'll continue to believe that Democrats have a greater regard for the common man than Republicans do\". However, during an episode of \"Firing Line\" on July 7, 1967, Marx admitted to voting for Wendell Willkie, the Republican candidate for president in 1940, over Franklin D. Roosevelt, stating that he did not believe that any man should run for more than two terms.\nLater years.\n\"You Bet Your Life\".\nMarx's radio career was not as successful as his work on stage and in film, though historians such as Gerald Nachman and Michael Barson suggest that, in the case of the single-season \"Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel\" (1932), the failure may have been a combination of a poor time slot and the Marx Brothers' returning to Hollywood to make another film.\nBy the mid-1940s, Marx was experiencing a depressing lull in his career. His radio show \"Blue Ribbon Town\" had failed; Irving Brecher was unable to find a sponsor for his proposed radio sitcom \"The Flotsam Family\" created for Marx, only to see it become a huge hit revamped as \"The Life of Riley\" starring William Bendix in the title role. By that time, the Marx Brothers as film performers had officially retired.\nMarx was scheduled to appear on a radio show with Bob Hope. Annoyed that he was made to wait in the green room for 40 minutes, he went on the air in a foul mood. Hope began by saying \"Why, Groucho Marx! Groucho, what are you doing out here in the desert?\" Marx retorted, \"Huh, desert, I've been sitting in the dressing room for forty minutes! Some desert alright\u00a0...\". Marx continued to ignore the script, ad-libbing at length, and took it well beyond its allotted time slot.\n\"You Bet Your Life\" debuted in October 1947 on ABC radio (which aired it from 1947 to 1949), sponsored by costume jewelry manufacturer Allen Gellman; and then on CBS (1949\u201350), and finally NBC. The show was on radio only from 1947 to 1950; on both radio and television from 1950 to 1960; and on television only, from 1960 to 1961. The show proved a huge hit, being one of the most popular on television by the mid-1950s, garnering a number one rating in 1953. With George Fenneman as his announcer and straight man, Marx entertained his audiences with rapier wit and improvised conversation with his guests. Since \"You Bet Your Life\" was mostly ad-libbed and unscripted\u2014although writers did pre-interview the guests and feed Marx ready-made lines in advance\u2014the producers insisted that the network prerecord it instead of it being broadcast live. There were three reasons for this: prerecording provided Marx with time to fish around for funny exchanges, any intervening dead spots could be edited out; and most importantly to protect the network from what was considered risqu\u00e9, since Marx was notorious for saying almost anything. The television show ran for 11 seasons until it was canceled in 1961. Ironically longtime major sponsor, automobile \"marque\" DeSoto went out of business for declining sales that same year. For the DeSoto ads, Marx would sometimes say: \"Tell 'em Groucho sent you\", or \"Try a DeSoto before you decide.\" Repeats of the program were syndicated and broadcast during the mid-1960s and again, in the mid-1970s, under the title \"The Best of Groucho\".\nThe program's theme music was an instrumental version of \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\", which became increasingly identified as Marx's personal theme song. A recording of the song with Marx and the Ken Lane singers with an orchestra directed by Victor Young was released in 1952. Another recording made by Marx during this period was \"The Funniest Song in the World\", released on the Young People's Records label in 1949. It was a series of five original children's songs with a connecting narrative about a monkey and his fellow zoo creatures.\nOne of Marx's most oft-quoted remarks supposedly occurred during a 1947 radio episode. Marx was interviewing Charlotte Story, who had borne 20 children. When Marx asked why she had chosen to raise such a large family, Mrs. Story is said to have replied, \"I love my husband,\" to which Marx responded, \"I love my cigar, but I take it out of my mouth once in a while.\" The remark was judged too risqu\u00e9 to be aired, according to the anecdote, and was edited out before broadcast. Charlotte Story and her husband Marion, indeed parents of 20 children, were real people who appeared on the program. Audio recordings of the interview exist, and a reference to cigars is made (\"With each new kid, do you go around passing out cigars?\"), but there is no evidence of the claimed remark. \"I get credit all the time for things I never said,\" Marx told Roger Ebert in 1972. \"You know that line in \"You Bet Your Life\"? The guy says he has seventeen kids and I say, 'I smoke a cigar, but I take it out of my mouth occasionally'? I never said that.\" Marx's 1976 memoir recounts the episode as fact, but co-writer Hector Arce relied mostly on sources other than Marx himself\u2014who was by then in his mid eighties, in ill health and mentally compromised\u2014and was probably unaware that Marx had specifically denied making the observation. Head writer Bernie Smith recalled in a 1996 interview that the remark was indeed made\u2014but again, well after the fact.\nIn 1946, as part of the marketing campaign for the Marx Brothers film \"A Night in Casablanca\", Marx created a storyline that Warner Bros. Pictures threatened to sue him, contending that that title was too similar to their 1942 film \"Casablanca\". Groucho wrote open letters \"responding\" to the four Warner brothers, including one in which he questions their own use of various words, such as: wondering if \"in 1471, Ferdinand Balboa Warner, your great-great-grandfather... stumbled on the shores of Africa and... named it Casablanca\"; suggesting that \"[David] Burbank's survivors aren't too happy with the fact that\" Warner Bros. Burbank, California studios are called their \"Burbank studios\"; and even suggesting a Marx Brothers legal action addressing \"What about 'Warner Brothers'? ... Professionally, we were brothers long before you were.\"\nOther work.\nOn August 5, 1948, Marx's comedy play \"April Fool\" premiered at the Lobero Theatre in Santa Barbara, California, to mediocre reviews. Penned by Groucho Marx and Norman Krasna, the play was rewritten and retitled \"Time for Elizabeth\", and opened at the Fulton Theatre in New York City on September 27, 1948, where it closed after only eight performances.\nBy the time \"You Bet Your Life\" debuted on TV on October 5, 1950, Marx had grown a real mustache (which he had already sported earlier in the films \"Copacabana\" and \"Love Happy\").\nDuring a tour of Germany in 1958, accompanied by then-wife Eden, daughter Melinda, Robert Dwan and Dwan's daughter Judith, he climbed a pile of rubble that marked the site of Adolf Hitler's bunker, the site of Hitler's death, and performed a two-minute Charleston. He later remarked to Richard J. Anobile in \"The Marx Brothers Scrapbook,\" \"Not much satisfaction after he killed six million Jews!\"\nIn 1960, Marx, a lifelong devotee of the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan, appeared as Ko-Ko, the Lord High Executioner, in a televised production of \"The Mikado\" on NBC's \"The Bell Telephone Hour\". A clip of this is in rotation on Classic Arts Showcase.\nAnother TV show, \"Tell It to Groucho\", premiered January 11, 1962, on CBS, but only lasted five months. On October 1, 1962, Marx, after acting as occasional guest host of \"The Tonight Show\" during the six-month interval between Jack Paar and Johnny Carson, introduced Carson as the new host.\nIn 1964, Marx starred in the \"Time for Elizabeth\" episode of \"Bob Hope Presents the Chrysler Theatre\", a truncated version of the play that he and Norman Krasna wrote in 1948.\nIn 1965, Marx starred in a weekly show for British TV titled \"Groucho\", broadcast on ITV. The program was along similar lines to \"You Bet Your Life\", with Keith Fordyce taking on the Fenneman role. However, it was poorly received and lasted only 11 weeks.\nMarx appeared as a gangster named God in the comedy movie \"Skidoo\" (1968), directed by Otto Preminger, and starring Jackie Gleason and Carol Channing. It was released by the studio where the Marx Brothers began their film career, Paramount Pictures. The film received almost universally negative reviews. Writer Paul Krassner published a story in the February 1981 issue of \"High Times\", relating how Marx prepared for the LSD-themed movie by taking a dose of the drug in Krassner's company, and had a moving, largely pleasant experience.\nMarx developed friendships with rock star Alice Cooper\u2014the two were photographed together for \"Rolling Stone\" magazine\u2014and television host Dick Cavett, becoming a frequent guest on Cavett's late-night talk show, even appearing in a one-man, 90-minute interview. When Elton John was visiting California in 1972, he and Marx became friendly. Marx insisted on calling him \"John Elton\". According to writer Philip Norman, when Elton John was playing the piano at Marx's home, Marx jokingly pointed his index fingers as if holding a pair of six-shooters; John put up his hands and said, \"Don't shoot me, I'm only the piano player,\" thereby giving him the title of the album he had just completed. A film poster for the Marx Bros. film \"Go West\" is visible on the album cover photograph as an homage to Marx. Elton John accompanied Marx to a performance of \"Jesus Christ Superstar\". As the lights went down, Marx called out, \"Does it have a happy ending?\" And during the Crucifixion scene, he declared, \"This is sure to offend the Jews.\"\nMarx's previous work regained popularity; new books of transcribed conversations were published by Richard J. Anobile and Charlotte Chandler. In a BBC interview in 1975, Marx called his most significant achievement having a book selected for cultural preservation in the Library of Congress. In a Cavett interview in 1971, Marx said being published in \"The New Yorker\" under his own name, Julius Henry Marx, meant more than all the plays he appeared in. For a man who had little formal education, to have his writings declared culturally important was a point of great satisfaction.\nAs he passed his 81st birthday in October 1971, Marx became increasingly frail, physically and mentally, as a result of a succession of minor strokes and other health issues. In 1972, largely at the behest of his companion Erin Fleming, Marx appeared in a live one-man show at Carnegie Hall that was later released as a double album, \"An Evening with Groucho\", on A&amp;M Records. He also made an appearance in 1973 on a short-lived variety show hosted by Bill Cosby. Fleming's influence on Marx was a matter of controversy. Some close to Marx believed that she played a significant role in reviving his popularity, and the relationship with a younger woman likely boosted his ego and vitality. Others described her as a Svengali, exploiting an increasingly frail Marx in pursuit of her own acting career. Marx's children, particularly his son Arthur, felt strongly that Fleming was pushing their ailing father beyond his physical and mental limits. Writer Mark Evanier concurred.\nOn April 2, 1974, at the 46th annual Academy Awards, Jack Lemmon presented Marx with an honorary Oscar to a standing ovation. The award honored Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo as well: \"in recognition of his brilliant creativity and for the unequalled achievements of the Marx Brothers in the art of motion picture comedy\". Noticeably frail, Marx took a bow for his deceased brothers, saying that \"I wish that Harpo and Chico could be here to share with me this great honor.\" (Zeppo, still alive, was in the audience). He also praised the late Margaret Dumont as a great straight woman who never understood any of his jokes. Marx's final appearance was a brief sketch with George Burns in the Bob Hope television special \"Joys\" (a parody of the 1975 movie \"Jaws\") in March 1976. His health continued to decline the following year; when his younger brother Gummo died at age 83 on April 21, 1977, Marx was never told for fear of eliciting still further deterioration of his health.\nMarx maintained his irrepressible sense of humor to the very end, however. George Fenneman, his radio and TV announcer, good-natured foil, and lifelong friend, often related a story of one of his final visits to Marx's home: When the time came to end the visit, Fenneman lifted Marx from his wheelchair, put his arms around his torso, and began to \"walk\" the frail comedian backwards across the room towards his bed. As he did, he heard a weak voice in his ear: \"Fenneman,\" whispered Marx, \"you always were a lousy dancer.\" When a nurse approached him with a thermometer during his final hospitalization, explaining that she wanted to see if he had a temperature, he responded, \"Don't be silly\u2014everybody has a temperature.\" Actor Elliott Gould recalled a similar incident: \"I recall the last time I saw Groucho, he was in the hospital, and he had tubes in his nose and what have you,\" he said. \"And when he saw me, he was weak, but he was there; and he put his fingers on the tubes and played them like it was a clarinet. Groucho played the tubes for me, which brings me to tears.\"\nDeath.\nOn June 22, 1977, Marx was hospitalized at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center with pneumonia. He died there nearly two months later on August 19, at the age of 86, four months after Gummo's death. News reports of Groucho's death and legacy were largely overshadowed by the extensive media coverage of the unexpected death of Elvis Presley, three days earlier.\nMarx's body was cremated and the ashes are interred in the Eden Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles. He was survived by his three children and younger brother Zeppo, who outlived him by two years. His gravestone bears no epitaph but in one of his last interviews he suggested one: \"Excuse me, I can't stand up.\"\nLitigation over his estate lasted into the 1980s. Eventually, his three children were awarded the bulk of the estate, while Erin Fleming, his companion during his final years, was ordered to repay $472,000.\nLegacy.\nGroucho Marx was considered the most recognizable of the Marx Brothers. Groucho-like characters and references have appeared in popular culture both during and after his life, some aimed at audiences who may never have seen a Marx Brothers movie. Marx's trademark eyeglasses, nose, mustache, and cigar have become icons of comedy\u2014glasses with fake noses and mustaches (referred to as \"Groucho glasses\", \"nose-glasses,\" and other names) are sold by novelty and costume shops around the world.\nThe cover of The Firesign Theatre's 1969 album, \"How Can You Be in Two Places at Once When You're Not Anywhere at All\", subtitled \"All Hail Marx and Lennon\", features images of Groucho Marx and John Lennon.\nNat Perrin, close friend of Groucho Marx and writer of several Marx Brothers films, inspired John Astin's portrayal of Gomez Addams on the 1960s TV series \"The Addams Family\" with similarly thick mustache, eyebrows, sardonic remarks, backward logic, and ever-present cigar (pulled from his breast pocket already lit).\n\"Minnie's Boys\", a 1970 Broadway musical, focused on the younger years of Marx (played by Lewis J. Stadlen), his brothers, and his mother (played by Shelley Winters). Marx received credit as the show's advisor and appeared on \"The Dick Cavett Show\" to promote the production. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs Groucho Marx once said, 'Anyone can get old\u2014all you have to do is to live long enough'.\n\u00a0\u2014Queen Elizabeth II speaking at her 80th birthday celebration in 2006.\nIn 1972, at Cannes, Marx was made a Commander in the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, an honor he was very proud of.\nA meeting with Elton John led to a press photo of Marx pointing both of his index fingers and thumbs at Elton like revolvers. John's spontaneous response of holding up his hands and replying, \"Don't shoot me! I'm only the piano player!\" was so amusing that Elton John reused it as the title of a 1973 album. An added Marx homage was that a poster for the Marx Brothers' movie \"Go West\" was included on the cover art.\nMarx was also known to influence the Warner Bros. cartoon character Bugs Bunny, who recited his famous line \"Of course you realize this means war!\" in several cartoons including \"Long-Haired Hare\" and \"Bully for Bugs\", after his antagonist has offended him.\nTwo albums by British rock band Queen, \"A Night at the Opera\" (1975) and \"A Day at the Races\" (1976), are named after Marx Brothers films. In March 1977, Marx invited Queen to visit him in his Los Angeles home; there they performed \"'39\" a cappella.\nA long-running ad campaign for Vlasic Pickles features an animated stork that imitates Marx's mannerisms and voice. On the famous Hollywood Sign in California, one of the \"O\"s is dedicated to Marx. Alice Cooper contributed over $27,000 to remodel the sign, in memory of his friend.\nActor Frank Ferrante has performed as Groucho Marx on stage since 1986. He continues to tour under rights granted by the Marx family in a show entitled \"An Evening with Groucho\" in theaters throughout the United States and Canada with supporting actors and piano accompanist Jim Furmston. In the late 1980s, Ferrante starred as Marx in the off-Broadway and London show \"\", penned by Marx's son Arthur. Ferrante portrayed the comedian from age 15 to 85. The show was later filmed for PBS in 2001. In 1982, Gabe Kaplan filmed a version of the same show, entitled \"Groucho\".\nIn the Hungarian dubbed version of Woody Allen's film \"Annie Hall\", a famous quotation told by Alvy Singer (Allen) at the beginning of the film is not attributed to Groucho Marx as in the original, but to Buster Keaton. The reason was that in communist Hungary, the name 'Marx' was associated with Karl Marx, and the name was not allowed to be used in such a light, humorous context.\nWoody Allen's 1996 musical \"Everyone Says I Love You\", in addition to being named for one of Marx's signature songs, ends with a Groucho-themed New Year's Eve party in Paris, which some of the stars, including Allen and Goldie Hawn, attend in full Groucho costume. The highlight of the scene is an ensemble song-and-dance performance of \"Hooray for Captain Spaulding\"\u2014done entirely in French.\nIn 2008, \"Minnie's Boys\" was remounted Off-Broadway with Erik Liberman as Groucho and Pamela Myers as Minnie Marx. Liberman later played Marx in a musical based on \"Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel\" called \"The Most Ridiculous Thing You Ever Hoid\" (2010) and at the Obama White House.\nLord Julius, the Grandlord of Palnu in the comic series \"Cerebus the Aardvark\", is clearly modeled on Groucho's appearance and personality, although without Groucho's iconic glasses.\nGroucho, a supporting character in the Italian horror comics series \"Dylan Dog\", is a Groucho Marx impersonator whose character became his permanent personality, and he works with Dylan Dog as his professional sidekick. In the English-language version by Dark Horse Comics, to avoid legal complications regarding Groucho Marx's estate, the art was altered so that Groucho no longer sports the Marx brother's signature moustache, and was renamed \"Felix\".\nThroughout the \"M*A*S*H\" television series, several Groucho homage traits are mirrored in Alan Alda's portrayal of Hawkeye, including the 1972 season one episode \"Yankee Doodle Doctor\" that had a full Groucho impression complete with moustache, cigar and glasses.\nIn 2023, notable artist William Kentridge included a drawing of Marx in his solo museum exhibition at The Broad in Los Angeles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "12429", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12429", "title": "Gameboy Advance", "text": ""}
