{"id": "19679", "revid": "19093512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19679", "title": "Mary Rose", "text": "English Tudor warship (1511\u20131545)\nThe Mary Rose was a carrack in the English Tudor navy of King Henry VIII. She was launched in 1511 and served for 34 years in several wars against France, Scotland, and Brittany. After being substantially rebuilt in 1536, she saw her last action on 19 July 1545. She led the attack on the galleys of a French invasion fleet, but sank off Spithead in the Solent, the strait north of the Isle of Wight.\nThe wreck of the \"Mary Rose\" was located in 1971 and was raised on 11 October 1982 by the Mary Rose Trust in one of the most complex and expensive maritime salvage projects in history. The surviving section of the ship and thousands of recovered artefacts are of significance as a Tudor period time capsule. The excavation and raising of the \"Mary Rose\" was a milestone in the field of maritime archaeology, comparable in complexity and cost to the raising of the 17th-century Swedish warship \"Vasa\" in 1961. The \"Mary Rose\" site is designated under the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 by statutory instrument 1974/55. The wreck is a Protected Wreck managed by Historic England.\nThe finds include weapons, sailing equipment, naval supplies, and a wide array of objects used by the crew. Many of the artefacts are unique to the \"Mary Rose\" and have provided insights into topics ranging from naval warfare to the history of musical instruments. The remains of the hull have been on display at the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard since the mid-1980s while undergoing restoration. An extensive collection of well-preserved artefacts is on display at the Mary Rose Museum, built to display the remains of the ship and her artefacts.\n\"Mary Rose\" was one of the largest ships in the English navy through more than three decades of intermittent war, and she was one of the earliest examples of a purpose-built sailing warship. She was armed with new types of heavy guns that could fire through the recently invented gun-ports. She was substantially rebuilt in 1536 and was also one of the earliest ships that could fire a broadside, although the line of battle tactics had not yet been developed. Several theories have sought to explain the demise of the \"Mary Rose\", based on historical records, knowledge of 16th-century shipbuilding, and modern experiments. The precise cause of her sinking is subject to conflicting testimonies and a lack of conclusive evidence.\nHistorical context.\nIn the late 15th century, England was still reeling from its dynastic wars first with France and then among its ruling families back on home soil. The great victories against France in the Hundred Years' War were in the past; only the small exclave of Calais in northern France remained of the vast continental holdings of the English kings. The War of the Roses\u00a0\u2013 the civil war between the houses of York and Lancaster\u00a0\u2013 had ended with Henry VII's establishment of the House of Tudor, the new ruling dynasty of England. The ambitious naval policies of Henry V were not continued by his successors, and from 1422 to 1509 only six ships were built for the crown. The marriage alliance between Anne of Brittany and Charles VIII of France in 1491, and his successor Louis XII in 1499, left England with a weakened strategic position on its southern flank. Despite this, Henry\u00a0VII managed to maintain a comparatively long period of peace and a small but powerful core of a navy.\nAt the onset of the early modern period, the great European powers were France, the Holy Roman Empire and Spain. All three became involved in the War of the League of Cambrai in 1508. The conflict was initially aimed at the Republic of Venice but eventually turned against France. England's close economic relationship with the Low Countries, ruled by the Spanish Habsburgs and any ambition of the young Henry VIII to recover territory in France made Spain the obvious ally. In 1509, six weeks into his reign, Henry married the Spanish princess Catherine of Aragon and joined the League, intent on certifying his historical claim as king of both England and France. By 1511 Henry was part of an anti-French alliance that included Ferdinand II of Aragon, Pope Julius II and Holy Roman emperor Maximilian.\nThe small navy that Henry VIII inherited from his father had only two sizeable ships, the carracks \"Regent\" and \"Sovereign\". Just months after his accession, two large ships were ordered: the \"Mary Rose\" and the \"Peter Pomegranate\" (later known as \"Peter\" after being rebuilt in 1536) of about 500 and 450\u00a0tons respectively. Which king ordered the building of the \"Mary Rose\" is unclear; although construction began during Henry VIII's reign, the plans for naval expansion could have been in the making earlier. Henry\u00a0VIII oversaw the project and he ordered additional large ships to be built, most notably the \"Henry Grace \u00e0 Dieu\" (\"Henry by the Grace of God\"), or \"Great Harry\" at more than 1000\u00a0tons burthen. By the 1520s the English state had established a \"de facto\" permanent \"Navy Royal\", the organizational ancestor of the modern Royal Navy.\nConstruction.\nConstruction of \"Mary Rose\" began on 29 January 1510 in Portsmouth and she was launched in July 1511. She was then towed to London and fitted with rigging and decking, and supplied with armaments. Other than the structural details needed to sail, stock and arm the \"Mary Rose\", she was also equipped with flags, banners and streamers (extremely elongated flags that were flown from the top of the masts) that were either painted or gilded.\nConstructing a warship of the size of the \"Mary Rose\" was a major undertaking, requiring vast quantities of high-quality material. For a state-of-the-art warship, these materials were primarily oak. The total amount of timber needed for the construction can only be roughly calculated since only about one third of the ship still exists. One estimate for the number of trees is around 600 mostly large oaks, representing about of woodland.\nThe huge trees that had been common in Europe and the British Isles in previous centuries were by the 16th century quite rare, which meant that timbers were brought in from all over southern England. The largest timbers used in the construction were of roughly the same size as those used in the roofs of the largest cathedrals in the High Middle Ages. An unworked hull plank would have weighed over , and one of the main deck beams would have weighed close to three-quarters of a tonne.\nNaming.\nThe common explanation for the ship's name was that it was inspired by Henry VIII's favourite sister, Mary Tudor, Queen of France, and the rose as the emblem of the Tudors. According to the historians David Childs, David Loades and Peter Marsden, no direct evidence of naming the ship after the King's sister exists. It was far more common at the time to give ships pious Christian names, a long-standing tradition in Western Europe, or to associate them with their royal patrons. Names like \"Grace Dieu\" (Hallelujah) and \"Holighost\" (Holy Spirit) had been common since the 15th century and other Tudor navy ships had names like the \"Regent\" and \"Three Ostrich Feathers\" (referring to the crest of the Prince of Wales).\nThe Virgin Mary is a more likely candidate for a namesake, and she was also associated with the Rosa Mystica (mystic rose). The name of the sister ship of the \"Mary Rose\", the \"Peter Pomegranate\", is believed to have been named in honour of Saint Peter, and the badge of the Queen Catharine of Aragon, a pomegranate. According to Childs, Loades and Marsden, the two ships, which were built around the same time, were named in honour of the king and queen, respectively.\nDesign.\nThe \"Mary Rose\" was substantially rebuilt in 1536. The 1536 rebuilding turned a ship of 500 tons into one of 700 tons, and added an entire extra tier of broadside guns to the old carrack-style structure. By consequence, modern research is based mostly on interpretations of the concrete physical evidence of this version of the \"Mary Rose\". The construction of the original design from 1509 is less known.\nThe \"Mary Rose\" was built according to the carrack-style with high \"castles\" fore and aft with a low waist of open decking in the middle. The hull has tumblehome: above the waterline, the hull gradually narrows. This makes boarding more difficult and reduces the quantity (and so weight) of heavy structural timbers that carry the higher guns. Modern understanding is that tumblehome does not improve stability by positioning the guns closer to the centreline, though that may have been the belief and intention of her builders.\nSince only part of the hull has survived, it is not possible to determine many of the basic dimensions with any great accuracy. The , the widest point of the ship roughly above the waterline, was about and the keel about , although the ship's overall length is uncertain.\nThe hull had four levels separated by three decks. Because the terminology for these was not yet standardised in the 16th century, the terms used here are those that were applied by the Mary Rose Trust. The \"hold\" lay furthest down in the ship, right above the bottom planking and below the waterline. This is where the galley was situated and the food was cooked. Directly aft of the galley was the mast step, a rebate in the centre-most timber of the keelson, right above the keel, which supported the main mast, and next to it the main bilge pump. To increase the stability of the ship, the hold was where the ballast was placed and much of the supplies were kept. Right above the hold was the \"orlop\", the lowest deck. Like the hold, it was partitioned and was also used as a storage area for everything from food to spare sails.\nAbove the orlop lay the \"main deck\", which housed the heaviest guns. The side of the hull on the main deck level had seven gunports on each side fitted with heavy lids that would have been watertight when closed. This was also the highest deck that was caulked and waterproof. Along the sides of the main deck there were cabins under the forecastle and aftercastle which have been identified as belonging to the carpenter, barber-surgeon, pilot and possibly also the master gunner and some of the officers.\nThe top deck in the hull structure was the \"upper deck\" (or weather deck) which was exposed to the elements in the waist. It was a dedicated fighting deck without any known partitions and a mix of heavy and light guns. Over the open waist, the upper deck was entirely covered with a boarding net, a coarse netting that served as a defence measure against boarding. Though very little of the upper deck has survived, it has been suggested that it housed the main living quarters of the crew underneath the aftercastle. A drain located in this area has been identified as a possible \"piss-dale\", a general urinal to complement the regular toilets which would probably have been located in the bow.\nThe castles of the \"Mary Rose\" had additional decks, but since almost nothing of them survives, their design has had to be reconstructed from historical records. Contemporary ships of equal size were consistently listed as having three decks in both castles. Although speculative, this layout is supported by the illustration in the Anthony Roll and the gun inventories.\nDuring the early stages of excavation of the wreck, it was erroneously believed that the ship had originally been built with clinker (or clench) planking, a technique in which the hull consisted of overlapping planks that bore the structural strength of the ship. Later examination indicates that the clinker planking was never present throughout the ship; only the outer structure of the sterncastle is built with overlapping planking, though not with a true clinker technique.\nConstruction method.\nThe hull of \"Mary Rose\" is carvel built. The ship is an early example of this method of construction in England. Her hull shape is now known to have been set out using the three arc method of producing the hull cross section. This geometric process is similar to that known to have been used some two hundred years later, so giving a much earlier date for this technique. This, and studies of other ships specified in the 15th century, is suggestive that the three arc methodology was probably already in existence before the time \"Mary Rose\" was built.\nThe construction sequence began with laying the keel and setting up the stem and sternpost. The midships and a few other frames (master frames) controlled the shape of the hull, so the s in those positions were fastened to the top of the keel. Then planking started with the s being fastened to the keel and those floors that were already installed. A temporary timber batten (called a ribband) was fastened across the floors that had been fitted and the remaining floors were shaped to fit the curve delineated by the ribbands and the garboards. The keelson was fastened over the top of the floors and planking continued up from the garboards to near the end of the floors. The first s were then installed, again using ribbands to achieve a fair shape relative to the master frames. The hull construction continued with phases of planking and the fitting of second and third futtocks until deck level was reached.\n\"Mary Rose\" does not have the characteristic dove-tailed mortises seen joining the floors and first futtocks in Basque-built ships such as the Red Bay wreck 24M. There is some fastening of floors to timbers in \"Mary Rose\" that is less systematic and robust, but there are no treenails connecting frame elements to each other as seen on later vessels. This demonstrates that the hull was not made by first building the hull framework and then adding the planking once that was complete. Instead planking and framing were carried out in alternating steps, with later futtocks being added as planking carried on up to the weather deck level. This is in sharp contrast to the usual way of building a carvel hull today.\nThe construction sequence used for \"Mary Rose\" was typical for a ship built during the lengthy transition period during which carvel became established in Northern Europe and the precise detail is one of the milestones in that story.\nSails and rigging.\nAlthough only the lower fittings of the rigging survive, a 1514 inventory and the only known contemporary depiction of the ship from the Anthony Roll have been used to determine how the \"Mary Rose\" was rigged. Nine, or possibly ten, sails were set from four masts and a bowsprit: the foremast had two square sails and the mainmast three; the mizzen mast had a lateen sail and a small square sail; the bonaventure mizzen had at least one lateen sail and possibly also a square sail; and the bowsprit set a small square spritsail. According to the Anthony Roll illustration (see top of this section), the yards (the spars from which the sails were set) on the foremast and mainmast were also equipped with sheerhooks \u2013 twin curved blades sharpened on the inside \u2013 that were intended to cut an enemy ship's rigging during boarding actions.\nThe operation of \"Mary Rose\"'s rig and some of its fitments were substantially different from several phases of later versions of square rig. All the yards were hoisted and lowered as part of the normal processes of setting, ing or reducing sail. The furling of the square sails pulled much of the bulk of the sail into the centre of the yard, so the work aloft did not involve a lot of work on the yards (the foot-rope did not come into use until the early 18th century), with much being done from the tops. Ships of this era generally did not have reefing points (though they existed on boats' sails). Instead a square sail might be equipped with a bonnet\u00a0\u2013 an extra section of sail that is laced onto the foot of a square sail. Instead of reefing, the bonnet was removed. Lacing that would suit a bonnet was found on \"Mary Rose\".\nPerformance.\nWhen the wreck of Mary Rose was first recovered, there was surprise that this was not the beamy vessel that was expected. The relatively narrow length to breadth ratio was accompanied by , particularly in the run (the underwater hull shape the midship section). Even in the full sections in the forward part of the hull there are some hollow lines. Generally, hull shape is a major contributor, in conjunction with the efficiency of the sails, to good sailing performance. This hull shape can certainly explain the reported good sailing qualities that \"Mary Rose\" displayed prior to her rebuild.\nThe sailing capabilities of the \"Mary Rose\" were commented on by her contemporaries and were once even put to the test. In March 1513 a contest was arranged off The Downs, east of Kent, in which she raced against nine other ships. She won the contest, and Admiral Edward Howard described her enthusiastically as \"the noblest ship of sayle [of any] gret ship, at this howr, that I trow [believe] be in Cristendom\". Several years later, while sailing between Dover and The Downs, Vice-Admiral William Fitzwilliam noted that both the \"Henry Grace \u00e0 Dieu\" and the \"Mary Rose\" performed very well, riding steadily in rough seas and that it would have been a \"hard chose\" between the two. The reports of good sailing performance early in her career did not continue after successive repairs and the major rebuild altered her characteristics.\nArmament.\nThe \"Mary Rose\" represented a transitional ship design in naval warfare. Since ancient times, war at sea had been fought much as on land: with melee weapons and bows and arrows, only on floating wooden platforms rather than battlefields. Though the introduction of guns was a significant change, it only slowly changed the dynamics of ship-to-ship combat. As guns became heavier and able to take more powerful gunpowder charges, they needed to be placed lower in the ship, closer to the water line. Gunports cut in the hull of ships had been introduced as early as 1501, only about a decade before the \"Mary Rose\" was built.\nThis made broadsides \u2013 coordinated volleys from all the guns on one side of a ship \u2013 possible, at least in theory, but in practice this was a relatively minor part of the gunnery tactics of the time. Throughout the 16th century and well into the 17th century the focus was on countering the oar-powered galleys that were armed with heavy guns in the bow, facing forwards, which were aimed by turning the entire ship against its target. Sailing warships did this first with their chase guns. Combined with inefficient gunpowder and the difficulties inherent in firing accurately from moving platforms, this meant that boarding remained the primary tactic for decisive victory throughout the 16th century.\nBronze and iron guns.\n\"Mary Rose\" served during a period of both the development of ship-borne guns and the design features of ships that deployed these weapons. By the time of her sinking, the number of heavy guns had roughly doubled. The heavy armament was a mix of older-type wrought iron and more modern cast bronze guns, which differed considerably in size, range and design. The large iron guns were made up of staves or bars welded into cylinders and then reinforced by shrinking iron hoops and breech loaded and equipped with simpler gun-carriages made from hollowed-out elm logs with only one pair of wheels, or without wheels entirely.\nThe bronze guns were cast in one piece and rested on four-wheel carriages which were essentially the same as those used until the 19th century. The breech-loaders were cheaper to produce and both easier and faster to reload, but could take less powerful charges than cast bronze guns. Generally, the bronze guns used cast iron shot and were more suited to penetrate hull sides while the iron guns used stone shot that would shatter on impact and leave large, jagged holes, but both could also fire a variety of ammunition intended to destroy rigging and light structure or injure enemy personnel.\nThe majority of the guns were small iron guns with short range that could be aimed and fired by a single person. The two most common are the \"bases\", breech-loading swivel guns, most likely placed in the castles, and \"hailshot pieces\", small muzzle-loaders with rectangular bores and fin-like protrusions that were used to support the guns against the railing and allow the ship structure to take the force of the recoil. Though the design is unknown, there were two \"top pieces\" in a 1546 inventory (finished after the sinking) which were probably similar to a base, but placed in one or more of the fighting tops.\nThe ship went through several changes in her armament throughout her career, most significantly accompanying her \"rebuilding\" in 1536 (see below), when the number of anti-personnel guns was reduced and a second tier of carriage-mounted long guns fitted. There are three inventories that list her guns, dating to 1514, 1540 and 1546. Together with records from the armoury at the Tower of London, these show how the configuration of guns changed as gun-making technology evolved and new classifications were invented. In 1514, the armament consisted mostly of anti-personnel guns like the larger breech-loading iron \"murderers\" and the small \"serpentines\", \"demi-slings\" and stone guns.\nOnly a handful of guns in the first inventory were powerful enough to hole enemy ships, and most would have been supported by the ship's structure rather than resting on carriages. The inventories of both the \"Mary Rose\" and the Tower had changed radically by 1540. There were now the new cast bronze \"cannons\", \"demi-cannons\", \"culverins\" and \"sakers\" and the wrought iron \"port pieces\" (a name that indicated they fired through ports), all of which required carriages, had longer range and were capable of doing serious damage to other ships. The analysis of the 1514 inventory combined with hints of structural changes in the ship both indicate that the gunports on the main deck were indeed a later addition.\nVarious types of ammunition could be used for different purposes: plain spherical shot of stone or iron smashed hulls, spiked bar shot and shot linked with chains would tear sails or damage rigging, and canister shot packed with sharp flints produced a devastating shotgun effect. Trials made with replicas of culverins and port pieces showed that they could penetrate wood the same thickness of the \"Mary Rose's\" hull planking, indicating a stand-off range of at least . The port pieces proved particularly efficient at smashing large holes in wood when firing stone shot and were a devastating anti-personnel weapon when loaded with flakes or pebbles.\nHand-held weapons.\nTo defend against being boarded, \"Mary Rose\" carried large stocks of melee weapons, including pikes and bills; 150 of each kind were stocked on the ship according to the Anthony Roll, a figure confirmed roughly by the excavations. Swords and daggers were personal possessions and not listed in the inventories, but the remains of both have been found in great quantities, including the earliest dated example of a British basket-hilted sword.\nA total of 250 longbows were carried on board, and 172 of these have so far been found, as well as almost 4,000 arrows, bracers (arm guards) and other archery-related equipment. Longbow archery in Tudor England was mandatory for all able adult men, and despite the introduction of field artillery and handguns, they were used alongside new missile weapons in great quantities. On the \"Mary Rose\", the longbows could only have been drawn and shot properly from behind protective panels in the open waist or from the top of the castles as the lower decks lacked sufficient headroom. There were several types of bows of various size and range. Lighter bows would have been used as \"sniper\" bows, while the heavier design could possibly have been used to shoot fire arrows.\nThe inventories of both 1514 and 1546 also list several hundred heavy darts and lime pots that were designed to be thrown onto the deck of enemy ships from the fighting tops, although no physical evidence of either of these weapon types has been identified. Of the 50 handguns listed in the Anthony Roll, the complete stocks of five matchlock muskets and fragments of another eleven have been found. They had been manufactured mainly in Italy, with some originating from Germany. Found in storage were several \"gunshields\", a rare type of firearm consisting of a wooden shield with a small gun fixed in the middle.\nCrew.\nThroughout her 33-year career, the crew of the \"Mary Rose\" changed several times and varied considerably in size. It would have a minimal skeleton crew of 17 men or fewer in peacetime and when she was \"laid up in ordinary\" (in reserve). The average wartime manning would have been about 185 soldiers, 200 sailors, 20\u201330 gunners and an assortment of other specialists such as surgeons, trumpeters and members of the admiral's staff, for a total of 400\u2013450 men. When taking part in land invasions or raids, such as in the summer of 1512, the number of soldiers could have swelled to just over 400 for a combined total of more than 700. Even with the normal crew size of around 400, the ship was quite crowded, and with additional soldiers would have been extremely cramped.\nLittle is known of the identities of the men who served on the \"Mary Rose\", even when it comes to the names of the officers, who would have belonged to the gentry. Two admirals and four captains (including Edward and Thomas Howard, who served both positions) are known through records, as well as a few ship masters, pursers, master gunners and other specialists. Forensic science has been used by artists to create reconstructions of faces of eight crew members, and the results were publicised in May 2013. In addition, researchers have extracted DNA from remains in the hopes of identifying origins of crew, and potentially living descendants.\nOf the vast majority of the crewmen, soldiers, sailors and gunners alike, nothing has been recorded. The only source of information for these men has been through osteological analysis of the human bones found at the wrecksite. An approximate composition of some of the crew has been conjectured based on contemporary records. The \"Mary Rose\" would have carried a captain, a master responsible for navigation, and deck crew. There would also have been a purser responsible for handling payments, a boatswain, the captain's second in command, at least one carpenter, a pilot in charge of navigation, and a cook, all of whom had one or more assistants (mates). The ship was also staffed by a barber-surgeon who tended to the sick and wounded, along with an apprentice or mate and possibly also a junior surgeon. The only positively identified person who went down with the ship was Vice-Admiral George Carew. McKee, Stirland and several other authors have also named Roger Grenville, father of Richard Grenville of the Elizabethan-era \"Revenge\", captain during the final battle, although the accuracy of the sourcing for this has been disputed by maritime archaeologist Peter Marsden.\nThe bones of a total of 179 people were found during the excavations of the \"Mary Rose\", including 92 \"fairly complete skeletons\", more or less complete collections of bones associated with specific individuals. Analysis of these has shown that crew members were all male, most of them young adults. Some were no more than 11\u201313 years old, and the majority (81%) under 30. They were mainly of English origin and, according to archaeologist Julie Gardiner, they most likely came from the West Country; many following their aristocratic masters into maritime service. There were also a few people from continental Europe. An eyewitness testimony right after the sinking refers to a survivor who was a Fleming, and the pilot may very well have been French. Analysis of oxygen isotopes in teeth indicates that some were also of southern European origin. At least one crewmember was of North African ancestry. In general they were strong, well-fed men, but many of the bones also reveal tell-tale signs of childhood diseases and a life of grinding toil. The bones also showed traces of numerous healed fractures, probably the result of on-board accidents.\nThere are no extant written records of the make-up of the broader categories of soldiers and sailors, but since the \"Mary Rose\" carried some 300 longbows and several thousand arrows there had to be a considerable proportion of longbow archers. Examination of the skeletal remains has found that there was a disproportionate number of men with a condition known as \"os acromiale\", affecting their shoulder blades. This condition is known among modern elite archery athletes and is caused by placing considerable stress on the arm and shoulder muscles, particularly of the left arm that is used to hold the bow to brace against the pull on the bowstring. Among the men who died on the ship it was likely that some had practised using the longbow since childhood, and served on board as specialist archers.\nA group of six skeletons was found close to one of the 2-tonne bronze culverins on the main deck near the bow. Fusing of parts of the spine and ossification, the growth of new bone, on several vertebrae evidenced all but one of these crewmen to have been strong, well-muscled men who had been engaged in heavy pulling and pushing, the exception possibly being a \"powder monkey\" not involved in heavy work. These have been tentatively classified as members of a complete gun crew, all having died at their battle station.\nMilitary career.\nFirst French war.\nThe \"Mary Rose\" first saw battle in 1512, in a joint naval operation with the Spanish against the French. The English were to meet the French and Breton fleets in the English Channel while the Spanish attacked them in the Bay of Biscay and then attacked Gascony. The 35-year-old Sir Edward Howard was appointed Lord High Admiral in April and chose the \"Mary Rose\" as his flagship. His first mission was to clear the seas of French naval forces between England to the northern coast of Spain to allow for the landing of supporting troops near the French border at Fuenterrabia. The fleet consisted of 18 ships, among them the large ships the \"Regent\" and the \"Peter Pomegranate\", carrying over 5,000 men. Howard's expedition led to the capture of twelve Breton ships and a four-day raiding tour of Brittany where English forces successfully fought against local forces and burned numerous settlements.\nThe fleet returned to Southampton in June where it was visited by King Henry. In August the fleet sailed for Brest where it encountered a joint, but ill-coordinated, French-Breton fleet at the battle of St. Mathieu. The English with one of the great ships in the lead (according to Marsden the \"Mary Rose\") battered the French ships with heavy gunfire and forced them to retreat. The Breton flagship \"Cordeli\u00e8re\" put up a fight and was boarded by the 1,000-ton \"Regent\". By accident or through the unwillingness of the Breton crew to surrender, the powder magazine of the \"Cordeli\u00e8re\" caught fire and blew up in a violent explosion, setting fire to the \"Regent\" and eventually sinking her. About 180 English crew members saved themselves by throwing themselves into the sea; a handful of Bretons survived, only to be captured. The captain of the \"Regent\", 600 soldiers and sailors, the High Admiral of France and the steward of the town of Morlaix were killed in the incident, making it the focal point of several contemporary chronicles and reports. On 11 August, the English burnt 27 French ships, captured another five and landed forces near Brest to raid and take prisoners, but storms forced the fleet back to Dartmouth in Devon and then to Southampton for repairs.\nIn early 1513, the \"Mary Rose\" was once more chosen by Howard as the flagship for an expedition against the French. Before seeing action, she took part in a race against other ships where she was deemed to be one of the most nimble and the fastest of the great ships in the fleet (see details under \"Sails and rigging\"). On 11 April, Howard's force arrived off Brest only to see a small enemy force join with the larger force in the safety of Brest harbour and its fortifications. The French had recently been reinforced by a force of galleys from the Mediterranean, which sank one English ship and seriously damaged another. Howard landed forces near Brest, but made no headway against the town and was by now getting low on supplies. Attempting to force a victory, he took a small force of small oared vessels on a daring frontal attack on the French galleys on 25 April. Howard himself managed to reach the ship of French admiral, Pr\u00e9gent de Bidoux, and led a small party to board her. The French fought back fiercely and cut the cables that attached the two ships, separating Howard from his men. It left him at the mercy of the soldiers aboard the galley, who instantly killed him.\nDemoralised by the loss of its admiral and seriously short of food, the fleet returned to Plymouth. Thomas Howard, elder brother of Edward, was assigned the new Lord Admiral, and was set to the task of arranging another attack on Brittany. The fleet was not able to mount the planned attack because of adverse winds and great difficulties in supplying the ships adequately and the \"Mary Rose\" took up winter quarters in Southampton. In August the Scots joined France in war against England, but were dealt a crushing defeat at the Battle of Flodden on 9 September 1513. A follow-up attack in early 1514 was supported by a naval force that included the \"Mary Rose\", but without any known engagements. The French and English mounted raids on each other throughout that summer, but achieved little, and both sides were by then exhausted. By autumn the war was over and a peace treaty was sealed by the marriage of Henry's sister, Mary, to French king Louis XII.\nAfter the peace \"Mary Rose\" was placed in the reserves, \"in ordinary\". She was laid up for maintenance along with her sister ship the \"Peter Pomegranate\" in July 1514. In 1518 she received a routine repair and caulking, waterproofing with tar and oakum (old rope fibres) and was then assigned a small skeleton crew who lived on board the ship until 1522. She served briefly on a mission with other warships to \"scour the seas\" in preparation for Henry VIII's journey across the Channel to the summit with the French king Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in June 1520.\nSecond French war.\nIn 1522, England was once again at war with France because of a treaty with the Holy Roman Emperor Charles\u00a0V. The plan was for an attack on two fronts with an English thrust in northern France. The \"Mary Rose\" participated in the escort transport of troops in June 1522, and by 1 July the Breton port of Morlaix was captured. The fleet sailed home and the \"Mary Rose\" berthed for the winter in Dartmouth. The war raged on until 1525 and saw the Scots join the French side. Though Charles Brandon came close to capturing Paris in 1523, there was little gained either against France or Scotland throughout the war. With the defeat of the French army and capture of Francis\u00a0I by Charles\u00a0V's forces at the Battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525, the war was effectively over without any major gains or major victories for the English side.\nMaintenance and \"in ordinary\".\nThe \"Mary Rose\" was kept in reserve from 1522 to 1545. She was once more caulked and repaired in 1527 in a newly dug dock at Portsmouth and her longboat was repaired and trimmed. Little documentation about the \"Mary Rose\" between 1528 and 1539 exists. A document written by Thomas Cromwell in 1536 specifies that the \"Mary Rose\" and six other ships were \"made new\" during his service under the king, though it is unclear which years he was referring to and what \"made new\" actually meant. A later document from January 1536 by an anonymous author states that the \"Mary Rose\" and other ships were \"new made\", and dating of timbers from the ship confirms some type of repair being done in 1535 or 1536. This would have coincided with the controversial dissolution of the monasteries that resulted in a major influx of funds into the royal treasury. The nature and extent of this repair is unknown. Many experts, including Margaret Rule, the project leader for the raising of the \"Mary Rose\", wrongly presumed that it meant a complete rebuilding from clinker planking to carvel planking, and that it was only after 1536 that the ship took on the form that it had when it sank and that was eventually recovered in the 20th century. Marsden has speculated that it could even mean that the \"Mary Rose\" was originally built in a style that was closer to 15th-century ships, with a rounded, rather than square, stern and without the main deck gunports.\nThird French war.\nHenry's complicated marital situation and his dissolution of the monasteries angered the Pope and Catholic rulers throughout Europe, which increased England's diplomatic isolation. In 1544 Henry had agreed to attack France together with Emperor Charles\u00a0V, and English forces captured Boulogne at great cost in September, but soon England was left in the lurch after Charles had achieved his objectives and brokered a separate peace.\nIn May 1545, the French had assembled a large fleet in the estuary of the Seine with the intent to land troops on English soil. The estimates of the size of the fleet varied considerably; between 123 and 300 vessels according to French sources; and up to 226 sailing ships and galleys according to the chronicler Edward Hall. In addition to the massive fleet, 50,000 troops were assembled at Havre de Gr\u00e2ce (modern-day Le Havre). An English force of 160 ships and 12,000 troops under Viscount Lisle was ready at Portsmouth by early June, before the French were ready to set sail, and an ineffective pre-emptive strike was made in the middle of the month. In early July the huge French force under the command of Admiral Claude d'Annebault set sail for England and entered the Solent unopposed with 128 ships on 16 July. The English had around 80 ships with which to oppose the French, including the flagship \"Mary Rose\". But since they had virtually no heavy galleys, the vessels that were at their best in sheltered waters like the Solent, the English fleet promptly retreated into Portsmouth harbour.\nBattle of the Solent.\nThe English were becalmed in port and unable to manoeuvre. On 19 July 1545, the French galleys advanced on the immobilised English fleet, and initially threatened to destroy a force of 13 small galleys, or \"rowbarges\", the only ships that were able to move against them without a wind. The wind picked up and the sailing ships were able to go on the offensive before the oared vessels were overwhelmed. Two of the largest ships, the \"Henry Grace \u00e0 Dieu\" and the \"Mary Rose\", led the attack on the French galleys in the Solent.\nEarly in the battle something went wrong. While engaging the French galleys the \"Mary Rose\" suddenly heeled (leaned) heavily over to her starboard (right) side and water rushed in through the open gunports. The crew was powerless to correct the sudden imbalance, and could only scramble for the safety of the upper deck as the ship began to sink rapidly. As she leaned over, equipment, ammunition, supplies and storage containers shifted and came loose, adding to the general chaos. The massive port side brick oven in the galley collapsed completely and the huge 360-litre (90 gallon) copper cauldron was thrown onto the orlop deck above. Heavy guns came free and slammed into the opposite side, impeding escape or crushing men beneath them.\nFor those who were not injured or killed outright by moving objects, there was little time to reach safety, especially for the men who were manning the guns on the main deck or fetching ammunition and supplies in the hold. The companionways that connected the decks with one another would have become bottlenecks for fleeing men, something indicated by the positioning of many of the skeletons recovered from the wreck. What turned the sinking into a major tragedy was the anti-boarding netting that covered the upper decks in the waist (the midsection of the ship) and the sterncastle. With the exception of the men who were stationed in the tops in the masts, most of those who managed to get up from below deck were trapped under the netting; they would have been in view of the surface, and their colleagues above, but with little or no chance to break through, and were dragged down with the ship. Out of a crew of at least 400, fewer than 35 escaped, a casualty rate of over 90%.\nCauses of sinking.\nContemporary accounts.\nMany accounts of the sinking have been preserved, but the only confirmed eyewitness account is the testimony of a surviving Flemish crewman written down by the Holy Roman Emperor's ambassador Fran\u00e7ois van der Delft in a letter dated 24 July. According to the unnamed Fleming, the ship had fired all of her guns on one side and was turning to present the guns on the other side to the enemy ship, when she was caught in a strong gust of wind, heeled and took in water through the open gunports. In a letter to William Paget dated 23 July, former Lord High Admiral John Russel claimed that the ship had been lost because of \"rechenes and great negligence\". Three years after the sinking, \"Hall's Chronicle\" gave the reason for the sinking as being caused by \"to[o] much foly\u00a0... for she was laden with much ordinaunce, and the portes left open, which were low, &amp; the great ordinaunce unbreached, so that when the ship should turne, the water entered, and sodainly she sanke.\"\nLater accounts repeat the explanation that the ship heeled over while going about and that the ship was brought down because of the open gunports. A biography of Peter Carew, brother of George Carew, written by John Hooker sometime after 1575, gives the same reason for the sinking, but adds that insubordination among the crew was to blame. The biography claims that George Carew noted that the \"Mary Rose\" showed signs of instability as soon as her sails were raised. George's uncle Gawen Carew had passed by with his own ship the \"Matthew Gonson\" during the battle to inquire about the situation of his nephew's ship. In reply he was told \"that he had a sorte of knaves whom he could not rule\". Contrary to all other accounts, Martin du Bellay, a French cavalry officer who was present at the battle, stated that the \"Mary Rose\" had been sunk by French guns.\nModern theories.\nThe most common explanation for the sinking among modern historians is that the ship was unstable for a number of reasons. A strong gust of wind hit the sails at a critical moment and the open gunports proved fatal, causing the ship to flood and quickly founder. Coates offered a variant of this hypothesis, which explains why a ship unexpectedly foundered after serving for several decades without sinking, even fighting in actions in the rough seas off Brittany: the ship had accumulated additional weight over the years in service and finally become unseaworthy. Marsden has questioned whether the ship was turning after firing all the guns on one side, after examination of guns recovered in the 19th and 20th centuries; guns from both sides were found still loaded. This has been interpreted to mean that something else could have gone wrong, since it is assumed that an experienced crew would not have failed to secure the gunports before making a potentially risky turn.\nThe most recent surveys of the ship indicate that she was modified late in her career, lending support to the idea that the \"Mary Rose\" was altered too much to be properly seaworthy. Marsden has suggested that the weight of additional heavy guns would have increased her draught so much that the waterline was less than one metre (c. 3 feet) from the gunports on the main deck.\nPeter Carew's claim of insubordination has been reinterpreted by James Watt, former Medical Director-General of the Royal Navy, based on records of an epidemic of dysentery in Portsmouth which could have rendered the crew incapable of handling the ship properly. Historian Richard Barker has suggested that the crew actually knew that the ship was an accident waiting to happen, at which they balked and refused to follow orders. Marsden has noted that the Carew biography is in some details inconsistent with the sequence of events reported by both French and English eyewitnesses. It also reports that there were 700 men on board, an unusually high number. The distance in time to the event it describes may mean that it was embellished to add a dramatic touch. The report of French galleys sinking the \"Mary Rose\" as stated by Martin du Bellay has been described as \"the account of a courtesan\" by naval historian Maurice de Brossard. Du Bellay and his two brothers were close to king Francis\u00a0I and du Bellay had much to gain from portraying the sinking as a French victory. English sources, even if biased, would have nothing to gain from portraying the sinking as the result of crew incompetence rather than conceding a victory to the much-feared gun galleys.\nDominic Fontana, a geographer at the University of Portsmouth, has voiced support for du Bellay's version of the sinking, based on the battle as it is depicted in the Cowdray Engraving and modern GIS analysis of the scene of the battle. By plotting the fleets and calculating the conjectured final manoeuvres of the \"Mary Rose\", Fontana reached the conclusion that the ship had been hit low in the hull by the galleys and was destabilised after taking in water. He has interpreted the final heading of the ship straight due north as a failed attempt to reach the shallows at Spitbank only a few hundred metres away. This theory has been given partial support by Alexzandra Hildred, one of the experts who has worked with the \"Mary Rose\", though she has suggested that the close proximity to Spitbank could also indicate that the sinking occurred while trying to make a hard turn to avoid running aground.\nExperiments.\nIn 2000, the Channel 4 television programme \"What Sank the Mary Rose?\" attempted to investigate the causes suggested for her sinking by means of experiments with scale models of the ship and metal weights to simulate the presence of troops on the upper decks. Initial tests showed that the ship was able to make the turn described by eyewitnesses without capsizing. In later tests, a fan was used to create a breeze similar to the one reported to have suddenly sprung up on the day of the sinking as the \"Mary Rose\" went to make the turn. As the model made the turn, the breeze in the upper works forced it to heel more than at calm, forcing the main deck gun ports below the waterline and foundering the model within a few seconds. The sequence of events closely followed what eyewitnesses had reported, particularly the suddenness with which the ship sank.\nHistory as a shipwreck.\nA salvage attempt was ordered by Secretary of State William Paget only days after the sinking, and Charles Brandon, the king's brother-in-law, took charge of practical details. The operation followed the standard procedure for raising ships in shallow waters: strong cables were attached to the sunken ship and fastened to two empty ships, or hulks. At low tide, the ropes were pulled taut with capstans. When the high tide came in, the hulks rose and with them the wreck. It would then be towed into shallower water and the procedure repeated until the whole ship could be raised completely.\nA list of necessary equipment was compiled by 1 August and included, among other things, massive cables, capstans, pulleys, and 40 pounds of tallow for lubrication. The proposed salvage team comprised 30 Venetian mariners and a Venetian carpenter with 60 English sailors to serve them. The two ships to be used as hulks were \"Jesus of L\u00fcbeck\" and \"Samson\", each of 700\u00a0tons burthen and similar in size to the \"Mary Rose\". Brandon was so confident of success that he reassured the king that it would only be a matter of days before they could raise the \"Mary Rose\". The optimism proved unfounded. Since the ship had settled at a 60-degree angle to starboard much of her was stuck deep into the clay of the seabed. This made it virtually impossible to pass cables under the hull and required far more lifting power than if the ship had settled on a hard seabed. An attempt to secure cables to the main mast appears only to have resulted in its being snapped off.\nThe project was successful only in raising rigging, some guns and other items. At least two other salvage teams in 1547 and 1549 received payment for raising more guns from the wreck. Despite the failure of the first salvage operation, there was still lingering belief in the possibility of retrieving the \"Mary Rose\" at least until 1546, when she was presented as part of the illustrated list of English warships called the Anthony Roll. When all hope of raising the complete ship was finally abandoned is not known. It could have been after Henry VIII's death in January 1547 or even as late as 1549, when the last guns were brought up. The \"Mary Rose\" was remembered well into the reign of Elizabeth\u00a0I, and according to one of the queen's admirals, William Monson (1569\u20131643), the wreck was visible from the surface at low tide in the late 16th century.\nDeterioration.\nAfter the sinking, the partially buried wreck created a barrier at a right angle against the currents of the Solent. Two scour pits, large underwater ditches, formed on either side of the wreck while silt and seaweed was deposited inside the ship. A deep but narrow pit formed on the upward tilting port side, while a shallower, broader pit formed on the starboard side, which had been mostly buried by the force of the impact. The abrasive actions of sand and silt carried by the currents and the activity of fungi, bacteria and wood-boring crustaceans and molluscs, such as the \"teredo\" \"shipworm\", began to break down the structure of the ship. Eventually the exposed wooden structure was weakened and gradually collapsed. The timbers and contents of the port side were either deposited in the scour pits and remaining ship structure or carried off by the currents. Following the collapse of the exposed parts of the ship, the site was levelled with the seabed and gradually covered by layers of sediment, concealing most of the remaining structure. During the 16th century, a hard layer of compacted clay and crushed shells formed over the ship, stabilising the site and sealing the Tudor-era deposits. Further layers of soft silt covered the site during the 18th and 19th centuries, but frequent changes in the tidal patterns and currents in the Solent occasionally exposed some of the timbers, leading to its accidental rediscovery in 1836 and aiding in locating the wreck in 1971. After the ship had been raised it was determined that about 40% of the original structure had survived.\nRediscovery in 19th century.\nIn mid-1836, a group of five fishermen caught their nets on timbers protruding from the bottom of the Solent. They contacted a diver to help them remove the hindrance, and on 10 June, Henry Abbinett became the first person to see the \"Mary Rose\" in almost 300 years. Later, two other professional divers, John Deane and William Edwards, were employed. Using a recently invented rubber suit and metal diving helmet, Deane and Edwards began to examine the wreck and salvage items from it. Along with an assortment of timbers and wooden objects, including several longbows, they brought up several bronze and iron guns, which were sold to the Board of Ordnance for over \u00a3220. Initially, this caused a dispute between Deane (who had also brought in his brother Charles into the project), Abbinett and the fishermen who had hired them. The matter was eventually settled by allowing the fishermen a share of the proceeds from the sale of the first salvaged guns, while Deane received exclusive salvage rights at the expense of Abbinett. The wreck was soon identified as the \"Mary Rose\" from the inscriptions of one of the bronze guns manufactured in 1537.\nThe identification of the ship led to high public interest in the salvage operation and caused a great demand for the objects that were brought up. Though many of the objects could not be properly conserved at the time and subsequently deteriorated, many were documented with pencil sketches and watercolour drawings, which survive to this day. John Deane ceased working on the wreck in 1836, but returned in 1840 with new, more destructive methods. With the help of condemned bomb shells filled with gunpowder acquired from the Ordnance Board, he blasted his way into parts of the wreck. Fragments of bombs and traces of blasting craters were found during the modern excavations, but there was no evidence that Deane managed to penetrate the hard layer that had sealed off the Tudor levels. Deane reported retrieving a bilge pump and the lower part of the main mast, both of which would have been located inside the ship. The recovery of small wooden objects like longbows suggests that Deane did manage to penetrate the Tudor levels at some point, though this has been disputed by the excavation project leader Margaret Rule. Newspaper reports on Deane's diving operations in October 1840 report that the ship was clinker built, but since the sterncastle is the only part of the ship with this feature, an alternative explanation has been suggested: Deane did not penetrate the hard shelly layer that covered most of the ship, but managed only to get into remains of the sterncastle that today no longer exist. Despite the rough handling by Deane, the \"Mary Rose\" escaped the wholesale destruction by giant rakes and explosives that was the fate of other wrecks in the Solent (such as ).\nModern rediscovery.\nThe modern search for the \"Mary Rose\" was initiated by the Southsea branch of the British Sub-Aqua Club in 1965 as part of a project to locate shipwrecks in the Solent. The project was under the leadership of historian, journalist and amateur diver Alexander McKee. Another group led by Lieutenant-Commander Alan Bax of the Royal Navy, sponsored by the Committee for Nautical Archaeology in London, also formed a search team. Initially the two teams had differing views on where to find the wreck, but eventually joined forces. In February 1966 a chart from 1841 was found that marked the positions of the \"Mary Rose\" and several other wrecks. The charted position coincided with a trench (one of the scour pits) that had already been located by McKee's team, and a definite location was finally established at a position south of the entrance to Portsmouth Harbour () in water with a depth of 11 m (36\u00a0feet) at low tide. Diving on the site began in 1966 and a sonar scan by Harold Edgerton in 1967\u201368 revealed some type of buried feature. In 1970 a loose timber was located and on 5 May 1971, the first structural details of the buried hull were identified after they were partially uncovered by winter storms.\nA major problem for the team from the start was that wreck sites in the UK lacked any legal protection from plunderers and treasure hunters. Sunken ships, once being moving objects, were legally treated as chattel and were awarded to those who could first raise them. The Merchant Shipping Act 1894 also stipulated that any objects raised from a wreck should be auctioned off to finance the salvage operations, and there was nothing preventing anyone from \"stealing\" the wreck and making a profit. The problem was handled by forming an organisation, the Mary Rose Committee, aiming \"to find, excavate, raise and preserve for all time such remains of the ship \"Mary Rose\" as may be of historical or archaeological interest\".\nTo keep intruders at bay, the committee arranged a lease of the seabed where the wreck lay from the Portsmouth authorities, thereby discouraging anyone from trespassing on the underwater property. In hindsight this was only a legalistic charade which had little chance of holding up in a court of law. In combination with secrecy as to the exact location of the wreck, it saved the project from interference. It was not until the passing of the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973 on 5 February 1973 that the \"Mary Rose\" was declared to be of national historic interest that enjoyed full legal protection from any disturbance by commercial salvage teams. Despite this, years after the passing of the 1973 act and the excavation of the ship, lingering conflicts with salvage legislation remained a threat to the \"Mary Rose\" project as \"personal\" finds such as chests, clothing and cooking utensils risked being confiscated and auctioned off.\nSurvey and excavation.\nFollowing the discovery of the wreck in 1971, the project became known to the general public and received increasing media attention. This helped bring in more donations and equipment, primarily from private sources. By 1974 the committee had representatives from the National Maritime Museum, the Royal Navy, the BBC and local organisations. In 1974 the project received royal patronage from Prince Charles, who participated in dives on the site. This attracted yet more publicity, and also more funding and assistance. The initial aims of the Mary Rose Committee were now more officially and definitely confirmed. The committee had become a registered charity in 1974, which made it easier to raise funds, and the application for excavation and raising of the ship had been officially approved by the UK government.\nBy 1978 the initial excavation work had uncovered a complete and coherent site with an intact ship structure and the orientation of the hull had been positively identified as being on an almost straight northerly heading with a 60-degree heel to starboard and a slight downward tilt towards the bow. As no records of English shipbuilding techniques used in vessels like the \"Mary Rose\" survive, excavation of the ship would allow for a detailed survey of her design and shed new light on the construction of ships of the era. A full excavation also meant removing the protective layers of silt that prevented the remaining ship structure from being destroyed through biological decay and the scouring of the currents; the operation had to be completed within a predetermined timespan of a few years or it risked irreversible damage. It was also considered desirable to recover and preserve the remains of the hull if possible. For the first time, the project was faced with the practical difficulties of actually raising, conserving and preparing the hull for public display.\nTo handle this new, considerably more complex and expensive task, it was decided that a new organisation was needed. The Mary Rose Trust, a limited charitable trust, with representatives from many organisations would handle the need for a larger operation and a large infusion of funds. In 1979 a new diving vessel was purchased to replace the previous catamaran \"Roger Greenville\" which had been used from 1971. The choice fell on the salvage vessel \"Sleipner\", the same craft that had been used as a platform for diving operations on the \"Vasa\". The project went from a team of only twelve volunteers working four months a year to over 50 individuals working almost around the clock nine months a year. In addition, there were over 500 volunteer divers and a laboratory staff of about 70 that ran the shore base and conservation facilities. During the four diving seasons from 1979 to 1982 over 22,000 diving hours were spent on the site, an effort that amounted to 11.8 man-years.\nRaising the ship.\nRaising the \"Mary Rose\" meant overcoming delicate problems that had never been encountered before. The raising of the Swedish warship \"Vasa\" during 1959\u201361 was the only comparable precedent, but it had been a relatively straightforward operation since the hull was completely intact and rested upright on the seabed. It had been raised with basically the same methods as were in use in Tudor England: cables were slung under the hull and attached to two pontoons on either side of the ship which was then gradually raised and towed into shallower waters. Only one-third of the \"Mary Rose\" was intact and she lay deeply embedded in mud. If the hull were raised in the conventional way, there was no guarantee that it would have enough structural strength to hold together out of water. Many suggestions for raising the ship were discarded, including the construction of a cofferdam around the wreck site, filling the ship with small buoyant objects (such as ping-pong balls) or even pumping brine into the seabed and freezing it so that it would float and take the hull with it. After lengthy discussions it was decided in February 1980 that the hull would first be emptied of all its contents and strengthened with steel braces and frames. It would then be lifted to the surface with floating sheerlegs attached to nylon strops passing under the hull and transferred to a cradle. It was also decided that the ship would be recovered before the end of the diving season in 1982. If the wreck stayed uncovered any longer it risked irreversible damage from biological decay and tidal scouring.\nDuring the last year of the operation, the massive scope of full excavation and raising was beginning to take its toll on those closely involved in the project. In May 1981, Alexander McKee voiced concerns about the method chosen for raising the timbers and openly questioned Margaret Rule's position as excavation leader. McKee felt ignored in what he viewed as a project where he had always played a central role, both as the initiator of the search for the \"Mary Rose\" and other ships in the Solent, and as an active member throughout the diving operations. He had several supporters who all pointed to the risk of the project's turning into an embarrassing failure if the ship were damaged during raising operations. To address these concerns it was suggested that the hull should be placed on top of a supporting steel cradle underwater. This would avoid the inherent risks of damaging the wooden structure if it were lifted out of the water without appropriate support. The idea of using nylon strops was also discarded in favour of drilling holes through the hull at 170 points and passing iron bolts through them to allow the attachment of wires connected to a lifting frame.\nIn the spring of 1982, after three intense seasons of archaeological underwater work, preparations began for raising the ship. The operation soon ran into problems: early on there were difficulties with the custom-made lifting equipment; the method of lifting the hull had to be considerably altered as late as June. Divers from the Royal Engineers were brought in to do much of the underwater work. After the frame was properly attached to the hull, it was slowly jacked up on four legs to pull the ship off the seabed. The massive crane of the barge \"Tog Mor\" then moved the frame and hull, transferring them underwater to the specially designed cradle, which was padded with water-filled bags. On the morning of 11 October 1982, the final lift of the entire package of cradle, hull and lifting frame began. It was watched by the team, Prince Charles and other spectators in boats around the site. At 9:03 am, the first timbers of the \"Mary Rose\" broke the surface. A second set of bags under the hull was inflated with air, to cushion the waterlogged wood. Finally, the whole package was placed on a barge and taken to the shore. Though eventually successful, the operation was close to foundering on two occasions; first when one of the supporting legs of the lifting frame was bent and had to be removed and later when a corner of the frame, with \"an unforgettable crunch\", slipped more than a metre (3\u00a0feet) and came close to crushing part of the hull.\nArchaeology.\nAs one of the most ambitious and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology, the \"Mary Rose\" project broke new ground within this field in the UK. Besides becoming one of the first wrecks to be protected under the new Protection of Wrecks Act in 1973 it also created several new precedents. It was the first time that a British privately funded project was able to apply modern scientific standards fully and without having to auction off part of the findings to finance its activities; where previous projects often had to settle for just a partial recovery of finds, everything found in connection with the \"Mary Rose\" was recovered and recorded. The raising of the vessel made it possible to establish the first historic shipwreck museum in the UK to receive government accreditation and funding. The excavation of the \"Mary Rose\" wreck site proved that it was possible to achieve a level of exactness in underwater excavations comparable to those on dry land.\nThroughout the 1970s, the \"Mary Rose\" was meticulously surveyed, excavated and recorded with the latest methods within the field of maritime archaeology. Working in an underwater environment meant that principles of land-based archaeology did not always apply. Mechanical excavators, airlifts and suction dredges were used in the process of locating the wreck, but as soon as it began to be uncovered in earnest, more delicate techniques were employed. Many objects from the \"Mary Rose\" had been well preserved in form and shape, but many were quite delicate, requiring careful handling. Artefacts of all sizes were supported with soft packing material, such as old plastic ice cream containers, and some of the arrows that were \"soft like cream cheese\" had to be brought up in special styrofoam containers. The airlifts that sucked up clay, sand and dirt off-site or to the surface were still used, but with much greater precision since they could potentially disrupt the site. The many layers of sediment that had accumulated on the site could be used to date artefacts in which they were found, and had to be recorded properly. The various types of accretions and remnants of chemicals with artefacts were essential clues to objects that had long since broken down and disappeared, and needed to be treated with considerable care.\nThe excavation and raising of the ship in the 1970s and early 1980s meant that diving operations ceased, even though modern scaffolding and part of the bow were left on the seabed. The pressure on conservators to treat tens of thousands of artefacts and the high costs of conserving, storing and displaying the finds and the ship meant that there were no funds available for diving. In 2002, the UK Ministry of Defence announced plans to build two new aircraft carriers. Because of the great size of the new vessels, the outlet from Portsmouth needed to be surveyed to make sure that they could sail no matter the tide. The planned route for the underwater channel ran close to the \"Mary Rose\" wrecksite, which meant that funding was supplied to survey and excavate the site once more. Even though the planned carriers were downsized enough not to require alteration of Portsmouth outlet, the excavations had already exposed timbers and were completed in 2005. Among the most important finds was the ten-metre (32\u00a0feet) stem, the forward continuation of the keel, which provided more exact details about the original profile of the ship.\nFinds.\nOver 26,000 artefacts and pieces of timber were raised along with remains of about half the crew members. The faces of some crew members have been reconstructed. Analysis of the crew skeletons shows many had suffered malnutrition, and had evidence of rickets, scurvy, and other deficiency diseases. Crew members also developed arthritis through the stresses on their joints from heavy lifting and maritime life generally, and suffered bone fractures.\nAs the ship was intended to function as a floating, self-contained community, she was stocked with victuals (food and drink) that could sustain her inhabitants for extended periods of time. The casks used for storage on the \"Mary Rose\" have been compared with those from a Basque whale ship wrecked in Red Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador c.\u20091565. and have revealed that they were of better quality, more robust and reliable, an indication that supplies for the Tudor navy were given high priority, and their requirements set a high standard for cask manufacturing at the time.\nAs a miniature society at sea, the wreck of the \"Mary Rose\" held personal objects belonging to individual crew members. This included clothing, games, various items for spiritual or recreational use, and objects related to mundane everyday tasks such as personal hygiene, fishing, and sewing. The master carpenter's chest, for example, contained an early backgammon set, a book, three plates, a sundial, and a tankard, goods suggesting he was relatively wealthy.\nThe ship carried several skilled craftsmen and was equipped for handling both routine maintenance and repairing extensive battle damage. In and around one of the cabins on the main deck under the sterncastle, archaeologists found a \"collection of woodworking tools\u00a0... unprecedented in its range and size\", consisting of eight chests of carpentry tools. Along with loose mallets and tar pots used for caulking, this variety of tools belonged to one or several of the carpenters employed on the \"Mary Rose\".\nMany of the cannons and other weapons from the \"Mary Rose\" have provided invaluable physical evidence about 16th-century weapon technology. The surviving gunshields are almost all from the \"Mary Rose\", and the four small cast iron hailshot pieces are the only known examples of this type of weapon.\nAnimal remains have been found in the wreck of the \"Mary Rose\". These include the skeletons of a rat, a frog and a dog. The dog, an English Toy Terrier (Black &amp; Tan), was between eighteen months and two years in age, was found near the hatch to the ship's carpenter's cabin and is presumed to have been brought aboard as a ratter. Nine barrels have been found to contain bones of cattle, indicating that they contained pieces of beef butchered and stored as ship's rations. The bones of pigs and fish, stored in baskets, have also been found.\nMusical instruments.\nTwo fiddles, a bow, a still shawm or \"dou\u00e7aine\", three three-hole pipes, and a tabor drum with a drumstick were found throughout the wreck. These would have been used for the personal enjoyment of the crew and to provide a rhythm to work on the rigging and turning the capstans on the upper decks. The tabor drum is the earliest known example of its kind and the drumstick is of a previously unknown design. The tabor pipes are considerably longer than any known examples from the period. Their discovery proved that contemporary illustrations, previously viewed with some suspicion, were accurate depictions of the instruments. Before the discovery of the \"Mary Rose\" shawm, an early predecessor to the oboe, instrument historians had been puzzled by references to \"still shawms\", or \"soft\" shawms, that were said to have a sound that was less shrill than earlier shawms. The still shawm disappeared from the musical scene in the 16th century, and the instrument found on the \"Mary Rose\" is the only surviving example. A reproduction has been made and played. Combined with a pipe and tabor, it provides a \"very effective bass part\" that would have produced \"rich and full sound, which would have provided excellent music for dancing on board ship\". Only a few other fiddle-type instruments from the 16th century exist, but none of them of the type found on the \"Mary Rose\". Reproductions of both fiddles have been made, though less is known of their design than the shawm since the neck and strings were missing.\nNavigation tools.\nIn the remains of a small cabin in the bow of the ship and in a few other locations around the wreck was found the earliest dated set of navigation instruments in Europe found so far: compasses, divider calipers, a stick used for charting, protractors, sounding leads, tide calculators and a logreel, an instrument for calculating speed. Several of these objects are not only unique in having such an early, definite dating, but also because they pre-date written records of their use; protractors would have reasonably been used to measure bearings and courses on maps, but sea charts are not known to have been used by English navigators during the first half of the 16th century, compasses were not depicted on English ships until the 1560s, and the first mention of a logreel is from 1574.\nBarber-surgeon's cabin.\nThe cabin located on the main deck underneath the sterncastle is thought to have belonged to the barber-surgeon. He was a trained professional who saw to the health and welfare of the crew and acted as the medical expert on board. The most important of these finds were found in an intact wooden chest which contained over 60 objects relating to the barber-surgeon's medical practice: the wooden handles of a complete set of surgical tools and several shaving razors (although none of the steel blades had survived), a copper syringe for wound irrigation and treatment of gonorrhoea, and even a skilfully crafted feeding bottle for feeding incapacitated patients. More objects were found around the cabin, such as earscoops, shaving bowls and combs. With this wide selection of tools and medicaments the barber-surgeon, along with one or more assistants, could set bone fractures, perform amputations and deal with other acute injuries, treat a number of diseases and provide crew members with a minimal standard of personal hygiene.\nHatch.\nOne of the first scientifically confirmed ratters was a terrier and whippet dog crossbreed who spent his short life on the Mary Rose. The dog, named Hatch by researchers, was discovered in 1981 during the underwater excavation of the ship. Hatch's main duty was to kill rats on board the ship. Based on the DNA work performed on Hatch's teeth, he was a young adult male, 18\u201324 months old, with a brown coat. Hatch's skeleton is on display in the Mary Rose Museum in Portsmouth Historic Dockyard.\nConservation.\nPreservation of the \"Mary Rose\" and her contents was an essential part of the project from the start. Though many artefacts, especially those that were buried in silt, had been preserved, the long exposure to an underwater environment had rendered most of them sensitive to exposure to air after recovery. Archaeologists and conservators had to work in tandem from the start to prevent deterioration of the artefacts. After recovery, finds were placed in so-called passive storage, which would prevent any immediate deterioration before the active conservation which would allow them to be stored in an open-air environment. Passive storage depended on the type of material that the object was made of, and could vary considerably. Smaller objects from the most common material, wood, were sealed in polyethylene bags to preserve moisture. Timbers and other objects that were too large to be wrapped were stored in unsealed water tanks. Growth of fungi and microbes that could degrade wood were controlled by various techniques, including low-temperature storage, chemicals, and in the case of large objects, common pond snails that consumed wood-degrading organisms but not the wood itself.\nOther organic materials such as leather, skin and textiles were treated similarly, by keeping them moist in tanks or sealed plastic containers. Bone and ivory was desalinated to prevent damage from salt crystallisation, as were glass, ceramic and stone. Iron, copper and copper alloy objects were kept moist in a sodium sesquicarbonate solution to prevent oxidisation and reaction with the chlorides that had penetrated the surface. Alloys of lead and pewter are inherently stable in the atmosphere and generally require no special treatment. Silver and gold were the only materials that required no special passive storage.\nConserving the hull of the \"Mary Rose\" was the most complicated and expensive task for the project. In 2002 a donation of \u00a34.8 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund and equivalent monetary support from the Portsmouth City and Hampshire County Councils was needed to keep the work with conservation on schedule. During passive conservation, the ship structure could for practical reasons not be completely sealed, so instead it was regularly sprayed with filtered, recycled water that was kept at a temperature of to keep it from drying out. Drying waterlogged wood that has been submerged for several centuries without appropriate conservation causes considerable shrinkage (20\u201350%) and leads to severe warping and cracking as water evaporates from the cellular structure of the wood. The substance polyethylene glycol (PEG) had been used before on archaeological wood, and was during the 1980s being used to conserve the \"Vasa\". After almost ten years of small-scale trials on timbers, an active three-phase conservation programme of the hull of the \"Mary Rose\" began in 1994. During the first phase, which lasted from 1994 to 2003, the wood was sprayed with low-molecular-weight PEG to replace the water in the cellular structure of the wood. From 2003 to 2010, a higher-molecular-weight PEG was used to strengthen the mechanical properties of the outer surface layers. The third phase consisted of a controlled air drying ending in 2016. Researchers are planning on using magnetic nanoparticles to remove iron in the ship's wood to reduce the production of harmful sulfuric acid that is causing deterioration.\nThe wreck site is legally protected. Under the \"Protection of Wrecks Act 1973\" (1973 c. 33) any interference with the site requires a licence. The site is listed as being of \"historical, archaeological or artistic importance\" by Historic England.\nDisplay.\nAfter the decision to raise the \"Mary Rose,\" discussions ensued as to where she would eventually go on permanent display. The east end of Portsea Island at Eastney emerged as an early alternative, but was rejected because of parking problems and the distance from the dockyard where she was originally built. Placing the ship next to the famous flagship of Horatio Nelson, HMS \"Victory\", at Portsmouth Historic Dockyard was proposed in July 1981. A group called the Maritime Preservation Society even suggested Southsea Castle, where Henry\u00a0VIII had witnessed the sinking, as a final resting place and there was widespread scepticism to the dockyard location. At one point a county councillor even threatened to withdraw promised funds if the dockyard site became more than an interim solution. As costs for the project mounted, there was a debate in the Council chamber and in the local paper \"The News\" as to whether the money could be spent more appropriately. Although author David Childs writes that in the early 1980s \"the debate was as a fiery one\", the project was never seriously threatened because of the great symbolic importance of the \"Mary Rose\" to the naval history of both Portsmouth and England.\nSince the mid-1980s, the hull of the \"Mary Rose\" has been kept in a covered dry dock while undergoing conservation. Although the hull has been open to the public for viewing, the need for keeping the ship saturated first with water and later a polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution meant that, before 2013, visitors were separated from the hull by a glass barrier. By 2007, the specially built ship hall had been visited by over seven million visitors since it first opened on 4 October 1983, just under a year after the wreck was successfully raised.\nA separate Mary Rose Museum was housed in a structure called No. 5 Boathouse near the ship hall and was opened to the public on 9 July 1984, containing displays explaining the history of the ship and a small number of conserved artefacts, from entire bronze cannons to household items. In September 2009 the temporary \"Mary Rose\" display hall was closed to visitors to facilitate construction of the new \u00a335 million museum building, which opened to the public on 31 May 2013.\nThe new Mary Rose Museum was designed by architects Wilkinson Eyre, Perkins+Will and built by construction firm Warings. The construction has been challenging because the museum has been built over the ship in the dry dock which is a listed monument. During construction of the museum, conservation of the hull continued inside a sealed \"hotbox\". In April 2013 the polyethylene glycol sprays were turned off and the process of controlled airdrying began. In 2016 the \"hotbox\" was removed and for the first time since 1545, the ship was revealed dry. This new museum displays most of the artefacts recovered from within the ship in context with the conserved hull. As of 2018, the new museum has been visited by over 1.8 million people, and saw 189,702 visitors in 2019.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19680", "revid": "14264656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19680", "title": "Mario Kart", "text": "Video game series by Nintendo\n is a series of kart racing games based on the \"Mario\" franchise developed and published by Nintendo. Players compete in go-kart races while using various power-up items. It features characters from the \"Mario\" series racing along tracks from the \"Mario\" universe. Some releases have also included characters from other popular franchises like \"Pac-Man\", \"The Legend of Zelda\", \"Animal Crossing\", and \"Splatoon\".\nThe series was launched in 1992 with \"Super Mario Kart\" on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES), to critical and commercial success. The \"Mario Kart\" series totals seventeen games, with eight on home consoles, three on handheld-only consoles, five arcade games co-developed with Namco, and one for mobile phones. Over 189 million copies of the series have been sold worldwide.\n\"Mario Kart 8\", released on the Wii U in 2014 and ported to the Nintendo Switch in 2017, is one of the best-selling video games, at 76.66 million sold for both versions. \"\", a mixed reality game, was released on the Switch in October 2020. The newest installment, \"Mario Kart World\", was released as a launch game on the Nintendo Switch 2 on June 5, 2025.\nGameplay.\nIn the \"Mario Kart\" series, players compete in go-kart races, controlling one of a selection of \"Mario\" characters. Up to 24 characters can compete in each race (varying per game). Players can perform driving techniques during the race such as rocket starts, slipstreaming, drifting and mini-turbos.\nGameplay is enhanced by power-up items obtained by driving into item boxes laid out on the course. These power-ups vary across games in the series, but generally include Mushrooms to give players a speed boost, Red/Green Shells to be thrown at opponents, Banana Peels and hazards such as Fake Item Boxes. The game selects an item based on the player's current position in the race, utilising a mechanism known as rubber banding. For example, players lagging far behind may receive more powerful items such as Bullet Bills, which give the player invincibility while auto-piloting them forward at great speed, while the leader of a race may only receive small defensive items, such as Shells or Bananas. This gameplay mechanism allows other racers a realistic chance to catch up to the leading racer. In the original game, \"Super Mario Kart\", the player takes control one of the eight \"Mario\" series characters, each with differing capabilities. In single player mode, players can race against computer-controlled characters in 4 multi-race cups consisting of 20 tracks (5 in each cup) over three difficulty levels (50cc, 100cc and 150cc). Alternatively, players can race against the clock in a Time Trial mode. In multiplayer mode, two players can simultaneously take part in the cups or can race against each other one-on-one in Match Race mode. In a third multiplayer mode \u2013 Battle Mode \u2013 the aim is to defeat the other players by attacking them with power-ups, destroying balloons which surround each kart.\nEach new game has introduced new gameplay elements, such as new circuits, items, modes, and playable characters.\nModes.\nEach game has a variety of modes. The following five modes recur most often in the series:\nDevelopment.\nThe debut game in the \"Mario Kart\" series was \"Super Mario Kart\" released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) in 1992. Its development was overseen by \"Mario\" creator Shigeru Miyamoto, the Japanese designer of many successful Nintendo games including \"Super Mario Bros.\" Darran Jones of NowGamer suggests that the success of \"Super Mario Kart\" resulted from the \"Super Mario\" characters, and being a new type of racing game.\nGames.\nConsole.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Video game titles/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReception.\nThe \"Mario Kart\" series is critically acclaimed. \"Nintendo Power\" named it one of the greatest multiplayer experiences, citing the diversity in game modes and the entertainment value. The first game in the series, \"Super Mario Kart,\" received critical acclaim and proved to be a commercial success; it received a Player's Choice release after selling one million copies and went on to sell 8.76 million copies worldwide, becoming the fourth best-selling game ever for the SNES. In Japan, it was the top-selling game in September 1992 and became a multi-million seller in 1992, eventually selling a total of 3.82 million in Japan. In Europe, it was the top-selling game during the first quarter of 1993, above the Sega Mega Drive titles \"Sonic the Hedgehog 2\" and \"Streets of Rage 2\" during the same period. In the United Kingdom, \"Super Mario Kart\" was the top-selling Super NES game in February 1993, and it went on to be the seventh best-selling game of 1993 with more than 250,000 sales in the country.\nThe second game in the series, \"Mario Kart 64,\" received \"generally favorable\" reviews according to the review aggregator website Metacritic. The game was commercially successful, selling 9.87\u00a0million copies worldwide\u2014the second-bestselling game on the N64. It was the highest selling game in the United States over the first three months of 1997, and reached over one million sales within two months of its release in the region. By 1999, \"Mario Kart 64\" had sold 6.23\u00a0million copies in the United States and 2.06\u00a0million units in Japan, the highest and third-highest selling N64 game in those regions respectively.\nAlthough \"Super Circuit\" received critical acclaim upon launch, retrospectively, \"Super Circuit\" ranks low on retrospective critics' lists of the best \"Mario Kart\" games, and \"Nintendo World Report\" said it was the \"Mario Kart\" game with the \"fewest innovations\". Critics blamed this on the hardware limitations of the GBA; \"GamesRadar\" said that the scarcity of the Link Cable made \"Super Circuit\"'s multiplayer experience less memorable than other \"Mario Kart\" games. \"Kotaku\" described \"Super Circuit\" as \"lost\", unable to live up to the technically pioneering releases of \"Super Mario Kart\" and \"64\" because of the GBA's hardware. Nonetheless, critics rank \"Super Circuit\" among the best GBA games.\nThe fourth game in the series, \"Mario Kart: Double Dash,\" received \"generally favorable\" reviews from critics according to review aggregator website Metacritic. \"Nintendo Power\" gave the game a perfect score, and said the graphics were of \"3-D perfection\" and the controls and game mechanics \"rival those of any [GameCube] racing game\". Although the initial positive reviews, \"Double Dash\" has received criticism from the media. Considering the 7-year gap since \"Mario Kart 64\", Davis from GameSpot stated that he was \"a little disappointed with the limited scope [of \"Double Dash\"\"]. Mirabella of IGN was critical towards \"Double Dash\" for not progressing beyond its predecessor, calling the game a \"mediocre effort\". G-Wok of \"GameRevolution\" criticized the game's single-player mode for lacking substance and the track design for being \"bland\".\n\"Guinness World Records\" listed six records set by the \"Mario Kart\" series, including \"First Console Kart Racing Game\", \"Best Selling Racing Game\", and \"Longest Running Kart Racing Franchise\". \"Guinness World Records\" ranked \"Super Mario Kart\" number 1 of the top 50 console games of all time based on initial impact and lasting legacy. \"Super Mario Kart\" was inducted into the World Video Game Hall of Fame in 2019.\nSales.\nLike the \"Super Mario\" series, the \"Mario Kart\" series is a commercial success with 196 million copies sold in total. It is currently the most successful racing game franchise of all time. \"Super Mario Kart\" is the fourth-best-selling Super Nintendo Entertainment System game with 8.76 million copies sold. \"Mario Kart 64\" is the second-best-selling game for the Nintendo 64 (behind \"Super Mario 64\"), at 9.87 million copies. \"\" is the second-best-selling GameCube game (next to \"Super Smash Bros. Melee\") with 6.96 million copies sold. \"Mario Kart Wii\" is the second-best-selling in the series and is the second-best-selling Wii game (next to \"Wii Sports\") at 37.38 million copies. \"Mario Kart 8\" is the best-selling Wii U game at 8.46 million total copies sold. It was the fastest-selling Wii U game with 1.2 million copies shipped in North America and Europe combined on its first few days since launch, until \"Super Smash Bros. for Wii U\". The enhanced port for the Nintendo Switch, \"Mario Kart 8 Deluxe\", is the fastest-selling game in the series with 459,000 units sold in the United States in one day of its launch. It is the highest-selling Nintendo Switch game with a total of 69.56 million copies worldwide, outperforming the Wii U version. Both versions have a combined total of 78.02 million copies sold, making it the best-selling game in the series across regular and handheld consoles, and also the best selling \"Mario\" game as a whole. Additionally, the game holds the title of being the highest selling Nintendo game, excluding \"Wii Sports\" due to being bundled with the Wii. Upon its release on the Nintendo Switch 2, \"Mario Kart World\" became the fastest-selling game in the series in Japan, as well as the best-selling game on the Switch 2 in Japan, selling 782,566 physical units within the first four days. As of September 30, 2025, the game sold 9.57 million copies worldwide.\nThe handheld games were commercial successes too: \"\" is the fourth-best-selling Game Boy Advance game at 5.9 million copies. The second portable game, \"Mario Kart DS\", is the third-best-selling Nintendo DS game and the best-selling portable game in the series with a total of 23.6 million copies. \"Mario Kart 7\" is the best-selling Nintendo 3DS game as of March 2023 at 18.98 million copies.\nLegacy.\nMerchandise.\nThe \"Mario Kart\" series has had a range of merchandise. This includes a slot car racer series based on \"Mario Kart DS\": one set of which comes with Mario and Donkey Kong figures, with Wario and Luigi available separately. A line of radio-controlled karts are controlled by Game Boy Advance-shaped controllers, and feature Mario, Donkey Kong, and Yoshi. There are additional, larger karts which are radio-controlled by a GameCube-shape controller. Many racer figurines have been made. Sound Drops were inspired by \"Mario Kart Wii\" with eight sounds including the Spiny Shell and the race start countdown. A landline telephone features Mario holding a lightning bolt while seated in his kart. K'Nex released \"Mario Kart Wii\", \"Mario Kart 7\", and \"Mario Kart 8\" sets. Line released an animated sticker set with 24 stickers based on \"Mario Kart 8\" and \"Mario Kart 8 Deluxe\". Nintendo's customer rewards program, Club Nintendo, released a \"Mario Kart 8\" soundtrack, a \"Mario Kart Wii\"-themed stopwatch, and three gold trophies modeled after those in \"Mario Kart 7\". Before Club Nintendo, a \"Mario Kart 64\" soundtrack was offered by mail. In 2014, McDonald's released \"Mario Kart 8\" toys with Happy Meals. In 2018, \"Monopoly Gamer\" features a \"Mario Kart\" themed board game with courses from \"Mario Kart 8\" serving as properties, ten playable characters as tokens (Mario, Luigi, Peach, Toad, Donkey Kong, Shy Guy, Metal Mario, Rosalina, Bowser, and Yoshi) and a special die with power-ups. In 2019, Hot Wheels released \"Mario Kart\" sets of cars and tracks. In commemoration of Mario Day celebrations for March 10, 2021, Hot Wheels also released a \"Mario Kart\" track set based on Rainbow Road on June 24, 2021. In 2020, for the \"Super Mario Bros.\" 35th Anniversary, Cold Stone Creamery released Mario themed desserts including a Rainbow Road themed ice cream cake, from September 30 to December 15.\nRental go-kart dispute.\nIn September 2016, Nintendo filed an objection against the Japanese company MariCar, which rents go-karts modified for use on public roads in Tokyo along with costumes resembling Nintendo characters. MariCar's English website warned customers not to throw \"banana peels\" or \"red turtle shells\". The service is popular with tourists.\nNintendo argued that the MariCar name was \"intended to be mistaken for or confused with\" \"Mario Kart\", citing games commonly known by abbreviations in Japan, such as \"Pok\u00e9mon\" (for \"Pocket Monsters\") and Sumabura (\"Super Smash Bros.\"). In January 2017, the Japan Patent Office dismissed the objection, ruling that MariCar was not widely recognized as an abbreviation of \"Mario Kart\".\nIn February 2017, Nintendo sued MariCar over copyright infringement for renting unauthorized costumes of Nintendo characters and using their images to promote its business. In September 2018, MariCar was ordered to stop using the characters and pay Nintendo \u00a510 million in damages.\nTheme park attraction.\nUniversal Destinations &amp; Experiences' immersive Super Nintendo World areas in Universal Studios Japan, Universal Studios Hollywood, and Universal Epic Universe feature the ride as their primary \"anchor\" attraction. Utilizing innovative augmented reality technology and dark ride set design, guests travel through several environments from \"Mario Kart 8\", including Rainbow Road. The Japan version of the attraction includes a \"Mario Kart\" themed shop called \"Mario Motors\", and a nearby \"Pit Stop Popcorn\" food stand.\nFormula E attack mode.\nStarting with its 2018\u201319 season, electric open wheel racing series Formula E added a so-called \"attack mode\", which allows a driver to gain a temporary speed boost if they take an alternate lane (highlighted on television via augmented reality computer graphics). The concept has been described by members of the press and by series CEO Alejandro Agag as inspired by \"Mario Kart\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19683", "revid": "18735866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19683", "title": "Module", "text": "Module, modular and modularity may refer to the concept of modularity. They may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19684", "revid": "29214748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19684", "title": "May 21", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMay 21 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19685", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19685", "title": "Mythology", "text": ""}
{"id": "19688", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19688", "title": "Mind map", "text": "Diagram to visually organize information\nA mind map is a diagram used to visually organize information into a hierarchy, showing relationships among pieces of the whole. It is often based on a single concept, drawn as an image in the center of a blank page, to which associated representations of ideas such as images, words and parts of words are added. Major ideas are connected directly to the central concept, and other ideas branch out from those major ideas.\nMind maps can also be drawn by hand, either as \"notes\" during a lecture, meeting or planning session, for example, or as higher quality pictures when more time is available. Mind maps are considered to be a type of spider diagram.\nOrigin.\nAlthough the term \"mind map\" was first popularized by British popular psychology author and television personality Tony Buzan, the use of diagrams that visually \"map\" information using branching and radial maps traces back centuries. These pictorial methods record knowledge and model systems, and have a long history in learning, brainstorming, memory, visual thinking, and problem solving by educators, engineers, psychologists, and others. Some of the earliest examples of such graphical records were developed by Porphyry of Tyros, a noted thinker of the 3rd century, as he graphically visualized the concept categories of Aristotle. Philosopher Ramon Llull (1235\u20131315) also used such techniques.\nBuzan's specific approach, and the introduction of the term \"mind map\", started with a 1974 BBC TV series he hosted, called \"Use Your Head\". In this show, and companion book series, Buzan promoted his conception of radial tree, diagramming key words in a colorful, radiant, tree-like structure.\nResearch.\nEffectiveness.\nCunningham (2005) conducted a user study in which 80% of the students thought \"mindmapping helped them understand concepts and ideas in science\". Other studies also report some subjective positive effects of the use of mind maps. Positive opinions on their effectiveness, however, were much more prominent among students of art and design than in students of computer and information technology, with 62.5% vs 34% (respectively) agreeing that they were able to understand concepts better with mind mapping software. Farrand, Hussain, and Hennessy (2002) found that spider diagrams (similar to concept maps) had limited, but significant, impact on memory recall in undergraduate students (a 10% increase over baseline for a 600-word text only) as compared to preferred study methods (a 6% increase over baseline). This improvement was only robust after a week for those in the diagram group and there was a significant decrease in motivation compared to the subjects' preferred methods of note taking. A meta study about concept mapping concluded that concept mapping is more effective than \"reading text passages, attending lectures, and participating in class discussions\". The same study also concluded that concept mapping is slightly more effective \"than other constructive activities such as writing summaries and outlines\". However, results were inconsistent, with the authors noting \"significant heterogeneity was found in most subsets\". In addition, they concluded that low-ability students may benefit more from mind mapping than high-ability students.\nFeatures.\nJoeran Beel and Stefan Langer conducted a comprehensive analysis of the content of mind maps. They analysed 19,379 mind maps from 11,179 users of the mind mapping applications (now ) and MindMeister. Results include that average users create only a few mind maps (mean=2.7), average mind maps are rather small (31 nodes) with each node containing about three words (median). However, there were exceptions. One user created more than 200 mind maps, the largest mind map consisted of more than 50,000 nodes and the largest node contained ~7,500 words. The study also showed that between different mind mapping applications (Docear vs MindMeister) significant differences exist related to how users create mind maps.\nAutomatic creation.\nThere have been some attempts to create mind maps automatically. Brucks &amp; Schommer created mind maps automatically from full-text streams. Rothenberger et al. extracted the main story of a text and presented it as mind map. There is also a patent application about automatically creating sub-topics in mind maps.\nTools.\nMind-mapping software can be used to organize large amounts of information, combining spatial organization, dynamic hierarchical structuring and node folding.Software packages can extend the concept of mind-mapping by allowing individuals to map more than thoughts and ideas with information on their computers and the Internet, like spreadsheets, documents, Internet sites, images and videos. It has been suggested that mind-mapping can improve learning/study efficiency up to 15% over conventional note-taking.\nGallery.\nThe following dozen examples of mind maps show the range of styles that a mind map may take, from hand-drawn to computer-generated and from mostly text to highly illustrated. Despite their stylistic differences, all of the examples share a tree structure that hierarchically connects sub-topics to a main topic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19689", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19689", "title": "Molecular mechanisms of memory", "text": ""}
{"id": "19690", "revid": "49951385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19690", "title": "Machine gun", "text": "Fully-automatic firearm\nA machine gun (MG) is a fully automatic and rifled firearm designed for sustained direct fire. Automatic firearms of caliber or more are classified as autocannons rather than machine guns.\nAs a class of military kinetic projectile weapons, machine guns are designed to be mainly used as infantry support weapons and generally used when attached to a bipod or tripod, a fixed mount or a heavy weapons platform for stability against recoil. Many machine guns also use belt feeding and open bolt operation, features not normally found on other infantry firearms.\nMachine guns can be further categorized as light machine guns, medium machine guns, heavy machine guns, general-purpose machine guns, and squad automatic weapons.\nModern overview.\nUnlike semi-automatic firearms, which require one trigger pull per round fired, a machine gun is designed to continue firing for as long as the trigger is held down. Nowadays, the term is restricted to relatively heavy crew-served weapons, able to provide continuous or frequent bursts of automatic fire for as long as ammunition feeding is replete. Machine guns are used against infantry, low-flying aircraft, small boats and lightly/unarmored land vehicles, and can provide suppressive fire (either directly or indirectly) or enforce area denial over a sector of land with grazing fire. They are commonly mounted on fast attack vehicles such as technicals to provide heavy mobile firepower, armored vehicles such as tanks for engaging targets too small to justify the use of the primary weaponry or too fast to effectively engage with it, and on aircraft as defensive armament or for strafing ground targets, though on fighter aircraft true machine guns have mostly been supplanted by large-caliber rotary guns.\nSome machine guns have in practice sustained fire almost continuously for hours; other automatic weapons overheat after less than a minute of use. Because they become very hot, the great majority of designs fire from an open bolt, to permit air cooling from the breech between bursts. They also usually have either a barrel cooling system, slow-heating heavyweight barrel, or removable barrels which allow a hot barrel to be replaced.\nAlthough subdivided into \"light\", \"medium\", \"heavy\" or \"general-purpose\", even the lightest machine guns tend to be substantially larger and heavier than standard infantry arms. Medium and heavy machine guns are either mounted on a tripod or on a vehicle; when carried on foot, the machine gun and associated equipment (tripod, ammunition, spare barrels) require additional crew members.\nLight machine guns are designed to provide mobile fire support to a squad and are typically air-cooled weapons fitted with a box magazine or drum and a bipod; they may use full-size rifle rounds, but modern examples often use intermediate rounds. Medium machine guns use full-sized rifle rounds and are designed to be used from fixed positions mounted on a tripod. The term \"heavy machine gun\" originated in World War I to describe heavyweight medium machine guns, and persisted into World War II with Japanese Hotchkiss M1914 clones; today, however, it is used to refer to automatic weapons with a caliber of at least , but less than . A general-purpose machine gun is usually a lightweight medium machine gun that can either be used with a bipod and drum in the light machine gun role or a tripod and belt feed in the medium machine gun role.\nMachine guns usually have simple iron sights, though the use of optics is becoming more common. A common aiming system for direct fire is to alternate solid (\"ball\") rounds and tracer ammunition rounds (usually one tracer round for every four ball rounds), so shooters can see the trajectory and \"walk\" the fire into the target, and direct the fire of other soldiers.\nMany heavy machine guns, such as the Browning M2 .50 BMG machine gun, are accurate enough to engage targets at great distances. During the Vietnam War, Carlos Hathcock set the record for a long-distance shot at with a .50 caliber heavy machine gun he had equipped with a telescopic sight. This led to the introduction of .50 caliber anti-materiel sniper rifles, such as the Barrett M82.\nOther automatic weapons are subdivided into several categories based on the size of the bullet used, whether the cartridge is fired from a closed bolt or an open bolt, and whether the action used is locked or is some form of blowback.\nFully automatic firearms using pistol-caliber ammunition are called machine pistols or submachine guns largely on the basis of size; those using shotgun cartridges are almost always referred to as automatic shotguns. The term personal defense weapon (PDW) is sometimes applied to weapons firing dedicated armor-piercing rounds which would otherwise be regarded as machine pistols or SMGs, but it is not particularly strongly defined and has historically been used to describe a range of weapons from ordinary SMGs to compact assault rifles. Selective-fire rifles firing a full-power rifle cartridge from a closed bolt are called automatic rifles or battle rifles, while rifles that fire an intermediate cartridge are called assault rifles.\nAssault rifles are a compromise between the size and weight of a pistol-caliber submachine gun and a full-size battle rifle, firing intermediate cartridges and allowing semi-automatic and burst or full-automatic fire options (selective fire), sometimes with both of the latter presents.\nOperation.\nMany machine guns are of the locked breech type, and follow this cycle:\nThe operation is basically the same for all locked breech automatic firearms, regardless of the means of activating these mechanisms. There are also multi-chambered formats, such as revolver cannon, and some types, such as the Schwarzlose machine gun etc., that do not lock the breech but instead use some type of delayed blowback.\nDesign.\nMost modern machine guns are of the locking type, and of these, most utilize the principle of gas-operated reloading, which taps off some of the propellant gas from the fired cartridge, using its mechanical pressure to unlock the bolt and cycle the action. The first of these was invented by the French brothers Claire, who patented a gas operated rifle, which included a gas cylinder, in 1892. The Russian PK machine gun is a more modern example. Another efficient and widely used format is the recoil actuated type, which uses the gun's recoil energy for the same purpose. Machine guns, such as the M2 Browning and MG42, are of this second kind. A cam, lever or actuator absorbs part of the energy of the recoil to operate the gun mechanism.\nAn externally actuated weapon uses an external power source, such as an electric motor or hand crank, to move its mechanism through the firing sequence. Modern weapons of this type are often referred to as Gatling guns, after the original inventor (not only of the well-known hand-cranked 19th century proto-machine gun, but also of the first electrically powered version). They have several barrels each with an associated chamber and action on a rotating carousel and a system of cams that load, cock, and fire each mechanism progressively as it rotates through the sequence; essentially each barrel is a separate bolt-action rifle using a common feed source. The continuous nature of the rotary action and its relative immunity to overheating allow for a very high cyclic rate of fire, often several thousand rounds per minute. Rotary guns are less prone to jamming than a gun operated by gas or recoil, as the external power source will eject misfired rounds with no further trouble; but this is not possible in the rare cases of self-powered rotary guns. Rotary designs are intrinsically comparatively bulky and expensive and are therefore generally used with large rounds, 20\u00a0mm in diameter or more, often referred to as rotary cannon \u2013 though the rifle-calibre Minigun is an exception to this. Whereas such weapons are highly reliable and formidably effective, one drawback is that the weight and size of the power source and driving mechanism makes them usually impractical for use outside of a vehicle or aircraft mount.\nRevolver cannons, such as the Mauser MK 213, were developed in World War II by the Germans to provide high-caliber cannons with a reasonable rate of fire and reliability. In contrast to the rotary format, such weapons have a single barrel and a recoil-operated carriage holding a revolving chamber with typically five chambers. As each round is fired, electrically, the carriage moves back rotating the chamber which also ejects the spent case, indexes the next live round to be fired with the barrel and loads the next round into the chamber. The action is very similar to that of the revolver pistols common in the 19th and 20th centuries, giving this type of weapon its name. A chain gun is a specific, patented type of revolver cannon, the name, in this case, deriving from its driving mechanism.\nAs noted above, firing a machine gun for prolonged periods produces large amounts of heat. In a worst-case scenario, this may cause a cartridge to overheat and detonate even when the trigger is not pulled, potentially leading to damage or causing the gun to cycle its action and keep firing until it has exhausted its ammunition supply or jammed; this is known as \"cooking off\" (as distinct from \"runaway fire\" where the sear fails to re-engage when the trigger is released). To guard against cook-offs occurring, some kind of cooling system or design element is required. Early machine guns were often water-cooled and while this technology was very effective (and was indeed one of the sources of the notorious efficiency of machine guns during World War I), the water jackets also added considerable weight to an already bulky design; they were also vulnerable to the enemies' bullets themselves. Armour could be provided, and in World War I, the Germans in particular often did this; but this added yet more weight to the guns. Air-cooled machine guns often feature quick-change barrels (often carried by a crew member), passive cooling fins, or in some designs forced-air cooling, such as that employed by the Lewis Gun. Advances in metallurgy and the use of special composites in barrel liners have allowed for greater heat absorption and dissipation during firing. The higher the rate of fire, the more often barrels must be changed and allowed to cool. To minimize this, most air-cooled guns are fired only in short bursts or at a reduced rate of fire. Some designs \u2013 such as the many variants of the MG42 \u2013 are capable of rates of fire in excess of 1,200 rounds per minute. Motorized Gatling guns can achieve the fastest firing rates of all, partly because this format involves extra energy being injected into the system from outside, instead of depending on energy derived from the propellant contained within the cartridges, partly because the next round can be inserted simultaneously with or before the ejection of the previous cartridge case, and partly because this design intrinsically deals with the unwanted heat very efficiently \u2013 effectively quick-changing the barrel and chamber after every shot. The multiple guns that comprise a Gatling being a much larger bulk of metal than other, single-barreled guns, they are thus much slower to rise in temperature for a given amount of heat, while at the same time they are also much better at shedding the excess, as the extra barrels provide a larger surface area from which to dissipate the unwanted thermal energy. In addition to that, they are in the nature of the design spun at very high speed during rapid fire, which has the benefit of producing enhanced air-cooling as a side-effect.\nIn weapons where the round seats and fires at the same time, mechanical timing is essential for operator safety, to prevent the round from firing before it is seated properly. Machine guns are controlled by one or more mechanical sears. When a sear is in place, it effectively stops the bolt at some point in its range of motion. Some sears stop the bolt when it is locked to the rear. Other sears stop the firing pin from going forward after the round is locked into the chamber. Almost all machine guns have a \"safety\" sear, which simply keeps the trigger from engaging.\nHistory.\nThe first successful machine-gun designs were developed in the mid-19th century. The key characteristic of modern machine guns, their relatively high rate of fire and more importantly mechanical loading, first appeared in the Model 1862 Gatling gun, which was adopted by the United States Navy. These weapons were still powered by hand; however, this changed with Hiram Maxim's idea of harnessing recoil energy to power reloading in his Maxim machine gun. Dr. Gatling also experimented with electric-motor-powered models; as discussed above, this externally powered machine reloading has seen use in modern weapons as well.\nWhile technical use of the term \"machine gun\" has varied, the modern definition used by the Sporting Arms and Ammunition Manufacturers' Institute of America is \"a fully automatic firearm that loads, fires and ejects continuously when the trigger is held to the rear until the ammunition is exhausted or pressure on the trigger is released\". This definition excludes most early manually operated repeating arms the Gatling gun and such as volley guns like the Nordenfelt gun.\nMedieval.\nThe first known ancestors of multi-shot weapons were medieval organ guns. An early example of an attempt at the mechanisation of one of these would be an 'engine of war' produced in the mid-1570s in England capable of firing from 160 to 320 shots 4, 8, 12 or 24 bullets at a time at a rate of fire up to roughly 3 times the rate of fire of the typical arquebusier of the day. It was also claimed that the gun could be reloaded 'as often as you like' and fired no matter the weather though the English government never adopted the weapon despite testing being carried out at the Tower of London. The first firearms to have the ability to fire multiple shots from a single barrel without a full manual reload were revolvers made in Europe in the late 1500s. One is a shoulder-gun-length weapon made in Nuremberg, Germany, circa 1580. Another is a revolving arquebus, produced by Hans Stopler of Nuremberg in 1597.\n17th century.\nTrue repeating long arms were difficult to manufacture prior to the development of the unitary firearm cartridge; nevertheless, lever-action repeating rifles such as the Kalthoff repeater and Cookson repeater were made in small quantities in the 17th century.\nPerhaps the earliest examples of predecessors to the modern machine gun are to be found in East Asia. According to the Wu-Pei-Chih, a booklet examining Chinese military equipment produced during the first quarter of the 17th century, the Chinese army had in its arsenal the 'Po-Tzu Lien-Chu-P'ao' or 'string-of-100-bullets cannon'. This was a repeating cannon fed by a hopper containing balls which fired its charges sequentially. The way it worked was similar to the Perkins steam gun of 1824 or the Beningfield electrolysis gun of 1845 only slow-burning gunpowder was used as the propelling force in place of steam or the gases produced by electrolysis. Another repeating gun was produced by a Chinese commoner, Dai Zi, in the late 17th century. This weapon was also hopper-fed and never went into mass production.\nIn 1655, a way of loading, aiming and shooting up to 6 wall muskets 60 times in a minute for a total rate of fire of 360 shots per minute was mentioned in \"The Century of Inventions\" by Edward Somerset, 2nd Marquess of Worcester, though, like all the inventions mentioned in the book, it is uncertain if it was ever built.\nIt is sometimes claimed (i.e. in George Morgan Chinn's \"the Machine Gun\") that in 1663 the first mention of the automatic principle of machine guns was in a paper presented to the Royal Society of England by Palmer, an Englishman who described a volley gun capable of being operated by either recoil or gas. However, no one has been able to find this paper in recent times and all references to a multi-shot weapon by a Palmer during this period appear to be referring to a somewhat more common Kalthoff repeater or Lorenzoni-system gun. Despite this, there is a reference in 1663 to at least the concept of a genuine automatic gun that was presented to Prince Rupert, though its type and method of operation are unknown.\n18th century.\nIn 1708, it was reported from Constantinople that a French officer had invented a very light cannon that could fire from a single barrel 30 shots in 2 and a half minutes for a total rate of fire of 12 shots a minute.\nIn 1711, a French lawyer called Barbuot presented to the parliament of Dijon a crank-operated 'war machine' made up of 10 carbine barrels and loaded via a 'drum' capable of firing in vollies. It was said to be accurate at 400 to 500 paces and to strike with enough force to pierce 2 or 3 men at a time when close. It was also claimed to be able to shoot 5 or 6 times before infantry came within musket range or cavalry within pistol range and with no more space between each shot than the time needed to prime a pistol, cock it and release the hammer as well as being nearly as manoeuvrable as cavalry. An alternative and heavier version was said to be able to throw grenades and it was also proposed to equip the machine with a bellows for clearing smoke that built up during firing.\nAnother early revolving gun was created by James Puckle, a London lawyer, who patented what he called \"The Puckle Gun\" on May 15, 1718. It was a design for a manually operated 1.25 in. (32\u00a0mm) caliber, flintlock cannon with a revolver cylinder able to fire 6\u201311 rounds before reloading by swapping out the cylinder, intended for use on ships. It was one of the earliest weapons to be referred to as a machine gun, being called such in 1722, though its operation does not match the modern usage of the term. According to Puckle, it was able to fire round bullets at Christians and square bullets at Turks. However, it was a commercial failure and was not adopted or produced in any meaningful quantity.\nIn 1729, a report was written in France on a machine capable of firing 600 balls in a few minutes.\nIn 1720, a French inventor called Philippe Vayringe invented a small cannon that could fire 16 shots in succession, which he demonstrated before the Duke of Lorraine. In 1737, it was mentioned that Jacob de Weinholtz, a Dane who was serving in the Portuguese army, had invented a cannon capable of firing 20 to 30 shots a minute though requiring 15 people to work it. The cannons were brought along with a Portuguese fleet sent to India to take part in a colonial war in the 1740s. Also in 1737, it was mentioned that a German engineer had invented a 10-pounder cannon capable of firing 20 times in a minute. In 1740, a cannon able to shoot 11 times per minute was developed by a Frenchman called Chevalier de Benac. Meanwhile, not long after in England, in 1747 a cannon able to simultaneously charge and discharge itself 20 times in a minute was invented by James Allis and presented to the Royal Society of England. In 1750, in Denmark, a Prussian known as Captain Steuben of the Train of Artillery invented a breech-loading cannon worked by 4 people and fed by paper cartridges capable of firing 24 times in a minute and demonstrated it to the King of Denmark along with some other high-ranking officials in the same year. In 1764, Frenchman Ange Goudar wrote in his work \"The Chinese Spy\" that he had assisted in Paris in the proofing of a 'great gun' capable of firing 60 times in a minute. In 1773, another cannon capable of firing 23 or 24 times in a minute and cleaning itself after every shot was invented by Thomas Desaguliers. In 1775, it was mentioned that in England two large cannons invented by an unidentified matross at Woolwich had achieved a rate of fire of 59 shots in 59 and a half seconds.\nAlso in 1775, a breech-loading volley gun, similar to the later mitrailleuse, was invented by a Frenchman called Du Perron which was worked by 3 or 4 men and capable of discharging 24 barrels 10 times a minute for a total rate of fire of 240 shots per minute.\nIn 1776, a gun capable of charging and discharging itself 120 times 'by the motion of one hand only' in a minute was invented in England by an inventor from the county of Westmoreland.\nIn 1777, Philadelphia gunsmith Joseph Belton offered the Continental Congress a \"new improved gun\", which was capable of firing up to twenty shots in five seconds; unlike older repeaters using complex lever-action mechanisms, it used a simpler system of superposed loads, and was loaded with a single large paper cartridge. Congress requested that Belton modify 100 flintlock muskets to fire eight shots in this manner, but rescinded the order when Belton's price proved too high.\nIn 1779, a machine made up of 21 musket barrels worked by 3 men was produced by a British inventor called William Wilson Wright which he claimed could be fired 3 times quicker than a single man could load and fire a musket 3 times.\nIn 1788, a Swiss soldier invented a machine worked by 10 men capable of discharging 300 balls in 3 minutes.\nAlso in 1788, it was reported that a Prussian officer had invented a gun capable of firing 400 balls one after the other.\nIn 1790, a former officer in the French military known as Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois-Louis Grobert invented a 'ballistic machine' or 'pyroballistic machine' with multiple barrels operated by 4 men and a continuous rotational movement capable of firing 360 rifle shots a minute in a variety of calibers.\nIn 1792, a French artist known as Renard invented a piece of ordnance that could be operated by one man and fired 90 shots a minute.\nAlso in 1792, a French mechanic called Garnier invented a musket battery made up of 15 barrels capable of firing 300 shots in 2 minutes for a total rate of fire of 150 shots a minute or 10 shots per minute per barrel and of being operated by one man.\n19th century.\nIn the early and mid-19th century, a number of rapid-firing weapons appeared which offered multi-shot fire, mostly volley guns. Volley guns (such as the Mitrailleuse) and double-barreled pistols relied on duplicating all parts of the gun, though the Nock gun used the otherwise-undesirable \"chain fire\" phenomenon (where multiple chambers are ignited at once) to propagate a spark from a single flintlock mechanism to multiple barrels. Pepperbox pistols also did away with needing multiple hammers but used multiple manually operated barrels. Revolvers further reduced this to only needing a pre-prepared cylinder and linked advancing the cylinder to cocking the hammer. However, these were still manually operated.\nIn 1805, a British inventor from Northampton designed a cannon that would prime, load and fire itself 10 times a minute.\nIn 1806, a Viennese copper engraver and mechanic known as Mr Putz invented a machine cannon that could load, fire and clean itself once every second or potentially up to 60 times a minute though the rate of fire was limited by the overheating of the barrel.\nIn 1819, an American inventor from Baltimore designed a gun with 11 barrels that could fire 12 times in a minute for a total rate of fire of 132 shots a minute.\nIn 1821, a muzzle-loading repeating cannon capable of firing 30 shots in 6 minutes or 5 shots per minute was demonstrated in England by the French-American \"Fire King\" Ivan Ivanitz Chabert. It was worked by a \"wheel\" fed by paper cartridges from a store attached to the cannon and ignited using a match from a match-holder somewhere else on the cannon.\nIn 1825 an Italian book attempting to catalogue all topographic features of all known countries on Earth mentioned that in France there were 'mechanical rifles' used to defend warehouses that were capable of firing 120 shots without reloading.\nIn 1828, a swivel gun that did not need cleaning or muzzle-loading and was capable of being made to any dimensions and used as an ordinary cannon at a moment's notice and firing 40 shots a minute was invented by a native of Ireland.\nAlso in 1828 a revolver cannon capable of firing 12 shots a minute and worked by 2 artillerymen was invented by a Frenchman called Lesire-Fruyer. In 1854 this cannon would be put on display at the French Museum of the Marine.\nIn France, in 1831, a mechanic from the Vosges department invented a lever-operated cannon that could fire 100 shots a minute.\nIn 1832, a machine capable of firing 500 rifle shots a minute was devised by Hamel, a French mechanic.\nIn the 1830s, General Sir John Scott Lillie, a British veteran of the Peninsula War invented the \"Lillie Rifle battery\".\nIn the mid-1830s, a machine gun was designed by John Steuble (Swiss), who tried to sell it to the Russian, English and French governments. The English and Russian governments showed interest but the former refused to pay Steuble, who later sued them for this transgression, and the latter tried to imprison him. The French government showed interest at first and while it noted that mechanically there was nothing wrong with Steuble's invention it turned him down, stating that the machine both lacked novelty and could not be usefully employed by the army. The gun was reportedly breech-loading, fed by cartridges from some kind of hopper and could fire 34 barrels of one-inch calibre 4 or 6 times for a total of 136 or 204 shots a minute.\nA biography of William Lyon Mackenzie mentions that in 1839 a Detroit-based inventor was working on a cannon that could be fired 50 to 60 times in a minute.\nIn 1842, Dr. Thomson or Thompson, an American, invented a cannon fed by pre-loaded breech-pieces with 4 barrels that was operated by means of a revolving cylinder and could be fired 50 times in as many seconds or even up to 500 times in 500 seconds.\nIn 1846, Mr. Francis Dixon, an American, invented a cannon that loaded, primed and discharged itself through the use of a brake at a rate of fire of 30 to 40 shots a minute. A variation of it was worked by clockwork-like machinery and could be made to move by itself a certain distance along rails before firing 10 times and returning to its original position.\nAlso in 1846, in Canada, inventor Simeon \"Larochelle\" Gautron, invented a cannon that was similar to a wooden model of a repeating cannon he constructed in 1836 but for which he had made a number of improvements since then which could be fired 10 or 12 times in a minute when the typical muzzle-loading cannon of the day could be fired at only a fraction of that speed, and an English newspaper reporting on it claimed it could be fired up to 60 times in the same period of time, and clean itself after every shot. It was worked by a crank, could be worked by one man when the typical cannon of the day required twelve or more, was fed by paper cartridges from a revolving cylinder and used separate percussion caps for ignition. Larochelle tried to interest the Canadian military in his invention but was turned down for reasons of complexity and expense which, while it drew some criticism from the French language Canadian press, led to the inventor discontinuing development of it in favour of more profitable activities. A model of Larochelle's cannon is still on display at the Musee National des Beaux-Arts du Quebec.\nIn 1847, a short description of a prototype electrically ignited mechanical machine gun was published in Scientific American by J.R. Nichols. The model described is small in scale and works by rotating a series of barrels vertically so that it is feeding at the top from a \"tube\" or hopper and could be discharged immediately at any elevation after having received a charge, according to the author.\nIn 1848, the Italian Cesare Rosaglio announced his invention of a machine gun capable of being operated by a single man and firing 300 rifle shots a minute or 12,000 in an hour after taking into account the time needed to reload the \"tanks\" of ammunition.\nIn June 1851, a model of a 'war engine' allegedly capable of firing 10,000 ball cartridges in 10 minutes was demonstrated by a British inventor called Francis McGetrick.\nIn 1852, a rotary cannon using a unique form of wheellock ignition was demonstrated by Delany, an Irish immigrant to America.\nIn 1854, a British patent for a mechanically operated machine gun was filed by Henry Clarke. This weapon used multiple barrels arranged side by side, fed by a revolving cylinder similar to that used in a turret revolver that was in turn fed by hoppers, similar to the system used by Nichols. The gun could be fired by percussion or electricity, according to the author. In the percussion version of the gun, firing was carried out by separate percussion caps and the breeches could contain either loose powder and balls or paper cartridges. A model of this weapon, said to be capable of firing 1800 shots in a minute with great precision at 2000 yards and drawn by two horses, was constructed and tested though apparently not adopted for the military. In the same year, water cooling was proposed for machine guns by Henry Bessemer, along with a water cleaning system, though he later abandoned this design. In his patent, Bessemer describes a hydropneumatic delayed-blowback-operated, fully automatic cannon. Part of the patent also refers to a steam-operated piston to be used with firearms but the bulk of the patent is spent detailing the former system.\nIn America, a patent for a machine gun-type weapon was filed by John Andrus Reynolds in 1855. Another early American patent for a manually operated machine gun with a blowback-operated cocking mechanism was filed by C. E. Barnes in 1856.\nIn France and Britain, a mechanically operated machine gun was patented in 1856 by Frenchman Francois Julien. This weapon was a cannon that fed from a type of open-ended tubular magazine, only using rollers and an endless chain in place of springs.\nThe Agar Gun, otherwise known as a \"coffee-mill gun\" because of its resemblance to a coffee mill, was invented by Wilson Agar at the beginning of the US Civil War. The weapon featured mechanized loading, using a hand crank linked to a hopper above the weapon. The weapon featured a single barrel, and fired through the turning of the same crank; it operated using paper cartridges fitted with percussion caps and inserted into metal tubes that acted as chambers; it was therefore functionally similar to a revolver. The weapon was demonstrated to President Lincoln in 1861. He was so impressed with the weapon that he purchased 10 on the spot for $1,500 apiece. The Union Army eventually purchased a total of 70 of the weapons. However, due to the antiquated views of the Ordnance Department, the weapon \u2013 like its more famous counterpart the Gatling Gun \u2013 saw only limited use.\nThe Gatling gun, patented in 1861 by Richard Jordan Gatling, was the first to offer controlled, sequential fire with mechanical loading. The design's key features were machine loading of prepared cartridges and a hand-operated crank for sequential high-speed firing. It first saw very limited action in the American Civil War; it was subsequently improved and used in the Franco-Prussian war and North-West Rebellion. Many were sold to other armies in the late 19th century and continued to be used into the early 20th century until they were gradually supplanted by Maxim guns. Early multi-barrel guns were approximately the size and weight of contemporary artillery pieces, and were often perceived as a replacement for cannon firing grapeshot or canister shot. The large wheels required to move these guns around required a high firing position, which increased the vulnerability of their crews. Sustained firing of gunpowder cartridges generated a cloud of smoke, making concealment impossible until smokeless powder became available in the late 19th century. Gatling guns were targeted by artillery they could not reach, and their crews were targeted by snipers they could not see. The Gatling gun was used most successfully to expand European colonial empires, since against poorly equipped indigenous armies it did not face such threats.\nIn 1864, in the aftermath of the Second Schleswig War, Denmark started a program intended to develop a gun that used the recoil of a fired shot to reload the firearm though a working model would not be produced until 1888.\nIn 1870, a Lt. Holsten Friberg of the Swedish army patented a fully automatic recoil-operated firearm action and may have produced firing prototypes of a derived design around 1882: this was the forerunner to the 1907 Kjellman machine gun, though, due to rapid residue buildup from the use of black powder, Friberg's design was not a practical weapon.\nAlso in 1870, the Bavarian regiment of the Prussian army used a unique mitrailleuse-style weapon in the Franco-Prussian war. The weapon was made up of four barrels placed side by side that replaced the manual loading of the French mitrailleuse with a mechanical loading system featuring a hopper containing 41 cartridges at the breech of each barrel. Although it was used effectively at times, mechanical difficulties hindered its operation and it was ultimately abandoned shortly after the war ended ().\nMaxim and World War I.\nThe first practical self-powered machine gun was invented in 1884 by Sir Hiram Maxim. The Maxim machine gun used the recoil power of the previously fired bullet to cycle rather than being hand-powered, enabling a much higher rate of fire than was possible using earlier designs such as the Nordenfelt and Gatling weapons. Maxim also introduced the use of water cooling, via a water jacket around the barrel, to reduce overheating. Maxim's gun was widely adopted, and derivative designs were used on all sides during the First World War. The design required fewer crew and was lighter and more usable than the Nordenfelt and Gatling guns. First World War combat experience demonstrated the military importance of the machine gun. The United States Army issued four machine guns per regiment in 1912, but that allowance increased to 336 machine guns per regiment by 1919.\nHeavy guns based on the Maxim such as the Vickers machine gun were joined by many other machine weapons, which mostly had their start in the early 20th century such as the Hotchkiss machine gun. Submachine guns (e.g., the German MP 18) as well as lighter machine guns (the first light machine gun deployed in any significant number being the Madsen machine gun, with the Chauchat and Lewis gun soon following) saw their first major use in World War I, along with heavy use of large-caliber machine guns. The biggest single cause of casualties in World War I was actually artillery, but combined with wire entanglements, machine guns earned a fearsome reputation.\nAnother fundamental development occurring before and during the war was the incorporation by gun designers of machine gun auto-loading mechanisms into handguns, giving rise to semi-automatic pistols such as the Borchardt (1890s), automatic machine pistols and later submachine guns (such as the Beretta 1918).\nAircraft-mounted machine guns were first used in combat in World War I. Immediately this raised a fundamental problem. The most effective position for guns in a single-seater fighter was clearly, for the purpose of aiming, directly in front of the pilot; but this placement would obviously result in bullets striking the moving propeller. Early solutions, aside from simply hoping that luck was on the pilot's side with an unsynchronized forward-firing gun, involved either aircraft with pusher props like the Vickers F.B.5, Royal Aircraft Factory F.E.2 and Airco DH.2, wing mounts like that of the Nieuport 10 and Nieuport 11 which avoided the propeller entirely, or armored propeller blades such as those mounted on the Morane-Saulnier L which would allow the propeller to deflect unsynchronized gunfire. By mid 1915, the introduction of a reliable gun synchronizer by the Imperial German Flying Corps made it possible to fire a closed-bolt machine gun forward through a spinning propeller by timing the firing of the gun to miss the blades. The Allies had no equivalent system until 1916 and their aircraft suffered badly as a result, a period known as the Fokker Scourge, after the Fokker Eindecker, the first German plane to incorporate the new technology.\nInterwar era and World War II.\nAs better materials became available following the First World War, light machine guns became more readily portable; designs such as the Bren light machine gun replaced bulky predecessors like the Lewis gun in the squad support weapon role, while the modern division between medium machine guns like the M1919 Browning machine gun and heavy machine guns like the Browning M2 became clearer. New designs largely abandoned water jacket cooling systems as both undesirable, due to a greater emphasis on mobile tactics; and unnecessary, thanks to the alternative and superior technique of preventing overheating by swapping barrels.\nThe interwar years also produced the first widely used and successful general-purpose machine gun, the German MG 34. While this machine gun was equally able in the light and medium roles, it proved difficult to manufacture in quantity, and experts on industrial metalworking were called in to redesign the weapon for modern tooling, creating the MG 42. This weapon was simpler, cheaper to produce, fired faster, and replaced the MG 34 in every application except vehicle mounts since the MG 42's barrel changing system could not be operated when it was mounted.\nCold War.\nExperience with the MG 42 led to the US issuing a requirement to replace the aging Browning Automatic Rifle with a similar weapon, which would also replace the M1919; simply using the MG 42 itself was not possible, as the design brief required a weapon which could be fired from the hip or shoulder like the BAR. The resulting design, the M60 machine gun, was issued to troops during the Vietnam War.\nAs it became clear that a high-volume-of-fire weapon would be needed for fast-moving jet aircraft to reliably hit their opponents, Gatling's work with electrically powered weapons was recalled and the 20\u00a0mm M61 Vulcan was designed; as well as a miniaturized 7.62\u00a0mm version initially known as the \"mini-Vulcan\" and quickly shortened to \"minigun\" soon in production for use on helicopters, where the volume of fire could compensate for the instability of the helicopter as a firing platform.\nHuman interface.\nThe most common interface on light machine guns is a pistol grip and trigger with a buttstock attached. Vehicle and tripod mounted machine guns usually have spade grips. Earlier machine guns commonly featured hand cranks, and modern externally powered machine guns, such as miniguns, commonly use an electronic button or trigger on a joystick. In the late 20th century, scopes and other complex optics became more common rather than the more basic iron sights.\nLoading systems in early manual machine guns were often from a hopper of loose (un-linked) cartridges. Manually operated volley guns usually had to be reloaded all at once (each barrel reloaded by hand, or with a set of cartridges affixed to a plate that was inserted into the weapon). With hoppers, the rounds could often be added while the weapon was firing. This gradually changed to belt-fed systems, which were either held by a person (the shooter or a support person), or in a bag or box. Some modern vehicle machine guns use linkless feed systems.\nModern machine guns are commonly mounted in one of four ways. The first is a bipod, often integrated with the weapon, common on light and medium machine guns. Another is the tripod, usually found on medium and heavy machine guns. On ships, vehicles, and aircraft, machine guns are usually mounted on a pintle mount, a steel post that is connected to the frame or body of the vehicle. The last common mounting type is as part of a vehicle's armament system, such as a tank coaxial or part of an aircraft's armament. These are usually electrically fired and have complex sighting systems, for example, the US Helicopter Armament Subsystems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19692", "revid": "50514054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19692", "title": "Monopoly (game)", "text": "Economics board game\nMonopoly is a multiplayer economics-themed board game. In the game, players roll two dice (or 1 extra special red die depending on the game) to move around the game board, buying and trading properties and developing them with houses and hotels. Players collect rent from their opponents and aim to drive them into bankruptcy. Money can also be gained or lost through \"Chance\" and \"Community Chest\" cards and tax squares. Players receive a salary every time they pass \"Go\" and can end up in jail, from which they cannot move until they have met one of three conditions. House rules, hundreds of different editions, many spin-offs, and related media exist.\n\"Monopoly\" has become a part of international popular culture, having been licensed locally in more than 113 countries and printed in more than 46 languages. As of 2015[ [update]], it was estimated that the game had sold 275 million copies worldwide. The properties on the original game board were named after locations in and around Atlantic City, New Jersey.\nThe game is named after the economic concept of a monopoly\u2014the domination of a market by a single entity. The game is derived from \"The Landlord's Game\", created in 1903 in the United States by Lizzie Magie, as a way to demonstrate that an economy rewarding individuals is better than one where monopolies hold all the wealth. It also served to promote the economic theories of Henry George\u2014in particular, his ideas about taxation. \"The Landlord's Game\" originally had two sets of rules, one with tax and another on which the current rules are mainly based. Parker Brothers first published \"Monopoly\" in 1935. Parker Brothers was eventually absorbed into Hasbro in 1991.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe history of \"Monopoly\" can be traced back to 1903, when American anti-monopolist Lizzie Magie created a game called \"The Landlord's Game\" that she hoped would explain the single-tax theory of Henry George as laid out in his book \"Progress and Poverty\". She devised the key features of the game. It was intended as an educational tool to illustrate the negative aspects of concentrating land in private monopolies. She took out a patent in 1904. This shows the game's characteristic features of a square circuit consisting of corner squares (one the starting point) and a series of intervening spaces where players went round and round until the game's goal was reached. The railway stations were hazards, demanding a $5 fine. Players received money after completing each circuit. This design was different from other board games of the time. It is possible, but not definitely known, that she was inspired by a game called Zohn Ahl, played by the Kiowa which had a similar shaped board but different rules, and was described in a book about games in 1898. Her game was self-published beginning in 1906.\nMagie created two sets of rules: an anti-monopolist set in which all were rewarded when wealth was created, and a monopolist set in which the goal was to create monopolies and crush opponents.\nSeveral variant board games, based on her concept, were developed from 1906 through the 1930s. They involved both the process of buying land for its development, and the sale of any undeveloped property. Cardboard houses were added, and rents increased as they were added to a property. Magie patented the game again in 1923.\nAccording to an advertisement placed in \"The Christian Science Monitor\", Charles Todd of Philadelphia recalled the day in 1932 when his childhood friend Esther Jones and her husband, Charles Darrow, came to his house for dinner. After the meal, the Todds introduced Darrow to \"The Landlord's Game\", which they then played several times. The game was entirely new to Darrow, and he asked the Todds for a written set of the rules. After that night, Darrow went on to utilize it to distribute the game himself as \"Monopoly\". His only change was to add symbols for the electricity and water companies and for the railway stations. Darrow used oil cloth to create a game board, drawn by an artist, which is now in the collection of The Strong National Museum of Play after a $146,500 bid at Sotheby's in 2010.\nThe Parker Brothers bought the game's copyrights from Darrow. When the company learned Darrow was not the sole inventor of the game, it bought the rights to Magie's patent for $500.\nParker Brothers began marketing the game on November 5, 1935. Cartoonist F. O. Alexander contributed the design. U.S. patent number \"US 2026082 A\" was issued to Charles Darrow on December 31, 1935, for the game board design and was assigned to Parker Brothers Inc. The original version of the game in this format was based on the streets of Atlantic City, New Jersey.\n1936\u20131970.\nParker Brothers began licensing the game for sale outside the United States in 1936. In 1941, the British Secret Intelligence Service had John Waddington Ltd., the licensed manufacturer of the game in the United Kingdom, create a special edition for World War II prisoners of war held by the Nazis. Hidden inside these games were maps, compasses, real money, and other objects useful for escaping. They were distributed to prisoners by fake charity organizations created by the British Secret Service.\n1970s\u20131980s.\nEconomics professor Ralph Anspach published \"Anti-Monopoly\" in 1973, and was sued for trademark infringement by Parker Brothers in 1974. The case went to trial in 1976. Anspach won on appeals in 1979, as the 9th Circuit Court determined that the trademark \"Monopoly\" was generic and therefore unenforceable. The United States Supreme Court declined to hear the case, allowing the appellate court ruling to stand. This decision was overturned by the passage of Public Law 98-620 in 1984. With that law in place, Parker Brothers and its parent company, Hasbro, continue to hold valid trademarks for the game \"Monopoly\". However, \"Anti-Monopoly\" was exempted from the law and Anspach later reached a settlement with Hasbro and marketed his game under license from them.\nHasbro ownership.\nHasbro acquired Parker Bros. and thus \"Monopoly\" in 1991. Before the Hasbro acquisition, Parker Bros. acted as a publisher, issuing only two versions at a time, a regular and deluxe. Hasbro moved to create and license many other versions of \"Monopoly\" and sought public input in varying the game. A new wave of licensed products began in 1994, when Hasbro granted a license to USAopoly to begin publishing a San Diego Edition of \"Monopoly\", which has since been followed by more than a hundred more licensees including Winning Moves Games (since 1995) and Winning Solutions, Inc. (since 2000) in the United States.\nThe company held a national tournament on a chartered train going from Chicago to Atlantic City (see ) in 2003. Also that year, Hasbro sued the maker of \"Ghettopoly\" for violation of trademarks and copyrights and won. In February 2005, the company sued RADGames over their Super Add-On accessory board game that fitted in the center of the board. The judge initially issued an injunction on February 25, 2005, to halt production and sales before ruling in RADGames's favor in April 2005.\nThe Speed Die was added to all regular Monopoly sets in 2008. After polling their Facebook followers, Hasbro Gaming took the top house rules and added them to a House Rule Edition released in the fall of 2014 and added them as optional rules in 2015. In January 2017, Hasbro invited internet users to vote on a new set of game pieces, with this new regular edition to be issued in March 2017.\nOn May 1, 2018, the Monopoly Mansion hotel agreement was announced by Hasbro's managing director for southeast Asia, Jenny Chew Yean Nee, with M101 Holdings Sdn Bhd. M101 has the five-star, 225-room hotel, then under construction, located at the M101 Bukit Bintang in Kuala Lumpur and with a 1920s Gatsby feel. M101's Sirocco Group would manage the hotel when it opened in 2019.\nHasbro announced in March 2021 that it planned to update the Community Chest cards with ones that would be more socially aware, inviting fans of the game to vote on the new versions. In April 2022, Hasbro announced another poll. This vote would see the reintroduction of one previously retired token in exchange for an existing token. The result would see the Thimble return and the T-Rex phased out by fall 2022.\nHasbro revealed an overhaul on January 7, 2025, for release that year, changing the box to a square, renovating the Banker's tray, and enlarging the tokens by roughly 20%. Oriental Avenue was renamed to Rhode Island Avenue, another street in Atlantic City.\nBoard.\nThe \"Monopoly\" game board consists of forty spaces containing twenty-eight properties\u2014twenty-two streets (grouped into eight distinct color groups), four railroads, and two utilities\u2014three Chance spaces, three Community Chest spaces, a Luxury Tax space, an Income Tax space, and the four corner squares: GO, (In) Jail/Just Visiting, Free Parking, and Go to Jail.\nUS versions.\nThere have since been some changes to the board. Not all of the Chance and Community Chest cards shown in the 1935 patent were used in editions from 1936/1937 onwards. Graphics with the Mr. Monopoly character (then known as \"Rich Uncle Pennybags\") were added during that same time frame. A graphic of a chest containing coins was added to the Community Chest spaces, as were the flat purchase prices of the properties. Traditionally, the Community Chest cards were yellow (although they were sometimes printed on blue stock), with no decoration or text on the back; Chance cards were orange, also with no text or decoration on the back.\nHasbro commissioned a major graphic redesign to the U.S. standard edition of the game in 2008, along with some minor revisions. Among the changes: the colors of Mediterranean and Baltic avenues were changed from purple to brown, and the color of the \"Go\" square was changed from red to black. The Luxury Tax amount was increased from $75 to $100, and a flat $200 income tax was imposed (formerly the player's choice of $200 or 10% of their total holdings, which they could not calculate until after making their final decision). Originally, the amount was $300, but was changed a year after the game's debut. \nThere were also changes to the Chance and Community Chest cards. For example, the \"poor tax\", \"receive for services\", \"Xmas fund matures\", and \"grand opera opening\" cards became \"speeding fine\", \"receive $25 consultancy fee\", \"holiday fund matures\", and \"it is your birthday\", respectively; though their effects remained the same, the player must pay only $50 instead of $150 for the school tax. In addition, a player now gets $50 instead of $45 for sale of stock, and the \"Advance to Illinois Avenue\" card now includes added text indicating that the player collects $200 if they pass Go on the way there.\nAll the Chance and Community Chest cards were altered in 2008 as part of the game's redesign. Mr. Monopoly's original line illustration was typically replaced by renderings of a 3D Mr. Monopoly model. The backs of the cards now feature their respective symbols, with Community Chest cards in blue and Chance cards in orange.\nAdditionally, recent versions of \"Monopoly\" replace the dollar sign ($) with an \"M\" symbol including two horizontal strokes through it.\nIn the US versions shown below, the properties are named after locations in (or near) Atlantic City, New Jersey.\nAtlantic City's Illinois Avenue was renamed Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard in the 1980s. St. Charles Place no longer exists, as the Showboat Atlantic City was developed where it once ran. The values on the board reflect real estate property values of 1930s Atlantic City. The two cheapest properties, Baltic Avenue and Mediterranean Avenue, were situated in a low-income, African-American neighborhood; higher-value properties, such as Pennsylvania Avenue, Park Place, and Ventnor Avenue, were situated in wealthier neighborhoods.\nVarious Monopoly-inspired board games have been created based on various current consumer interests, such as: \"Dog-opoly\", \"Cat-opoly\", \"Bug-opoly\", and TV/movie-themed editions, among others.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Standard (American Edition) \"Monopoly\" board layout as of July 2025\n&lt;table \nborder=\"3\" cellspacing=\"0\" cellpadding=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;font:normal 8pt/9pt helvetica,arial,sans-serif;width:400px;border-collapse:separate; background-color:#F0FFF0;\"&gt;\n&lt;/table&gt;\n Marvin Gardens, the farthest yellow property, is a misspelling of its actual name, \"Marven Gardens\". The misspelling was introduced by Charles and Olive Todd, who taught the game to Charles Darrow. It was passed on when their homemade \"Monopoly\" board was copied by Darrow and then by Parker Brothers. The Todds also changed the Atlantic City Quakers' Arctic Avenue to Mediterranean, and shortened the Shore Fast Line to the Short Line.\nIt was not until 1995 that Parker Brothers acknowledged the misspelling of \"Marvin Gardens\", formally apologizing to the residents of Marven Gardens.\nShort Line refers to the Shore Fast Line, a streetcar line that served Atlantic City. The B&amp;O Railroad did not serve Atlantic City. A booklet included with the reprinted 1935 edition states that the four railroads that served Atlantic City in the mid-1930s were the Jersey Central, the Seashore Lines, the Reading Railroad (now part of Norfolk Southern &amp; CSX), and the Pennsylvania Railroad.\nThe Baltimore &amp; Ohio (now part of CSX) was the parent of the Reading. There is a tunnel in Philadelphia where track to the south was B. &amp; O. and track to the north is Reading. The Central of N.J. did not have a track to Atlantic City but was the daughter of the Reading (and granddaughter of the B. &amp; O.) Their track ran from the New York City area to Delaware Bay and some trains ran on the Reading-controlled track to Atlantic City.\nThe actual \"Electric Company\" and \"Water Works\" serving the city are respectively Atlantic City Electric Company (a subsidiary of Exelon) and the Atlantic City Municipal Utilities Authority.\nUK version.\nIn the 1930s, John Waddington Ltd., known as Waddingtons, was a printing company in Leeds that had branched out into packaging and the production of playing cards. Waddingtons had sent the card game \"Lexicon\" to Parker Brothers hoping to interest it in publishing the game in the United States. In a similar fashion, Parker Brothers sent over a copy of \"Monopoly\" to Waddingtons early in 1935 before the game had been put into production in the United States.\nVictor Watson, the managing director of Waddingtons, gave the game to his son Norman, head of the card games division, to test over a weekend. Norman was impressed by the game and persuaded his father to call Parker Brothers on Monday morning\u2014transatlantic calls then being almost unheard of. This call resulted in Waddingtons obtaining a license to produce and market the game outside the United States.\nWatson felt that for the game to be a success in the United Kingdom, the American locations would have to be replaced, so Victor and his secretary Marjory Phillips went to London to scout out locations. The Angel, Islington is not a street in London but a building (which also gave its name to the road intersection where it is located, as well as an area of the city and a Tube station). It had been a coaching inn that stood on the Great North Road. By the 1930s, the inn had become a J. Lyons and Co. tea room and is today offices and a Co-operative Bank. Some accounts say that Marjory and Victor met at the Angel to discuss the selection and celebrated the fact by including it on the \"Monopoly\" board. In 2003, a plaque commemorating the naming was unveiled at the site by Victor Watson's grandson, who is also named Victor.\nIt might be expected that the railway stations in Monopoly would have been chosen to allow travel in the four compass directions\u2014for example: Euston, St Pancras or King's Cross (north); Liverpool Street or Fenchurch Street (east); London Bridge or Victoria (south); Paddington (west). However all four stations had been owned by the same company, LNER, prior to nationalisation as British Rail(ways). It has been suggested that Waddingtons chose LNER stations because this was the company that served Leeds where they were based.\nDuring World War II, the British Secret Service contacted Waddingtons, as the company could also print on silk, to make \"Monopoly\" sets that included escape maps, money, a compass and file, all hidden in copies of the game sent by fake POW relief charities to prisoners of war.\nThe standard British board, produced by Waddingtons, was for many years the version most familiar to people in countries in the Commonwealth, except Canada, where the US edition with Atlantic City-area names was reprinted. Local variants of the board are now also found in several Commonwealth countries.\nIn 1998, Winning Moves procured the \"Monopoly\" license from Hasbro and created new UK city and regional editions with sponsored squares. Initially, in December 1998, the game was sold in just a few W H Smith stores, but demand was high, with almost 50,000 games sold in the four weeks before Christmas. Winning Moves still produces new annually.\nThe original income tax choice from the 1930s US board is replaced by a flat rate on the UK board, and the $75 Luxury Tax space is replaced with the \u00a3100 Super Tax space, the same as the current German board. In 2008, the US edition was changed to match the UK and various European editions, including a flat $200 Income Tax value and an increased $100 Luxury Tax amount.\nIn cases where a national company produced the game, the $ (dollar) sign was replaced with the \u00a3 (pound), but the place names were unchanged.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;UK edition \"Monopoly\" board layout\n&lt;table \nborder=\"3\" cellspacing=\"0\" cellpadding=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;font:normal 8pt/9pt helvetica,arial,sans-serif;width:400px;border-collapse:separate; background-color:#F0FFF0;\"&gt;\n&lt;/table&gt;\nPost-2005 variations.\nBeginning in the UK in 2005, a revised version of the game, titled \"Monopoly Here and Now\", was produced, replacing game scenarios, properties, and tokens with more modern equivalents. Similar boards were produced for Germany and France. Variants of these first editions appeared with Visa-branded debit cards taking the place of cash\u2014the later US \"Electronic Banking\" edition has unbranded debit cards.\nThe success of the first \"Here and Now\" editions prompted Hasbro US to allow online voting for twenty-six landmark properties across the United States to take their places along the game-board. The popularity of this voting, in turn, led to the creation of similar websites, and secondary game-boards per popular vote to be created in the UK, Canada, France, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, and other nations.\nWinning Moves Games released the \"\", with a 30% larger game-board and revised game play, in 2006. Other streets from Atlantic City (eight, one per color group) were included, along with a third utility, the Gas Company. In addition, $1,000 denomination notes (first seen in Winning Moves' \"Monopoly: The Card Game\") are included. Game play is further changed with bus tickets (allowing non-dice-roll movement along one side of the board), a speed die (itself adopted into variants of the \"Atlantic City standard edition\"; see below), skyscrapers (after houses and hotels), and train stations that can be placed on the Railroad spaces.\nThis edition was adapted for the UK market in 2007, and is sold by Winning Moves UK.\n\"Here and Now\".\nThe US edition of \"Monopoly Here and Now\" was released in September 2006. This edition features top landmarks across the US. The properties were decided by votes over the Internet in the spring of 2006.\nMonetary values are multiplied by 10,000 (e.g., one collects $2,000,000 instead of $200 for passing GO and pays that much for Income Tax (or 10% of their total, as this edition was launched prior to 2008), each player starts with $15,000,000 instead of $1,500, etc.). Also, the Chance and Community Chest cards are updated, the Railroads are replaced by Airports (Chicago O'Hare, Los Angeles International, New York City's JFK, and Atlanta's Hartsfield\u2013Jackson), and the Utilities (Electric Company and Water Works) are replaced by Service Providers (Internet Service Provider and Cell Phone Service Provider). The houses and hotels are blue and silver, not green and red as in most editions of \"Monopoly\". The board uses the traditional US layout; the cheapest properties are purple, not brown, and \"Interest on Credit Card Debt\" replaces \"Luxury Tax\".\nDespite the updated Luxury Tax space, and the Income Tax space no longer using the 10% option, this edition uses paper \"Monopoly\" money, and not an electronic banking unit like the \"Here and Now World Edition\". However, a similar edition of \"Monopoly\", the \"Electronic Banking\" edition, does feature an electronic banking unit and bank cards, as well as a different set of tokens. Both \"Here and Now\" and \"Electronic Banking\" feature an updated set of tokens from the Atlantic City edition.\nOne landmark, Texas Stadium, has been demolished and was replaced by the Irving Interchange exit ramps the join Texas State Highway 183 (Airport Freeway) to Texas State Highway Loop 12. Another landmark, Jacobs Field, still exists, but was renamed Progressive Field in 2008.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Monopoly Here and Now: The U.S. Edition\" (2006)\n&lt;table \nborder=\"3\" cellspacing=\"0\" cellpadding=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;font:normal 8pt/9pt helvetica,arial,sans-serif;width:400px;border-collapse:separate; background-color:#F0FFF0;\"&gt;\n&lt;/table&gt;\nIn 2015, in honor of the game's 80th birthday, Hasbro held an online vote to determine which cities would make it into an updated version of \"Here and Now\". This second edition is more a spin-off as the winning condition has changed to completing a passport instead of bankrupting opponents. Community Chest is replaced with Here and Now cards, while the Here and Now space replaced the railroads. Houses and hotels have been removed.\nHasbro released a \"World\" edition with the top voted cities from all around the world, as well as at least a \"Here and Now\" edition with the voted-on U.S. cities.\n\"Empire\".\n\"Monopoly Empire\" has uniquely branded tokens and places based on popular brands. Instead of buying properties, players buy popular brands one by one and slide their billboards onto their Empire towers. Instead of building houses and hotels, players collect rent from their rivals based on their tower height. The first player to fill their tower with billboards wins. Every space on the board is a brand name, such as Xbox, Coca-Cola, McDonald's and Samsung.\n\"Token Madness\".\nThis version of Monopoly contains 8 of the 56 tokens from the 2017 Token Madness event. That includes a penguin, a television, a race car, a Mr. Monopoly emoji, a rubber duck, a watch, a wheel and a bunny slipper.\nThe Penguin and Rubber Duck, alongside the T-Rex, (which was not present in \"Token Madness\") would eventually become part of the main game, replacing the Boot, Wheelbarrow and Thimble. The T-Rex would be replaced by the returning Thimble in the 2022 Throwback Token Vote.\n\"Jackpot\".\nDuring the game, players travel around the gameboard buying properties and collecting rent. If they land on a Chance space, or roll the Chance icon on a die, they can spin the Chance spinner to try to make more money. Players may hit the \"Jackpot\", go bankrupt, or be sent to Jail. The player who has the most cash when the bank crashes wins.\n\"Ultimate Banking Edition\".\nIn this version, there is no cash. The Monopoly Ultimate Banking game features an electronic ultimate banking piece with touch technology. Players can buy properties instantly and set rents by tapping. Each player has a bankcard and their cash is tracked by the Ultimate Banking unit. It can scan the game's property cards and boost or crash the market. Event cards and Location spaces replace Chance and Community Chest cards. On an Event Space, rents may be raised or lowered, a player may earn or lose money, or someone could be sent to Jail. Location Spaces allow players to pay and move to any property space on the gameboard.\n\"Voice Banking\".\nIn this version, there are no cash or cards. \"Voice Banking\" allows the player to respond by voice to the Top Hat. The hat responds by purchasing properties, paying rent, and making buildings.\n\"Ms. Monopoly\".\nIn this version, the spaces that players land on are replaced by inventions that women created or contributed to, and female players are given bonuses.\n\"Monopoly Deal\".\n\"Monopoly Deal\" is a card game derived from the board-game Monopoly introduced in 2008, produced and sold by Cartamundi under a license from Hasbro. Players attempt to collect three complete sets of cards representing the properties from the original board game, either by playing them directly, stealing them from other players, swapping cards with other players, or collecting them as rent for other properties they already own. The cards in the 110-card deck represent properties and wild cards, various denominations of Monopoly money used to pay rent, and special action cards which can either be played for their effects or banked as money instead.\n\"Monopoly Go!\".\n\"Monopoly Go!\" is a game developed by Scopely in collaboration with Hasbro, available since 2023 for Android and iOS for free. In this digital version of traditional Monopoly, you will need to roll dice to advance on the board and accumulate wealth. With the money you manage to obtain, you will have to build structures in different worlds, which act as levels.\nEquipment.\nAll property deeds, houses, and hotels are held by the bank until bought by the players. A standard set of \"Monopoly\" pieces includes:\nCards.\nA \"Monopoly\" set contains thirty-two Chance and Community Chest cards (sixteen each) which players draw when they land on corresponding squares of the track; players then follow the instructions printed on the card.\nDeeds.\nA title deed for each property is given to a player to signify ownership, and specifies purchase price, mortgage value, the cost of building houses and hotels on that property, and the various rents depending on how developed the property is. Properties include:\nThe purchase price for properties varies from $60 to $400 on a U.S. Standard Edition set.\nDice.\nA pair of six-sided dice is included, with a \"speed die\" added for variation in 2007. The 1999 Millennium Edition featured two jewel-like dice which were the subject of a lawsuit from Michael Bowling, owner of dice maker Crystal Caste. Hasbro lost the suit in 2008 and had to pay $446,182 in royalties. Subsequent printings of the game reverted to normal six-sided dice.\nHouses and hotels.\n32 houses and 12 hotels made of wood or plastic (the original and current \"Deluxe Edition\" have wooden houses and hotels; the current \"base set\" uses plastic buildings). Unlike money, houses and hotels have a finite supply. If no more are available, no substitute is allowed. In most editions, houses are green and hotels red.\nMoney.\nOlder US standard editions of the game included a total of $15,140 in the following denominations:\nNewer (September 2008 and later) US editions provide a total of $20,580\u201430 of each denomination instead. The colors of some of the bills are also changed: $10s are now blue instead of yellow, $20s are a brighter green than before, and $50s are now purple instead of blue.\nEach player begins the game with their token on the Go square, and $1,500 (or 1,500 of a localized currency) in play money ($2,500 with the Speed Die). Before September 2008, the money was divided with greater numbers of 20 and 10-dollar bills. Since then, the US version has taken on the British version's initial cash distributions.\nAlthough the US version is indicated as allowing eight players, the cash distribution shown above is not possible with all eight players since it requires 32 $100 bills and 40 $1 bills. However, the amount of cash contained in the game is enough for eight players with a slight alteration of bill distribution.\nInternational currencies.\nPre-Euro German editions of the game started with 30,000 \"Spielmark\" in eight denominations (abbreviated as \"M.\"), and later used seven denominations of the Deutsche Mark (\"DM.\"). In the classic Italian game, each player received L. 350,000 ($3500) in a two-player game, but L. 50,000 ($500) less for each player more than two. Only in a six-player game does a player receive the equivalent of $1,500. The classic Italian games were played with only four denominations of currency. Both Spanish editions (the Barcelona and Madrid editions) started the game with 150,000 in play money, with a breakdown identical to that of the American version.\nExtra currency.\nAccording to the Parker Brothers rules, Monopoly money is theoretically unlimited; if the bank runs out of money it may issue as much as needed \"by merely writing on any ordinary paper\".\nHowever, Hasbro's published Monopoly rules make no mention of this. Additional paper money can be bought at certain locations, notably game and hobby stores, or downloaded from various websites and printed and cut by hand. One such site has created a $1,000 bill; while a $1,000 bill can be found in \"\" and \"Monopoly: The Card Game\", both published by Winning Moves Games, this note is not a standard denomination for classic versions of Monopoly.\nElectronic banking.\nBesides demonstrating the dangers of land rents and monopolies, Lizzie Magie also intended \"The Landlord's Game\" for children as a teaching tool to learn how to add and subtract through the usage of paper money, which was inherited by \"Monopoly\" and the vast majority of its spin-offs. However, some Monopoly variations use bank cards instead of paper money.\nIn these specific variations, instead of receiving paper money, each player receives a plastic bank card that is inserted into a calculator-like electronic device that keeps track of the player's balance.\nTokens.\nClassic.\nEach player is represented by a small metal or plastic token that is moved around the edge of the board according to the roll of two six-sided dice. The number of tokens (and the tokens themselves) have changed over the history of the game with many appearing in special editions only, and some available with non-game purchases. After prints with wood tokens in 1937, a set of eight metal tokens was introduced. Two more were added in late 1937, and tokens changed again in 1942. During World War II, the game tokens were switched back to wood. Early localized editions of the standard edition (including some Canadian editions, which used the U.S. board layout) did not include tokens but instead had generic wooden pawns identical to those that \"Sorry!\" had.\nMany of the early tokens were created by companies such as Dowst Miniature Toy Company, which made metal tokens designed to be used on charm bracelets. The battleship and cannon were also used briefly in the Parker Brothers war game \"Conflict\" (released in 1940), but after the game failed on the market, the premade pieces were recycled for \"Monopoly\" usage. By 1943, there were ten tokens: the Battleship, Boot, Cannon, Horse and Rider, Iron, Racecar, Scottie Dog, Thimble, Top Hat, and Wheelbarrow. These tokens remained the same until the late 1990s, when Parker Brothers was sold to Hasbro.\nIn 1998, a Hasbro advertising campaign asked the public to vote on a new playing piece to be added to the set. The candidates were a bag of money, a biplane, and a piggy bank. The bag ended up winning 51 percent of the vote compared to the other two which failed to go above 30%. This new token was added to the set in 1999, bringing the number of tokens to eleven. Another 1998 campaign poll asked people which monopoly token was their favorite. The most popular was the Race Car at 18%, followed by the Dog (16%), Cannon (14%) and Top Hat (10%). The least favorite in the poll was the Wheelbarrow, at 3%, followed by Thimble (7%) and the Iron (7%). The Cannon, and Horse and rider were both retired in 2000 with no new tokens taking their place. Another retirement came in 2007 with the sack of money, bringing the total token count back down to eight again.\nIn 2013, a similar promotional campaign was launched encouraging the public to vote on one of several possible new tokens to replace an existing one. The choices were a guitar, a diamond ring, a helicopter, a robot, and a cat. This new campaign was different from the one in 1998, as the least-popular existing piece would be retired and replaced with a new one. Both were chosen by a vote that ran on Facebook from January 8 to February 5, 2013. The cat took the top spot with 31% of the vote, while the iron proved to be the least-popular classic piece and was retired and replaced by the cat. In January 2017, Hasbro placed the line of tokens in the regular edition with another vote which included a total of 64 options. The eight playable tokens at the time included the Battleship, Boot, Cat, Racecar, Scottie Dog, Thimble, Top hat, and Wheelbarrow. By March 17, 2017, Hasbro retired three additional tokens, the thimble, wheelbarrow, and boot; these were replaced by a penguin, a Tyrannosaurus and a rubber duck. In April 2022, it was announced that a previously retired token would return to Monopoly sets. The candidates for reintroduction were the wheelbarrow, thimble, iron, horse &amp; rider, boot, and money bag. One existing token would also be dropped from the line-up. Based on the results of the vote, Hasbro announced that, starting in spring 2023, the T-Rex would be replaced by the Thimble in regular sets of Monopoly.\nSource:\nSpecial editions.\nOver the years, Hasbro has released tokens for special or collector's editions of the game. One of the first tokens to come out included the Steam Locomotive, which was only released in Deluxe Editions. A Director's Chair token was released in 2011 in limited edition copies of \"\". Shortly after the 2013 Facebook voting campaign, a limited-edition Golden Token set was released exclusively at various national retailers, such as Target in the U.S., and Tesco in the U.K.\nThe set contained the Battleship, Boot, Iron, Racecar, Scottie Dog, Thimble, Top hat and Wheelbarrow as well as the iron's potential replacements. These replacement tokens included the cat, the guitar, the diamond ring, the helicopter, and the robot. Hasbro released a 64-token limited edition set in 2017 called \"Monopoly Signature Token Collection\" to include all of the candidates that were not chosen in the vote held that year.\nRules.\nOfficial rules.\nEach player starts with $1,500 in their bank. Players roll the dice, and whoever rolls the highest number goes first. On a player's turn they roll the dice and advance their piece clockwise around the board the corresponding number of squares. Rolling doubles allows a player to take another turn after moving their piece; however, if three consecutive doubles are rolled, the player is immediately sent to jail.\nA player who lands on or passes the \"GO\" space collects $200 from the bank. Players who land on either Income Tax or Luxury Tax pay the indicated amount to the bank. In older editions of the game, two options were given for Income Tax: either pay a flat fee of $200 (or $300) or 10% of total net worth (including the current values of all the properties and buildings owned). No calculation could be made before the choice, and no latitude was given for reversing an unwise decision. In 2008, the calculation option was removed from the official rules; simultaneously, the Luxury Tax was increased from $75 to $100. Nothing happens when a player lands on Free Parking.\nChance and Community Chest.\nIf a player lands on a Chance or Community Chest space, they take the top card from the respective deck and follow its instructions. This may include collecting or paying money to the bank or another player or moving to a different space on the board. Two types of cards that involve jail, \"Go to Jail\" and \"Get Out of Jail Free\", are explained below.\nJail.\nA player lands in Jail by:\nWhen a player is sent to Jail, they do not collect their $200 salary or pass Go. They move directly to the \"In Jail\" part of the \"In Jail/Just Visiting\" space, and their turn ends. If an ordinary dice roll (not one of the above events) ends with the player's token on the Jail corner, they are \"Just Visiting\" and can move ahead on their next turn without penalty.\nIf a player is in Jail, they cannot move and must either pay a fine of $50 to be released, use a Chance or Community Chest Get Out of Jail Free card, or roll doubles on their next turn. If a player fails to roll doubles, they lose their turn. Failing to roll doubles for three consecutive turns requires the player to either pay the $50 fine or use a Get Out of Jail Free card, then when they get out of Jail to move ahead according to the total rolled. Players in Jail may not buy properties directly from the bank since they cannot move. This does not impede any other transaction, meaning they can: mortgage properties, sell/trade properties to other players, buy/sell houses and hotels, collect rent, and bid on property auctions. A player who rolls doubles to leave Jail does not roll again; however, if the player pays the fine or uses a card to get out and then rolls doubles, they take another turn.\nProperties.\nA player who lands on any unowned property may buy it from the bank at the listed purchase price. If the player declines to do so, the bank auctions the property and all players are eligible to bid, including the one who landed on it. If they land on a property that they own, nothing happens.\nIf they land on a property that someone else owns and is unmortgaged, they must pay the owner a given rent if the owner calls for the rent within a certain time (typically it must be called before the next one or two players have thrown the dice, depending on edition). If a player has insufficient money to pay the rent, they may only mortgage properties or sell buildings to avoid going bankrupt. Previous editions of the rules were widely interpreted to mean trading with other players was allowed to avoid bankruptcy.\nIf a player owns all the properties in a color group, the rent on the properties is doubled; and, if no properties in the group are mortgaged (see below), they can increase rent further by building houses on the property. A player may build houses on their own turn or between other players' turns. They pay the bank the cost listed on the property deed to place a house on the property. Houses must be built evenly on a group of properties: e.g., a second house cannot be built on any property within a group until all of them have their first house. Once four houses are built on a property, instead of building a fifth house the player may (for the same cost as building a house) return the four houses to the bank and replace them with a hotel, beyond which no further development is possible. If there is more demand for houses to be built than houses remaining in the bank, then an auction is conducted to determine who will get to purchase each house. Houses and hotels may be sold back to the bank for half their purchase price.\nRailroads and utilities do not belong to color groups and may not have houses and hotels built on them. However, their rent increases if a player owns more than one of either type.\nProperties with no houses or hotels on them can be traded or sold between players at any time, in any deal that is mutually agreed upon.\nMortgaging.\nProperties with no buildings on them can also be mortgaged. The player receives half the purchase price from the bank for each mortgaged property. This must be repaid with 10% interest to unmortgage. Players cannot collect rent on mortgaged properties; however, trading mortgaged properties is allowed, but the player receiving the mortgaged property must pay the bank the mortgage price plus 10% or keep the property mortgaged by paying just the 10% interest amount; if the player chooses the latter, they must pay the 10% again when they pay unmortgage.\nBankruptcy.\nWhen a player incurs debt to another player or the bank, the player must be able to raise enough cash to pay the full amount owed. A player who cannot pay their debts is considered bankrupt and is eliminated from the game. If the bankrupt player owes the bank, they must return all of their properties to the bank who then removes all buildings and puts them up for auction. If the debt is owed to another player, all properties are given to that opponent, except buildings which must be sold to the bank. The new owner must either pay off any mortgages held by the bank on the properties received or pay a fee of 10% of the mortgaged value if they choose to leave the properties mortgaged.\nThe winner is the player remaining after all others have gone bankrupt.\nOfficial Short Game rules.\nFrom 1936, the rules booklet included with each Monopoly set contained a short section at the end providing rules for making the game shorter, including dealing out two Title Deed cards to each player before starting the game, by setting a time limit or by ending the game after two players go bankrupt. A later version of the rules changed the termination condition to one player going bankrupt, similar to the junior version, in addition to adding the time limit game, in the main rules booklet. Tournaments, which are played to a time limit, are played as standard games with no rule changes (no Title Deed cards handed to players).\nIn all short games (including tournament play), the winner (and other players who advance in tournament play) is determined by their score. A player's total score consists of cash on hand, added by properties owned based on the price printed on the board, mortgaged properties at one-half the price on the board (mortgage value), houses at the purchase price, and hotels, at the purchase price and value of houses turned in.\nHouse rules.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:30em; \"\nMany house rules have emerged for the game throughout its history. Well-known is the \"Free Parking jackpot rule\", where all the money collected from Income Tax, Luxury Tax, Chance and Community Chest goes to the center of the board instead of the bank. Many people add $500 to start each pile of Free Parking money, guaranteeing a minimum payout. When a player lands on Free Parking, they may take the money. Another rule is that if a player lands directly on Go (rather than passing by it on their turn), they collect double the usual amount ($400 instead of $200). Another rule is that if a player is in jail, they cannot collect rent, bid during auctions, or do any transactions.\nOther commonly used house rules include: eliminating property auctions if a player declines to buy or cannot afford an unowned property on which they land; awarding additional money for rolling \"snake eyes\"; allowing a player to loan money to another player; or enabling someone to grant rent immunity to someone else. Some players and tournaments add extra flexibility when settling debts by allowing property trades with other players.\nSince these rules typically provide additional cash to players regardless of their property management choices, they can lengthen the game considerably and limit the role of strategy.\nVideo game and computer game versions of \"Monopoly\" have \na couple of options where popular house rules can be used. In 2014, Hasbro determined five popular house rules by public Facebook vote, and released a \"House Rules Edition\" of the board game. Rules selected include a \"Free Parking\" house rule without additional money and forcing players to traverse the board once before buying properties.\nStrategy.\nAccording to Jim Slater in \"The Mayfair Set\", the Orange property group is the best to own because players land on them more often, as a result of the Chance cards \"Go to Jail\", \"Advance to St. Charles Place (Pall Mall)\", \"Advance to Reading Railroad (Kings Cross Station)\" and \"Go Back Three Spaces\".\nIn all, during game play, Illinois Avenue (Trafalgar Square) (Red), New York Avenue (Vine Street) (Orange), B&amp;O Railroad (Fenchurch Street Station), and Reading Railroad (Kings Cross Station) are the most frequently landed-upon properties. Mediterranean Avenue (Old Kent Road) (Brown/Purple), Baltic Avenue (Whitechapel Road) (Brown/Purple), Park Place (Park Lane) (Dark Blue), and Oriental Avenue (The Angel, Islington) (Light Blue) are the least-landed-upon properties. Among the property groups, the Railroads are most frequently landed upon, as no other group has four properties; Orange has the next highest frequency, followed by Red.\nAccording to \"Business Insider\", the best way to get the most out of every property is to build three houses on each as quickly as possible. In order to do so, the player must have all the corresponding properties of the color set. Once every possible property has three houses, it is advised they then upgrade to hotels.\nTrading.\nTrading is a vital strategy in order to accumulate all the properties in a color set. Obtaining all the properties in a specific color set enables the player to buy houses and hotels which increase the rent another player has to pay when they land on the property. According to \"Slate\", players trade to speed up the process and secure a win. Building at least 3 houses on each property allows the player to break even once at least one player lands on this property.\nEnd game.\nOne common criticism of \"Monopoly\" is that although it has carefully defined termination conditions, it may take an unlimited amount of time to reach them. Edward P. Parker, a former president of Parker Brothers, is quoted as saying, \"We always felt that forty-five minutes was about the right length for a game, but \"Monopoly\" could go on for hours. Also, a game was supposed to have a definite end somewhere. In \"Monopoly\" you kept going around and around.\"\nHasbro states that the longest game of \"Monopoly\" ever played lasted 70 days.\nRelated games.\nAdd-ons.\nNumerous add-ons have been produced for \"Monopoly\", sold independently from the game both before its commercialization and after, with three official ones discussed below:\n\"Stock Exchange\".\nThe original \"Stock Exchange\" add-on was published by Capitol Novelty Co. of Rensselaer, New York in early 1936. It was marketed as an add-on for \"Monopoly\", \"Finance\", or \"Easy Money\" games. Shortly after Capitol Novelty introduced \"Stock Exchange\", Parker Brothers bought it from them then marketed their own, slightly redesigned, version as an add-on specifically for their \"new\" \"Monopoly\" game; the Parker Brothers version was available in June 1936. The Free Parking square is covered over by a new Stock Exchange space and the add-on included three Chance and three Community Chest cards directing the player to \"Advance to Stock Exchange\".\nThe \"Stock Exchange\" add-on was later redesigned and re-released in 1992 under license by Chessex, this time including a larger number of new Chance and Community Chest cards. This version included ten new Chance cards (five \"Advance to Stock Exchange\" and five other related cards) and eleven new Community Chest cards (five \"Advance to Stock Exchange\" and six other related cards; the regular Community Chest card \"From sale of stock you get $45\" is removed from play when using these cards). Many of the original rules applied to this new version (in fact, one optional play choice allows for playing in the original form by only adding the \"Advance to Stock Exchange\" cards to each deck).\nA \"Monopoly Stock Exchange Edition\" was released in 2001 (although not in the U.S.), this time adding an electronic calculator-like device to keep track of the complex stock figures. This was a full edition, not just an add-on, that came with its own board, money and playing pieces. Properties on the board were replaced by companies on which shares could be floated, and offices and home offices (instead of houses and hotels) could be built.\nPlaymaster.\nPlaymaster, another official add-on, released in 1982, is an electronic device that keeps track of all player movement and dice rolls as well as what properties are still available. It then uses this information to call random auctions and mortgages making it easier to free up cards of a color group. It also plays eight short tunes when key game functions occur; for example when a player lands on a railroad it plays \"I've Been Working on the Railroad\", and a police car's siren sounds when a player goes to Jail.\n\"Get Out of Jail\" and \"Free Parking\" minigames.\nIn 2009, Hasbro released two minigames that can be played as stand-alone games or combined with the \"Monopoly\" game. In \"Get Out of Jail\", the goal is to manipulate a spade under a jail cell to flick out various colored prisoners. In \"Free Parking\", players attempt to balance taxis on a wobbly board. Both add-ons can also be integrated into the Monopoly game. Adding \"Free Parking\" allows players to take the \"Taxi Challenge\" when they land on Free Parking, and if successful, can move to any space on the board. Adding \"Get Out of Jail\" replaces the mechanic of rolling doubles to get out of jail with successfully flicking a prisoner out of the jail.\nSpeed Die.\nFirst included in Winning Moves' \"Monopoly: The Mega Edition\" variant, this third, six-sided die is rolled with the other two, and accelerates game-play when in use. In 2007, Parker Brothers began releasing its standard version (also called the Speed Die Edition) of \"Monopoly\" with the same die (originally in blue, later in red). Its faces are: 1, 2, 3, two \"Mr. Monopoly\" sides, and a bus. The numbers behave as normal, adding to the other two dice, unless a \"triple\" is rolled, in which case the player can move to any space on the board. If \"Mr. Monopoly\" is rolled while there are unowned properties, the player advances forward to the nearest one. Otherwise, the player advances to the nearest property on which rent is owed. In the \"Monopoly: Mega Edition\", rolling the bus allows the player to take the regular dice move, then either take a bus ticket or move to the nearest draw card space.\nMega rules specifies that triples do not count as doubles for going to jail as the player does not roll again. Used in a regular edition, the bus (properly \"get off the bus\") allows the player to use only one of the two numbered dice or the sum of both, thus a roll of 1, 5, and bus would let the player choose between moving 1, 5, or 6 spaces. The Speed Die is used throughout the game in the \"Mega Edition\", while in the regular edition it is used by any player who has passed GO at least once. In these editions it remains optional, although use of the Speed Die was made mandatory for use in the 2009 U.S. and World \"Monopoly\" Championship, as well as the 2015 World Championship.\n2025 expansion packs.\nOn January 7, 2025, three expansion packs were introduced by Hasbro: \"Go to Jail\", \"Buy Everything\" and \"Free Parking Jackpot,\" as part of the game's 90th anniversary celebration and a broader revamp of the classic board game. In all three versions, the game ends when one player goes bankrupt or all available properties are purchased, and the standard short game scoring is used to determine the winner.\nSpin-offs.\nParker Brothers and its licensees have also sold several spin-offs of \"Monopoly\". These are not add-ons, as they do not function as an addition to the \"Monopoly\" game, but are simply additional games with the flavor of \"Monopoly\":\nMonopoly for Sore Losers.\nMonopoly for Sore Losers is a spin-off of \"Monopoly\". It was published in 2020 by Hasbro and, according to the box, \"creates\u2014and celebrates\u2014sore losers\".\nIts main difference from standard \"Monopoly\" is the introduction of a sore loser mechanic, which allows players to temporarily assume control of a special token that protects them from most negative effects of landing on board spaces\u2014at their opponents' expense.\nGameplay differences from regular \"Monopoly\".\nDuring the initial roll to determine turn order, the player with the lowest total goes first.\nThe main difference from standard \"Monopoly\" is the introduction of the sore loser mechanic. Each player is given 2 sore loser coins upon the start of the game, and the remainder are placed in the centre of the board. A player collects a sore loser coin from the Bank if they have to do any of the following: pay rent to another player, pay taxes and bills to the Bank, go to jail, land on a property that they own, or draw a Chance or Community Chest card that instructs them to collect a coin. If a player lands on Free Parking, they are allowed to steal a sore loser coin from another player, which could be traded.\nA player may not collect a sore loser coin if they have four. At the beginning of their turn, a player with four sore loser coins, may place them in the centre of the board. That player then takes the Mr. Monopoly token and replaces their token with the Mr. Monopoly token\u2014their normal token being placed in the centre of the board. Whilst a player is Mr. Monopoly, they cannot collect sore loser coins, and the actions they take when landing on spaces are altered, including collecting money when landing on the properties of other players, collecting money from the bank when landing on a tax or bill space, not go to jail, and requiring other players to lose sore loser coins.\nWhenever any player, including Mr. Monopoly's owner, rolls doubles, Mr. Monopoly's owner is allowed to place one free house on any street on the board. The property selected for this free house does not need to be owned by Mr. Monopoly, nor does it need to be part of a complete set, and placing doubles houses unevenly is also allowed. However, Mr. Monopoly's owner may not place this free house on a street that already has four houses, nor may they upgrade to a hotel.\nBuildings are permanent and could not be sold. If a property with buildings on it is traded away, the buildings remain and start providing rent to the new owner.\nIf Mr. Monopoly's dice roll makes him land on the same space as another player, the Mr. Monopoly token is placed over that other player's token, and Mr. Monopoly's owner is allowed to steal one property from the player he landed on\u2014said property must not be part of a complete set. If a property with buildings on it is stolen, the buildings remain on the property and start providing rent to Mr. Monopoly's owner. In addition, whilst a player is under Mr. Monopoly, they are trapped\u2014their turn will be skipped until Mr. Monopoly moves, but said players can still take part in auctions and trade. If Mr. Monopoly lands on the Jail space, he traps other players on both spaces. However, these actions could not be taken if a player becomes Mr. Monopoly whilst on the same space as another player.\nOnce Mr. Monopoly is in play, if another player cashes in their sore loser coins to become him, the old owner restores their normal token to the space they are on, and Mr. Monopoly is transferred to the space of the new owner, whose token is placed in the centre of the board.\nIf a player goes bankrupt, their sore loser coins are returned to the centre of the board.\nThe game is ended through one of two means- bankruptcy or all of the properties have been purchased. If the latter happens, players must return to Go, with Mr. Monopoly's owner not allowed to steal a property when they land on Go for the final time. Players subsequently collect rent from all of their properties, according to full colour sets and development, and after that the player with the most capital is the winner.\nVideo games.\nBesides the many variants of the actual game (and the \"Monopoly Junior\" spin-off) released in either video game or computer game formats (e.g., Commodore 64, Macintosh, Windows-based PC, Game Boy, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo Entertainment System, iPad, Genesis, Super NES, etc.), two spin-off computer games have been created. In 1995, Hasbro released their first in-house \"Monopoly\" video game. An electronic hand-held version was marketed from 1997 to 2001. Notable recent releases include:\nGambling games.\n\"Monopoly\"-themed slot machines and lotteries have been produced by WMS Gaming in conjunction with International Game Technology for land-based casinos. WagerWorks, who have the online rights to \"Monopoly\", have created online \"Monopoly\" themed games.\nLondon's Gamesys Group have also developed \"Monopoly\"-themed gambling games. The British quiz machine brand itbox also supports a \"Monopoly\" trivia and chance game.\nThere was also a live, online version of \"Monopoly\". Six painted taxis drive around London picking up passengers. When the taxis reach their final destination, the region of London that they are in is displayed on the online board. This version takes far longer to play than board-game \"Monopoly\", with one game lasting 24 hours. Results and position are sent to players via e-mail at the conclusion of the game.\nPlay-by-mail game.\nMail Games Inc. created a play-by-mail game (PBM) version of \"Monopoly\", reviewed in the August\u2013September 1990 issue of \"White Wolf Magazine\". The PBM version was similar to the board game, although compared with many PBM games it was relatively simple. The game moderator processed players' turn orders simultaneously, but alternated the order that players' turns were initiated to allow sequential transactions as in the board game.\nMedia.\nCommercial promotions.\nThe McDonald's Monopoly game is a sweepstakes advertising promotion of McDonald's and Hasbro that has been offered in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, United Kingdom and United States.\nTelevision game show.\nA short-lived \"Monopoly\" game show aired on Saturday evenings from June 16 to September 1, 1990, on ABC. The show was produced by Merv Griffin and hosted by Mike Reilly. The show was paired with a summer-long \"Super Jeopardy!\" tournament, which also aired during this period on ABC.\nFrom 2010 to 2014, The Hub aired the game show \"Family Game Night\" with Todd Newton. For the first two seasons, teams earned cash in the form of \"Monopoly Crazy Cash Cards\" from the \"Monopoly Crazy Cash Corner\", which was then inserted to the \"Monopoly Crazy Cash Machine\" at the end of the show. In addition, beginning with Season 2, teams won \"Monopoly Party Packages\" for winning the individual games. For Season 3, there was a Community Chest. Each card on Mr. Monopoly had a combination of three colors. Teams used the combination card to unlock the chest. If it was the right combination, they advanced to the Crazy Cash Machine for a brand-new car. For the show's fourth season, a new game was added called Monopoly Remix, featuring Park Place and Boardwalk, as well as Income Tax and Luxury Tax.\nTo honor the game's 80th anniversary, a game show in syndication on March 28, 2015, called \"Monopoly Millionaires' Club\" was launched. It was connected with a multi-state lottery game of the same name and hosted by comedian Billy Gardell from \"Mike &amp; Molly\". The game show was filmed at the Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino and at Bally's Las Vegas in Las Vegas, with players having a chance to win up to $1,000,000. However, the lottery game connected with the game show (which provided the contestants) went through multiple complications and variations, and the game show last aired at the end of April 2016.\nFilms.\nIn November 2008, Ridley Scott was announced to direct Universal Pictures' film version of the game, based on a script written by Pamela Pettler. The film was being co-produced by Hasbro's Brian Goldner as part of a deal with Hasbro to develop movies based on the company's line of toys and games. The story was being developed by author Frank Beddor. However, Universal eventually halted development in February 2012 then opted out of the agreement and the rights reverted to Hasbro.\nIn October 2012, Hasbro announced a new partnership with production company Emmett/Furla Films, and said they would develop a live-action version of the game, along with Action Man and Hungry Hungry Hippos. Emmett/Furla/Oasis dropped out of the production of this satire version that was to be directed by Ridley Scott.\nIn July 2015, Hasbro announced that Lionsgate would distribute a \"Monopoly\" film with Andrew Niccol writing the film as a family-friendly action adventure film co-financed and produced by Lionsgate and Hasbro's Allspark Pictures.\nIn January 2019, it was announced that Allspark Pictures would now be producing an untitled \"Monopoly\" film in conjunction with Kevin Hart's company HartBeat Productions and The Story Company. Hart was attached to star in the film and Tim Story was attached to direct. No logline or writer for this iteration of the long-gestating project had been announced.\nIn April 2024 at CinemaCon, it was announced that Lionsgate and Hasbro Entertainment would partner with Margot Robbie and Tom Ackerley's company LuckyChap Entertainment to produce the \"Monopoly\" film adaptation.\nThe documentary \"\", covering the history and players of the game, won an Audience Award for Best Documentary at the 2010 Anaheim International Film Festival. The film played theatrically in the U.S. beginning in March 2011 and was released on Amazon and iTunes on February 14, 2012. The television version of the film won four regional Emmy Awards from the Pacific Southwest Chapter of NATAS. The film is directed by Kevin Tostado and narrated by Zachary Levi.\nIt is the subject of Stephen Ives' documentary film \"Ruthless: Monopoly's Secret History\" which first aired on \"American Experience\" on February 20, 2023.\nTournaments.\nU.S. National Championship.\nUntil 1999, U.S. entrants had to win a state/district/territory competition to represent that state/district/territory at the once every four-year national championship. The 1999 U.S. National Tournament had 50 contestants\u201449 State Champions (Oklahoma was not represented) and the reigning national champion.\nQualifying for the National Championship has been online since 2003. For the 2003 Championship, qualification was limited to the first fifty people who correctly completed an online quiz. Out of concerns that such methods of qualifying might not always ensure a competition of the best players, the 2009 Championship qualifying was expanded to include an online multiple-choice quiz (a score of 80% or better was required to advance); followed by an online five-question essay test; followed by a two-game online tournament at Pogo.com. The process was to have produced a field of 23 plus one: Matt McNally, the 2003 national champion, who received a bye and was not required to qualify. However, at the end of the online tournament, there was an eleven-way tie for the last six spots. The decision was made to invite all of those who had tied for said spots. In fact, two of those who had tied and would have otherwise been eliminated, Dale Crabtree of Indianapolis, Indiana, and Brandon Baker, of Tuscaloosa, Alabama, played in the final game and finished third and fourth respectively.\nThe 2009 \"Monopoly\" U.S. National Championship was held on April 14\u201315 in Washington, D.C. In his first tournament, Richard Marinaccio, an attorney from Sloan, New York, beat two previous champions to be crowned the 2009 U.S. National Champion and took home $20,580\u2014the amount of money in the bank of the board game\u2014and competed in the 2009 World Championship in Las Vegas, Nevada, on October 21\u201322, where he finished in third place.\nIn 2015, Hasbro used an online competition to determine who would be the U.S. representative to compete at the 2015 \"Monopoly\" World Championship. Interested players took a twenty-question quiz on \"Monopoly\" strategy and rules and submitted a hundred-word essay on how to win a \"Monopoly\" tournament. Hasbro then selected Brian Valentine of Washington, D.C., to be the U.S. representative.\nWorld Championship.\nHasbro conducts a worldwide \"Monopoly\" tournament. The first \"Monopoly\" World Championships took place in Grossinger's Resort in New York, in November 1973, but they did not include competitors from outside the United States until 1975. It has been aired in the United States by ESPN. In 2009, forty-one players competed for the title of \"Monopoly\" World Champion and a cash prize of $20,580 (USD)\u2014the total amount of Monopoly money in the current Monopoly set used in the tournament. The most recent World Championship took place September 2015 in Macau. Italian Nicol\u00f2 Falcone defeated the defending world champion and players from twenty-six other countries. World Championships were planned for 2021 but were canceled due to the Coronavirus pandemic.\nVariants.\nBecause \"Monopoly\" evolved in the public domain before its commercialization, \"Monopoly\" has seen many variant games. The game is licensed in 103 countries and printed in thirty-seven languages. Most of the variants are exact copies of the \"Monopoly\" games with the street names replaced with locales from a particular town, university, or fictional place. National boards have been released as well. Over the years, many specialty \"Monopoly\" editions, licensed by Parker Brothers/Hasbro, and produced by them, or their licensees (including USAopoly and Winning Moves Games) have been sold to local and national markets worldwide. Two well known \"families\" of -opoly like games, without licenses from Parker Brothers/Hasbro, have also been produced.\nSeveral published games like \"Monopoly\" include:\nOther unlicensed editions include: \"BibleOpoly\", \"HomoNoPolis\" and Petropolis, among others.\nGames by locale or theme.\nThere have been a large number of localized editions, broken down here by region:\nUnauthorized and parody games.\nThis list is of unauthorized, unlicensed games based on \"Monopoly\":\n\"Ghettopoly\"\n\"Middopoly\"\n\"Memeopolis\" (Android app)\nWorld editions.\nIn 2008, Hasbro released \"Monopoly Here and Now: The World Edition\". This world edition features top locations of the world. The locations were decided by votes over the Internet. The result of the voting was announced on August 20, 2008.\nOut of these, Gdynia is especially notable, as it is by far the smallest city of those featured and won the vote as a \"wild card\" along with Taipei thanks to its residents and supporters.\nIt is also notable that three cities (Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver) are from Canada and three other cities (Beijing, Hong Kong, and Shanghai) are from the People's Republic of China. No other countries are represented by more than one city.\nOf the 68 cities listed on Hasbro Inc.'s website for the vote, Jerusalem was chosen as one of the 20 cities to be featured in the newest \"Monopoly\" World Edition. Before the vote took place, a Hasbro employee in the London office eliminated the country signifier \"Israel\" after the city, in response to pressure from pro-Palestinian advocacy groups. After the Israeli government protested, Hasbro Inc. issued a statement that read: \"It was a bad decision, one that we rectified relatively quickly. This is a game. We never wanted to enter into any political debate. We apologize to our \"Monopoly\" fans.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Monopoly Here and Now: The World Edition\" (2008)\n&lt;table \nborder=\"3\" cellspacing=\"0\" cellpadding=\"3\" style=\"text-align:center;font:normal 8pt/9pt helvetica,arial,sans-serif;width:400px;border-collapse:separate; background-color:#F0FFF0;\"&gt;\n&lt;/table&gt;\nA similar online vote was held in early 2015 for an updated version of the game. The resulting board was released worldwide in late 2015. Lima, Peru, won the vote to hold the Boardwalk space.\nDeluxe editions.\nHasbro sells a \"Deluxe Edition\", which is mostly identical to the classic edition but has wooden houses and hotels and gold-toned tokens, including one token in addition to the standard eleven, a railroad locomotive. Other additions to the \"Deluxe Edition\" include a card carousel, which holds the title deed cards, and money printed with two colors of ink.\nIn 1978, retailer Neiman Marcus manufactured and sold an all-chocolate edition of \"Monopoly\" through its \"Christmas Wish Book\" for that year. The entire set was edible, including the money, dice, hotels, properties, tokens and playing board. The set retailed for $600.\nIn 2000, the FAO Schwarz store in New York City sold a custom version called \"One-Of-A-Kind Monopoly\" for $100,000. This special edition comes in a locking attach\u00e9 case made with Napolino leather and lined in suede, and features include:\nThe \"Guinness Book of World Records\" states that a set worth $2,000,000 and made of 23-carat gold, with rubies and sapphires atop the chimneys of the houses and hotels, is the most expensive \"Monopoly\" set ever produced. This set was designed by artist Sidney Mobell to honor the game's 50th anniversary in 1985, and is now in the Smithsonian Institution.\nReception.\nDespite the game's legacy and forming a prominent aspect of modern culture, contemporary reviews of \"Monopoly\" are largely negative. On BoardGameGeek, the game is ranked in the bottom ten board games, with a mean rating of 4.4/10. \"Wired\" magazine believes \"Monopoly\" is a poorly designed game. Former Wall Streeter Derk Solko explains, \"\"Monopoly\" has you grinding your opponents into dust. It's a very negative experience. It's all about cackling when your opponent lands on your space and you get to take all their money.\" \"Wired\" further observed that most of the three to four-hour average playing time is spent waiting for other players to play their turn, and there is usually little to no choice involved. \"Board game enthusiasts disparagingly call this a 'roll your dice, move your mice' format.\" FiveThirtyEight also stated that the game suffers from issues of elimination and a runaway leader, problems that \"most game designers nowadays try to avoid\". The Guardian also describes Monopoly as \"a collection of terrible design choices\" combined with \"an array of house rules that serve only to make the experience ever more interminable\".\n\"Games\" magazine included \"Monopoly\" in their \"Top 100 Games of 1980\", praising it as \"the original landlord game in which players buy, sell, and rent Atlantic City real estate at pre-casino prices\" and noting that at the time it was \"so popular that Parker Brothers prints more paper money each year than the U.S Government\". It was again included in their \"Top 100 Games of 1981\", noting that despite having been \"Initially rejected by both Parker and Milton Bradley as containing 'fundamental errors' that the public would not accept\", it became \"one of the most popular games in the world, and deservedly so\", and again in their \"Top 100 Games of 1982\", commenting that \"The orange monopoly is the best [...] Try counting how many times you land on it as you leave jail.\"\nFigurative language.\nMonopoly's popularity has led to it spawning a number of English turns of phrase. These include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19693", "revid": "295399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19693", "title": "Max Steiner", "text": "Austrian-born American composer (1888\u20131971)\nMaximilian Raoul Steiner (10 May 1888\u00a0\u2013 28 December 1971) was an Austrian composer and conductor who emigrated to America and became one of Hollywood's greatest musical composers.\nSteiner was a child prodigy who conducted his first operetta when he was twelve and became a full-time professional, proficient at composing, arranging, and conducting, by the time he was fifteen. Threatened with internment in England during World War I, he fled to Broadway; and in 1929 he moved to Hollywood, where he became one of the first composers to write music scores for films. He is often referred to as \"the father of film music\", as Steiner played a major part in creating the tradition of writing music for films, along with composers Dimitri Tiomkin, Erich Wolfgang Korngold, Franz Waxman, Alfred Newman, Bernard Herrmann, and Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa.\nSteiner composed over 300 film scores with RKO Pictures and Warner Bros., and was nominated for 24 Academy Awards, winning three: \"The Informer\" (1935); \"Now, Voyager\" (1942); and \"Since You Went Away\" (1944). Besides his Oscar-winning scores, some of Steiner's popular works include \"King Kong\" (1933), \"Little Women\" (1933), \"Jezebel\" (1938), and \"Casablanca\" (1942), though he did not compose its love theme, \"As Time Goes By\". In addition, Steiner scored \"The Searchers\" (1956), \"A Summer Place\" (1959), and \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939), which ranked second on the AFI's list of best American film scores, and is the film score for which he is best known.\nHe was also the first recipient of the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score, which he won for his score for \"Life with Father\". Steiner was a frequent collaborator with some of the best known film directors in history, including Michael Curtiz, John Ford, and William Wyler, and scored many of the films with Errol Flynn, Bette Davis, Humphrey Bogart, and Fred Astaire. Many of his film scores are available as separate soundtrack recordings.\nBiography.\nEarly years (1888\u20131907).\nMax Steiner was born on 10 May 1888, in Vienna, Austria-Hungary, as the only child in a wealthy business and theatrical family of Jewish heritage. He was named after his paternal grandfather, Maximilian Steiner (1839\u20131880), who was credited with first persuading Johann Strauss II to write for the theater, and was the influential manager of Vienna's historic Theater an der Wien. His parents were Marie Josefine/Mirjam (Hasiba) and Hungarian-Jewish G\u00e1bor Steiner (1858\u20131944, born in Temesv\u00e1r, Kingdom of Hungary, Austrian Empire), a Viennese impresario, carnival exposition manager, and inventor, responsible for building the Wiener Riesenrad. His father encouraged Steiner's musical talent, and allowed him to conduct an American operetta at the age of twelve, \"The Belle of New York\", which allowed Steiner to gain early recognition by the operetta's author, Gustave Kerker. Steiner's mother Marie was a dancer in stage productions put on by his grandfather when she was young, but later became involved in the restaurant business. Richard Strauss strongly influenced Steiner's future work. Steiner often credited his family for inspiring his early musical abilities. As early as six years old, Steiner was taking three or four piano lessons a week from Johannes Brahms but often became bored with the lessons. Because of this, he would practice improvising on his own, his father encouraging him to write his music down. Steiner cited his early improvisation as an influence of his taste in music, particularly his interest in the music of Claude Debussy which was \"avant garde\" for the time. In his youth, he began his composing career through his work on marches for regimental bands and hit songs for a show put on by his father.\nSteiner's parents sent him to the Vienna University of Technology, but he expressed little interest in scholastic subjects. He enrolled in the Imperial Academy of Music in 1904, where, due to his precocious musical talents and private tutoring by Robert Fuchs, and Gustav Mahler, he completed a four-year course in only one year, winning himself a gold medal from the academy at the age of fifteen. He studied various instruments including violin, double bass, organ, and trumpet. His preferred and best instrument was the piano, but he acknowledged the importance of being familiar with what the other instruments could do. He also had courses in harmony, counterpoint, and composition. Along with Mahler and Fuchs, he cited his teachers as Felix Weingartner and Edmund Eysler.\nBeginning music career (1907\u20131914).\nThe music of Edmund Eysler was an early influence in the pieces of Max Steiner; however, one of his first introductions to operettas was by Franz Leh\u00e1r who worked for a time as a military bandmaster for Steiner's father's theatre. Steiner paid tribute to Leh\u00e1r through an operetta modeled after Leh\u00e1r's \"Die lustige Witwe\" which Steiner staged in 1907 in Vienna. Eysler was well known for his operettas though as critiqued by Richard Traubner, the libretti were poor, with a fairly simple style, the music often relying too heavily on the Viennese waltz style. As a result, when Steiner started writing pieces for the theater, he was interested in writing libretto as his teacher had, but had minimal success. However, many of his future film scores such as \"Dark Victory\" (1939), \"In This Our Life\" (1941), and \"Now, Voyager\" (1942) had frequent waltz melodies as influenced by Eysler. According to author of \"Max Steiner's \"Now, Voyager\"\" Kate Daubney, Steiner may also have been influenced by Felix Weingartner who conducted the Vienna Opera from 1908 to 1911. Although he took composition classes from Weingartner, as a young boy, Steiner always wanted to be a great conductor.\nBetween 1907 and 1914, Steiner traveled between Britain and Europe to work on theatrical productions. Steiner first entered the world of professional music when he was fifteen. He wrote and conducted the operetta \"The Beautiful Greek Girl\", but his father refused to stage it saying it was not good enough. Steiner took the composition to competing impresario Carl Tuschl who offered to produce it. Much to Steiner's pleasure, it ran in the Orpheum Theatre for a year. This led to opportunities to conduct other shows in various cities around the world, including Moscow and Hamburg. Upon returning to Vienna, Steiner found his father in bankruptcy. Having difficulties finding work, he moved to London (in part to follow an English showgirl he had met in Vienna). In London, he was invited to conduct Lehar's \"The Merry Widow\". He stayed in London for eight years conducting musicals at Daly's Theatre, the Adelphi, the Hippodrome, the London Pavilion, and the Blackpool Winter Gardens. Steiner married Beatrice Tilt on September 12, 1912. The exact date of their divorce is unknown.\nIn England, Steiner wrote and conducted theater productions and symphonies. But the beginning of World War I in 1914 led him to be interned as an enemy alien. Fortunately, he was befriended by the Duke of Westminster, who was a fan of his work, and was given exit papers to go to America, although his money was impounded. He arrived in New York City in December 1914, with only $32. Unable to find work, he resorted to menial jobs such as a copyist for Harms Music Publishing, which quickly led him to jobs orchestrating stage musicals.\nBroadway music (1914\u20131929).\nIn New York, Max Steiner quickly acquired employment and worked for fifteen years as a musical director, arranger, orchestrator, and conductor of Broadway productions. These productions include operettas and musicals written by Victor Herbert, Jerome Kern, Vincent Youmans, and George Gershwin, among others. Steiner's credits include: \"George White's Scandals\" (1922) (director), \"Peaches\" (1923) (composer), and \"Lady, Be Good\" (1924) (conductor and orchestrator). At twenty-seven years old, Steiner became Fox Film's musical director in 1915. At the time, there was no specially written music for films and Steiner told studio founder William Fox his idea to write an original score for \"The Bondman\" (1916). Fox agreed and they put together a 110-piece orchestra to accompany the screenings. During his time working on Broadway, he married Audree van Lieu on 27 April 1927. They divorced on 14 December 1933. In 1927, Steiner orchestrated and conducted Harry Tierney's \"Rio Rita\". Tierney himself later requested RKO Pictures in Hollywood hire Steiner to work in their music production departments. William LeBaron, RKO's head of production, traveled to New York to watch Steiner conduct and was impressed by Steiner and his musicians, who each played several instruments. Eventually, Steiner became a Hollywood asset. Steiner's final production on Broadway was \"Sons O' Guns\" in 1929.\nScoring for RKO (1929\u20131937).\nBy request of Harry Tierney, RKO hired Max Steiner as an orchestrator and his first film job consisted of composing music for the main and end titles and occasional \"on screen\" music. According to Steiner, the general opinion of filmmakers during the time was that film music was a \"necessary evil\", and would often slow down production and release of the film after it was filmed. Steiner's first job was for the film \"Dixiana\"; however, after a while, RKO decided to let him go, feeling they were not using him. His agent found him a job as a musical director on an operetta in Atlantic City. Before he left RKO, they offered him a month to month contract as the head of the music department with promise of more work in the future and he agreed. Because the few composers in Hollywood were unavailable, Steiner composed his first film score for \"Cimarron\". The score was well received and was partially credited for the success of the film. He turned down several offers to teach film scoring technique in Moscow and Peking in order to stay in Hollywood. In 1932, Steiner was asked by David O. Selznick, the new producer at RKO, to add music to \"Symphony of Six Million\". Steiner composed a short segment; Selznick liked it so much that he asked him to compose the theme and underscoring for the entire picture. Selznick was proud of the film, feeling it gave a realistic view of Jewish family life and tradition. \"Music until then had not been used very much for underscoring\". Steiner \"pioneered the use of original composition as background scoring for films\". The successful scoring in \"Symphony of Six Million\" was a turning point for Steiner's career and for the film industry. Steiner reflected that a large part of the success of \"Symphony of Six Million\" \"was attributed to the extensive use of music\" in the film.\nThe score for \"King Kong\" (1933) became Steiner's breakthrough and represented a paradigm shift in the scoring of fantasy and adventure films. The score was an integral part of the film, because it added realism to an unrealistic film plot. The studio's bosses were initially skeptical about the need for an original score; however, since they disliked the film's contrived special effects, they let Steiner try to improve the film with music. The studio suggested using old tracks in order to save on the cost of the film; however, \"King Kong\" producer Merian C. Cooper asked Steiner to score the film and said he would pay for the orchestra. Steiner took advantage of this offer and used an eighty-piece orchestra, explaining the film \"was made for music\". According to Steiner, \"it was the kind of film that allowed you to do anything and everything, from weird chords and dissonances to pretty melodies.\" Steiner additionally scored the wild tribal music which accompanied the ceremony to sacrifice Ann to Kong. He wrote the score in two weeks and the music recording cost around $50,000. The film became a \"landmark of film scoring\", as it showed the power music has to manipulate audience emotions. Steiner constructed the score on Wagnerian leitmotif principle, which calls for special themes for leading characters and concepts. The theme of the monster is recognizable as a descending three-note chromatic motif. After the death of King Kong, the Kong theme and the Fay Wray theme converge, underlining the \"Beauty and the Beast\" type relationship between the characters. The music in the film's finale helped express the tender feelings Kong had for the woman without the film having to explicitly state it. The majority of the music is heavy and loud, but some of the music is a bit lighter. For example, when the ship sails into Skull Island, Steiner keeps the music calm and quiet with a small amount of texture in the harps to help characterize the ship as it cautiously moves through the misty waters. Steiner received a bonus from his work, as Cooper credited 25 percent of the film's success to the film score. Before he died, Steiner admitted \"King Kong\" was one of his favorite scores.\n\"King Kong\" quickly made Steiner one of the most respected names in Hollywood. He continued as RKO's music director for two more years, until 1936. Max married Louise Klos, a harpist, in 1936. They had a son, Ron, together and they divorced in 1946. Steiner composed, arranged and conducted another 55 films, including three of Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers' dance musicals. Additionally, Steiner wrote a sonata used in Katharine Hepburn's first film, \"Bill of Divorcement\" (1932). RKO producers, including Selznick, often came to him when they had problems with films, treating him as if he were a music \"doctor\". Steiner was asked to compose a score for \"Of Human Bondage\" (1934), which originally lacked music. He added musical touches to significant scenes. Director John Ford called on Steiner to score his film, \"The Lost Patrol\" (1934), which lacked tension without music.\nJohn Ford hired Steiner again to compose for his next film, \"The Informer\" (1935), before Ford began production of the film. Ford even asked his screenwriter to meet with Steiner during the writing phase to collaborate. This was unusual for Steiner who typically refused to compose a score from anything earlier than a rough cut of the film. Because Steiner scored the music before and during film production, Ford would sometimes shoot scenes in synchronization with the music Steiner composed rather than the usual practice of film composers synchronizing music to the film's scenes. Consequently, Steiner directly influenced the development of the protagonist, Gypo. Victor McLaglen, who played Gypo, rehearsed his walking in order to match the fumbling leitmotif Steiner had created for Gypo. This unique film production practice was successful; the film was nominated for six Academy Awards and won four, including Steiner's first Academy Award for Best Scoring. This score helped to exemplify Steiner's ability to encompass the essence of a film in a single theme. The main title of the film's soundtrack has three specific aspects. First, the heavy-march-like theme helps to describe the oppressive military and main character Gypo's inevitable downfall. Second, the character's theme is stern and sober and puts the audience into the correct mood for the film. Finally, the theme of the music contains some Irish folk song influences which serves to better characterize the Irish historical setting and influence of the film. The theme is not heard consistently throughout the film and serves rather as a framework for the other melodic motifs heard throughout different parts of the film.\nThe score for this film is made up of many different themes which characterize the different personages and situations in the film. Steiner helps portray the genuine love Katie has for the main character Gypo. In one scene, Katie calls after Gypo as a solo violin echos the falling cadence of her voice. In another scene, Gypo sees an advertisement for a steamship to America and instead of the advertisement, sees himself holding Katie's hand on the ship. Wedding bells are heard along with organ music and he sees Katie wearing a veil and holding a bouquet. In a later scene, the Katie theme plays as a drunk Gypo sees a beautiful woman at the bar, insinuating he had mistaken her for Katie. Other musical themes included in the film score are an Irish folk song on French horns for Frankie McPhilip, a warm string theme for Dan and Gallagher and Mary McPhillip, and a sad theme on English horn with harp for the blind man.The most important motif in the film is the theme of betrayal relating to how Gypo betrays his friend Frankie: the \"blood-money\" motif. The theme is heard as the Captain throws the money on the table after Frankie is killed. The theme is a four note descending tune on harp; the first interval is the tritone. As the men are deciding who will be the executioner, the motif is repeated quietly and perpetually to establish Gypo's guilt and the musical motif is synchronized with the dripping of water in the prison. As it appears in the end of the film, the theme is played at a fortissimo volume as Gypo staggers into the church, ending the climax with the clap of the cymbals, indicating Gypo's penitence, no longer needing to establish his guilt.\nSilent film mannerisms are still seen in Steiner's composition such as when actions or consequences are accompanied by a \"sforzato\" chord immediately before it, followed by silence. An example of this is remarked in the part of the film when Frankie confronts Gypo looking at his reward for arrest poster. Steiner uses minor \"Mickey Mousing\" techniques in the film. Through this score, Steiner showed the potential of film music, as he attempted the show the internal struggles inside of Gypo's mind through the mixing of different themes such as the Irish \"Circassian Circle\", the \"blood-money\" motif, and Frankie's theme. The score concludes with an original \"Sancta Maria\" by Steiner. Some writers have erroneously referred to the cue as featuring Franz Schubert's \"Ave Maria\".\nIn 1937, Steiner was hired by Frank Capra to conduct Dimitri Tiomkin's score for \"Lost Horizon\" (1937) as a safeguard in case Steiner needed to rewrite the score by an inexperienced Tiomkin; however, according to Hugo Friedhofer, Tiomkin specifically asked for Steiner, preferring him over the film studio's then music director. Selznick set up his own production company in 1936 and recruited Steiner to write the scores for his next three films.\nComposing for Warner Bros. (1937\u20131953).\nIn April 1937, Steiner left RKO and signed a long-term contract with Warner Bros.; he would, however, continue to work for Selznick. The first film he scored for Warner Bros. was \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1936). Steiner became a mainstay at Warner Bros., scoring 140 of their films over the next 30 years alongside Hollywood stars such as Bette Davis, Errol Flynn, Humphrey Bogart, and James Cagney. Steiner frequently worked with composer Hugo Friedhofer who was hired as an orchestrator for Warner Bros; Friedholfer would orchestrate more than 50 of Steiner's pieces during his career. In 1938, Steiner wrote and arranged the first \"composed for film\" piece, \"Symphony Moderne\" which a character plays on the piano and later plays as a theme in \"Four Daughters\" (1938) and is performed by a full orchestra in \"Four Wives\" (1939).\nIn 1939, Steiner was borrowed from Warner Bros. by Selznick to compose the score for \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939), which became one of Steiner's most notable successes. Steiner was the only composer Selznick considered for scoring the film. Steiner was given only three months to complete the score, despite composing twelve more film scores in 1939, more than he would in any other year of his career. Because Selznick was concerned Steiner wouldn't have enough time to finish the score, he had Franz Waxman write an additional score in the case the Steiner didn't finish. To meet the deadline, Steiner sometimes worked for 20-hours straight, assisted by doctor-administered Benzedrine to stay awake. When the film was released, it was the longest film score ever composed, nearly three hours. The composition consisted of 16 main themes and nearly 300 musical segments. Due to the score's length, Steiner had help from four orchestrators and arrangers, including Heinz Roemheld, to work on the score. Selznick had asked Steiner to use only pre-existing classical music to help cut down on cost and time, but Steiner tried to convince him that filling the picture with swatches of classic concert music or popular works would not be as effective as an original score, which could be used to heighten the emotional content of scenes. Steiner ignored Selznick's wishes and composed an entirely new score. Selznick's opinion about using original scoring may have changed due to the overwhelming reaction to the film, nearly all of which contained Steiner's music. A year later, he even wrote a letter emphasizing the value of original film scores. The most well known of Steiner's themes for the score is the \"Tara\" theme for the O'Hara family plantation. Steiner explains Scarlett's deep-founded love for her home is why \"the 'Tara' theme begins and ends with the picture and permeates the entire score\". The film went on to win ten Academy Awards, although not for Best Original Score, which instead went to Herbert Stothart for \"The Wizard of Oz\". The score of \"Gone with the Wind\" is ranked #2 by AFI as the second greatest American film score of all time.\n\"Now, Voyager\" would be the film score for which Steiner would win his second Academy Award. Kate Daubney attributes the success of this score to Steiner's ability to \"[balance] the scheme of thematic meaning with the sound of the music.\" Steiner used motifs and thematic elements in the music to emphasize the emotional development of the narrative. After finishing \"Now, Voyager\" (1942), Steiner was hired to score the music for \"Casablanca\" (1942). Steiner would typically wait until the film was edited before scoring it, and after watching \"Casablanca\", he decided the song \"As Time Goes By\" by Herman Hupfeld wasn't an appropriate addition to the movie and he wanted to replace it with a song of his own composition; however, Ingrid Bergman had just cut her hair short in preparation for filming \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" (1943), so she couldn't re-film the section with Steiner's song. Stuck with \"As Time Goes By\", Steiner embraced the song and made it the center theme of his score. Steiner's score for \"Casablanca\" was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture, losing to \"The Song of Bernadette\" (1943). Steiner received his third and final Oscar in 1944 for \"Since You Went Away\" (1944). Steiner actually first composed the theme from \"Since You Went Away\" while helping counterbalance Franz Waxman's moody score for \"Rebecca\". Producer David O. Selznick liked the theme so much, he asked Steiner to include it in \"Since You Went Away\". In 1947, Max married Leonette Blair.\nSteiner also found success with the film noir genre. \"The Big Sleep\", \"Mildred Pierce\", and \"The Letter\" were his best film noir scores of the 1940s. \"The Letter\" is set in Singapore, the tale of murder begins with the loud main musical theme during the credits, which sets the tense and violent mood of the film. The main theme characterizes Leslie, the main character, by her tragic passion. The main theme is heard in the confrontation between Leslie and the murdered man's wife in the Chinese shop. Steiner portrays this scene through the jangling of wind chimes which crescendos as the wife emerges through opium smoke. The jangling continues until the wife asks Leslie to take off her shawl, after which the theme blasts indicating the breaking point of emotions of these women. Steiner's score for \"The Letter\" was nominated for the 1941 Academy Award for Best Original Score, losing to Walt Disney's \"Pinocchio\". In the score for \"The Big Sleep\", Steiner uses musical thematic characterization for the characters in the film. The theme for Philip Marlowe (Humphrey Bogart) is beguiling and ironic, with a playful grace note at the end of the motif, portrayed mixed between major and minor. At the end of the film, his theme is played fully in major chords and finishes by abruptly ending the chord as the film terminates (this was an unusual film music practice in Hollywood at the time). According to Christopher Palmer, the love theme for Bogart's Philip and Lauren Bacall's Vivian is one of Steiner's strongest themes. Steiner uses the contrast of high strings and low strings and brass to emphasize Philip's feelings for Vivian opposed with the brutality of the criminal world.In 1947, Steiner scored a film noir Western, \"Pursued\".\nSteiner had more success with the Western genre of film, writing the scores for over twenty large-scale Westerns, most with epic-inspiring scores \"about empire building and progress\", like \"Dodge City\" (1939), \"The Oklahoma Kid\" (1939), and \"Virginia City\" (1940). \"Dodge City\", starring Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, is a good example of Steiner's handling of typical scenes of the Western genre. Steiner used a \"lifting, loping melody\" which reflected the movement and sounds of wagons, horses, and cattle. Steiner showed a love for combining Westerns and romance, as he did in \"They Died with Their Boots On\" (1941), also starring Flynn and de Havilland. \"The Searchers\" (1956) is, today, considered his greatest Western.\nLater works (1953\u20131965).\nAlthough his contract ended in 1953, Steiner returned to Warner Bros. in 1958 and scored several films such as \"Band of Angels\", \"Marjorie Morningstar\", and \"John Paul Jones\", and later ventured into television. Steiner still preferred large orchestras and leitmotif techniques during this part of his career. Steiner's pace slowed significantly in the mid-1950s, and he began freelancing. In 1954, RCA Victor asked Steiner to prepare and conduct an orchestral suite of music from \"Gone with the Wind\" for a special LP, which was later issued on CD. There are also acetates of Steiner conducting the Warner Brothers studio orchestra in music from many of his film scores. Composer Victor Young and Steiner were good friends, and Steiner completed the film score for \"China Gate\", because Young had died before he could finish it. The credit frame reads: \"Music by Victor Young, extended by his old friend, Max Steiner.\" There are numerous soundtrack recordings of Steiner's music as soundtracks, collections, and recordings by others. Steiner wrote into his seventies, ailing and near blind, but his compositions \"revealed a freshness and fertility of invention.\" A theme for \"A Summer Place\" in 1959, written when Steiner was 71, became one of Warner Brothers' biggest hit-tunes for years and a re-recorded pop standard. This memorable instrumental theme spent nine weeks at #1 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 singles chart in 1960 (in an instrumental cover version by Percy Faith). Steiner continued to score films produced by Warner until the mid-sixties.\nIn 1963, Steiner began writing his autobiography. Although it was completed, it was never published, and is the only source available on Steiner's childhood. A copy of the manuscript resides with the rest of the Max Steiner Collection at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. Steiner scored his last piece in 1965; however, he claimed he would have scored more films had he been offered the opportunity. His lack of work in the last years of his life was due to Hollywood's decreased interest in his scores caused by new film producers and new taste in film music. Another contribution to his declining career was his failing eyesight and deteriorating health, which caused him to reluctantly retire. Tony Thomas cited Steiner's last score as, \"a weak coda to a mighty career.\"\nSteiner died of congestive heart failure in Hollywood, aged 83. He is entombed in the Great Mausoleum at Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery in Glendale, California.\nMethods of composing.\nMusic as background to dialogue.\nIn the early days of sound, producers avoided underscoring music behind dialogue, feeling the audience would wonder where the music was coming from. As a result, Steiner noted, \"They began to add a little music here and there to support love scenes or silent sequences.\" But in scenes where music might be expected, such as a nightclub, ballroom, or theater, the orchestra fit in more naturally and was used often. In order to justify the addition of music in scenes where it wasn't expected, music was integrated into the scene through characters or added more conspicuously. For example, a shepherd boy might play a flute along with the orchestra heard in the background, or a random, wandering violinist might follow around a couple during a love scene; however, because half of the music was recorded on the set, Steiner says it led to a great deal of inconvenience and cost when scenes were later edited, because the score would often be ruined. As recording technology improved during this period, he was able to record the music synced to the film and could change the score after the film was edited. Steiner explains his own typical method of scoring:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a picture is finished and finally edited, it is turned over to me. Then I time it: not by stop watch, however, as many do. I have the film put through a special measuring machine and then a cue sheet created which gives me the exact time, to a split second, in which an action takes place, or a word is spoken. While these cue sheets are being made, I begin to work on themes for the different characters and scenes, but without regard to the required timing. During this period I also digest what I have seen, and try to plan the music for this picture.\nThere may be a scene that is played a shade too slowly which I might be able to quicken with a little animated music; or, to a scene that is too fast, I may be able to give a little more feeling by using slower music. Or perhaps the music can clarify a character's emotion, such as intense suffering, which is not demanded or fully revealed by a silent close-up.\nSteiner often followed his instincts and his own reasoning in creating film scores. For example, when he chose to go against Selznick's instruction to use classical music for \"Gone with the Wind.\" Steiner stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is my conviction that familiar music, however popular, does not aid the underlying score of a dramatic picture. I believe that, while the American people are more musically minded than any other nation in the world, they are still not entirely familiar with all the old and new masters' works\u00a0... Of course there are many in our industry who disagree with my viewpoint.\nScores from the classics were sometimes harmful to a picture, especially when they drew unwanted attention to themselves by virtue of their familiarity. For example, films like \"\", \"The Sting\", and \"Manhattan\", had scores with recognizable tunes instead of having a preferred \"subliminal\" effect. Steiner, was among the first to acknowledge the need for original scores for each film.\nSteiner felt knowing when to start and stop was the hardest part of proper scoring, since incorrect placement of music can speed up a scene meant to be slow and vice versa: \"Knowing the difference is what makes a film composer.\" He also notes that many composers, contrary to his own technique, would fail to subordinate the music to the film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I've always tried to subordinate myself to the picture. A lot of composers make the mistake of thinking of film as a concert platform on which they can show off. This is not the place\u00a0... If you get too decorative, you lose your appeal to the emotions. My theory is that the music should be felt rather than heard.\nClick tracks.\nAlthough some scholars cite Steiner as the inventor of the click track technique as such, he, possibly alongside Roy Webb, was the first to use the technique in film scoring. Carl W. Stalling and Scott Bradley used the technique first in cartoon music. The click-track allows the composer to sync music and film together more precisely. The technique involves punching holes into the soundtrack film based on the mathematics of metronome speed. As the holes pass through a projector, the orchestra and conductor can hear the clicking sound through headphones, allowing them to record the music along the exact timing of the film. This technique allowed conductors and orchestras to match the music with perfection to the timing of the film, eliminating the previous necessity to cut off or stop music in the middle of recording as had been done previously. Popularized by Steiner in film music, this technique allowed Steiner to \"catch the action\", creating sounds for small details on screen. In fact, Steiner reportedly spent more of his time matching the action to the music than composing the melodies and motifs, as creating and composing came easy to him.\nLeitmotifs.\nWith Steiner's background in his European musical training largely consisting of operas and operettas and his experience with stage music, he brought with him a slew of old-fashioned techniques he contributed to the development of the Hollywood film score. Although Steiner has been called, \"the man who invented modern film music\", he himself claimed that, \"the idea originated with Richard Wagner ... If Wagner had lived in this century, he would have been the No. 1 film composer.\" Wagner was the inventor of the leitmotif, and this influenced Steiner's composition. In his music, Steiner relied heavily on leitmotifs. He would also quote pre-existing, recognizable melodies in his scores, such as national anthems. Steiner was known and often criticized for his use of Mickey Mousing or \"catching the action\". This technique is characterized by the precise matching of music with the actions or gestures on screen. Steiner was criticized for using this technique too frequently. For example, in \"Of Human Bondage\", Steiner created a limping effect with his music whenever the clubfooted character walked.\nOne of the important principles that guided Steiner whenever possible was his rule: \"Every character should have a theme.\" \"Steiner creates a musical picture that tells us all we need to know about the character.\" To accomplish this, Steiner synchronized the music, the narrative action, and the leitmotif as a structural framework for his compositions. It may be added that Steiner's leitmotifs were more direct and less subtle than those by his contemporary Austrian-emigr\u00e9 competitors in the Hollywood scoring market, such as Erich Korngold or Ernst Toch. Unlike the latter two, Steiner took on large staff to help with orchestration, allowing him to multiply his output.\nA good example of how the characters and the music worked together is best exemplified by his score for \"The Glass Menagerie\" (1950):\nAnother film which exemplifies the synchronizing of character and music is \"The Fountainhead\" (1949):\nThe character of Roark, an idealist architect (played by Gary Cooper):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Steiner's theme for the hero is fraught with a true emotion and a genuine idealism and aspiration. It surges upward in 'masculine' style, whilst Roark's mistress's theme wends downwards in curves of typically feminine shapeliness\u00a0... He above, she traveling up in the workmen's elevator: the music seems to draw them together in mutual fulfillment\u00a0... The score brings dignity and grandeur to the picture.\nIn the same way that Steiner created a theme for each character in a film, Steiner's music developed themes to express emotional aspects of general scenes which originally lacked emotional content. For example:\nRealistic and background music.\nWhen adding a music score to a picture, Steiner used a \"spotting process\" in which he and the director of the film would watch the film in its entirety and discuss where underscoring of diegetic music would begin and end. Another technique Steiner used was the mixing of realistic and background music. For example, a character humming to himself is realistic music, and the orchestra might play his tune, creating a background music effect that ties into the film. Steiner was criticized for this technique as the awareness of the film music can ruin the narrative illusion of the film; however, Steiner understood the importance of letting the film take the spotlight, making the music, \"subordinate..to the picture,\" stating that, \"if it gets too decorative, it loses its emotional appeal.\" Before 1932, producers of sound films tried to avoid the use of background music, because viewers would wonder where the music was coming from. Steiner was known for writing using atmospheric music without melodic content for certain neutral scenes in music. Steiner designed a melodic motion to create normal-sounding music without taking too much attention away from the film. In contrast, Steiner sometimes used diegetic, or narrative based music, in order to emphasize certain emotions or contradict them. According to Steiner, there is, \"no greater counterpoint ... than gay music underlying a tragic scene or vice versa.\"\nInfluence.\nIndustry recognition.\nThree of Max Steiner's scores won the Academy Award for Best Original Score: \"The Informer\" (1935), \"Now, Voyager\" (1942), and \"Since You Went Away\" (1944). Steiner received a certificate for \"The Informer\". He originally received plaques for \"Now, Voyager\" and \"Since You Went Away\", but those plaques were replaced with Academy Award statuettes in 1946. As an individual, Steiner was nominated for a total of 20 Academy Awards, and won two. Prior to 1939, the academy recognized a studio's music department, rather than the individual composer, with a nomination in the scoring category. During this time, five of Steiner's scores including \"The Lost Patrol\" and \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" were nominated, but the academy does not consider these nominations to belong to Max Steiner himself. Consequently, even though Steiner's score for \"The Informer\" won the Academy Award in 1936, the academy does not officially consider Steiner as the individual winner of the award, as Steiner accepted the award on behalf of RKO's music department of which he was the department head. Steiner's 20 nominations make him the third most nominated individual in the history of the scoring categories, behind John Williams and Alfred Newman.\nThe United States Postal Service issued its \"American Music Series\" stamps on 16 September 1999, to pay tribute to renowned Hollywood composers, including Steiner. After Steiner's death, Charles Gerhardt conducted the National Philharmonic Orchestra in an RCA Victor album of highlights from Steiner's career, titled \"Now Voyager\". He also won a Golden Globe for Best Original Score for \"Life with Father\" (1947). Additional selections of Steiner scores were included on other RCA classic film albums during the early 1970s. The quadraphonic recordings were later digitally remastered for Dolby surround sound and released on CD. In 1975, Steiner was honored with a star located at 1551 Vine Street on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contribution to motion pictures. In 1995, Steiner was inducted posthumously into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In commemoration of Steiner's 100th birthday, a memorial plaque was unveiled in 1988 at Steiner's birthplace, the \"Hotel Nordbahn\" (now \"Austria Classic Hotel Wien\") on Praterstra\u00dfe 72. In 1990, Steiner was one of the first to be recognized for Lifetime Achievement by an online awards site.\nLegacy among composers.\nIn Kurt London's \"Film Music\", London expressed the opinion that American film music was inferior to European film music because it lacked originality of composition; he cited the music of Steiner as an exception to the rule. Steiner, along with contemporaries Erich Wolfgang Korngold and Alfred Newman, set the style and forms of film music of the time period and for film scores to come. Known for their similar music styles, Roy Webb was also Steiner's contemporary and they were friends until Steiner's death. Webb's score for \"Mighty Joe Young\" was reminiscent of Steiner. James Bond composer John Barry cited Steiner as an influence of his work. James Newton Howard, who composed the score for the 2005 remake of \"King Kong\", stated that he was influenced by Steiner's score; his descending theme when Kong first appears is reminiscent of Steiner's score. In fact, during the tribal sacrifice scene of the 2005 version, the music playing is from Steiner's score of the same scene in the 1933 version. Composer of the \"Star Wars\" film score, John Williams cited Steiner as well as other European emigrant composers in the 1930s and 1940s \"Golden Age\" of film music as influences of his work. In fact, George Lucas wanted Williams to use the scores of Steiner and Korngold as influences for the music for \"Star Wars\", despite the rarity of grandiose film music and the lack of use of leitmotifs and full orchestrations during the 1970s.\nOften compared to his contemporary Erich Wolfgang Korngold, his rival and friend at Warner Bros., the music of Steiner was often seen by critics as inferior to Korngold. Composer David Raksin stated that the music of Korngold was, \"of a higher order with a much wider sweep;\" however, according to William Darby and Jack Du Bois's \"American Film Music\", even though other film score composers may have produced greater individual scores than Steiner, no composer ever created as many \"very good\" ones as Steiner. Despite the inferiority of Steiner's individual scores, his influence was largely historical. Steiner was one of the first composers to reintroduce music into films after the invention of talking films. Steiner's score for \"King Kong\" modeled the method of adding background music into a movie. Some of his contemporaries did not like his music. Mikl\u00f3s R\u00f3zsa criticized Steiner for his use of Mickey Mousing and did not like his music, but R\u00f3zsa conceded that Steiner had a successful career and had a good \"melodic sense\".\nNow referred to as the \"father of film music\" or the \"dean of film music\", Steiner had written or arranged music for over three hundred films by the end of his career. George Korngold, son of Erich Korngold, produced the Classic Film Score Series albums which included the music of Steiner. Albert K. Bender established the Max Steiner Music Society with international membership, publishing journals and newsletters and a library of audio recordings. When the Steiner collection went to Brigham Young University in 1981, the organization disbanded. The Max Steiner Memorial Society was formed in the United Kingdom continue the work of the Max Steiner Music Society.\nFilmography.\nThe American Film Institute respectively ranked Steiner's scores for \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) and \"King Kong\" (1933) #2 and #13 on their list of the 25 greatest film scores. His scores for the following films were also nominated for the list:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19694", "revid": "47078414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19694", "title": "Mercury (planet)", "text": "First planet from the Sun\nMercury is the first planet from the Sun and the smallest in the Solar System. It is a rocky planet with a trace atmosphere and a surface gravity slightly higher than that of Mars. The surface of Mercury is similar to Earth's Moon, being heavily cratered, with an expansive rupes system generated from thrust faults, and bright ray systems, formed by ejecta. Its largest crater, Caloris Planitia, has a diameter of , which is about one-third the diameter of the planet (). \nBeing the most inferior orbiting planet, it always appears close to the sun in Earth's sky, either as a \"morning star\" or an \"evening star\". It is the planet with the highest delta-v required for travel from Earth, as well as to and from the other planets in the Solar System.\nMercury's sidereal year (88.0 Earth days) and sidereal day (58.65 Earth days) are in a 3:2 ratio, in a spin\u2013orbit resonance. Consequently, one solar day (sunrise to sunrise) on Mercury lasts for around 176 Earth days: twice the planet's sidereal year. This means that one side of Mercury will remain in sunlight for one Mercurian year of 88 Earth days; while during the next orbit, that side will be in darkness all the time until the next sunrise after another 88 Earth days. Above the planet's surface is an extremely tenuous exosphere and a faint magnetic field just strong enough to deflect solar winds. Combined with its high orbital eccentricity, the planet's surface has widely varying sunlight intensity and temperature, with the equatorial regions ranging from at night to during sunlight. Due to its very small axial tilt, the planet's poles are permanently shadowed. This strongly suggests that water ice could be present in the craters.\nLike the other planets in the Solar System, Mercury formed approximately 4.5 billion years ago. There are many competing hypotheses about Mercury's origins and development, some of which incorporate collision with planetesimals and rock vaporization; as of the early 2020s, many broad details of Mercury's geological history are still under investigation or pending data from space probes. Its mantle is highly homogeneous, which suggests that Mercury had a magma ocean early in its history, like the Moon. According to current models, Mercury may have a solid silicate crust and mantle overlaying a solid outer core, a deeper liquid core layer, and a solid inner core. Mercury is expected to be destroyed, along with Venus, and possibly the Earth and the Moon, when the Sun becomes a Red Giant in approximately seven or eight billion years.\nMercury is a classical planet that has been observed and recognized throughout history as a planet (or wandering star). In English, it is named after the ancient Roman god (Mercury), god of commerce and communication, and the messenger of the gods. The first successful flyby of Mercury was conducted by \"Mariner 10\" in 1974, and it has since been visited and explored by the \"MESSENGER\" and \"BepiColombo\" orbiters.\nNomenclature.\nHistorically, humans knew Mercury by different names depending on whether it was an evening star or a morning star. By about 350 BC, the ancient Greeks had realized the two stars were one. They knew the planet as , meaning \"twinkling\", and , for its fleeting motion, a name that is retained in modern Greek ( ). The Romans named the planet after the swift-footed Roman messenger god, Mercury (Latin ), whom they equated with the Greek Hermes, because it moves across the sky faster than any other planet, though some associated the planet with Apollo instead, as detailed by Pliny the Elder. The astronomical symbol for Mercury is a stylized version of Hermes' caduceus; a Christian cross was added in the 16th century:.\nPhysical characteristics.\nMercury is one of four terrestrial planets in the Solar System, which means it is a rocky body like Earth. It is the smallest planet in the Solar System, with an equatorial radius of . Mercury is also smaller\u2014albeit more massive\u2014than the largest natural satellites in the Solar System, Ganymede and Titan. Mercury consists of approximately 70% metallic and 30% silicate material.\nInternal structure.\nMercury appears to have a solid silicate crust and mantle overlying a solid, metallic outer core layer, a deeper liquid core layer, and a solid inner core. The composition of the iron-rich core remains uncertain, but it likely contains nickel, silicon and perhaps sulfur and carbon, plus trace amounts of other elements. The planet's density is the second highest in the Solar System at 5.427\u00a0g/cm3, only slightly less than Earth's density of 5.515\u00a0g/cm3. If the effect of gravitational compression were to be factored out from both planets, the materials of which Mercury is made would be denser than those of Earth, with an uncompressed density of 5.3\u00a0g/cm3 versus Earth's 4.4\u00a0g/cm3. Mercury's density can be used to infer details of its inner structure. Although Earth's high density results appreciably from gravitational compression, particularly at the core, Mercury is much smaller and its inner regions are not as compressed. Therefore, for it to have such a high density, its core must be large and rich in iron.\nThe radius of Mercury's core is estimated to be , based on interior models constrained to be consistent with a moment of inertia factor of . Hence, Mercury's core occupies about 57% of its volume; for Earth this proportion is 17%. Research published in 2007 suggests that Mercury has a molten core. The mantle-crust layer is in total thick. Projections differ as to the size of the crust specifically; data from the \"Mariner 10\" and \"MESSENGER\" probes suggests a thickness of , whereas an Airy isostacy model suggests a thickness of . One distinctive feature of Mercury's surface is the presence of numerous narrow ridges, extending up to several hundred kilometers in length. It is thought that these were formed as Mercury's core and mantle cooled and contracted at a time when the crust had already solidified.\nMercury's core has a higher iron content than that of any other planet in the Solar System, and several theories have been proposed to explain this. The most widely accepted theory is that Mercury originally had a metal\u2013silicate ratio similar to common chondrite meteorites, thought to be typical of the Solar System's rocky matter, and a mass approximately 2.25 times its current mass. Early in the Solar System's history, Mercury may have been struck by a planetesimal of approximately &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20446 Mercury's mass and several thousand kilometers across. The impact would have stripped away much of the original crust and mantle, leaving the core behind as a relatively major component. A similar process, known as the giant impact hypothesis, has been proposed to explain the formation of Earth's Moon.\nAlternatively, Mercury may have formed from the solar nebula before the Sun's energy output had stabilized. It would initially have had twice its present mass, but as the protosun contracted, temperatures near Mercury could have been between 2,500 and 3,500\u00a0K and possibly even as high as 10,000\u00a0K. Much of Mercury's surface rock could have been vaporized at such temperatures, forming an atmosphere of \"rock vapor\" that could have been carried away by the solar wind. A third hypothesis proposes that the solar nebula caused drag on the particles from which Mercury was accreting, which meant that lighter particles were lost from the accreting material and not gathered by Mercury.\nEach hypothesis predicts a different surface composition, and two space missions have been tasked with making observations of this composition. The first \"MESSENGER\", which ended in 2015, found higher-than-expected potassium and sulfur levels on the surface, suggesting that the giant impact hypothesis and vaporization of the crust and mantle did not occur because said potassium and sulfur would have been driven off by the extreme heat of these events. \"BepiColombo\", which will arrive at Mercury in 2025, will make observations to test these hypotheses. The findings so far would seem to favor the third hypothesis; however, further analysis of the data is needed.\nSurface geology.\nMercury's surface is similar in appearance to that of the Moon, showing extensive mare-like plains and heavy cratering, indicating that it has been geologically inactive for billions of years. It is more heterogeneous than the surface of Mars or the Moon, both of which contain significant stretches of similar geology, such as maria and plateaus. Albedo features are areas of markedly different reflectivity, which include impact craters, the resulting ejecta, and ray systems. Larger albedo features correspond to higher reflectivity plains. Mercury has \"wrinkle-ridges\" (dorsa), Moon-like highlands, mountains (montes), plains (planitiae), escarpments (rupes), and valleys (valles).\nThe planet's mantle is chemically heterogeneous, suggesting the planet went through a magma ocean phase early in its history. Crystallization of minerals and convective overturn resulted in a layered, chemically heterogeneous crust with large-scale variations in chemical composition observed on the surface. The crust is low in iron but high in sulfur, resulting from the stronger early chemically reducing conditions than is found on other terrestrial planets. The surface is dominated by iron-poor pyroxene and olivine, as represented by enstatite and forsterite, respectively, along with sodium-rich plagioclase and minerals of mixed magnesium, calcium, and iron-sulfide. The less reflective regions of the crust are high in carbon, most likely in the form of graphite.\nNames for features on Mercury come from a variety of sources and are set according to the IAU planetary nomenclature system. Names coming from people are limited to the deceased. Craters are named for artists, musicians, painters, and authors who have made outstanding or fundamental contributions to their field. Ridges, or dorsa, are named for scientists who have contributed to the study of Mercury. Depressions or fossae are named for works of architecture. Montes are named for the word \"hot\" in a variety of languages. Plains or planitiae are named for Mercury in various languages. Escarpments or rup\u0113s are named for ships of scientific expeditions. Valleys or valles are named for abandoned cities, towns, or settlements of antiquity.\nImpact basins and craters.\nMercury was heavily bombarded by comets and asteroids during and shortly following its formation 4.6 billion years ago, as well as during a possibly separate subsequent episode called the Late Heavy Bombardment that ended 3.8 billion years ago. Mercury received impacts over its entire surface during this period of intense crater formation, facilitated by the lack of any atmosphere to slow impactors down. During this time Mercury was volcanically active; basins were filled by magma, producing smooth plains similar to the maria found on the Moon. One of the most unusual craters is Apollodorus, or \"the Spider\", which hosts a series of radiating troughs extending outwards from its impact site.\nCraters on Mercury range in diameter from small bowl-shaped cavities to multi-ringed impact basins hundreds of kilometers across. They appear in all states of degradation, from relatively fresh rayed craters to highly degraded crater remnants. Mercurian craters differ subtly from lunar craters in that the area blanketed by their ejecta is much smaller, a consequence of Mercury's stronger surface gravity. According to International Astronomical Union rules, each new crater must be named after an artist who was famous for more than fifty years, and dead for more than three years, before the date the crater is named.\nThe largest known crater is Caloris Planitia, or Caloris Basin, with a diameter of . The impact that created the Caloris Basin was so powerful that it caused lava eruptions and left a concentric mountainous ring ~ tall surrounding the impact crater. The floor of the Caloris Basin is filled by a geologically distinct flat plain, broken up by ridges and fractures in a roughly polygonal pattern. It is not clear whether they were volcanic lava flows induced by the impact or a large sheet of impact melt.\nAt the antipode of the Caloris Basin is a large region of unusual, hilly terrain known as the \"Weird Terrain\". One hypothesis for its origin is that shock waves generated during the Caloris impact traveled around Mercury, converging at the basin's antipode (180 degrees away). The resulting high stresses fractured the surface. Alternatively, it has been suggested that this terrain formed as a result of the convergence of ejecta at this basin's antipode.\nOverall, 46 impact basins have been identified. A notable basin is the -wide, multi-ring Tolstoj Basin that has an ejecta blanket extending up to from its rim and a floor that has been filled by smooth plains materials. Beethoven Basin has a similar-sized ejecta blanket and a -diameter rim. Like the Moon, the surface of Mercury has likely incurred the effects of space weathering processes, including solar wind and micrometeorite impacts.\nPlains.\nThere are two geologically distinct plains regions on Mercury. Gently rolling, hilly plains in the regions between craters are Mercury's oldest visible surfaces, predating the heavily cratered terrain. These inter-crater plains appear to have obliterated many earlier craters, and show a general paucity of smaller craters below about in diameter.\nSmooth plains are widespread flat areas that fill depressions of various sizes and bear a strong resemblance to lunar maria. Unlike lunar maria, the smooth plains of Mercury have the same albedo as the older inter-crater plains. Despite a lack of unequivocally volcanic characteristics, the localization and rounded, lobate shape of these plains strongly support volcanic origins. All the smooth plains of Mercury formed significantly later than the Caloris basin, as evidenced by appreciably smaller crater densities than on the Caloris ejecta blanket.\nCompressional features.\nAn unusual feature of Mercury's surface is the numerous compression folds, or rupes, that crisscross the plains. These exist on the Moon, but are much more prominent on Mercury. As Mercury's interior cooled, it contracted and its surface began to deform, creating wrinkle ridges and lobate scarps associated with thrust faults. The scarps can reach lengths of and heights of . These compressional features can be seen on top of other features, such as craters and smooth plains, indicating they are more recent. Mapping of the features has suggested a total shrinkage of Mercury's radius in the range of ~. Most activity along the major thrust systems probably ended about 3.6\u20133.7\u00a0billion years ago. Small-scale thrust fault scarps have been found, tens of meters in height and with lengths in the range of a few kilometers, that appear to be less than 50 million years old, indicating that compression of the interior and consequent surface geological activity continue to the present.\nVolcanism.\nThere is evidence for pyroclastic flows on Mercury from low-profile shield volcanoes. Fifty-one pyroclastic deposits have been identified, where 90% of them are found within impact craters. A study of the degradation state of the impact craters that host pyroclastic deposits suggests that pyroclastic activity occurred on Mercury over a prolonged interval.\nA \"rimless depression\" inside the southwest rim of the Caloris Basin consists of at least nine overlapping volcanic vents, each individually up to in diameter. It is thus a \"compound volcano\". The vent floors are at least below their brinks and they bear a closer resemblance to volcanic craters sculpted by explosive eruptions or modified by collapse into void spaces created by magma withdrawal back down into a conduit. Scientists could not quantify the age of the volcanic complex system but reported that it could be on the order of a billion years.\nSurface conditions and exosphere.\nThe surface temperature of Mercury ranges from . It never rises above 180\u00a0K at the poles, due to the absence of an atmosphere and a steep temperature gradient between the equator and the poles. At perihelion, the equatorial subsolar point is located at longitude 0\u00b0W or 180\u00b0W, and it climbs to a temperature of about . During aphelion, this occurs at 90\u00b0 or 270\u00b0W and reaches only . On the dark side of the planet, temperatures average . The intensity of sunlight on Mercury's surface ranges between 4.59 and 10.61 times the solar constant (1,370 W\u00b7m\u22122).\nAlthough daylight temperatures at the surface of Mercury are generally extremely high, observations strongly suggest that ice (frozen water) exists on Mercury. The floors of deep craters at the poles are never exposed to direct sunlight, and temperatures there remain below 102\u00a0K, far lower than the global average. This creates a cold trap where ice can accumulate. Water ice strongly reflects radar, and observations by the 70-meter Goldstone Solar System Radar and the VLA in the early 1990s revealed that there are patches of high radar reflection near the poles. Although ice was not the only possible cause of these reflective regions, astronomers thought it to be the most likely explanation. The presence of water ice was confirmed using \"MESSENGER\" images of craters at the north pole.\nThe icy crater regions are estimated to contain about 1014\u20131015\u00a0kg of ice, and may be covered by a layer of regolith that inhibits sublimation. By comparison, the Antarctic ice sheet on Earth has a mass of about 4\u00d71018\u00a0kg, and Mars's south polar cap contains about 1016\u00a0kg of water. The origin of the ice on Mercury is not yet known, but the two most likely sources are from outgassing of water from the planet's interior and deposition by impacts of comets.\nMercury is too small and hot for its gravity to retain any significant atmosphere over long periods of time; it does have a tenuous surface-bounded exosphere at a surface pressure of less than approximately 0.5\u00a0nPa (0.005 picobars). It includes hydrogen, helium, oxygen, sodium, calcium, potassium, magnesium, silicon, and hydroxide, among others. This exosphere is not stable \u2013atoms are continuously lost and replenished from a variety of sources. Hydrogen atoms and helium atoms probably come from the solar wind, diffusing into Mercury's magnetosphere before later escaping back into space. The radioactive decay of elements within Mercury's crust is another source of helium, as well as sodium and potassium. Water vapor is present, released by a combination of processes such as comets striking its surface, sputtering creating water out of hydrogen from the solar wind and oxygen from rock, and sublimation from reservoirs of water ice in the permanently shadowed polar craters. The detection of high amounts of water-related ions like O+, OH\u2212, and H3O+ was a surprise. Because of the quantities of these ions that were detected in Mercury's space environment, scientists surmise that these molecules were blasted from the surface or exosphere by the solar wind.\nSodium, potassium, and calcium were discovered in the atmosphere during the 1980s\u20131990s, and are thought to result primarily from the vaporization of surface rock struck by micrometeorite impacts including presently from Comet Encke. In 2008, magnesium was discovered by \"MESSENGER\". Studies indicate that, at times, sodium emissions are localized at points that correspond to the planet's magnetic poles. This would indicate an interaction between the magnetosphere and the planet's surface.\nAccording to NASA, Mercury is not a suitable planet for Earth-like life. It has a surface boundary exosphere instead of a layered atmosphere, extreme temperatures, and high solar radiation. It is unlikely that any living beings can withstand those conditions. Some parts of the subsurface of Mercury may have been habitable, and perhaps life forms, albeit likely primitive microorganisms, may have existed on the planet.\nMagnetic field and magnetosphere.\nDespite its small size and slow 59-day-long rotation, Mercury has a significant, and apparently global, magnetic field. According to measurements taken by \"Mariner 10\", it is about 1.1% the strength of Earth's. The magnetic-field strength at Mercury's equator is about 300 nT. Like that of Earth, Mercury's magnetic field is dipolar and nearly aligned with the planet's spin axis (10\u00b0 dipolar tilt, compared to 11\u00b0 for Earth). Measurements from both the \"Mariner 10\" and \"MESSENGER\" space probes have indicated that the strength and shape of the magnetic field are stable.\nIt is likely that this magnetic field is generated by a dynamo effect, in a manner similar to the magnetic field of Earth. This dynamo effect would result from the circulation of the planet's iron-rich liquid core. Particularly strong tidal heating effects caused by the planet's high orbital eccentricity would serve to keep part of the core in the liquid state necessary for this dynamo effect.\nMercury's magnetic field is strong enough to deflect the solar wind around the planet, creating a magnetosphere. The planet's magnetosphere, though small enough to fit within Earth, is strong enough to trap solar wind plasma. This contributes to the space weathering of the planet's surface. Observations taken by the \"Mariner 10\" spacecraft detected this low energy plasma in the magnetosphere of the planet's nightside. Bursts of energetic particles in the planet's magnetotail indicate a dynamic quality to the planet's magnetosphere.\nDuring its second flyby of the planet on October 6, 2008, \"MESSENGER\" discovered that Mercury's magnetic field can be extremely \"leaky\". The spacecraft encountered magnetic \"tornadoes\"\u2014twisted bundles of magnetic fields connecting the planetary magnetic field to interplanetary space\u2014that were up to 800 km wide or a third of the radius of the planet. These twisted magnetic flux tubes, technically known as flux transfer events, form open windows in the planet's magnetic shield through which the solar wind may enter and directly impact Mercury's surface via magnetic reconnection. This also occurs in Earth's magnetic field. The \"MESSENGER\" observations showed the reconnection rate was ten times higher at Mercury, but its proximity to the Sun only accounts for about a third of the reconnection rate observed by \"MESSENGER\".\nOrbit, rotation, and longitude.\nMercury has the most eccentric orbit of all the planets in the Solar System; its eccentricity is 0.21 with its distance from the Sun ranging from . It takes 87.969 Earth days to complete an orbit. The diagram illustrates the effects of the eccentricity, showing Mercury's orbit overlaid with a circular orbit having the same semi-major axis. Mercury's higher velocity when it is near perihelion is clear from the greater distance it covers in each 5-day interval. In the diagram, the varying distance of Mercury to the Sun is represented by the size of the planet, which is inversely proportional to Mercury's distance from the Sun.\nThis varying distance to the Sun leads to Mercury's surface being flexed by tidal bulges raised by the Sun that are about 17 times stronger than the Moon's on Earth. Combined with a 3:2 spin\u2013orbit resonance of the planet's rotation around its axis, it also results in complex variations of the surface temperature. The resonance makes a single solar day (the length between two meridian transits of the Sun) on Mercury last exactly two Mercury years, or about 176 Earth days.\nMercury's orbit is inclined by 7 degrees to the plane of Earth's orbit (the ecliptic), the largest of all eight known solar planets. As a result, transits of Mercury across the face of the Sun can only occur when the planet is crossing the plane of the ecliptic at the time it lies between Earth and the Sun, which is in May or November. This occurs about every seven years on average.\nMercury's axial tilt is almost zero, with the best measured value as low as 0.027 degrees. This is significantly smaller than that of Jupiter, which has the second smallest axial tilt of all planets at 3.1 degrees. This means that to an observer at Mercury's poles, the center of the Sun never rises more than 2.1 arcminutes above the horizon. By comparison, the angular size of the Sun as seen from Mercury ranges from &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20444 to 2 degrees across.\nAt certain points on Mercury's surface, an observer would be able to see the Sun peek up a little more than two-thirds of the way over the horizon, then reverse and set before rising again, all within the same Mercurian day. This is because approximately four Earth days before perihelion, Mercury's angular orbital velocity equals its angular rotational velocity so that the Sun's apparent motion ceases; closer to perihelion, Mercury's angular orbital velocity then exceeds the angular rotational velocity. Thus, to a hypothetical observer on Mercury, the Sun appears to move in a retrograde direction. Four Earth days after perihelion, the Sun's normal apparent motion resumes. A similar effect would have occurred if Mercury had been in synchronous rotation: the alternating gain and loss of rotation over a revolution would have caused a libration of 23.65\u00b0 in longitude.\nFor the same reason, there are two points on Mercury's equator, 180 degrees apart in longitude, at either of which, around perihelion in alternate Mercurian years (once a Mercurian day), the Sun passes overhead, then reverses its apparent motion and passes overhead again, then reverses a second time and passes overhead a third time, taking a total of about 16 Earth-days for this entire process. In the other alternate Mercurian years, the same thing happens at the other of these two points. The amplitude of the retrograde motion is small, so the overall effect is that, for two or three weeks, the Sun is almost stationary overhead, and is at its most brilliant because Mercury is at perihelion, its closest to the Sun. This prolonged exposure to the Sun at its brightest makes these two points the hottest places on Mercury. Maximum temperature occurs when the Sun is at an angle of about 25 degrees past noon due to diurnal temperature lag, at 0.4 Mercury days and 0.8 Mercury years past sunrise. Conversely, there are two other points on the equator, 90 degrees of longitude apart from the first ones, where the Sun passes overhead only when the planet is at aphelion in alternate years, when the apparent motion of the Sun in Mercury's sky is relatively rapid. These points, which are the ones on the equator where the apparent retrograde motion of the Sun happens when it is crossing the horizon as described in the preceding paragraph, receive much less solar heat than the first ones described above.\nMercury attains an inferior conjunction (nearest approach to Earth) every 116 Earth days on average, but this interval can range from 105 days to 129 days due to the planet's eccentric orbit. Mercury can come as near as to Earth, and that is slowly declining: The next approach to within is in 2679, and to within in 4487, but it will not be closer to Earth than until 28,622. Its period of retrograde motion as seen from Earth can vary from 8 to 15 days on either side of an inferior conjunction. This large range arises from the planet's high orbital eccentricity. Essentially, because Mercury is closest to the Sun, when taking an average over time, Mercury is most often the closest planet to the Earth, and\u2014in that measure\u2014it is the closest planet to each of the other planets in the Solar System.\nLongitude convention.\nThe longitude convention for Mercury puts the zero of longitude at one of the two hottest points on the surface, as described above. However, when this area was first visited, by \"Mariner 10\", this zero meridian was in darkness, so it was impossible to select a feature on the surface to define the exact position of the meridian. Therefore, a small crater further west was chosen, called Hun Kal, which provides the exact reference point for measuring longitude. The center of Hun Kal defines the 20\u00b0\u00a0west meridian. A 1970 International Astronomical Union resolution suggests that longitudes be measured positively in the westerly direction on Mercury. The two hottest places on the equator are therefore at longitudes 0\u00b0\u00a0W and 180\u00b0\u00a0W, and the coolest points on the equator are at longitudes 90\u00b0\u00a0W and 270\u00b0\u00a0W. However, the \"MESSENGER\" project uses an east-positive convention.\nSpin-orbit resonance.\nFor many years it was thought that Mercury was synchronously tidally locked with the Sun, rotating once for each orbit and always keeping the same face directed towards the Sun, in the same way that the same side of the Moon always faces Earth. Radar observations in 1965 proved that the planet has a 3:2 spin-orbit resonance, rotating three times for every two revolutions around the Sun. The eccentricity of Mercury's orbit makes this resonance stable\u2014at perihelion, when the solar tide is strongest, the Sun is nearly stationary in Mercury's sky.\nThe 3:2 resonant tidal locking is stabilized by the variance of the tidal force along Mercury's eccentric orbit, acting on a permanent dipole component of Mercury's mass distribution. In a circular orbit there is no such variance, so the only resonance stabilized in such an orbit is at 1:1 (e.g., Earth\u2013Moon), when the tidal force, stretching a body along the \"center-body\" line, exerts a torque that aligns the body's axis of least inertia (the \"longest\" axis, and the axis of the aforementioned dipole) to always point at the center. However, with noticeable eccentricity, like that of Mercury's orbit, the tidal force has a maximum at perihelion and therefore stabilizes resonances, like 3:2, ensuring that the planet points its axis of least inertia roughly at the Sun when passing through perihelion.\nThe original reason astronomers thought it was synchronously locked was that, whenever Mercury was best placed for observation, it was always nearly at the same point in its 3:2 resonance, hence showing the same face. This is because, coincidentally, Mercury's rotation period is almost exactly half of its synodic period with respect to Earth. Due to Mercury's 3:2 spin-orbit resonance, a solar day lasts about 176 Earth days. A sidereal day (the period of rotation) lasts about 58.7 Earth days.\nSimulations indicate that the orbital eccentricity of Mercury varies chaotically from nearly zero (circular) to more than 0.45 over millions of years due to perturbations from the other planets. This was thought to explain Mercury's 3:2 spin-orbit resonance (rather than the more usual 1:1), because this state is more likely to arise during a period of high eccentricity. However, accurate modeling based on a realistic model of tidal response has demonstrated that Mercury was captured into the 3:2 spin-orbit state at a very early stage of its history, within 20 (more likely, 10) million years after its formation.\nNumerical simulations show that a future secular orbital resonant interaction with the perihelion of Jupiter may cause the eccentricity of Mercury's orbit to increase to the point where there is a 1% chance that the orbit will be destabilized in the next five billion years. If this happens, Mercury may fall into the Sun, collide with Venus, be ejected from the Solar System, or even disrupt the rest of the inner Solar System.\nAdvance of perihelion.\nIn 1859, the French mathematician and astronomer Urbain Le Verrier reported that the slow precession of Mercury's orbit around the Sun could not be completely explained by Newtonian mechanics and perturbations by the known planets. He suggested, among possible explanations, that another planet (or perhaps instead a series of smaller \"corpuscules\") might exist in an orbit even closer to the Sun than that of Mercury, to account for this perturbation. Other explanations considered included a slight oblateness of the Sun. The success of the search for Neptune based on its perturbations of the orbit of Uranus led astronomers to place faith in this possible explanation, and the hypothetical planet was named Vulcan, but no such planet was ever found.\nThe observed perihelion precession of Mercury is 5,600 arcseconds (1.5556\u00b0) per century relative to Earth, or per century relative to the inertial ICRF. Newtonian mechanics, taking into account all the effects from the other planets and including 0.0254 arcseconds per century due to the oblateness of the Sun, predicts a precession of 5,557 arcseconds (1.5436\u00b0) per century relative to Earth, or per century relative to ICRF. In the early 20th century, Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity provided the explanation for the observed precession, by formalizing gravitation as being mediated by the curvature of spacetime. The effect is small: just per century (or 0.43 arcsecond per year, or 0.1035 arcsecond per orbital period) for Mercury; it therefore requires a little over 12.5 million orbits, or 3 million years, for a full excess turn. Similar, but much smaller, effects exist for other Solar System bodies: 8.6247 arcseconds per century for Venus, 3.8387 for Earth, 1.351 for Mars, and 10.05 for 1566 Icarus.\nObservation.\nMercury's apparent magnitude is calculated to vary between \u22122.48 (brighter than Sirius) around superior conjunction and +7.25 (below the limit of naked-eye visibility) around inferior conjunction. The mean apparent magnitude is 0.23 while the standard deviation of 1.78 is the largest of any planet. The mean apparent magnitude at superior conjunction is \u22121.89 while that at inferior conjunction is +5.93. Observation of Mercury is complicated by its proximity to the Sun, as it is lost in the Sun's glare for much of the time. Mercury can be observed for only a brief period during either morning or evening twilight.\nGround-based telescope observations of Mercury reveal only an illuminated partial disk with limited detail. The Hubble Space Telescope cannot observe Mercury at all, due to safety procedures that prevent its pointing too close to the Sun. Because the shift of 0.15 revolutions of Earth in a Mercurian year makes up a seven-Mercurian-year cycle (0.15 \u00d7 7 \u2248 1.0), in the seventh Mercurian year, Mercury follows almost exactly (earlier by 7 days) the sequence of phenomena it showed seven Mercurian years before.\nLike the Moon and Venus, Mercury exhibits phases as seen from Earth. It is \"new\" at inferior conjunction and \"full\" at superior conjunction. The planet is rendered invisible from Earth on both of these occasions because of its being obscured by the Sun, except at its new phase during a transit. Mercury is technically brightest as seen from Earth when it is at a full phase. Although Mercury is farthest from Earth when it is full, the greater illuminated area that is visible and the opposition brightness surge more than compensates for the distance. The opposite is true for Venus, which appears brightest when it is a crescent, because it is much closer to Earth than when gibbous.\nMercury is best observed at the first and last quarter, although they are phases of lesser brightness. The first and last quarter phases occur at greatest elongation east and west of the Sun, respectively. At both of these times, Mercury's separation from the Sun ranges anywhere from 17.9\u00b0 at perihelion to 27.8\u00b0 at aphelion. At greatest \"western\" elongation, Mercury rises at its earliest before sunrise, and at greatest \"eastern\" elongation, it sets at its latest after sunset.\nMercury is more often and easily visible from the Southern Hemisphere than from the Northern. This is because Mercury's maximum western elongation occurs only during early autumn in the Southern Hemisphere, whereas its greatest eastern elongation happens only during late winter in the Southern Hemisphere. In both of these cases, the angle at which the planet's orbit intersects the horizon is maximized, allowing it to rise several hours before sunrise in the former instance and not set until several hours after sundown in the latter from southern mid-latitudes, such as Argentina and South Africa.\nAn alternate method for viewing Mercury involves observing the planet with a telescope during daylight hours when conditions are clear, ideally when it is at its greatest elongation. This allows the planet to be found easily, even when using telescopes with apertures. However, great care must be taken to obstruct the Sun from sight because of the extreme risk for eye damage. This method bypasses the limitation of twilight observing when the ecliptic is located at a low elevation (e.g. on autumn evenings). The planet is higher in the sky and less atmospheric effects affect the view of the planet. Mercury can be viewed as close as 4\u00b0 to the Sun near superior conjunction when it is almost at its brightest.\nMercury can, like several other planets and the brightest stars, be seen during a total solar eclipse.\nObservation history.\nAncient astronomers.\nThe earliest known recorded observations of Mercury are from the MUL.APIN tablets. These observations were most likely made by an Assyrian astronomer around the 14th century BC. The cuneiform name used to designate Mercury on the MUL.APIN tablets is transcribed as UDU.IDIM.GU\\U4.UD (\"the jumping planet\"). Babylonian records of Mercury date back to the 1st millennium BC. The Babylonians called the planet Nabu after the messenger to the gods in their mythology.\nThe Greco-Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy wrote about the possibility of planetary transits across the face of the Sun in his work \"Planetary Hypotheses\". He suggested that no transits had been observed either because planets such as Mercury were too small to see, or because transits were too infrequent.\nIn ancient China, Mercury was known as \"the Hour Star\" (\"Chen-xing\" ). It was associated with the direction north and the phase of water in the Five Phases system of metaphysics. Modern Chinese, Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese cultures refer to the planet literally as the \"water star\" (), based on the Five elements. Hindu mythology used the name Budha for Mercury, and this god was thought to preside over Wednesday. The god Odin (or Woden) of Germanic paganism was associated with the planet Mercury and Wednesday. The Maya may have represented Mercury as an owl (or possibly four owls; two for the morning aspect and two for the evening) that served as a messenger to the underworld. Mercury was sometimes known as Stilbon (Greek: \u03a3\u03c4\u03af\u03bb\u03b2\u03c9\u03bd) meaning 'the shining, glittering'.\nIn medieval Islamic astronomy, the Andalusian astronomer Ab\u016b Ish\u0101q Ibr\u0101h\u012bm al-Zarq\u0101l\u012b in the 11th century described the deferent of Mercury's geocentric orbit as being oval, like an egg or a pignon, although this insight did not influence his astronomical theory or his astronomical calculations. In the 12th century, Ibn Bajjah observed \"two planets as black spots on the face of the Sun\", which was later suggested as the transit of Mercury and/or Venus by the Maragha astronomer Qotb al-Din Shirazi in the 13th century. Most such medieval reports of transits were later taken as observations of sunspots.\nIn India, the Kerala school astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji in the 15th century developed a partially heliocentric planetary model in which Mercury orbits the Sun, which in turn orbits Earth, similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century.\nGround-based telescopic research.\nThe first telescopic observations of Mercury were made by Thomas Harriot and Galileo from 1610. In 1612, Simon Marius observed the brightness of Mercury varied with the planet's orbital position and concluded it had phases \"in the same way as Venus and the Moon\". In 1631, Pierre Gassendi made the first telescopic observations of the transit of a planet across the Sun when he saw a transit of Mercury predicted by Johannes Kepler. In 1639, Giovanni Zupi used a telescope to discover that the planet had orbital phases similar to Venus and the Moon. The observation demonstrated conclusively that Mercury orbited the Sun.\nA rare event in astronomy is the passage of one planet in front of another (occultation), as seen from Earth. Mercury and Venus occult each other every few centuries, and the event of May 28, 1737, is the only one historically observed, having been seen by John Bevis at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. The next occultation of Mercury by Venus will be on December 3, 2133.\nThe difficulties inherent in observing Mercury meant that it was far less studied than the other planets. In 1800, Johann Schr\u00f6ter made observations of surface features, claiming to have observed mountains. Friedrich Bessel used Schr\u00f6ter's drawings to erroneously estimate the rotation period as 24 hours and an axial tilt of 70\u00b0. In the 1880s, Giovanni Schiaparelli mapped the planet more accurately, and suggested that Mercury's rotational period was 88 days, the same as its orbital period due to tidal locking. This phenomenon is known as synchronous rotation. The effort to map the surface of Mercury was continued by Eugenios Antoniadi, who published a book in 1934 that included both maps and his own observations. Many of the planet's surface features, particularly the albedo features, take their names from Antoniadi's map.\nIn June 1962, Soviet scientists at the Institute of Radio-engineering and Electronics of the USSR Academy of Sciences, led by Vladimir Kotelnikov, became the first to bounce a radar signal off Mercury and receive it, starting radar observations of the planet. Three years later, radar observations by Americans Gordon H. Pettengill and Rolf B. Dyce, using the Arecibo radio telescope in Puerto Rico, showed conclusively that the planet's rotational period was about 59 days. The theory that Mercury's rotation was synchronous had become widely held, and it was a surprise to astronomers when these radio observations were announced. If Mercury were tidally locked, its dark face would be extremely cold, but measurements of radio emission revealed that it was much hotter than expected. Astronomers were reluctant to drop the synchronous rotation theory and proposed alternative mechanisms such as powerful heat-distributing winds to explain the observations.\nIn 1965, Italian astronomer Giuseppe Colombo noted that the rotation value was about two-thirds of Mercury's orbital period, and proposed that the planet's orbital and rotational periods were locked into a 3:2 rather than a 1:1 resonance. Data from \"Mariner 10\" subsequently confirmed this view. This means that Schiaparelli's and Antoniadi's maps were not \"wrong\". Instead, the astronomers saw the same features during every \"second\" orbit and recorded them, but disregarded those seen in the meantime, when Mercury's other face was toward the Sun, because the orbital geometry meant that these observations were made under poor viewing conditions.\nGround-based optical observations did not shed much further light on Mercury, but radio astronomers using interferometry at microwave wavelengths, a technique that enables removal of the solar radiation, were able to discern physical and chemical characteristics of the subsurface layers to a depth of several meters. Not until the first space probe flew past Mercury did many of its most fundamental morphological properties become known. Moreover, technological advances have led to improved ground-based observations. In 2000, high-resolution lucky imaging observations were conducted by the Mount Wilson Observatory Hale telescope. They provided the first views that resolved surface features on the parts of Mercury that were not imaged in the \"Mariner 10\" mission. Most of the planet has been mapped by the Arecibo radar telescope, with resolution, including polar deposits in shadowed craters of what may be water ice.\nResearch with space probes.\nReaching Mercury from Earth poses significant technical challenges, because it orbits so much closer to the Sun than Earth. A Mercury-bound spacecraft launched from Earth must travel over into the Sun's gravitational potential well. Mercury has an orbital speed of , whereas Earth's orbital speed is . Therefore, the spacecraft must make a larger change in velocity (delta-v) to get to Mercury and then enter orbit, as compared to the delta-v required for, say, Mars planetary missions.\nThe potential energy liberated by moving down the Sun's potential well becomes kinetic energy, requiring a delta-v change to do anything other than pass by Mercury. Some portion of this delta-v budget can be provided from a gravity assist during one or more fly-bys of Venus. To land safely or enter a stable orbit the spacecraft would rely entirely on rocket motors. Aerobraking is ruled out because Mercury has a negligible atmosphere. A trip to Mercury requires more rocket fuel than that required to escape the Solar System completely. As a result, only three space probes have visited it so far. A proposed alternative approach would use a solar sail to attain a Mercury-synchronous orbit around the Sun.\n\"Mariner 10\".\nThe first spacecraft to visit Mercury was NASA's \"Mariner 10\" (1974\u20131975). The spacecraft used the gravity of Venus to adjust its orbital velocity so that it could approach Mercury, making it both the first spacecraft to use this gravitational \"slingshot\" effect and the first NASA mission to visit multiple planets. \"Mariner 10\" provided the first close-up images of Mercury's surface, which immediately showed its heavily cratered nature, and revealed many other types of geological features, such as the giant scarps that were later ascribed to the effect of the planet shrinking slightly as its iron core cools. Unfortunately, the same face of the planet was lit at each of \"Mariner 10\"'s close approaches. This made close observation of both sides of the planet impossible, and resulted in the mapping of less than 45% of the planet's surface.\nThe spacecraft made three close approaches to Mercury, the closest of which took it to within of the surface. At the first close approach, instruments detected a magnetic field, to the great surprise of planetary geologists\u2014Mercury's rotation was expected to be much too slow to generate a significant dynamo effect. The second close approach was primarily used for imaging, but at the third approach, extensive magnetic data were obtained. The data revealed that the planet's magnetic field is much like Earth's, which deflects the solar wind around the planet. For many years after the \"Mariner 10\" encounters, the origin of Mercury's magnetic field remained the subject of several competing theories.\nOn March 24, 1975, just eight days after its final close approach, \"Mariner 10\" ran out of fuel. Because its orbit could no longer be accurately controlled, mission controllers instructed the probe to shut down. \"Mariner 10\" is thought to be still orbiting the Sun, passing close to Mercury every few months.\n\"MESSENGER\".\nA second NASA mission to Mercury, named \"MESSENGER\" (MErcury Surface, Space ENvironment, GEochemistry, and Ranging), was launched on August 3, 2004. It made a fly-by of Earth in August 2005, and of Venus in October 2006 and June 2007 to place it onto the correct trajectory to reach an orbit around Mercury. A first fly-by of Mercury occurred on January 14, 2008, a second on October 6, 2008, and a third on September 29, 2009. Most of the hemisphere not imaged by \"Mariner 10\" was mapped during these fly-bys. The probe successfully entered an elliptical orbit around the planet on March 18, 2011. The first orbital image of Mercury was obtained on March 29, 2011. The probe finished a one-year mapping mission, and then entered a one-year extended mission into 2013. In addition to continued observations and mapping of Mercury, \"MESSENGER\" observed the 2012 solar maximum.\n The mission was designed to clear up six key issues: Mercury's high density, its geological history, the nature of its magnetic field, the structure of its core, whether it has ice at its poles, and where its tenuous atmosphere comes from. To this end, the probe carried imaging devices that gathered much-higher-resolution images of much more of Mercury than \"Mariner 10\", assorted spectrometers to determine the abundances of elements in the crust, and magnetometers and devices to measure velocities of charged particles. Measurements of changes in the probe's orbital velocity were expected to be used to infer details of the planet's interior structure. \"MESSENGER\"'s final maneuver was on April 24, 2015, and it crashed into Mercury's surface on April 30, 2015. The spacecraft's impact with Mercury occurred at 3:26:01\u00a0p.m. EDT on April 30, 2015, leaving a crater estimated to be in diameter.\n\"BepiColombo\".\nThe European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency developed and launched a joint mission called \"BepiColombo\", which will orbit Mercury with two probes: one to map the planet and the other to study its magnetosphere. \"BepiColombo\" was launched on October 20, 2018. It will release a magnetometer probe into an elliptical orbit, then chemical rockets will fire to deposit the mapper probe into a circular orbit. Both probes will operate for one terrestrial year. The mapper probe carries an array of spectrometers similar to those on \"MESSENGER\", and will study the planet at many different wavelengths including infrared, ultraviolet, X-ray and gamma ray. \"BepiColombo\" conducted the first of its six planned Mercury flybys on October 1, 2021, and the sixth was completed on January 9, 2025. The spacecraft will enter the planet's orbit in 2026.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19701", "revid": "7021758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19701", "title": "Monty Python and the Holy Grail", "text": "1975 British comedy film\nMonty Python and the Holy Grail is a 1975 British comedy film based on the Arthurian legend, written and performed by the Monty Python comedy group (Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Eric Idle, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin) and directed by Gilliam and Jones in their feature directorial debuts. It was conceived during the hiatus between the third and fourth series of their BBC Television series \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\".\nWhile the group's first film, \"And Now for Something Completely Different\", was a compilation of sketches from the first two television series, \"Holy Grail\" is an original story that parodies the legend of King Arthur's quest for the Holy Grail. Thirty years later, Idle used the film as the basis for the 2005 Tony Award-winning musical \"Spamalot\".\n\"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" grossed more than any other British film screened in the US in 1975, and has since been considered one of the greatest comedy films of all time. In the US, it was selected in 2011 as the second-best comedy of all time in the ABC special \"Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time\" behind \"Airplane!\". In the UK, readers of \"Total Film\" magazine in 2000 ranked it the fifth-greatest comedy film of all time; a similar poll of Channel 4 viewers in 2006 placed it sixth.\nPlot.\nThe opening credits of the film feature pseudo-Swedish subtitles, which soon turn into an appeal to visit Sweden and see the country's moose. The subtitles are soon stopped and claim that the people responsible have been sacked, but moose references continue throughout the actual credits. The subtitles were written by Michael Palin as a way to \"entertain the 'captive' audience\" at the beginning of the film.\nIn AD 932, King Arthur and his squire Patsy, who claps coconut shells as Arthur mimes riding a horse, travel Britain searching for men to join the Knights of the Round Table. Along the way, Arthur debates whether swallows could carry coconuts, passes through a town infected with a plague, recounts receiving Excalibur from the Lady of the Lake to two anarcho-syndicalist peasants, and defeats the Black Knight. At an impromptu witch trial, he recruits Sir Bedevere the Wise, later joined by Sir Lancelot the Brave, Sir Galahad the Pure, Sir Robin the Not-Quite-So-Brave-as-Sir-Lancelot, and the aptly named Sir Not-Appearing-in-this-Film, along with their squires and Robin's minstrels. Arthur leads the knights to Camelot, but changes his mind after the knights in the castle perform a musical number, deeming it \"a silly place\". God then appears and orders Arthur to find the Holy Grail.\nArthur and his knights arrive at a castle occupied by French soldiers, who claim to have the Grail and taunt the Britons, driving them back with a barrage of barnyard animals. Bedevere concocts a plan to sneak in using a Trojan Rabbit, but forgets to tell the others to hide inside it; the Knights are forced to flee when it is flung back at them. Arthur decides the knights should go their separate ways to search for the Grail. Meanwhile, a modern-day historian filming a documentary on the Arthurian legends is killed by an unknown knight on horseback, triggering a police investigation.\nArthur and Bedevere are given directions by an old man and attempt to satisfy the strange requests of the dreaded Knights Who Say \"Ni!\". Sir Robin avoids a fight with a Three-Headed Knight by running away while the heads are arguing amongst themselves. Sir Galahad is led by a grail-shaped beacon to Castle Anthrax, which is occupied exclusively by nubile young women, who wish to be punished for misleading him, but is \"rescued\" against his will by Lancelot. Lancelot receives an arrow-shot note from Swamp Castle. Believing the author is a lady being forced to marry against her will, he storms the castle and slaughters several wedding party members, only to discover the author is an effeminate prince.\nArthur and his knights regroup and are joined by Brother Maynard, his monk brethren, and three new knights: Bors, Gawain and Ector. They meet Tim the Enchanter, a pyromancer who directs them to a cave where the location of the Grail is said to be written. The entrance to the cave is guarded by the Rabbit of Caerbannog. Underestimating it, the knights attack, but the Rabbit easily kills Bors, Gawain and Ector. Arthur uses the \"Holy Hand Grenade of Antioch\", provided by Brother Maynard, to destroy the creature. Inside the cave, they find an inscription from Joseph of Arimathea, directing them to \"the Castle of Aarrgh\". They are interrupted by an attack from the animated \"Legendary Black Beast\" that lives in the cave, which devours Brother Maynard and pursues the others. Arthur and the knights escape after the film's animator unexpectedly suffers a fatal heart attack, erasing the Black Beast.\nThe knights approach the Bridge of Death, where the soothsaying bridge-keeper demands they each answer three questions in order to pass or else be cast into the Gorge of Eternal Peril. Lancelot easily answers simple questions and crosses. An overly cocky Robin is defeated by an unexpectedly difficult question, and an indecisive Galahad fails an easy one; both are magically flung into the gorge. When Arthur asks for clarification on a question regarding the airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow, the bridge-keeper cannot answer and is himself thrown into the gorge.\nArthur and Bedevere cannot find Lancelot, unaware that he has been arrested by police investigating the historian's death. They find Castle Aarrgh occupied by the French soldiers from earlier in the film. After being repelled by showers of manure, they summon an army of knights and prepare to assault the castle. As the army charges, the police arrive, arrest Arthur and Bedevere on suspicion of the murder of the historian, and break the camera, abruptly ending the film.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nIn January 1973, the Monty Python troupe wrote the first draft of the screenplay. Half of the material was set in the Middle Ages and half in the present day. The group decided to set the film during the Middle Ages and focus on the legend of the Holy Grail. By the fourth or fifth draft, the story was complete, and the cast joked that the fact that the Grail was never retrieved would be \"a big let-down ... a great anti-climax\". Graham Chapman said a challenge was incorporating scenes that did not fit the Holy Grail motif.\nNeither Terry Gilliam nor Terry Jones had directed a film before, and described it as a learning experience in which they would learn to make a film by making an entire full-length film. The cast humorously described the novice directing style as employing the level of mutual disrespect always found in Monty Python's work.\nFinancing.\nAccording to Gilliam, the Pythons turned to rock bands like Pink Floyd and Led Zeppelin for financing because no studio would fund the film, and the rock stars saw it as \"a good tax write-off\" because the top rate of UK income tax was \"as high as 90%\" at the time. Idle and Gilliam had previously mentioned that Elton John also contributed to the financing of the film. A 2021 tweet by Eric Idle revealed that the entire original budget of \u00a3175,350 (about $410,000 in 1974) was provided by eight investors: Led Zeppelin (\u00a331,500), Pink Floyd (\u00a321,000), Jethro Tull's Ian Anderson (\u00a36300), \"Holy Grail\"'s co-producer Michael White (\u00a378,750), Heartaches (a cricket team founded by lyricist Tim Rice (\u00a35,250), and three record companies: Island Records (\u00a321,000), Chrysalis Records (\u00a36,300), and Charisma Records (\u00a35,250), the record label that had released Python's early comedy albums. The investors also received part of the proceeds from the 2005 musical \"Spamalot\".\nFilming.\n\"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" was mostly shot on location in Scotland, particularly around Doune Castle, Glen Coe, and the privately owned Castle Stalker. The many castles seen throughout the film were mainly either Doune Castle shot from different angles or hanging miniatures. There are several exceptions to this: the first exterior shot of a castle at the beginning of the film is Kidwelly Castle in South Wales, and the single exterior shot of the Swamp Castle during \"Tale of Sir Lancelot\" is Bodiam Castle in East Sussex; all subsequent shots of the exterior and interior of those scenes were filmed at Doune Castle. Production designer Julian Doyle recounted that his crew constructed walls in the forest near Doune. Terry Jones later recalled the crew had selected more castles around Scotland for locations, but during the two weeks prior to principal photography, the Scottish Department of the Environment declined permission for use of the castles in its jurisdiction, for fear of damage.\nAt the start of \"The Tale of Sir Robin\", there is a slow camera zoom in on rocky scenery (that in the voice-over is described as \"the dark forest of Ewing\"). This is actually a still photograph of the gorge at Mount Buffalo National Park in Victoria, Australia. Doyle stated in 2000 during an interview with \"Hotdog\" magazine that it was a still image filmed with candles underneath the frame (to give a heat haze). This was a low-cost method of achieving a convincing location effect.\nOn the DVD audio commentary, Cleese described challenges shooting and editing Castle Anthrax in \"The Tale of Sir Galahad\", with what he felt the most comedic take being unused because an anachronistic coat was visible in it. Castle Anthrax was also shot in one part of Doune, where costume designer Hazel Pethig advised against nudity, dressing the girls in shifts.\nThe scene in which the knights fight the Rabbit of Caerbannog was filmed at Tomnadashan mine. A real white rabbit was used, switched with puppets for its killings. The bite effects were done with special puppetry by both Gilliam and SFX technician John Horton. According to Gilliam, the rabbit was covered with red liquid to simulate blood, though its owner did not want the animal dirty and was kept unaware. The liquid was difficult to remove from the fur. Gilliam also stated that he thought, in hindsight, the crew could have just purchased their own rabbit instead. Regardless, the rabbit itself was unharmed.\nAs chronicled in \"The Life of Python\", \"The First 20 Years of Monty Python\", and \"The Pythons' Autobiography\", Chapman suffered from acrophobia, trembling and bouts of forgetfulness during filming due to his alcoholism, prompting him to refrain from drinking while the production continued in order to remain \"on an even keel\". Nearly three years later, in December 1977, Chapman achieved sobriety.\nOriginally the knight characters were going to ride real horses, but after it became clear that the film's small budget precluded real horses (except for a lone horse appearing in a couple of scenes), the Pythons decided their characters would mime horse-riding while their porters trotted behind them banging coconut shells together. The joke was derived from the old-fashioned sound effect used by radio shows to convey the sound of hooves clattering. This was later referred to in the German release of the film, which translated the title as \"Die Ritter der Kokosnu\u00df\" (\"The Knights of the Coconut\"). Similarly, the Hungarian title \"Gyalog galopp\" translates to \"Galloping on Foot\".\nSoundtrack.\nIn addition to several songs written by Python regular Neil Innes, several pieces of music were licensed from De Wolfe Music Library. These include:\nInnes was supposed to write the film's soundtrack in its entirety, but after the team watched the movie with Innes's soundtrack, they decided to go instead with \"canned\" music, music borrowed from existing stock recordings. One problem with Innes's music, apparently, was that they considered it too appropriate, so that, according to Python scholar Darl Larsen, it \"undercut the Pythons' attempt at undercutting the medieval world they were trying to depict\".\nRelease.\nAdvance publicity for \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" included a theatrical trailer incorporating scenes from the film, footage not included in the film (Arthur knighting a peasant only to stab him when the prop castle in the background falls over), and excerpts of Graeme Garden and Terry Jones in a parody of Ingmar Bergman's \"The Seventh Seal\" filmed for the 1967 sketch comedy series \"Twice a Fortnight\". Narrated largely by British actor Burt Kwouk in Mandarin Chinese, the trailer concludes by advertising a Chinese restaurant ostensibly located four minutes from where the film is playing.\n\"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" had its theatrical debut in London on 3 April 1975, followed by a screening on 27 April 1975 at the Century Plaza Cinemas in Los Angeles. It opened to the public in the United States at Cinema II in New York City on 28 April.\nThe film had its television premiere 25 February 1977 on the \"CBS Late Movie\". Reportedly, the Pythons were displeased to discover a number of edits were done by the network to reduce use of profanity and the showing of blood. The troupe pulled back the rights and thereafter had it broadcast in the United States only on PBS and later other channels such as Comedy Central and IFC, where it runs uncut.\nThe book \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail (Book)\" (titled \"M\u00f8nti Pyth\u00f8n ik den H\u00f8lie Gr\u00e4ilen (B\u00f8k)\" on the spine) was published by Methuen Publishing in 1977. The book includes two versions of the script - the 1973 first draft (titled \"Monty Python's Second Film\") and the 1974 final draft - as well as various photographs and ancillary material such as the film's Statement of Financial Position and Cost of Production Statement.\nThe film has been periodically re-released. A \"21st anniversary edition\" was released on video in 1995 with 24 seconds of extra footage. This version with a new stereo soundtrack was released in theatres starting 15 June 2001 in the United States. It was re-released on 14 October 2015 in the United Kingdom. It was re-released together with a special \"quote-along\" version in early December 2023 to celebrate its \"48th-and-a-half anniversary\".\nBox office.\nThe film grossed $122,200 in its first three weeks in London. In its first week in New York it grossed $35,000.\nAccording to records of the NFFC, as of 31 December 1978 the distributor earned receipts of \u00a32,358,229 in the United Kingdom. It earned rentals in the US and Canada of $5.17 million.\nHome media.\nIn Region 1, The Criterion Collection released a LaserDisc version of the film featuring audio commentary from directors Jones and Gilliam.\nIn 2001, Columbia TriStar published a two-disc, special-edition DVD. Disc one includes the Jones and Gilliam commentary, a second commentary with Idle, Palin and Cleese, the film's screenplay on a subtitle track and \"Subtitles for People Who Don't Like the Film\"\u2013consisting of lines taken from William Shakespeare's \"Henry IV, Part 2\". Disc two includes \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail in Lego\", a \"brickfilm\" version of the \"Camelot Song\" as sung by Lego minifigures. It was created by Spite Your Face Productions on commission from the Lego Group and Python Pictures. The project was conceived by the original film's respective producer and co-director, John Goldstone and Terry Gilliam. Disc two also includes two scenes from the film's Japanese dub, literally translated back into English through subtitles. \"The Quest for the Holy Grail Locations\", hosted by Palin and Jones, shows places in Scotland used for the setting titled as \"England 932 A.D.\" (as well as the two Pythons purchasing a copy of their own script as a guide). Also included is a who's who page, advertising galleries and sing-alongs. A \"Collector's Edition\" DVD release additionally included a book of the screenplay, a limited-edition film cell/senitype, and limited-edition art cards.\nOn the special edition DVD, the studio logos, opening credits and a brief portion of the opening scene of 1961 British Film \"Dentist on the Job\" is added to the start of the film. The clip ends with a spluttering, unseen \"projectionist\" realising he has played the wrong film. A \"slide\" then appears urging the audience to wait one moment please while the operator changes reels.\nA 35th-anniversary edition on Blu-ray was released in the US on 6 March 2012. Special features include \"The Holy Book of Days,\" a second-screen experience that can be downloaded as an app on an iOS device and played with the Blu-ray to enhance its viewing, lost animation sequences with a new intro from animator Terry Gilliam, outtakes and extended scenes with Python member and the movie's co-director Terry Jones.\nIt was released on Blu-ray again for the film's 40th anniversary on 27 October 2015, including a new special feature consisting of a Q&amp;A with the Pythons at the Tribeca Film Festival. Its physical release had a limited edition box set resembling a castle with a catapult and rubber animals to launch.\nOn the film's 50th anniversary, Sony Pictures Home Entertainment will release \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" on Ultra HD Blu-ray on 26 August 2025.\nReception and legacy.\nContemporary reviews were mixed. Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" wrote in a favourable review that the film had \"some low spots,\" but had gags which were \"nonstop, occasionally inspired and should not be divulged, though it's not giving away too much to say that I particularly liked a sequence in which the knights, to gain access to an enemy castle, come up with the idea of building a Trojan rabbit.\" Charles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" was also positive, writing that the film, \"like \"Mad\" comics, is not certain to please every taste. But its youthful exuberance and its rousing zaniness are hard not to like. As a matter of fact, the sense of fun is dangerously contagious.\" Penelope Gilliatt of \"The New Yorker\" called the film \"often recklessly funny and sometimes a matter of comic genius.\"\nOther reviews were less enthusiastic. \"Variety\" wrote that the storyline was \"basically an excuse for set pieces, some amusing, others overdone.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film two-and-a-half stars, writing that he felt \"it contained about 10 very funny moments and 70 minutes of silence. Too many jokes took too long to set up, a trait shared by both \"Blazing Saddles\" and \"Young Frankenstein\". I guess I prefer Monty Python in chunks, in its original, television revue format.\" Gary Arnold of \"The Washington Post\" called the film \"a fitfully amusing spoof of the Arthurian legends\" but \"rather poky\" in tempo, citing the running gag of Swedish subtitles in the opening credits as an example of how the Pythons \"don't know when to let go of any \"shtik\"\". Geoff Brown of \"The Monthly Film Bulletin\" wrote in a mixed review that \"the team's visual buffooneries and verbal rigamaroles (some good, some bad, but mostly indifferent) are piled on top of each other with no attention to judicious timing or structure, and a form which began as a jaunty assault on the well-made revue sketch and an ingenious misuse of television's fragmented style of presentation, threatens to become as unyielding and unfruitful as the conventions it originally attacked.\"\nThe film's reputation grew over time. In 2000, readers of \"Total Film\" magazine voted \"Holy Grail\" the fifth-greatest comedy film of all time. The next Python film, \"Life of Brian\", was ranked first. A 2006 poll of Channel 4 viewers on the 50 Greatest Comedy Films saw \"Holy Grail\" placed sixth (with \"Life of Brian\" again topping the list). In 2011, an ABC prime-time special, \"Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time\", counted down the best films chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and \"People\". \"Holy Grail\" was selected as the second best comedy after \"Airplane!\" In 2016, \"Empire\" magazine ranked \"Holy Grail\" 18th in their list of the 100 best British films (\"Life of Brian\" was ranked 2nd), their entry stating, \"Elvis ordered a print of this comedy classic and watched it five times. If it's good enough for the King, it's good enough for you.\"\nIn a 2017 interview at Indiana University in Bloomington, John Cleese expressed disappointment with the film's conclusion. \"'The ending annoys me the most...It ends the way it does because we couldn't think of any other way'\". However, scripts for the film and notebooks that are among Michael Palin's private archive, which he donated to the British Library in 2017, do document at least one alternative ending that the troupe considered: \"a battle between the knights of Camelot, the French, and the Killer Rabbit of Caerbannog\". Due to the film's small production budget, that idea for a \"much pricier option\" was discarded by the Pythons in favour of the ending with \"King Arthur getting arrested\", which Palin deemed \"cheaper\" and \"funnier\".\nReview aggregator Rotten Tomatoes offers a 91% approval rating from reviews of 126 critics, with an average rating of 8.40/10. The consensus reads, \"A cult classic as gut-bustingly hilarious as it is blithely ridiculous, \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" has lost none of its exceedingly silly charm.\" On Metacritic, the film has a score of 91 out of 100 based on 24 critics' reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\".\n\"Spamalot\".\nThe film was adapted as the 2005 Tony Award-winning Broadway musical \"Spamalot\". Written primarily by Idle, the stage show offers a revised plot, while retaining many jokes from the film.\nIn May 2018, 20th Century Fox green-lit a film adaptation of the musical. Idle would write the screenplay and stage director Casey Nicholaw would direct. Slated to begin filming in early 2019, production was delayed as a result of the acquisition of 20th Century Fox by The Walt Disney Company. The project announced a move to Paramount Pictures on January 6, 2020, with Idle and Nicholaw still attached as writer and director, and Dan Jinks joining as a producer. However, in 2021, Idle confirmed on his Twitter account that the film would not be made because two of his former colleagues opposed it.\nA Broadway revival began previews on October 31, 2023 at the St. James Theatre, with an official opening night of November 16, 2023.\nIn 2013, the Pythons lost a legal case to Mark Forstater, the film's producer, owing a combined \u00a3800,000 in legal fees and back royalties to Forstater for the derivative work of \"Spamalot\". To help cover the cost of these royalties and fees, the group arranged and performed in a stage show, \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\", held at the O2 Arena in London in July 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19702", "revid": "49829114", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19702", "title": "Mutation", "text": "Alteration in the nucleotide sequence of a genome\nIn biology, a mutation is an alteration in the nucleic acid sequence of the genome of an organism, virus, or extrachromosomal DNA. Viral genomes contain either DNA or RNA. Mutations result from errors during DNA or viral replication, mitosis, or meiosis or other types of damage to DNA (such as pyrimidine dimers caused by exposure to ultraviolet radiation), which then may undergo error-prone repair (especially microhomology-mediated end joining), cause an error during other forms of repair, or cause an error during replication (translesion synthesis). Mutations may also result from substitution, insertion or deletion of segments of DNA due to mobile genetic elements.\nMutations may or may not produce detectable changes in the observable characteristics (phenotype) of an organism. Mutations play a part in both normal and abnormal biological processes including: evolution, cancer, and the development of the immune system, including junctional diversity. Mutation is the ultimate source of all genetic variation, providing the raw material on which evolutionary forces such as natural selection can act.\nMutation can result in many different types of change in sequences. Mutations in genes can have no effect, alter the product of a gene, or prevent the gene from functioning properly or completely. Mutations can also occur in non-genic regions. A 2007 study on genetic variations between different species of \"Drosophila\" suggested that, if a mutation changes a protein produced by a gene, the result is likely to be harmful, with an estimated 70% of amino acid polymorphisms that have damaging effects, and the remainder being either neutral or marginally beneficial.\nMutation and DNA damage are the two major types of errors that occur in DNA, but they are fundamentally different. DNA damage is a physical alteration in the DNA structure, such as a single or double strand break, a modified guanosine residue in DNA such as 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine, or a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon adduct. DNA damages can be recognized by enzymes, and therefore can be correctly repaired using the complementary undamaged strand in DNA as a template or an undamaged sequence in a homologous chromosome if it is available. If DNA damage remains in a cell, transcription of a gene may be prevented and thus translation into a protein may also be blocked. DNA replication may also be blocked and/or the cell may die. In contrast to a DNA damage, a mutation is an alteration of the base sequence of the DNA. Ordinarily, a mutation cannot be recognized by enzymes once the base change is present in both DNA strands, and thus a mutation is not ordinarily repaired. At the cellular level, mutations can alter protein function and regulation. Unlike DNA damages, mutations are replicated when the cell replicates. At the level of cell populations, cells with mutations will increase or decrease in frequency according to the effects of the mutations on the ability of the cell to survive and reproduce. Although distinctly different from each other, DNA damages and mutations are related because DNA damages often cause errors of DNA synthesis during replication or repair and these errors are a major source of mutation.\nOverview.\nMutations can involve the duplication of large sections of DNA, usually through genetic recombination. These duplications are a major source of raw material for evolving new genes, with tens to hundreds of genes duplicated in animal genomes every million years. Most genes belong to larger gene families of shared ancestry, detectable by their sequence homology. Novel genes are produced by several methods, commonly through the duplication and mutation of an ancestral gene, or by recombining parts of different genes to form new combinations with new functions.\nHere, protein domains act as modules, each with a particular and independent function, that can be mixed together to produce genes encoding new proteins with novel properties. For example, the human eye uses four genes to make structures that sense light: three for cone cell or colour vision and one for rod cell or night vision; all four arose from a single ancestral gene. Another advantage of duplicating a gene (or even an entire genome) is that this increases engineering redundancy; this allows one gene in the pair to acquire a new function while the other copy performs the original function. Other types of mutation occasionally create new genes from previously noncoding DNA.\nChanges in chromosome number may involve even larger mutations, where segments of the DNA within chromosomes break and then rearrange. For example, in the Homininae, two chromosomes fused to produce human chromosome 2; this fusion did not occur in the lineage of the other apes, and they retain these separate chromosomes. In evolution, the most important role of such chromosomal rearrangements may be to accelerate the divergence of a population into new species by making populations less likely to interbreed, thereby preserving genetic differences between these populations.\nSequences of DNA that can move about the genome, such as transposons, make up a major fraction of the genetic material of plants and animals, and may have been important in the evolution of genomes. For example, more than a million copies of the Alu sequence are present in the human genome, and these sequences have now been recruited to perform functions such as regulating gene expression. Another effect of these mobile DNA sequences is that when they move within a genome, they can mutate or delete existing genes and thereby produce genetic diversity.\nNonlethal mutations accumulate within the gene pool and increase the amount of genetic variation. The abundance of some genetic changes within the gene pool can be reduced by natural selection, while other \"more favorable\" mutations may accumulate and result in adaptive changes.\nFor example, a butterfly may produce offspring with new mutations. The majority of these mutations will have no effect; but one might change the colour of one of the butterfly's offspring, making it harder (or easier) for predators to see. If this color change is advantageous, the chances of this butterfly's surviving and producing its own offspring are a little better, and over time the number of butterflies with this mutation may form a larger percentage of the population.\nNeutral mutations are defined as mutations whose effects do not influence the fitness of an individual. These can increase in frequency over time due to genetic drift. It is believed that the overwhelming majority of mutations have no significant effect on an organism's fitness. Also, DNA repair mechanisms are able to mend most changes before they become permanent mutations, and many organisms have mechanisms, such as apoptotic pathways, for eliminating otherwise-permanently mutated somatic cells.\nBeneficial mutations can improve reproductive success.\nCauses.\nFour classes of mutations are (1) &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;spontaneous mutations (molecular decay), (2) mutations due to error-prone replication bypass of naturally occurring DNA damage (also called error-prone translesion synthesis), (3) errors introduced during DNA repair, and (4) induced mutations caused by mutagens. Scientists may sometimes deliberately introduce mutations into cells or research organisms for the sake of scientific experimentation.\nOne 2017 study claimed that 66% of cancer-causing mutations are random, 29% are due to the environment (the studied population spanned 69 countries), and 5% are inherited.\nHumans on average pass 60 new mutations to their children but fathers pass more mutations depending on their age with every year adding two new mutations to a child.\nSpontaneous mutation.\n\"Spontaneous mutations\" occur with non-zero probability even given a healthy, uncontaminated cell. Naturally occurring oxidative DNA damage is estimated to occur 10,000 times per cell per day in humans and 100,000 times per cell per day in rats. Spontaneous mutations can be characterized by the specific change:\nError-prone replication bypass.\nThere is increasing evidence that the majority of spontaneously arising mutations are due to error-prone replication (translesion synthesis) past DNA damage in the template strand. In mice, the majority of mutations are caused by translesion synthesis. Likewise, in yeast, Kunz et al. found that more than 60% of the spontaneous single base pair substitutions and deletions were caused by translesion synthesis.\nErrors introduced during DNA repair.\nAlthough naturally occurring double-strand breaks occur at a relatively low frequency in DNA, their repair often causes mutation. Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) is a major pathway for repairing double-strand breaks. NHEJ involves removal of a few nucleotides to allow somewhat inaccurate alignment of the two ends for rejoining followed by addition of nucleotides to fill in gaps. As a consequence, NHEJ often introduces mutations.\nInduced mutation.\nInduced mutations are alterations in the gene after it has come in contact with mutagens and environmental causes.\n\"Induced mutations\" on the molecular level can be caused by:\nWhereas in former times mutations were assumed to occur by chance, or induced by mutagens, molecular mechanisms of mutation have been discovered in bacteria and across the tree of life. As S. Rosenberg states, \"These mechanisms reveal a picture of highly regulated mutagenesis, up-regulated temporally by stress responses and activated when cells/organisms are maladapted to their environments\u2014when stressed\u2014potentially accelerating adaptation.\" Since they are self-induced mutagenic mechanisms that increase the adaptation rate of organisms, they have some times been named as adaptive mutagenesis mechanisms, and include the SOS response in bacteria, ectopic intrachromosomal recombination and other chromosomal events such as duplications.\nClassification of types.\nBy effect on structure.\nThe sequence of a gene can be altered in a number of ways. Gene mutations have varying effects on health depending on where they occur and whether they alter the function of essential proteins.\nMutations in the structure of genes can be classified into several types.\nLarge-scale mutations.\nLarge-scale mutations in chromosomal structure include:\nSmall-scale mutations.\nSmall-scale mutations affect a gene in one or a few nucleotides. (If only a single nucleotide is affected, they are called point mutations.) Small-scale mutations include:\nBy impact on protein sequence.\nThe effect of a mutation on protein sequence depends in part on where in the genome it occurs, especially whether it is in a coding or non-coding region. Mutations in the non-coding regulatory sequences of a gene, such as promoters, enhancers, and silencers, can alter levels of gene expression, but are less likely to alter the protein sequence. Mutations within introns and in regions with no known biological function (e.g. pseudogenes, retrotransposons) are generally neutral, having no effect on phenotype \u2013 though intron mutations could alter the protein product if they affect mRNA splicing.\nMutations that occur in coding regions of the genome are more likely to alter the protein product, and can be categorized by their effect on amino acid sequence:\nBy effect on function.\nA mutation becomes an effect on function mutation when the exactitude of functions between a mutated protein and its direct interactor undergoes change. The interactors can be other proteins, molecules, nucleic acids, etc. There are many mutations that fall under the category of by effect on function, but depending on the specificity of the change the mutations listed below will occur.\nBy effect on fitness (harmful, beneficial, neutral mutations).\nIn genetics, it is sometimes useful to classify mutations as either &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;harmful or beneficial (or neutral):\nLarge-scale quantitative mutagenesis screens, in which thousands of millions of mutations are tested, invariably find that a larger fraction of mutations has harmful effects but always returns a number of beneficial mutations as well. For instance, in a screen of all gene deletions in \"E. coli\", 80% of mutations were negative, but 20% were positive, even though many had a very small effect on growth (depending on condition). Gene \"deletions\" involve removal of whole genes, so that point mutations almost always have a much smaller effect. In a similar screen in \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\", but this time with transposon insertions, 76% of insertion mutants were classified as neutral, 16% had a significantly reduced fitness, but 6% were advantageous.\nThis classification is obviously relative and somewhat artificial: a harmful mutation can quickly turn into a beneficial mutations when conditions change. Also, there is a gradient from harmful/beneficial to neutral, as many mutations may have small and mostly neglectable effects but under certain conditions will become relevant. Also, many traits are determined by hundreds of genes (or loci), so that each locus has only a minor effect. For instance, human height is determined by hundreds of genetic variants (\"mutations\") but each of them has a very minor effect on height, apart from the impact of nutrition. Height (or size) itself may be more or less beneficial as the huge range of sizes in animal or plant groups shows.\nDistribution of fitness effects (DFE).\nAttempts have been made to infer the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) using mutagenesis experiments and theoretical models applied to molecular sequence data. DFE, as used to determine the relative abundance of different types of mutations (i.e., strongly deleterious, nearly neutral or advantageous), is relevant to many evolutionary questions, such as the maintenance of genetic variation, the rate of genomic decay, the maintenance of outcrossing sexual reproduction as opposed to inbreeding and the evolution of sex and genetic recombination. DFE can also be tracked by tracking the skewness of the distribution of mutations with putatively severe effects as compared to the distribution of mutations with putatively mild or absent effect. In summary, the DFE plays an important role in predicting evolutionary dynamics. A variety of approaches have been used to study the DFE, including theoretical, experimental and analytical methods.\nOne of the earliest theoretical studies of the distribution of fitness effects was done by Motoo Kimura, an influential theoretical population geneticist. His neutral theory of molecular evolution proposes that most novel mutations will be highly deleterious, with a small fraction being neutral. A later proposal by Hiroshi Akashi proposed a bimodal model for the DFE, with modes centered around highly deleterious and neutral mutations. Both theories agree that the vast majority of novel mutations are neutral or deleterious and that advantageous mutations are rare, which has been supported by experimental results. One example is a study done on the DFE of random mutations in vesicular stomatitis virus. Out of all mutations, 39.6% were lethal, 31.2% were non-lethal deleterious, and 27.1% were neutral. Another example comes from a high throughput mutagenesis experiment with yeast. In this experiment it was shown that the overall DFE is bimodal, with a cluster of neutral mutations, and a broad distribution of deleterious mutations.\nThough relatively few mutations are advantageous, those that are play an important role in evolutionary changes. Like neutral mutations, weakly selected advantageous mutations can be lost due to random genetic drift, but strongly selected advantageous mutations are more likely to be fixed. Knowing the DFE of advantageous mutations may lead to increased ability to predict the evolutionary dynamics. Theoretical work on the DFE for advantageous mutations has been done by John H. Gillespie and H. Allen Orr. They proposed that the distribution for advantageous mutations should be exponential under a wide range of conditions, which, in general, has been supported by experimental studies, at least for strongly selected advantageous mutations.\nIn general, it is accepted that the majority of mutations are neutral or deleterious, with advantageous mutations being rare; however, the proportion of types of mutations varies between species. This indicates two important points: first, the proportion of effectively neutral mutations is likely to vary between species, resulting from dependence on effective population size; second, the average effect of deleterious mutations varies dramatically between species. In addition, the DFE also differs between coding regions and noncoding regions, with the DFE of noncoding DNA containing more weakly selected mutations.\nBy inheritance.\nIn multicellular organisms with dedicated reproductive cells, mutations can be subdivided into germline mutations, which can be passed on to descendants through their reproductive cells, and somatic mutations (also called acquired mutations), which involve cells outside the dedicated reproductive group and which are not usually transmitted to descendants.\nDiploid organisms (e.g., humans) contain two copies of each gene\u2014a paternal and a maternal allele. Based on the occurrence of mutation on each chromosome, we may classify mutations into three types. A wild type or homozygous non-mutated organism is one in which neither allele is mutated.\nGermline mutation.\nA germline mutation in the reproductive cells of an individual gives rise to a \"constitutional mutation\" in the offspring, that is, a mutation that is present in every cell. A constitutional mutation can also occur very soon after fertilization, or continue from a previous constitutional mutation in a parent. A germline mutation can be passed down through subsequent generations of organisms.\nThe distinction between germline and somatic mutations is important in animals that have a dedicated germline to produce reproductive cells. However, it is of little value in understanding the effects of mutations in plants, which lack a dedicated germline. The distinction is also blurred in those animals that reproduce asexually through mechanisms such as budding, because the cells that give rise to the daughter organisms also give rise to that organism's germline.\nA new germline mutation not inherited from either parent is called a \"de novo\" mutation.\nSomatic mutation.\nA change in the genetic structure that is not inherited from a parent, and also not passed to offspring, is called a somatic mutation\".\" Somatic mutations are not inherited by an organism's offspring because they do not affect the germline. However, they are passed down to all the progeny of a mutated cell within the same organism during mitosis. A major section of an organism therefore might carry the same mutation. These types of mutations are usually prompted by environmental causes, such as ultraviolet radiation or any exposure to certain harmful chemicals, and can cause diseases including cancer.\"\"\nWith plants, some somatic mutations can be propagated without the need for seed production, for example, by grafting and stem cuttings. These types of mutations have led to new types of fruits, such as the \"Delicious\" apple and the \"Washington\" navel orange.\nHuman and mouse somatic cells have a mutation rate more than ten times higher than the germline mutation rate for both species; mice have a higher rate of both somatic and germline mutations per cell division than humans. The disparity in mutation rate between the germline and somatic tissues likely reflects the greater importance of genome maintenance in the germline than in the soma.\nNomenclature.\nIn order to categorize a mutation as such, the \"normal\" sequence must be obtained from the DNA of a \"normal\" or \"healthy\" organism (as opposed to a \"mutant\" or \"sick\" one), it should be identified and reported; ideally, it should be made publicly available for a straightforward nucleotide-by-nucleotide comparison, and agreed upon by the scientific community or by a group of expert geneticists and biologists, who have the responsibility of establishing the \"standard\" or so-called \"consensus\" sequence. This step requires a tremendous scientific effort. Once the consensus sequence is known, the mutations in a genome can be pinpointed, described, and classified. The committee of the Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) has developed the standard human sequence variant nomenclature, which should be used by researchers and DNA diagnostic centers to generate unambiguous mutation descriptions. In principle, this nomenclature can also be used to describe mutations in other organisms. The nomenclature specifies the type of mutation and base or amino acid changes.\nMutation rates.\nMutation rates vary substantially across species, and the evolutionary forces that generally determine mutation are the subject of ongoing investigation.\nIn humans, the mutation rate is about 50\u201390 \"de novo\" mutations per genome per generation, that is, each human accumulates about 50\u201390 novel mutations that were not present in their parents. This number has been established by sequencing thousands of human trios, that is, two parents and at least one child.\nThe genomes of RNA viruses are based on RNA rather than DNA. The RNA viral genome can be double-stranded (as in DNA) or single-stranded. In some of these viruses (such as the single-stranded human immunodeficiency virus), replication occurs quickly, and there are no mechanisms to check the genome for accuracy. This error-prone process often results in mutations.\nThe rate of de novo mutations, whether germline or somatic, vary among organisms. Individuals within the same species can even express varying rates of mutation. Overall, rates of de novo mutations are low compared to those of inherited mutations, which categorizes them as rare forms of genetic variation. Many observations of de novo mutation rates have associated higher rates of mutation correlated to paternal age. In sexually reproducing organisms, the comparatively higher frequency of cell divisions in the parental sperm donor germline drive conclusions that rates of de novo mutation can be tracked along a common basis. The frequency of error during the DNA replication process of gametogenesis, especially amplified in the rapid production of sperm cells, can promote more opportunities for de novo mutations to replicate unregulated by DNA repair machinery. This claim combines the observed effects of increased probability for mutation in rapid spermatogenesis with short periods of time between cellular divisions that limit the efficiency of repair machinery. Rates of de novo mutations that affect an organism during its development can also increase with certain environmental factors. For example, certain intensities of exposure to radioactive elements can inflict damage to an organism's genome, heightening rates of mutation. In humans, the appearance of skin cancer during one's lifetime is induced by overexposure to UV radiation that causes mutations in the cellular and skin genome.\nRandomness of mutations.\nThere is a widespread assumption that mutations are (entirely) \"random\" with respect to their consequences (in terms of probability). This was shown to be wrong as mutation frequency can vary across regions of the genome, with such DNA repair- and mutation-biases being associated with various factors. For instance, Monroe and colleagues demonstrated that\u2014in the studied plant (\"Arabidopsis thaliana\")\u2014more important genes mutate less frequently than less important ones. They demonstrated that mutation is \"non-random in a way that benefits the plant\". Additionally, previous experiments typically used to demonstrate mutations being random with respect to fitness (such as the Fluctuation Test and Replica plating) have been shown to only support the weaker claim that those mutations are random with respect to external selective constraints, not fitness as a whole.\nDisease causation.\nChanges in DNA caused by mutation in a coding region of DNA can cause errors in protein sequence that may result in partially or completely non-functional proteins. Each cell, in order to function correctly, depends on thousands of proteins to function in the right places at the right times. When a mutation alters a protein that plays a critical role in the body, a medical condition can result. One study on the comparison of genes between different species of \"Drosophila\" suggests that if a mutation does change a protein, the mutation will most likely be harmful, with an estimated 70 per cent of amino acid polymorphisms having damaging effects, and the remainder being either neutral or weakly beneficial. Some mutations alter a gene's DNA base sequence but do not change the protein made by the gene. Studies have shown that only 7% of point mutations in noncoding DNA of yeast are deleterious and 12% in coding DNA are deleterious. The rest of the mutations are either neutral or slightly beneficial.\nInherited disorders.\nIf a mutation is present in a germ cell, it can give rise to offspring that carries the mutation in all of its cells. This is the case in hereditary diseases. In particular, if there is a mutation in a DNA repair gene within a germ cell, humans carrying such germline mutations may have an increased risk of cancer. A list of 34 such germline mutations is given in the article DNA repair-deficiency disorder. An example of one is albinism, a mutation that occurs in the \"OCA1\" or \"OCA2\" gene. Individuals with this disorder are more prone to many types of cancers, other disorders and have impaired vision.\nDNA damage can cause an error when the DNA is replicated, and this error of replication can cause a gene mutation that, in turn, could cause a genetic disorder. DNA damages are repaired by the DNA repair system of the cell. Each cell has a number of pathways through which enzymes recognize and repair damages in DNA. Because DNA can be damaged in many ways, the process of DNA repair is an important way in which the body protects itself from disease. Once DNA damage has given rise to a mutation, the mutation cannot be repaired.\nRole in carcinogenesis.\nOn the other hand, a mutation may occur in a somatic cell of an organism. Such mutations will be present in all descendants of this cell within the same organism. The accumulation of certain mutations over generations of somatic cells is part of cause of malignant transformation, from normal cell to cancer cell.\nCells with heterozygous loss-of-function mutations (one good copy of gene and one mutated copy) may function normally with the unmutated copy until the good copy has been spontaneously somatically mutated. This kind of mutation happens often in living organisms, but it is difficult to measure the rate. Measuring this rate is important in predicting the rate at which people may develop cancer.\nPoint mutations may arise from spontaneous mutations that occur during DNA replication. The rate of mutation may be increased by mutagens. Mutagens can be physical, such as radiation from UV rays, X-rays or extreme heat, or chemical (molecules that misplace base pairs or disrupt the helical shape of DNA). Mutagens associated with cancers are often studied to learn about cancer and its prevention.\nBeneficial and conditional mutations.\nAlthough mutations that cause changes in protein sequences can be harmful to an organism, on occasions the effect may be positive in a given environment. In this case, the mutation may enable the mutant organism to withstand particular environmental stresses better than wild-type organisms, or reproduce more quickly. In these cases a mutation will tend to become more common in a population through natural selection. That said, the same mutation can be beneficial in one condition and disadvantageous in another condition. Examples include the following:\nHIV resistance: a specific 32 base pair deletion in human CCR5 (CCR5-\u039432) confers HIV resistance to homozygotes and delays AIDS onset in heterozygotes. One possible explanation of the etiology of the relatively high frequency of CCR5-\u039432 in the European population is that it conferred resistance to the bubonic plague in mid-14th century Europe. People with this mutation were more likely to survive infection; thus its frequency in the population increased. This theory could explain why this mutation is not found in Southern Africa, which remained untouched by bubonic plague. A newer theory suggests that the selective pressure on the CCR5 Delta 32 mutation was caused by smallpox instead of the bubonic plague.\nMalaria resistance: An example of a harmful mutation is sickle-cell disease, a blood disorder in which the body produces an abnormal type of the oxygen-carrying substance haemoglobin in the red blood cells. One-third of all indigenous inhabitants of Sub-Saharan Africa carry the allele, because, in areas where malaria is common, there is a survival value in carrying only a single sickle-cell allele (sickle cell trait). Those with only one of the two alleles of the sickle-cell disease are more resistant to malaria, since the infestation of the malaria \"Plasmodium\" is halted by the sickling of the cells that it infests.\nAntibiotic resistance: Practically all bacteria develop antibiotic resistance when exposed to antibiotics. In fact, bacterial populations already have such mutations that get selected under antibiotic selection. Obviously, such mutations are only beneficial for the bacteria but not for those infected.\nLactase persistence. A mutation allowed humans to express the enzyme lactase after they are naturally weaned from breast milk, allowing adults to digest lactose, which is likely one of the most beneficial mutations in recent human evolution.\nRole in evolution.\nBy introducing novel genetic qualities to a population of organisms, de novo mutations play a critical role in the combined forces of evolutionary change. However, the weight of genetic diversity generated by mutational change is often considered a generally \"weak\" evolutionary force. Although the random emergence of mutations alone provides the basis for genetic variation across all organic life, this force must be taken in consideration alongside all evolutionary forces at play. Spontaneous de novo mutations as cataclysmic events of speciation depend on factors introduced by natural selection, genetic flow, and genetic drift. For example, smaller populations with heavy mutational input (high rates of mutation) are prone to increases of genetic variation which lead to speciation in future generations. In contrast, larger populations tend to see lesser effects of newly introduced mutated traits. In these conditions, selective forces diminish the frequency of mutated alleles, which are most often deleterious, over time.\nCompensated pathogenic deviations.\nCompensated pathogenic deviations refer to amino acid residues in a protein sequence that are pathogenic in one species but are wild type residues in the functionally equivalent protein in another species. Although the amino acid residue is pathogenic in the first species, it is not so in the second species because its pathogenicity is compensated by one or more amino acid substitutions in the second species. The compensatory mutation can occur in the same protein or in another protein with which it interacts.\nIt is critical to understand the effects of compensatory mutations in the context of fixed deleterious mutations due to the population fitness decreasing because of fixation. Effective population size refers to a population that is reproducing. An increase in this population size has been correlated with a decreased rate of genetic diversity. The position of a population relative to the critical effect population size is essential to determine the effect deleterious alleles will have on fitness. If the population is below the critical effective size fitness will decrease drastically, however if the population is above the critical effect size, fitness can increase regardless of deleterious mutations due to compensatory alleles.\nCompensatory mutations in RNA.\nAs the function of a RNA molecule is dependent on its structure, the structure of RNA molecules is evolutionarily conserved. Therefore, any mutation that alters the stable structure of RNA molecules must be compensated by other compensatory mutations. In the context of RNA, the sequence of the RNA can be considered as ' genotype' and the structure of the RNA can be considered as its 'phenotype'. Since RNAs have relatively simpler composition than proteins, the structure of RNA molecules can be computationally predicted with high degree of accuracy. Because of this convenience, compensatory mutations have been studied in computational simulations using RNA folding algorithms.\nEvolutionary mechanism of compensation.\nCompensatory mutations can be explained by the genetic phenomenon epistasis whereby the phenotypic effect of one mutation is dependent upon mutation(s) at other loci. While epistasis was originally conceived in the context of interaction between different genes, intragenic epistasis has also been studied recently. Existence of compensated pathogenic deviations can be explained by 'sign epistasis', in which the effects of a deleterious mutation can be compensated by the presence of an epistatic mutation in another loci. For a given protein, a deleterious mutation (D) and a compensatory mutation (C) can be considered, where C can be in the same protein as D or in a different interacting protein depending on the context. The fitness effect of C itself could be neutral or somewhat deleterious such that it can still exist in the population, and the effect of D is deleterious to the extent that it cannot exist in the population. However, when C and D co-occur together, the combined fitness effect becomes neutral or positive. Thus, compensatory mutations can bring novelty to proteins by forging new pathways of protein evolution : it allows individuals to travel from one fitness peak to another through the valleys of lower fitness.\nDePristo et al. 2005 outlined two models to explain the dynamics of compensatory pathogenic deviations (CPD). In the first hypothesis P is a pathogenic amino acid mutation that and C is a neutral compensatory mutation. Under these conditions, if the pathogenic mutation arises after a compensatory mutation, then P can become fixed in the population. The second model of CPDs states that P and C are both deleterious mutations resulting in fitness valleys when mutations occur simultaneously. Using publicly available, Ferrer-Costa et al. 2007 obtained compensatory mutations and human pathogenic mutation datasets that were characterized to determine what causes CPDs. Results indicate that the structural constraints and the location in protein structure determine whether compensated mutations will occur.\nExperimental evidence of compensatory mutations.\nExperiment in bacteria.\nLunzer et al. tested the outcome of swapping divergent amino acids between two orthologous proteins of isopropylmalate dehydrogenase (IMDH). They substituted 168 amino acids in \"Escherichia coli\" IMDH that are wild type residues in IMDH \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\". They found that over one third of these substitutions compromised IMDH enzymatic activity in the \"Escherichia coli\" genetic background. This demonstrated that identical amino acid states can result in different phenotypic states depending on the genetic background. Corrigan et al. 2011 demonstrated how \"Staphylococcus aureus\" was able to grow normally without the presence of lipoteichoic acid due to compensatory mutations. Whole genome sequencing results revealed that when Cyclic-di-AMP phosphodiesterase (GdpP) was disrupted in this bacterium, it compensated for the disappearance of the cell wall polymer, resulting in normal cell growth.\nResearch has shown that bacteria can gain drug resistance through compensatory mutations that do not impede or having little effect on fitness. Previous research from Gagneux et al. 2006 has found that laboratory grown \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" strains with rifampicin resistance have reduced fitness, however drug resistant clinical strains of this pathogenic bacteria do not have reduced fitness. Comas et al. 2012 used whole genome comparisons between clinical strains and lab derived mutants to determine the role and contribution of compensatory mutations in drug resistance to rifampicin. Genome analysis reveal rifampicin resistant strains have a mutation in rpoA and rpoC. A similar study investigated the bacterial fitness associated with compensatory mutations in rifampin resistant \"Escherichia coli\". Results obtained from this study demonstrate that drug resistance is linked to bacterial fitness as higher fitness costs are linked to greater transcription errors.\nExperiment in virus.\nGong et al. collected obtained genotype data of influenza nucleoprotein from different timelines and temporally ordered them according to their time of origin. Then they isolated 39 amino acid substitutions that occurred in different timelines and substituted them in a genetic background that approximated the ancestral genotype. They found that 3 of the 39 substitutions significantly reduced the fitness of the ancestral background. Compensatory mutations are new mutations that arise and have a positive or neutral impact on a populations fitness. Previous research has shown that populations have can compensate detrimental mutations. Burch and Chao tested Fisher's geometric model of adaptive evolution by testing whether bacteriophage \u03c66 evolves by small steps. Their results showed that bacteriophage \u03c66 fitness declined rapidly and recovered in small steps . Viral nucleoproteins have been shown to avoid cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) through arginine-to glycine substitutions. This substitution mutations impacts the fitness of viral nucleoproteins, however compensatory co-mutations impede fitness declines and aid the virus to avoid recognition from CTLs. Mutations can have three different effects; mutations can have deleterious effects, some increase fitness through compensatory mutations, and lastly mutations can be counterbalancing resulting in compensatory neutral mutations.\nApplication in human evolution and disease.\nIn the human genome, the frequency and characteristics of de novo mutations have been studied as important contextual factors to our evolution. Compared to the human reference genome, a typical human genome varies at approximately 4.1 to 5.0 million loci, and the majority of this genetic diversity is shared by nearly 0.5% of the population. The typical human genome also contains 40,000 to 200,000 rare variants observed in less than 0.5% of the population that can only have occurred from at least one de novo germline mutation in the history of human evolution. De novo mutations have also been researched as playing a crucial role in the persistence of genetic disease in humans. With recents advancements in next-generation sequencing (NGS), all types of de novo mutations within the genome can be directly studied, the detection of which provides a magnitude of insight toward the causes of both rare and common genetic disorders. Currently, the best estimate of the average human germline SNV mutation rate is 1.18 x 10^-8, with an approximate ~78 novel mutations per generation. The ability to conduct whole genome sequencing of parents and offspring allows for the comparison of mutation rates between generations, narrowing down the origin possibilities of certain genetic disorders.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19705", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19705", "title": "Microgyrus", "text": "Area of the cerebral cortex with four cortical layers instead of six\nIn neuroanatomy, a microgyrus is an area of the cerebral cortex that includes only four cortical layers instead of six.\nMicrogyria are believed by some to be part of the genetic lack of prenatal development which is a cause of, or one of the causes of, dyslexia.\nAlbert Galaburda of Harvard Medical School noticed that language centers in dyslexic brains showed microscopic flaws known as ectopias and microgyria (Galaburda \"et al.\", 2006, \"Nature Neuroscience\" 9(10): 1213\u20131217). Both affect the normal six-layer structure of the cortex. These flaws affect connectivity and functionality of the cortex in critical areas related to sound and visual processing. These and similar structural abnormalities may be the basis of the inevitable and hard to overcome difficulty in reading.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19707", "revid": "909078658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19707", "title": "Mercantilist", "text": ""}
{"id": "19708", "revid": "12051049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19708", "title": "Mercantilism", "text": "Economic policy emphasizing exports\nMercantilism is a form of economic system and nationalist economic policy that is designed to maximize the exports and minimize the imports of an economy. It seeks to maximize the accumulation of resources within the country and use those resources for one-sided trade. \nThe concept aims to reduce a possible current account deficit or reach a current account surplus, and it includes measures aimed at accumulating monetary reserves by a positive balance of trade, especially of finished goods. Historically, such policies may have contributed to war and motivated colonial expansion. Mercantilist theory varies in sophistication from one writer to another and has evolved over time.\nMercantilism promotes government regulation of a nation's economy for the purpose of augmenting and bolstering state power at the expense of rival national powers. High tariffs, especially on manufactured goods, were almost universally a feature of mercantilist policy. Before it fell into decline, mercantilism was dominant in modernized parts of Europe and some areas in Africa from the 16th to the 19th centuries, a period of proto-industrialization. Some commentators argue that it is still practised in the economies of industrializing countries in the form of economic interventionism.\nWith the efforts of supranational organizations such as the World Trade Organization to reduce tariffs globally, non-tariff barriers to trade have assumed a greater importance in neomercantilism.\nHistory.\nMercantilism became the dominant school of economic thought in Europe throughout the late Renaissance and the early modern period (from the 15th to the 18th centuries) before advent of Classical liberalism. Evidence of mercantilistic practices appeared in early modern Venice, Genoa, and Pisa regarding control of the Mediterranean trade in bullion. However, the empiricism of the Renaissance, which first began to quantify large-scale trade accurately, marked the beginning of mercantilism as a codified school of economic theories. The Italian economist and mercantilist Antonio Serra is considered to have written one of the first treatises on political economy in his 1613 work, \"A Short Treatise on the Wealth and Poverty of Nations\".\nMercantilism, in its simplest form, is all about bullionism, or the theory that a nation's wealth is measured in terms of how much precious metal, particularly gold and silver, it possesses. Mercantilist authors were concerned with the movement of money, however, more than with the hoarding of it. They felt that money needed to move through the economy to induce trade and economic activity, a concept different from that of simply amassing wealth. This focus on money's role, specifically precious metals, mirrors modern discussions of the money supply and its implications for economic growth, i.e., how money supply expansion can stimulate economic activity. However, with the advent of fiat money (money not backed by a physical commodity) and floating exchange rates, the importance of specie (gold and silver) in economic systems has diminished. Progressively, the focus shifted from the handling of money to the implementation of industrial policies that placed greater economic goals, e.g., stimulating general prosperity and supporting technological and industrial advancement, above the financing of war.\nEngland began the first large-scale and integrative approach to mercantilism during the Elizabethan Era (1558\u20131603). An early statement on national balance of trade appeared in \"Discourse of the Common Wealth of this Realm of England\", 1549: \"We must always take heed that we buy no more from strangers than we sell them, for so should we impoverish ourselves and enrich them.\" The period featured various but often disjointed efforts by the court of Queen Elizabeth I (r. 1558\u20131603) to develop a naval and merchant fleet capable of challenging the Spanish stranglehold on trade and of expanding the growth of bullion at home. Queen Elizabeth promoted trade and navigation acts in Parliament and issued orders to her navy for the protection and promotion of English shipping. The first Navigation Acts regulating trade were passed by Parliament in 1651 and 1652, during the English Commonwealth. \nAuthors noted most for establishing the English mercantilist system include Gerard de Malynes (fl. 1585\u20131641) and Thomas Mun (1571\u20131641), who first articulated the Elizabethan system (\"England's Treasure by Foreign Trade or the Balance of Foreign Trade is the Rule of Our Treasure\"), which Josiah Child (c.\u20091630/31\u20131699) then developed further.\nNumerous French authors helped cement French policy around statist mercantilism in the 17th century, as King Louis XIV (reigned 1643\u20131715) followed the guidance of Jean Baptiste Colbert, his Controller-General of Finances from 1665 to 1683 who revised the tariff system and expanded industrial policy. Colbertism was based on the principle that the state should rule in the economic realm as it did in the diplomatic, and that the interests of the state as identified by the king were superior to those of merchants and of everyone else. Mercantilist economic policies aimed to build up the state, especially in an age of incessant warfare, and theorists charged the state with looking for ways to strengthen the economy and to weaken foreign adversaries.\nIn Europe, academic belief in mercantilism began to fade in the late 18th century after the East India Company annexed Mughal Bengal, a major trading nation, and the establishment of British India through the activities of the East India Company, in light of the arguments of Adam Smith (1723\u20131790) and of the classical economists. French economic policy liberalized greatly under Napoleon (in power from 1799 to 1814/1815). The British Parliament's repeal of the Corn Laws under Robert Peel in 1846 symbolized the emergence of free trade as an alternative system.\nTheory.\nMost of the European economists who wrote between 1500 and 1750 are today generally described as mercantilists; this term was initially used solely by critics, such as Mirabeau and Smith, but historians proved quick to adopt it. Originally the standard English term was \"mercantile system\". The word \"mercantilism\" came into English from German in the early-19th century.\nThe bulk of what is commonly called \"mercantilist literature\" appeared in the 1620s in Great Britain. Smith saw the English merchant Thomas Mun (1571\u20131641) as a major creator of the mercantile system, especially in his posthumously published \"Treasure by Foreign Trade\" (1664), which Smith considered the archetype or manifesto of the movement. Perhaps the last major mercantilist work was James Steuart's \"Principles of Political Economy\", published in 1767.\nMercantilist literature also extended beyond England. Italy and France produced noted writers of mercantilist themes, including Italy's Giovanni Botero (1544\u20131617) and Antonio Serra (fl. 16th\u201317th centuries) and, in France, Jean Bodin and Jean-Baptiste Colbert. Themes also existed in writers from the German historical school from List, as well as followers of the American and British systems of free-trade, thus stretching the system into the 19th century. However, many British writers, including Mun and Edward Misselden, were merchants, while many of the writers from other countries were public officials. Beyond mercantilism as a way of understanding the wealth and power of nations, Mun and Misselden are noted for their viewpoints on a wide range of economic matters.\nThe Austrian lawyer and scholar Philipp Wilhelm von Hornick, one of the pioneers of cameralism, detailed a nine-point program of what he deemed effective national economy in his \"Austria Over All, If She Only Will\" of 1684, which comprehensively sums up the tenets of mercantilism:\nOther than Von Hornick, there were no mercantilist writers presenting an overarching scheme for the ideal economy, as Adam Smith would later do for classical economics. Rather, each mercantilist writer tended to focus on a single area of the economy. Only later did non-mercantilist scholars integrate these \"diverse\" ideas into what they called mercantilism. Some scholars thus reject the idea of mercantilism completely, arguing that it gives \"a false unity to disparate events\". Smith saw the mercantile system as an enormous conspiracy by manufacturers and merchants against consumers, a view that has led some authors, especially Robert E. Ekelund and Robert D. Tollison, to call mercantilism \"a rent-seeking society\". To a certain extent, mercantilist doctrine itself made a general theory of economics impossible. Mercantilists viewed the economic system as a zero-sum game, in which any gain by one party required a loss by another. Thus, any system of policies that benefited one group would by definition harm the other, and there was no possibility of economics being used to maximize the commonwealth, or common good. Mercantilists' writings were also generally created to rationalize particular practices rather than as investigations into the best policies.\nMercantilist domestic policy was more fragmented than its trade policy. While Adam Smith portrayed mercantilism as supportive of strict controls over the economy, many mercantilists disagreed. The early modern era was one of letters patent and government-imposed monopolies; some mercantilists supported these, but others acknowledged the corruption and inefficiency of such systems. Many mercantilists also realized that the inevitable results of quotas and price ceilings were black markets. One notion that mercantilists widely agreed upon was the need for economic oppression of the working population; laborers and farmers were to live at the \"margins of subsistence\". The goal was to maximize production, with no concern for consumption. Extra money, free time, and education for the lower classes were seen to inevitably lead to vice and laziness, and would result in harm to the economy.\nThe mercantilists saw a large population as a form of wealth that made possible the development of bigger markets and armies. Opposite to mercantilism was the doctrine of physiocracy, which predicted that mankind would outgrow its resources. The idea of mercantilism was to protect the markets as well as maintain agriculture and those who were dependent upon it.\nPolicies.\nMercantilist ideas were the dominant economic ideology of all of Europe in the early modern period, and most states embraced it to a certain degree. Mercantilism was centred on England and France, and it was in these states that mercantilist policies were most often enacted. The United States, a former British colony, has also employed mercantilist policies at times in its economic history.\nThe policies have included:\nFrance.\nMercantilism arose in France in the early 16th century soon after the monarchy had become the dominant force in French politics. In 1539, an important decree banned the import of woolen goods from Spain and some parts of Flanders. The next year, a number of restrictions were imposed on the export of bullion.\nOver the rest of the 16th century, further protectionist measures were introduced. The height of French mercantilism is closely associated with Jean-Baptiste Colbert, finance minister for 22 years in the 17th century, to the extent that French mercantilism is sometimes called Colbertism. Under Colbert, the French government became deeply involved in the economy in order to increase exports. Protectionist policies were enacted that limited imports and favored exports. Industries were organized into guilds and monopolies, and production was regulated by the state through a series of more than one thousand directives outlining how different products should be produced.\nTo encourage industry, foreign artisans and craftsmen were imported. Colbert also worked to decrease internal barriers to trade, reducing internal tariffs and building an extensive network of roads and canals. Colbert's policies were quite successful, and France's industrial output and the economy grew considerably during this period, as France became the dominant European power. He was less successful in turning France into a major trading power, and Britain and the Dutch Republic remained supreme in this field.\nNew France.\nFrance imposed its mercantilist philosophy on its colonies in North America, especially New France. It sought to derive the maximum material benefit from the colony, for the homeland, with a minimum of colonial investment in the colony itself. The ideology was embodied in New France through the establishment under Royal Charter of a number of corporate trading monopolies including La Compagnie des Marchands, which operated from 1613 to 1621, and the Compagnie de Montmorency, from that date until 1627. It was in turn replaced by La Compagnie des Cent-Associ\u00e9s, created in 1627 by King Louis XIII, and the Communaut\u00e9 des habitants in 1643. These were the first corporations to operate in what is now Canada.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn England, mercantilism reached its peak during the Long Parliament government (1640\u201360). Mercantilist policies were also embraced throughout much of the Tudor and Stuart periods, with Robert Walpole being another major proponent. In Britain, government control over the domestic economy was far less extensive than on the Continent, limited by common law and the steadily increasing power of Parliament. Government-controlled monopolies were common, especially before the English Civil War, but were often controversial.\nWith respect to its colonies, British mercantilism meant that the government and the merchants became partners with the goal of increasing political power and private wealth, to the exclusion of other European powers. The government protected its merchants\u2014and kept foreign ones out\u2014through trade barriers, regulations, and subsidies to domestic industries in order to maximize exports from and minimize imports to the realm. The government had to fight smuggling, which became a favourite American technique in the 18th century to circumvent the restrictions on trading with the French, Spanish, or Dutch. The goal of mercantilism was to run trade surpluses to benefit the government. The government took its share through duties and taxes, with the remainder going to merchants in Britain. The government spent much of its revenue on the Royal Navy, which both protected the colonies of Britain but was vital in capturing the colonies of other European powers.\nBritish mercantilist writers were themselves divided on whether domestic controls were necessary. British mercantilism thus mainly took the form of efforts to control trade. A wide array of regulations were put in place to encourage exports and discourage imports. Tariffs were placed on imports and bounties given for exports, and the export of some raw materials was banned completely. The Navigation Acts removed foreign merchants from being involved England's domestic trade. British policies in their American colonies led to friction with the inhabitants of the Thirteen Colonies, and mercantilist policies (such as forbidding trade with other European powers and enforcing bans on smuggling) were a major irritant leading to the American Revolution.\nMercantilism taught that trade was a zero-sum game, with one country's gain equivalent to a loss sustained by the trading partner. Some have argued that mercantilist policies had a positive impact on Britain, helping to transform the nation into the world's dominant trading power and a global hegemon. One domestic policy that had a lasting impact was the conversion of \"wastelands\" to agricultural use. Mercantilists believed that to maximize a nation's power, all land and resources had to be used to their highest and best use, and this era thus saw projects like the draining of The Fens.\nUnited States.\nThe American School of economics dominated United States national policies from the time of the American Civil War until the mid-20th century. It is closely related to mercantilism, and it can be seen as contrary to classical economics. It consisted of these three core policies:\nOther countries.\nThe other nations of Europe also embraced mercantilism to varying degrees. The Netherlands, which had become the financial centre of Europe by being its most efficient trader, had little interest in seeing trade restricted and adopted few mercantilist policies. Mercantilism became prominent in Central Europe and Scandinavia after the Thirty Years' War (1618\u201348), with Christina of Sweden, Jacob Kettler of Courland, and Christian IV of Denmark being notable proponents.\nThe Habsburg Holy Roman Emperors had long been interested in mercantilist policies, but the vast and decentralized nature of their empire made implementing such notions difficult. Some constituent states of the empire did embrace mercantilism, most notably Prussia, which under Frederick the Great had perhaps the most rigidly controlled economy in Europe.\nSpain benefited from mercantilism early on as it brought a large amount of precious metals such as gold and silver into their treasury by way of the new world. In the long run, Spain's economy collapsed as it was unable to adjust to the inflation that came with the large influx of bullion. Heavy intervention from the crown put crippling laws for the protection of Spanish goods and services. Mercantilist protectionist policy in Spain caused the long-run failure of the Castilian textile industry as the efficiency severely dropped off with each passing year due to the production being held at a specific level. Spain's heavily protected industries led to famines as much of its agricultural land was required to be used for sheep instead of grain. Much of their grain was imported from the Baltic region of Europe which caused a shortage of food in the inner regions of Spain. Spain limiting the trade of their colonies is one of the causes that led to the separation of the Dutch from the Spanish Empire. The culmination of all of these policies led to Spain defaulting in 1557, 1575, and 1596.\nDuring the economic collapse of the 17th century, Spain had little coherent economic policy, but French mercantilist policies were imported by Philip V with some success. Ottoman Grand Vizier Kemanke\u015f Kara Mustafa Pasha also followed some mercantilist financial policies during the reign of Ibrahim I. Russia under Peter I (Peter the Great) attempted to pursue mercantilism, but had little success because of Russia's lack of a large merchant class or an industrial base.\nWars and imperialism.\nMercantilism was the economic version of warfare backed up by the state apparatus, and was well suited to an era of military warfare. If authorities viewed the level of world trade as fixed, it followed that the only way to increase a polity's trade was to take it from another. A number of wars, most notably the four Anglo-Dutch Wars (from 1652 to 1784) and the Franco-Dutch Wars (as from 1672 to 1678), can be linked directly to mercantilist theories. Most wars had other causes but they reinforced mercantilism by clearly defining the enemy, and justified damage to the enemy's economy.\nMercantilism fueled the imperialism of this era, as many nations expended significant effort to conquer new colonies that would be sources of gold (as in Mexico) or sugar (as in the West Indies), as well as becoming exclusive markets. European power spread around the globe, often under the aegis of companies with government-guaranteed monopolies in certain defined geographical regions, such as the Dutch East India Company or the Hudson's Bay Company (operating in present-day Canada).\nWith the establishment of overseas colonies by European powers, especially from the 17th century, mercantile theory gained a new and wider significance, in which its aim and ideal became both national and imperialistic.\nThe connection between Marxist theory and mercantilism has been explored by Marxist economist and sociologist Giovanni Arrighi (1937-2009), who analyzed mercantilism as having three components: \"settler colonialism, capitalist slavery, and economic nationalism\", and further noted that slavery was \"partly a condition and partly a result of the success of settler colonialism.\"\nIn the French economy, the triangular trade method was integral in the continuation of mercantilism throughout the 17th and 18th centuries. In order to maximize exports and minimize imports, France worked on a strict Atlantic route: France, to Africa, to the Americas and then back to France. By bringing African slaves to labor in the New World, their labor value increased, and France capitalized upon the market resources produced by slave labor.\nMercantilism as a weapon has continued to be used by countries through the 21st century by way of modern tariffs, as it puts smaller economies in a position where they may need to conform to the larger economies' goals or risk economic ruin due to an imbalance in trade. Trade wars are often dependent on such tariffs and restrictions hurting an opposing economy.\nOrigins.\nThe term \"mercantile system\" was used by its foremost critic, Adam Smith, but Mirabeau (1715\u20131789) had used \"mercantilism\" earlier. Mercantilism functioned as the economic counterpart of the older version of political power: divine right of kings and absolute monarchy.\nScholars debate why mercantilism dominated economic ideology for 250 years. One group, represented by Jacob Viner, sees mercantilism as simply a straightforward, common-sense system whose logical fallacies remained opaque to people at the time. This, he argues, was because people lacked the necessary analytical tools.\nThe second school, supported by scholars such as Robert B. Ekelund, portrays mercantilism not as a mistake, but rather as the best possible system for those who developed it. This school argues that rent-seeking merchants and governments developed and enforced mercantilist policies. Merchants benefited greatly from the enforced monopolies, bans on foreign competition, and poverty of the workers. Governments benefited from the high tariffs and payments from the merchants. Whereas later economic ideas were often developed by academics and philosophers, almost all mercantilist writers were merchants or government officials.\nMonetarism offers a third explanation for mercantilism. European trade exported bullion to pay for goods from Asia, thus reducing the money supply and putting downward pressure on prices and economic activity. The evidence for this hypothesis is the lack of inflation in the British economy until the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, when paper money came into vogue.\nA fourth explanation lies in the increasing professionalisation and technification of the wars of the era, which turned the maintenance of adequate reserve funds (in the prospect of war) into a more and more expensive and eventually competitive business.\nMercantilism developed at a time of transition for the European economy. Isolated feudal estates were being replaced by centralized nation-states as the focus of power. Technological changes in shipping and the growth of urban centers led to a rapid increase in international trade. Mercantilism focused on how this trade could best aid the states. Another important change was the introduction of double-entry bookkeeping and modern accounting. This accounting made extremely clear the inflow and outflow of trade, contributing to the close scrutiny given to the balance of trade. New markets and new mines propelled foreign trade to previously inconceivable volumes, resulting in \"the great upward movement in prices\" and an increase in \"the volume of merchant activity itself\".\nBefore mercantilism, the most important work in economics in Europe was that of the medieval scholastic theorists. The goal of these thinkers was to find an economic system compatible with Christian doctrines of piety and justice. They focused mainly on microeconomics and on local exchanges between individuals. Mercantilism was closely aligned with the other theories and ideas that began to replace the medieval worldview. This period saw the adoption of Machiavellian realpolitik and the primacy of the \"raison d'\u00e9tat\" in international relations. The mercantilist idea of all trade as a zero-sum game, in which each side was trying to best the other in a ruthless competition, was integral to the works of Thomas Hobbes. This dark view of human nature also fit well with the Puritan view of the world, and some of the most stridently mercantilist legislation, such as the Navigation Ordinance of 1651, was enacted by the government of Oliver Cromwell.\nJean-Baptiste Colbert's work in 17th-century France came to exemplify classical mercantilism. In the English-speaking world, its ideas were criticized by Adam Smith with the publication of \"The Wealth of Nations\" in 1776 and later by David Ricardo with his explanation of comparative advantage. Mercantilism was rejected by Britain and France by the mid-19th century. The British Empire embraced free trade and used its power as the financial center of the world to promote the same. The Guyanese historian Walter Rodney describes mercantilism as the period of the worldwide development of European commerce which began in the 15th century with the voyages of Portuguese and Spanish explorers to Africa, Asia, and the New World.\nEnd of mercantilism.\nAdam Smith, David Hume, Edward Gibbon, Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau were the founding fathers of anti-mercantilist thought. A number of scholars found important flaws in mercantilism long before Smith developed an ideology that could fully replace it. Critics such as Hume, Dudley North and John Locke undermined much of mercantilism and it steadily lost favor during the 18th century.\nIn 1690, Locke argued that prices vary in proportion to the quantity of money. Locke's \"Second Treatise\" also points towards the heart of the anti-mercantilist critique: that the wealth of the world is not fixed, but is created by human labor (represented embryonically by Locke's labor theory of value). Mercantilists failed to understand the notions of absolute advantage and comparative advantage (this idea was only fully fleshed out in 1817 by David Ricardo) and the benefits of trade.\nHume famously noted the impossibility of the mercantilists' goal of a constant positive balance of trade. As bullion flowed into one country, the supply would increase, and the value of bullion in that state would steadily decline relative to other goods. Conversely, in the state exporting bullion, its value would slowly rise. Eventually, it would no longer be cost-effective to export goods from the high-price country to the low-price country, and the balance of trade would reverse. Mercantilists fundamentally misunderstood this, long arguing that an increase in the money supply simply meant that everyone gets richer.\nThe importance placed on bullion was also a central target, even if many mercantilists had themselves begun to de-emphasize the importance of gold and silver. Adam Smith noted that at the core of the mercantile system was the \"popular folly of confusing wealth with money\", that bullion was just the same as any other commodity, and that there was no reason to give it special treatment. More recently, scholars have discounted the accuracy of this critique. They believe Mun and Misselden were not making this mistake in the 1620s, and point to their followers Josiah Child and Charles Davenant, who in 1699 wrote, \"Gold and Silver are indeed the Measures of Trade, but that the Spring and Original of it, in all nations is the Natural or Artificial Product of the Country; that is to say, what this Land or what this Labour and Industry Produces.\" The critique that mercantilism was a form of rent seeking has also seen criticism, as scholars such as Jacob Viner in the 1930s pointed out that merchant mercantilists such as Mun understood that they would not gain by higher prices for English wares abroad.\nThe first school to completely reject mercantilism was the physiocrats, who developed their theories in France. Their theories also had several important problems, and the replacement of mercantilism did not come until Adam Smith published \"The Wealth of Nations\" in 1776. This book outlines the basics of what is today known as classical economics. Smith spent a considerable portion of the book rebutting the arguments of the mercantilists, though often these are simplified or exaggerated versions of mercantilist thought.\nScholars are also divided over the cause of mercantilism's end. Those who believe the theory was simply an error hold that its replacement was inevitable as soon as Smith's more accurate ideas were unveiled. Those who feel that mercantilism amounted to rent-seeking hold that it ended only when major power shifts occurred. In Britain, mercantilism faded as the Parliament gained the monarch's power to grant monopolies. While the wealthy capitalists who controlled the House of Commons benefited from these monopolies, Parliament found it difficult to implement them because of the high cost of group decision making.\nMercantilist regulations were steadily removed over the course of the 18th century in Britain, and during the 19th century, the British government fully embraced free trade and Smith's laissez-faire economics. On the continent, the process was somewhat different. In France, economic control remained in the hands of the royal family, and mercantilism continued until the French Revolution. In Germany, mercantilism remained an important ideology in the 19th and early 20th centuries, when the historical school of economics was paramount.\nLegacy.\nAdam Smith criticized the mercantile doctrine that prioritized production in the economy; he maintained that consumption was of prime significance. Additionally, the mercantile system was well-liked by the traders as it involved what is now referred to as rent seeking. \nIn specific instances, protectionist mercantilist policies also had an important and positive impact on the state that enacted them. Adam Smith, for instance, praised England's Navigation Acts of 1660 to 1760, as they greatly fostered the expansion of the British merchant fleet and played a central role in turning Britain into the world's naval and economic superpower from the 18th century onward. Some economists thus feel that protecting infant industries, while causing short-term harm, can be beneficial to a specific economy in the long term.\nIn the 20th century, John Maynard Keynes (1883-1946) affirmed that motivating the production process was as significant as encouraging consumption, which benefited the new mercantilism. Keynes also affirmed that in the post-classical period the primary focus on gold- and silver-supplies (bullion) was rational. During the era before paper money, an increase in gold and silver was one of the ways of mercantilism increasing an economy's reserve or the supply of money. Keynes reiterated that the doctrines advocated by mercantilism aided the improvement of both the domestic and foreign outlay \u2014 domestic because the policies lowered the domestic rate of interest, and investment by foreigners by tending to create a favorable balance of trade. Keynes and other economists of the 20th century also realized that the balance of payments is an important concern. Keynes also supported government intervention in the economy as necessary, as did mercantilism.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], the word \"mercantilism\" remained a pejorative term, often used to attack various forms of protectionism.\nPaul Samuelson, writing within a Keynesian framework, wrote of mercantilism: \"With employment less than full and Net National Product suboptimal, all the debunked mercantilist arguments turn out to be valid.\"\nMurray Rothbard (1926-1995), representing the Austrian School of economics, describes it this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mercantilism, which reached its height in the Europe of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, was a system of statism which employed economic fallacy to build up a structure of imperial state power, as well as special subsidy and monopolistic privilege to individuals or groups favored by the state. Thus, mercantilism held exports should be encouraged by the government and imports discouraged.\nRothbard viewed mercantilism not as a coherent economic theory but rather as a series of post-hoc rationalizations for various economic policies by interested parties. \nNeo-mercantilism.\nSome systems that copy several mercantilist policies, such as Japan's economic system, are sometimes called neo-mercantilist. In an essay appearing in the May 14, 2007 issue of \"Newsweek\", business columnist Robert J. Samuelson wrote that China was pursuing an essentially neo-mercantilist trade-policy that threatened to undermine the post\u2013World War II international economic structure.\nSecond presidency of Donald Trump.\nAfter the re-election of Donald Trump as president of the United States in 2024, Serbian-American economist Branko Milanovi\u0107 described Trump's policies of implementing tariffs on imports, trade blocs, and other barriers against China as \"neo-mercantilism\", stating that it \"marks a symbolic end to global neoliberalism\".\nMichael Strain of the conservative think-tank the American Enterprise Institute also described Trump's policy as a return to mercantilism: \"We are seeing a combination of true-believing mercantilism, shocking ignorance about how the global economy works, and shocking incompetence in the planning and execution of economic policy.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19709", "revid": "51029378", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19709", "title": "Meat Puppets", "text": "American rock band\nMeat Puppets are an American rock band formed in January 1980 in Phoenix, Arizona. The group's original lineup was Curt Kirkwood (guitar/vocals), his brother Cris Kirkwood (bass guitar/vocals), and Derrick Bostrom (drums). The Kirkwood brothers met Bostrom while attending Brophy Prep High School in Phoenix. The three then moved to Tempe, Arizona (a Phoenix suburb and home to Arizona State University), where the Kirkwood brothers purchased two adjacent houses, one of which had a shed in the back where they regularly practiced.\nMeat Puppets started as a punk rock band, but like most of their labelmates on SST Records, they established their own unique style, blending punk with country and psychedelic rock, and featuring Curt's warbling vocals. Meat Puppets later gained significant exposure when the Kirkwood brothers served as guest musicians on Nirvana's \"MTV Unplugged\" performance in 1993. The band's 1994 album \"Too High to Die\" subsequently became their most successful release. The band broke up twice, in 1996 and 2002, but reunited again in 2006.\nHistory.\nEarly career (1980\u20131990).\nIn the late 1970s, drummer Derrick Bostrom played with guitarist Jack Knetzger in a band called Atomic Bomb Club, which began as a duo, but would come to include bassist Cris Kirkwood. The band played a few local shows and recorded some demos, but began to dissolve quickly thereafter. Derrick and Cris began rehearsing together with Cris' brother Curt Kirkwood by learning songs from Bostrom's collection of punk rock 45s. After briefly toying with the name The Bastions of Immaturity, they settled on the name Meat Puppets in June, 1980 after a song by Curt of the same name which appears on their first album. Their earliest EP \"In A Car\" was made entirely of short hardcore punk with goofy lyrics, and attracted the attention of Joe Carducci as he was starting to work with legendary punk label SST Records. Carducci suggested they sign with the label, and Meat Puppets released their first album \"Meat Puppets\" in 1982, which among several new originals and a pair of heavily skewed Doc Watson and Bob Nolan covers, featured the songs \"The Gold Mine\" and \"Melons Rising\", two tunes Derrick and Cris originally had written and performed as Atomic Bomb Club previously. Years later, when the Meat Puppets reissued all of their albums in 1999, the five songs on \"In A Car\" would be combined with their debut album.\nBy the release of 1984's \"Meat Puppets II\", the bandmembers \"were so sick of the hardcore thing,\" according to Bostrom. \"We were really into pissing off the crowd.\" Here, the band experimented with acid rock and country and western sounds, while still retaining some punk influence on the tracks \"Split Myself in Two\" and \"New Gods\". This album contains some of the band's best known songs, such as \"Lake of Fire\" and \"Plateau\". While the album had been recorded in early 1983, the album's release was delayed for a year by SST. \"Meat Puppets II\" turned the band into one of the leading bands on SST Records, and along with the Violent Femmes, the Gun Club and others, helped establish the genre called \"cow punk\".\n\"Meat Puppets II\" was followed by 1985's \"Up on the Sun\". The album's psychedelic sound resembled the folk-rock of the Grateful Dead, while the songs still retained hardcore influences in the lengths of the songs and the tempos. Examples of this new style are the self-titled track, \"Enchanted Porkfist\" and \"Swimming Ground\". \"Up On The Sun\" featured the Kirkwood brothers harmonizing their vocals for the first time. These two albums were mainstays of college and independent radio at that time.\nDuring the rest of the 1980s, Meat Puppets remained on SST and released a series of albums while touring relentlessly. Between tours they would regularly play small shows in bars around the Phoenix area such as The Mason Jar (now The Rebel Lounge) and The Sun Club in Tempe. After the release of the hard-rock styled \"Out My Way\" EP in 1986, however, the band was briefly sidelined by an accident when Curt's finger was broken after being slammed in their touring van's door. The accident delayed the band's next album, the even more psychedelic \"Mirage\", until the next year. The final result included synthesizers and electronic drums. The tour for \"Mirage\" lasted less than 6 months, as the band found it difficult to recreate many of this album's songs in a concert atmosphere.\nTheir next album, the ZZ-Top inspired \"Huevos\", came out less than six months afterward, in late summer of 1987. These recordings were completed in only a matter of days, and along with a few drawings and one of Curt's paintings taken from the wall to serve as cover art (a dish of three boiled eggs, a green pepper, and a bottle of Tabasco sauce), were all sent to SST shortly before the band returned to the road en route to their next gig. Curt revealed in an interview that one of the reasons for the album being called Huevos (meaning 'eggs' in Spanish) was because of the predominance of first-takers on the record, as similarly eggs can only be used once.\n\"Monsters\" was released in 1989, featuring new elements to their sound with extended jams (such as \"Touchdown King\" and \"Flight of the Fire Weasel\") and heavy metal (\"Attacked by Monsters\"). This album was mostly motivated by the Meat Puppets' desire to attract the attention of a major label, as they were becoming frustrated with SST Records by this time.\nMajor label career (1991\u20131995).\nAs numerous bands from the seminal SST label and other kindred punk-oriented indies had before them, Meat Puppets grappled with the decision to switch to a major label. Two years after their final studio recording for SST, 1989's \"Monsters\", the trio released its major-label debut, \"Forbidden Places\", on the indie-friendly London Records. The band chose London Records because it was the first label that ZZ Top, one of their favorite bands, was signed to.\n\"Forbidden Places\" combined many elements of the band's sounds over the years (cowpunk, psychedelia, riffy heavier rock) while some songs had a more laid back early alternative sound. Songs include \"Sam\" and \"Whirlpool\", and the title track. Despite being a fan favorite, \"Forbidden Places\" is now out of print, and as such it remains a highly sought collectible online.\nIn 1992 following his departure from the Red Hot Chili Peppers, guitarist John Frusciante auditioned for the band. Cris Kirkwood stated \"He showed up with his guitar out of its case and barefoot. We were on a major label then, we just got signed, and those guys had blown up to where they were at and John needed to get out. John gets to our pad and we started getting ready to play and I said, 'You want to use my tuner?' He said, 'No, I'll bend it in.' It was so far out. Then we jammed but it didn't come to anything. Maybe he wasn't in the right place and we were a tight little unit. It just didn't quite happen but it could have worked.\"\nIn late 1993, Meat Puppets achieved mainstream popularity when Nirvana's Kurt Cobain, who became a fan after seeing them open for Black Flag in the '80s, invited Cris and Curt to join him on \"MTV Unplugged\" for acoustic performances of \"Plateau\", \"Oh Me\" and \"Lake of Fire\" (all originally from \"Meat Puppets II\"). The resulting album, \"MTV Unplugged in New York,\" served as a swan song for Nirvana, as Cobain died less than 5 months after the concert. \"Lake of Fire\" became a cult favorite for its particularly wrenching vocal performance from Cobain. Subsequently, the Nirvana exposure and the strength of the single \"Backwater\" (their highest-charting single) helped lift Meat Puppets to new commercial heights. The band's studio return was 1994's \"Too High to Die\", produced by Butthole Surfers guitarist Paul Leary. The album featured \"Backwater\", which reached #47 on the Billboard Hot 100, and a hidden-track update of \"Lake of Fire\". This album features a more straightforward alternative rock style, with occasional moments of pop, country and neo-psychedelic moments. \"Too High To Die\" earned the band a gold record (500,000 sold), outselling their previous records combined.\n1995's \"No Joke!\" was the final album recorded by the original Meat Puppets lineup. Stylistically it is very similar to \"Too High to Die\", although much heavier and with darker lyrics. Examples of this are the single \"Scum\" and \"Eyeball\", although the band's usual laid-back style is still heard on tracks like \"Chemical Garden\". Though the band's drug use had long included cocaine, heroin, LSD and many others, Cris' use of heroin and crack cocaine became so bad he rarely left his house except to obtain more drugs. At least two people (including his wife and one of his best friends) died of overdoses at his house in Tempe, AZ during this time. The Kirkwood brothers had always had a legendary appetite for illegal substances and during the tour to support \"Too High To Die\" with Stone Temple Pilots, the easy availability of drugs was too much for Cris. When it was over, he was severely addicted to cocaine and heroin. When their record label discovered Cris' addictions, support for \"No Joke!\" was subsequently dropped and it was met with poor sales figures.\nFirst hiatus and reunion (1996\u20132001).\nBostrom recorded a solo EP under the moniker \"Today's Sounds\" in 1996, and later on in 1999 took charge of re-issuing the Puppets' original seven records on Rykodisc as well as putting out their first live album, \"Live in Montana.\" Curt formed a new band in Austin, Texas called the Royal Neanderthal Orchestra, but they changed their name to Meat Puppets and released a promotional EP entitled \"You Love Me\" in 1999, \"Golden Lies\" in 2000 and \"Live\" in 2002. The line-up was Curt (voc/git), Kyle Ellison (voc/git), Andrew Duplantis (voc/bass) and Shandon Sahm (drums). Sahm's father was the legendary fiddler-singer-songwriter Doug Sahm of The Sir Douglas Quintet and Texas Tornados. The concluding track to \"Classic Puppets\" entitled \"New Leaf\" also dates from this incarnation of the band.\nBreak up (2002\u20132005).\nAround 2002, Meat Puppets dissolved after Duplantis left the band. Curt went on to release albums with the groups Eyes Adrift and Volcano. In 2005, he released his first solo album entitled \"Snow\".\nBassist Cris was arrested in December 2003 for attacking a security guard at the main post office in downtown Phoenix, Arizona with the guard's baton. The guard shot Kirkwood in the stomach at least twice during the melee, causing serious gunshot injuries requiring major surgery. Kirkwood was subsequently denied bail, the judge citing Kirkwood's previous drug arrests and probation violations. He eventually went to prison at the Arizona state prison in Florence, Arizona for felony assault. He was released in July 2005.\nDerrick Bostrom began a web site for the band about six months before the original trio stopped working together. The site went through many different permutations before it was essentially mothballed in 2003. In late 2005, Bostrom revamped it, this time as a \"blog\" for his recollections and as a place to share pieces of Meat Puppets history.\nSecond reunion (2006\u2013present).\nOn March 24, 2006, Curt Kirkwood polled fans at his MySpace page with a bulletin that asked: \"Question for all ! Would the original line up of Meat Puppets interest anyone ? Feedback is good \u2013 do you want a reunion!?\" The response from fans was overwhelmingly positive within a couple of hours, leading to speculation of a full-blown Meat Puppets reunion in the near future. However, a post made by Derrick Bostrom on the official Meat Puppets site dismissed the notion.\nIn April 2006, \"Billboard\" reported that the Kirkwood brothers would reunite as Meat Puppets without original drummer Derrick Bostrom. Although Primus drummer Tim Alexander was announced as Bostrom's replacement, the position was later filled by Ted Marcus. The new lineup recorded a new full-length album, \"Rise to Your Knees\", in mid-to-late 2006. The album was released by Anodyne Records on July 17, 2007.\nOn January 20, 2007, Meat Puppets brothers performed two songs during an Army of Anyone concert, at La Zona Rosa in Austin, Texas. The first song was played with Curt Kirkwood and Cris Kirkwood along with Army of Anyone's Ray Luzier and Dean DeLeo. Then the second song was played with original members Curt and Cris Kirkwood and new Meat Puppets drummer Ted Marcus. This was in the middle of Army of Anyone's set, which they listed as \"Meat Puppet Theatre\" on the evening's set list. The band performed several new songs in March at the South by Southwest festival. On March 28, 2007, the band announced a West Coast tour through their MySpace page. This was the first tour with original bassist Cris in eleven years. The tour continued into the east coast and midwest later in 2007.\nIn 2008, they performed their classic second album live in its entirety at the ATP New York festival.\nThe band parted ways with Anodyne, signed to Megaforce and began recording new material in the winter of 2008. The resulting album, entitled \"Sewn Together\", was released on May 12, 2009.\nIn the summer of 2009 the band continued to tour across America. They appeared in Rochester, Minnesota outside in front of over 5,000 fans, after playing Summerfest in Milwaukee, Wisconsin the night prior. Meat Puppets performed at the 2009 Voodoo Music Experience in New Orleans over the Halloween weekend.\nAs of November 2009, Shandon Sahm was back as the drummer in Meat Puppets, replacing Ted Marcus. The band was chosen by Animal Collective to perform the album \"Up on the Sun\" live in its entirety at the All Tomorrow's Parties festival that they curated in May 2011.\nThe band's thirteenth studio album, entitled \"Lollipop\", was released on April 12, 2011. The Dandies supported Meat Puppets on all European dates in 2011.\nMeat Puppets have played several gigs in their hometown since 2009, such as the Marquee show in June 2011 with Dead Confederate.\nAs of early 2011 Elmo Kirkwood, son of Curt Kirkwood and nephew of Cris Kirkwood, was touring regularly with the band playing rhythm guitar.\nMeat Puppets also contributed to \"Spin\" magazine's exclusive album \"\", playing Nirvana's \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\".\nIn June 2012, a book titled \"Too High to Die: Meet the Meat Puppets\" by author Greg Prato was released, which featured all-new interviews with band members past and present and friends of the band (including Peter Buck, Kim Thayil, Scott Asheton, Mike Watt, and Henry Rollins, among others), and covered the band's entire career.\nIn October 2012, it was announced that the group had just completed recording new songs. \"Rat Farm\", the band's 14th album, was released in April 2013.\nIn March 2013, Meat Puppets opened for Dave Grohl's Sound City Players at the SXSW Festival in Austin, Texas.\nIn April 2014, Meat Puppets completed a tour with The Moistboyz, and in the summer of 2015, they toured with Soul Asylum. \nThe Meat Puppets were picked to open for an 11 show tour as support of The Dean Ween Group in October 2016 after Curt Kirkwood and drummer Chuck Treece contribute to \"The Deaner Album\". Also the same year, Cris either produced and/or played with the following artists for Slope Records - The Exterminators, the Linecutters, and Sad Kid.\nOn August 17, 2017, original drummer Derrick Bostrom posted an update on his website derrickbostrom.net. He performed with Cris, Curt and Elmo Kirkwood at a concert honoring the Meat Puppets. It appears that, while Bostrom enjoyed himself, this was a one-off performance.\nOn July 8, 2018, it was confirmed that Bostrom had replaced Sahm as the drummer for the band, and that keyboardist Ron Stabinsky had joined, as well.\nThe band released their 15th studio album, \"Dusty Notes\", on March 8, 2019.\nMusical style and legacy.\nAccording to the \"Chicago Reader\", Meat Puppets \"were part of a crucial group of hardcore bands bucking the conventions of a genre that had quickly become codified.\" Pitchfork described the Meat Puppets' style as \"warped psychedelic country music\". Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the band's sound as \"punk rock with a strong affection for '60s psychedelia and American roots music\", noting that they were one of the first bands on SST Records to \"drift away from the fractured but muscular punk-oriented sound that had been SST's initial trademark.\" He also noted Meat Puppets' longevity compared to many other bands on the SST Records roster during the mid-1980s, saying the band \"[survived] where other bands fell apart.\"\nIn 1985, Steve Appleford of \"Daily Sundial\" described the band's sound as a \"sonic allusion to the desert of our cinematic dreams,\" saying that the music is \"pervaded by a sense of open space, haunted by the feeling of desolation an evocative of lonely reverie.\" He further assessed: \"This music was not brought about by any calculation of genre development or fashion. It's much too personal, heartfelt, exquisitely vulnerable for that.\"\nMusician Lou Barlow, member of the bands Dinosaur Jr. and Sebadoh, said, \"Meat Puppets are the singularly most influential band on both Dinosaur Jr. and Sebadoh. I kick myself for not ever emphasizing this enough.\" Dinosaur Jr. frontman J Mascis recalled that listeners construed his band as \"a Meat Puppets rip-off at first.\" In addition to Dinosaur Jr. and Sebadoh, Meat Puppets have been cited as an influence by numerous commercially successful rock bands, including Nirvana, Soundgarden, Pavement, Jawbreaker, and Sublime.\nIn 2014, \"Phoenix New Times\" named the band's self-titled debut album one of \"The Most Influential Arizona Punk Records\".\nMeat Puppets were inducted into the Arizona Music &amp; Entertainment Hall of Fame in 2017.\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19710", "revid": "7362413", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19710", "title": "List of mathematics competitions", "text": "Mathematics competitions or mathematical olympiads are competitive events where participants complete a math test. These tests may require multiple choice or numeric answers, or a detailed written solution or proof.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19711", "revid": "19553220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19711", "title": "Michael Polanyi", "text": "Hungarian-British polymath (1891\u20131976)\nMichael Polanyi ( ; ; 11 March 1891 \u2013 22 February 1976) was a Hungarian-British polymath, who made important theoretical contributions to physical chemistry, economics, and philosophy. He argued that positivism is a false account of knowing.\nHis wide-ranging research in physical science included chemical kinetics, x-ray diffraction, and adsorption of gases. He pioneered the theory of fibre diffraction analysis in 1921, and the dislocation theory of plastic deformation of ductile metals and other materials in 1934. He emigrated to Germany, in 1926 becoming a chemistry professor at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, and then in 1933 to England, becoming first a chemistry professor, and then a social sciences professor at the University of Manchester. Two of his students won the Nobel Prize, as did his son. In 1944 Polanyi was elected to the Royal Society.\nThe contributions which Polanyi made to the social sciences include the concept of a polycentric spontaneous order and his rejection of a value neutral conception of liberty. They were developed in the context of his opposition to central planning.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nPolanyi, born Mih\u00e1ly Pollacsek in Budapest, was the fifth child of Mih\u00e1ly and Cec\u00edlia Pollacsek (born as Cec\u00edlia Wohl), secular Jews from Ungv\u00e1r (then in Hungary but now in Ukraine) and Wilno, then Russian Empire, respectively. His father's family were entrepreneurs, while his mother's father, Osher Leyzerovich Vol, was the senior teacher of Jewish history at the Vilna rabbinic seminary. The family moved to Budapest and Magyarized their surname to Pol\u00e1nyi. His father built much of the Hungarian railway system, but lost most of his fortune in 1899 when bad weather caused a railway building project to go over budget. He died in 1905. Cec\u00edlia Pol\u00e1nyi established a salon that was well known among Budapest's intellectuals, and which continued until her death in 1939. His older brother was Karl Polanyi, the political economist and anthropologist, and his niece was Eva Zeisel, a world-renowned ceramist.\nEducation.\nIn 1908, Polanyi graduated the teacher-training secondary school, the Minta Gymnasium. He then studied medicine at the University of Budapest, obtaining his medical diploma in 1914. He was an active member of the Galileo Circle. With the support of Ign\u00e1c Pfeifer, professor of chemistry at the Royal Joseph University of Budapest, he obtained a scholarship to study chemistry at the Technische Hochschule in Karlsruhe, Germany. In the First World War, he served in the Austro-Hungarian army as a medical officer, and was sent to the Serbian front. While on sick-leave in 1916, he wrote a PhD thesis on adsorption. His research was encouraged by Albert Einstein and supervised by Guszt\u00e1v Buchb\u00f6ck, and in 1919 the Royal University of Pest awarded him a doctorate.\nCareer.\nIn October 1918, Mih\u00e1ly K\u00e1rolyi established the Hungarian Democratic Republic, and Polanyi became Secretary to the Minister of Health. When the Communists seized power in March 1919, he returned to medicine. When the Hungarian Soviet Republic was overthrown, Polanyi emigrated to Karlsruhe in Germany, and was invited by Fritz Haber to join the Kaiser Wilhelm Institut f\u00fcr Faserstoffchemie (fiber chemistry) in Berlin. A Christian since 1913, in a Roman Catholic ceremony he married Magda Elizabeth Kemeny. In 1926 he became the professorial head of department of the Institut f\u00fcr Physikalische Chemie und Elektrochemie (now the Fritz Haber Institute). In 1929, Magda gave birth to their son John, who was awarded a Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1986. Their other son, George Polanyi, who predeceased him, became a well-known economist.\nHis experience of runaway inflation and high unemployment in Weimar Germany led Polanyi to become interested in economics. With the coming to power in 1933 of the Nazi party, he accepted a chair in physical chemistry at the University of Manchester. Whilst there he was elected to membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society in 1934. Two of his pupils, Eugene Wigner and Melvin Calvin, went on to win the Nobel Prize. Because of his increasing interest in the social sciences, Manchester University created a new chair in Social Science (1948\u201358) for him.\nPolanyi was among the 2,300 names of prominent persons listed on the Nazis' Special Search List, of those who were to be arrested on the invasion of Great Britain and turned over to the Gestapo.\nFrom June 1944 to 1947, Polanyi participated in the activities of The Moot, a Christian discussion circle concerned with shaping the post-war society, at the invitation of Karl Mannheim and J. H. Oldham.\nIn 1944 Polanyi was elected a member of the Royal Society, and on his retirement from the University of Manchester in 1958 he was elected a senior research fellow at Merton College, Oxford. In 1962 he was elected a foreign honorary member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nWork.\nPhysical chemistry.\nPolanyi's scientific interests were extremely diverse, including work in chemical kinetics, x-ray diffraction, and the adsorption of gases at solid surfaces. He is also well known for the potential theory of adsorption, which was disputed for quite some time. In 1921, he laid the mathematical foundation of fibre diffraction analysis. In 1934, Polanyi, at about the same time as G. I. Taylor and Egon Orowan, realised that the plastic deformation of ductile materials could be explained in terms of the theory of dislocations developed by Vito Volterra in 1905. The insight was critical in developing the field of solid mechanics.\nFreedom and community.\nIn 1936, as a consequence of an invitation to give lectures for the Ministry of Heavy Industry in the USSR, Polanyi met Bukharin, who told him that in socialist societies all scientific research is directed to accord with the needs of the latest Five Year Plan. Polanyi noted what had happened to the study of genetics in the Soviet Union once the doctrines of Trofim Lysenko had gained the backing of the State. Demands in Britain, for example by the Marxist John Desmond Bernal, for centrally planned scientific research led Polanyi to defend the claim that science requires free debate. Together with John Baker, he founded the influential Society for Freedom in Science.\nIn a series of articles, re-published in \"The Contempt of Freedom\" (1940) and \"The Logic of Liberty\" (1951), Polanyi claimed that co-operation amongst scientists is analogous to the way agents co-ordinate themselves within a free market. Just as consumers in a free market determine the value of products, science is a spontaneous order that arises as a consequence of open debate amongst specialists. Science (contrary to the claims of Bukharin) flourishes when scientists have the liberty to pursue truth as an end in itself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[S]cientists, freely making their own choice of problems and pursuing them in the light of their own personal judgment, are in fact co-operating as members of a closely knit organization.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Such self-co-ordination of independent initiatives leads to a joint result which is unpremeditated by any of those who bring it about.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Any attempt to organize the group ... under a single authority would eliminate their independent initiatives, and thus reduce their joint effectiveness to that of the single person directing them from the centre. It would, in effect, paralyse their co-operation.\nHe derived the phrase spontaneous order from Gestalt psychology, and it was adopted by the classical liberal economist Friederich Hayek, although the concept can be traced back to at least Adam Smith. Polanyi unlike Hayek argued that there are higher and lower forms of spontaneous order, and he asserted that defending scientific inquiry on utilitarian or sceptical grounds undermined the practice of science. He extends this into a general claim about free societies. Polanyi defends a free society not on the negative grounds that we ought to respect \"private liberties\", but on the positive grounds that \"public liberties\" facilitate our pursuit of spiritual ends.\nAccording to Polanyi, a free society that strives to be value-neutral undermines its own justification. But it is not enough for the members of a free society to believe that ideals such as truth, justice, and beauty, are not simply subjective, they also have to accept that they transcend our ability to wholly capture them. The non-subjectivity of values must be combined with acceptance that all knowing is fallible.\nIn \"Full Employment and Free Trade\" (1948) Polanyi analyses the way money circulates around an economy, and in a monetarist analysis that, according to Paul Craig Roberts, was thirty years ahead of its time, he argues that a free market economy should not be left to be wholly self-adjusting. A central bank should attempt to moderate economic booms/busts via a strict/loose monetary policy.\nIn 1940, he produced a film, \"Unemployment and money. The principles involved\", perhaps the first film about economics. The film defended a version of Keynesianism, neutral Keynesianism, that advised the State to use budget deficit and tax reductions to increase the amount of money in the circulation in times of economic hardship but did not seek direct investment or engage in public works.\nAll knowing is personal.\nIn his book \"Science, Faith and Society\" (1946), Polanyi set out his opposition to a positivist account of science, noting that among other things it ignores the role personal commitments play in the practice of science. Polanyi gave the Gifford Lectures in 1951\u201352 at Aberdeen, and a revised version of his lectures were later published as \"Personal Knowledge\" (1958). In this book Polanyi claims that all knowledge claims (including those that derive from rules) rely on personal judgments. He denies that a scientific method can yield truth mechanically. All knowing, no matter how formalised, relies upon commitments. Polanyi argued that the assumptions that underlie critical philosophy are not only false, they undermine the commitments that motivate our highest achievements. He advocates a fiduciary post-critical approach, in which we recognise that we believe more than we can know, and know more than we can say.\nA knower does not stand apart from the universe, but participates personally within it. Our intellectual skills are driven by passionate commitments that motivate discovery and validation. According to Polanyi, a great scientist not only identifies patterns, but also asks significant questions likely to lead to a successful resolution. Innovators risk their reputation by committing to a hypothesis. Polanyi cites the example of Copernicus, who declared that the Earth revolves around the Sun. He claims that Copernicus arrived at the Earth's true relation to the Sun not as a consequence of following a method, but via \"the greater intellectual satisfaction he derived from the celestial panorama as seen from the Sun instead of the Earth.\" His writings on the practice of science influenced Thomas Kuhn and Paul Feyerabend.\nPolanyi rejected the claim by British Empiricists that experience can be reduced into sense data, but he also rejects the notion that \"indwelling\" within (sometimes incompatible) interpretative frameworks traps us within them. Our tacit awareness connects us, albeit fallibly, with reality. It supplies us with the context within which our articulations have meaning. Contrary to the views of his colleague and friend Alan Turing, whose work at the Victoria University of Manchester prepared the way for the first modern computer, he denied that minds are reducible to collections of rules. His work influenced the critique by Hubert Dreyfus of \"First Generation\" artificial intelligence.\nIt was while writing \"Personal Knowledge\" that he identified the \"structure of tacit knowing\". He viewed it as his most important discovery. He claimed that we experience the world by integrating our subsidiary awareness into a focal awareness. In his later work, for example his Terry Lectures, later published as \"The Tacit Dimension\" (1966), he distinguishes between the phenomenological, instrumental, semantic, and ontological aspects of tacit knowing, as discussed (but not necessarily identified as such) in his previous writing.\nCritique of reductionism.\nIn \"Life's irreducible structure\" (1968), Polanyi argues that the information contained in the DNA molecule is not reducible to the laws of physics and chemistry. Although a DNA molecule cannot exist without physical properties, these properties are constrained by higher-level ordering principles. In \"Transcendence and Self-transcendence\" (1970), Polanyi criticises the mechanistic world view that modern science inherited from Galileo.\nPolanyi advocates emergence i.e. the claim that there are several levels of reality and of causality. He relies on the assumption that boundary conditions supply degrees of freedom that, instead of being random, are determined by higher-level realities, whose properties are dependent on but distinct from the lower level from which they emerge. An example of a higher-level reality functioning as a downward causal force is consciousness \u2013 intentionality \u2013 generating meanings \u2013 intensionality.\nMind is a higher-level expression of the capacity of living organisms for discrimination. Our pursuit of self-set ideals such as truth and justice transform our understanding of the world. The reductionistic attempt to reduce higher-level realities into lower-level realities generates what Polanyi calls a moral inversion, in which the higher is rejected with moral passion. Polanyi identifies it as a pathology of the modern mind and traces its origins to a false conception of knowledge; although it is relatively harmless in the formal sciences, that pathology generates nihilism in the humanities. Polanyi considered Marxism an example of moral inversion. The State, on the grounds of an appeal to the logic of history, uses its coercive powers in ways that disregard any appeals to morality.\nTacit knowledge.\nTacit knowledge, as distinct from explicit knowledge, is an influential term developed by Polanyi in \"The Tacit Dimension\" to describe among other things the ability to do something without necessarily being able to articulate it: for example, being able to ride a bicycle or play a musical instrument without being able to fully explain the details of how it happens. He claims that not only do practical skills rely upon tacit awareness, all perception and meaning is rendered possible by agents relying upon their tacit awareness. Every consciousness has a subsidiary and a focal awareness, and this distinction also has an ontological dimension, because a lower and a higher dimension is how emergence takes place.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19712", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19712", "title": "Methanol", "text": "CH3OH; simplest possible alcohol\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nMethanol (also called methyl alcohol, wood alcohol, and wood spirit, amongst other names) is an organic chemical compound and the simplest aliphatic alcohol, with the chemical formula (a methyl group linked to a hydroxyl group, often abbreviated as MeOH). It is a light, volatile, colorless and flammable liquid with a distinctive alcoholic odor similar to that of ethanol (potable alcohol), but is more acutely toxic than the latter.\nMethanol acquired the name wood alcohol because it was once produced through destructive distillation of wood. Today, methanol is mainly produced industrially by hydrogenation of carbon monoxide. \nMethanol consists of a methyl group linked to a polar hydroxyl group. With more than 20 million tons produced annually, it is used as a precursor to other commodity chemicals, including formaldehyde, acetic acid, methyl \"tert\"-butyl ether, methyl benzoate, anisole, peroxyacids, as well as a host of more specialized chemicals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOccurrence.\nSmall amounts of methanol are present in normal, healthy human individuals. One study found a mean of 4.5\u00a0ppm in the exhaled breath of test subjects. The mean endogenous methanol in humans of 0.45 g/d may be metabolized from pectin found in fruit; one kilogram of apple produces up to 1.4 g of pectin (0.6 g of methanol.)\nMethanol is produced by anaerobic bacteria and phytoplankton.\nInterstellar medium.\nMethanol is also found in abundant quantities in star-forming regions of space and is used in astronomy as a marker for such regions. It is detected through its spectral emission lines.\nIn 2006, astronomers using the MERLIN array of radio telescopes at Jodrell Bank Observatory discovered a large cloud of methanol in space across. In 2016, astronomers detected methanol in a planet-forming disc around the young star TW Hydrae using the Atacama Large Millimeter Array radio telescope.\nHistory.\nIn their embalming process, the ancient Egyptians used a mixture of substances, including methanol, which they obtained from the pyrolysis of wood. Pure methanol, however, was first isolated in 1661 by Robert Boyle, when he produced it via the distillation of buxus (boxwood). It later became known as \"pyroxylic spirit\". In 1834, the French chemists Jean-Baptiste Dumas and Eugene Peligot determined its elemental composition.\nThey also introduced the word \"methyl\u00e8ne\" to organic chemistry, forming it from Greek \"methy\" = \"alcoholic liquid\" + \"h\u0233l\u0113\" = \"forest, wood, timber, material\". \"Methyl\u00e8ne\" designated a \"radical\" that was about 14% hydrogen by weight and contained one carbon atom. This would be , but at the time carbon was thought to have an atomic weight only six times that of hydrogen, so they gave the formula as CH. They then called wood alcohol (l'esprit de bois) \"bihydrate de m\u00e9thyl\u00e8ne\" (bihydrate because they thought the formula was or ). The term \"methyl\" was derived in about 1840 by back-formation from \"methylene\", and was then applied to describe \"methyl alcohol\". This was shortened to \"methanol\" in 1892 by the International Conference on Chemical Nomenclature. The suffix -yl, which, in organic chemistry, forms names of carbon groups, is from the word \"methyl\".\nFrench chemist Paul Sabatier presented the first process that could be used to produce methanol synthetically in 1905. This process suggested that carbon dioxide and hydrogen could be reacted to produce methanol. German chemists Alwin Mittasch and Mathias Pier, working for Badische-Anilin &amp; Soda-Fabrik (BASF), developed a means to convert synthesis gas (a mixture of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen) into methanol and received a patent. According to Bozzano and Manenti, BASF's process was first utilized in Leuna, Germany in 1923. Operating conditions consisted of \"high\" temperatures (between 300 and 400\u00a0\u00b0C) and pressures (between 250 and 350 atm) with a zinc/chromium oxide catalyst.\nUS patent 1,569,775 was applied for on 4 September 1924 and issued on 12 January 1926 to BASF; the process used a chromium and manganese oxide catalyst with extremely vigorous conditions: pressures ranging from 50 to 220 atm, and temperatures up to 450\u00a0\u00b0C. Modern methanol production has been made more efficient through use of catalysts (commonly copper) capable of operating at lower pressures. The modern low pressure methanol (LPM) process was developed by ICI in the late 1960s with the technology patent long since expired.\nDuring World War II, methanol was used as a fuel in several German military rocket designs, under the name M-Stoff, and in a roughly 50/50 mixture with hydrazine, known as C-Stoff.\nThe use of methanol as a motor fuel received attention during the oil crises of the 1970s. By the mid-1990s, over 20,000 methanol flexible fuel vehicles (FFVs) capable of operating on methanol or gasoline were introduced in the US. In addition, low levels of methanol were blended in gasoline fuels sold in Europe during much of the 1980s and early-1990s. Automakers stopped building methanol FFVs by the late-1990s, switching their attention to ethanol-fueled vehicles. While the methanol FFV program was a technical success, rising methanol pricing in the mid- to late-1990s during a period of slumping gasoline pump prices diminished interest in methanol fuels.\nIn the early 1970s, a process was developed by Mobil for producing gasoline fuel from methanol.\nBetween the 1960s and 1980s methanol emerged as a precursor to the feedstock chemicals acetic acid and acetic anhydride. These processes include the Monsanto acetic acid synthesis, Cativa process, and Tennessee Eastman acetic anhydride process.\nApplications.\nProduction of formaldehyde, acetic acid, methyl \"tert\"-butyl ether.\nMethanol is primarily converted to formaldehyde, which is widely used in many areas, especially polymers. The conversion entails oxidation:\nAcetic acid can be produced from methanol.\nMethanol and isobutene are combined to give methyl \"tert\"-butyl ether (MTBE). MTBE is a major octane booster in gasoline.\nMethanol to hydrocarbons, olefins, gasoline.\nCondensation of methanol to produce hydrocarbons and even aromatic systems is the basis of several technologies related to gas to liquids. These include methanol-to-hydrocarbons (MtH), methanol to gasoline (MtG), methanol to olefins (MtO), and methanol to propylene (MtP). These conversions are catalyzed by zeolites as heterogeneous catalysts. The MtG process was once commercialized at Motunui in New Zealand.\nGasoline additive.\nThe European Fuel Quality Directive allows fuel producers to blend up to 3% methanol, with an equal amount of cosolvent, with gasoline sold in Europe. In 2019, it is estimated that China used as much as 7 million tons of methanol as transportation fuels, representing over 5% of their fuel pool.\nOther chemicals.\nMethanol is the precursor to most simple methylamines, methyl halides, and methyl ethers. Methyl esters are produced from methanol, including the transesterification of fats and production of biodiesel via transesterification.\nNiche and potential uses.\nEnergy carrier.\nMethanol is a promising energy carrier because, as a liquid, it is easier to store than hydrogen and natural gas. Its energy density is, however, lower than methane, per kg. Its combustion energy density is 15.6 MJ/L (LHV), whereas that of ethanol is 24 and gasoline is 33 MJ/L.\nFurther advantages for methanol is its ready biodegradability and low environmental toxicity. It does not persist in either aerobic (oxygen-present) or anaerobic (oxygen-absent) environments. The half-life for methanol in groundwater is just one to seven days, while many common gasoline components have half-lives in the hundreds of days (such as benzene at 10\u2013730 days). Since methanol is miscible with water and biodegradable, it is unlikely to accumulate in groundwater, surface water, air or soil.\nFuel.\nMethanol is occasionally used to fuel internal combustion engines. It burns forming carbon dioxide and water:\nMethanol fuel has been proposed for ground transportation. The chief advantage of a methanol economy is that it could be adapted to gasoline internal combustion engines with minimum modification to the engines and to the infrastructure that delivers and stores liquid fuel. Its energy density, however, is less than gasoline, meaning more frequent fill ups would be required. However, it is equivalent to super high-octane gasoline in horsepower, and most modern computer-controlled fuel injection systems can already use it.\nMethanol is an alternative fuel for ships that helps the shipping industry meet increasingly strict emissions regulations. It significantly reduces emissions of sulfur oxides (SO\"x\"), nitrogen oxides (NO\"x\") and particulate matter. Methanol can be used with high efficiency in marine diesel engines after minor modifications using a small amount of pilot fuel (dual fuel).\nIn China, methanol fuels industrial boilers, which are used extensively to generate heat and steam for various industrial applications and residential heating. Its use is displacing coal, which is under pressure from increasingly stringent environmental regulations.\nDirect-methanol fuel cells are unique in their low temperature, atmospheric pressure operation, which lets them be greatly miniaturized. This, combined with the relatively easy and safe storage and handling of methanol, may open the possibility of fuel cell-powered consumer electronics, such as laptop computers and mobile phones.\nMethanol is also a widely used fuel in camping and boating stoves. Methanol burns well in an unpressurized burner, so alcohol stoves are often very simple, sometimes little more than a cup to hold fuel. This lack of complexity makes them a favorite of hikers who spend extended time in the wilderness. Similarly, the alcohol can be gelled to reduce risk of leaking or spilling, as with the brand \"Sterno\".\nMethanol is mixed with water and injected into high performance diesel and gasoline engines for an increase of power and a decrease in intake air temperature in a process known as water methanol injection.\nOther applications.\nMethanol is used as a denaturant for ethanol, the product being known as \"denatured alcohol\" or \"methylated spirit\". This was commonly used during the US prohibition to discourage consumption of bootlegged liquor, and ended up causing several deaths.\nIt is sometimes used as a fuel in alcohol lamps, portable fire pits and camping stoves.\nMethanol is used as a solvent and as an antifreeze in pipelines and windshield washer fluid. Methanol was used as an automobile coolant antifreeze in the early 1900s. As of May 2018, methanol was banned in the EU for use in windscreen washing or defrosting due to its risk of human consumption as a result of 2012 Czech Republic methanol poisonings.\nIn some wastewater treatment plants, a small amount of methanol is added to wastewater to provide a carbon food source for the denitrifying bacteria, which convert nitrates to nitrogen gas and reduce the nitrification of sensitive aquifers.\nMethanol is used as a destaining agent in polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.\nProduction.\nFrom synthesis gas.\nCarbon monoxide and hydrogen react over a catalyst to produce methanol. Today, the most widely used catalyst is a mixture of copper and zinc oxides, supported on alumina, as first used by ICI in 1966. At 5\u201310 MPa (50\u2013100\u00a0atm) and , the reaction\nis characterized by high selectivity (&gt;99.8%). The production of synthesis gas from methane produces three moles of hydrogen for every mole of carbon monoxide, whereas the synthesis consumes only two moles of hydrogen gas per mole of carbon monoxide. One way of dealing with the excess hydrogen is to inject carbon dioxide into the methanol synthesis reactor, where it, too, reacts to form methanol according to the equation\nIn terms of mechanism, the process occurs via initial conversion of CO into , which is then hydrogenated:\nwhere the byproduct is recycled via the water-gas shift reaction\nThis gives an overall reaction\nwhich is the same as listed above. In a process closely related to methanol production from synthesis gas, a feed of hydrogen and can be used directly. The main advantage of this process is that captured and hydrogen sourced from electrolysis could be used, removing the dependence on fossil fuels.\nBiosynthesis.\nThe catalytic conversion of methane to methanol is effected by enzymes including methane monooxygenases. These enzymes are mixed-function oxygenases, i.e. oxygenation is coupled with production of water and :\nBoth Fe- and Cu-dependent enzymes have been characterized. Intense but largely fruitless efforts have been undertaken to emulate this reactivity. Methanol is more easily oxidized than is the feedstock methane, so the reactions tend not to be selective. Some strategies exist to circumvent this problem. Examples include Shilov systems and Fe- and Cu-containing zeolites. These systems do not necessarily mimic the mechanisms employed by metalloenzymes, but draw some inspiration from them. Active sites can vary substantially from those known in the enzymes. For example, a dinuclear active site is proposed in the sMMO enzyme, whereas a mononuclear iron (alpha-oxygen) is proposed in the Fe-zeolite.\nGlobal emissions of methanol by plants are estimated at between 180 and 250 million tons per year. This is between two and three times larger than man-made industrial production of methanol.\nGreen methanol.\nAs of 2023, 0.2% of global methanol production is produced in ways that have relatively low greenhouse gas emissions; this is known as \"green\" methanol. Most green methanol is produced from gasification of biomass. Syngas is produced from biomass gasification and further converted into green methanol.\nAnother method of producing green methanol involves combining hydrogen, carbon dioxide, and a catalyst under high heat and pressure. To be classified as green methanol, the hydrogen must be produced using renewable electricity, and the carbon dioxide must be from carbon capture and storage, direct air capture or biomass of recent origin. Some definitions of green methanol specify that the carbon dioxide must be captured during the burning of bioenergy.\nQuality specifications and analysis.\nMethanol is available commercially in various purity grades. Commercial methanol is generally classified according to ASTM purity grades A and AA. Both grade A and grade AA purity are 99.85% methanol by weight. Grade \"AA\" methanol contains trace amounts of ethanol as well.\nMethanol for chemical use normally corresponds to Grade AA. In addition to water, typical impurities include acetone and ethanol (which are very difficult to separate by distillation). UV-vis spectroscopy is a convenient method for detecting aromatic impurities. Water content can be determined by the Karl-Fischer titration.\nSafety.\nMethanol is highly flammable. Its vapours are slightly denser than air and can travel to a distant ignition source and ignite. Methanol fires should be extinguished with dry chemical, carbon dioxide, water spray or alcohol-resistant foam. Methanol flames are invisible in daylight. \nToxicity.\nIngestion of as little as 3.16 grams of methanol can cause irreversible optic nerve damage, and the oral LD50 for humans is estimated to be 56.2 grams. The reference dose for methanol is 0.5\u00a0mg/kg in a day. Toxic effects begin hours after ingestion, and antidotes can often prevent permanent damage. Because of its similarities in both appearance and odor to ethanol (the alcohol in beverages) or isopropyl alcohol, it is difficult to differentiate between the three.\nMethanol is toxic by two mechanisms. First, methanol can be fatal due to effects on the central nervous system, acting as a central nervous system depressant in the same manner as ethanol poisoning. Second, in a process of toxication, it is metabolised to formic acid (which is present as the formate ion) via formaldehyde in a process initiated by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase in the liver. Methanol is converted to formaldehyde via alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and formaldehyde is converted to formic acid (formate) via aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). The conversion to formate via ALDH proceeds completely, with no detectable formaldehyde remaining. Formate is toxic because it inhibits mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase, causing hypoxia at the cellular level, and metabolic acidosis, among a variety of other metabolic disturbances.\nOutbreaks of methanol poisoning have occurred primarily due to contamination of drinking alcohol. It is also worth noting that ethanol is a natural antidote to methanol poisoning. Contaminated batches of alcohol contained a much higher concentration of methanol than ethanol, which did not provide a sufficient dose of the antidote and caused it to be ineffective. This is more common in the developing world. In 2013 more than 1700 cases nonetheless occurred in the United States. Those affected are often adult men. Outcomes may be good with early treatment. The toxicity of methanol was described as early as 1856.\nBecause of its toxic properties, methanol is frequently used as a denaturant additive for ethanol manufactured for industrial uses. This addition of methanol exempts industrial ethanol (commonly known as \"denatured alcohol\" or \"methylated spirit\") from liquor excise taxation in the US and other countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19714", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19714", "title": "Milk", "text": "Nutrient-rich liquid produced by mammals\nMilk is a white liquid food produced by the mammary glands of lactating mammals. It is the primary source of nutrition for young mammals (including breastfed human infants) before they are able to digest solid food. Milk contains many nutrients, including calcium and protein, as well as lactose and saturated fat; the enzyme lactase is needed to break down lactose. Immune factors and immune-modulating components in milk contribute to milk immunity. The first milk, which is called colostrum, contains antibodies and immune-modulating components that strengthen the immune system against many diseases.\nAs an agricultural product, milk is collected from farm animals, mostly cattle, on a dairy. It is used by humans as a drink and as the base ingredient for dairy products. The US CDC recommends that children over the age of 12 months (the minimum age to stop giving breast milk or formula) should have two servings of milk products a day, and more than six billion people worldwide consume milk and milk products. The ability for adult humans to digest milk relies on lactase persistence, so lactose intolerant individuals have trouble digesting lactose.\nIn 2011, dairy farms produced around of milk from 260 million dairy cows. India is the world's largest producer of milk and the leading exporter of skimmed milk powder. New Zealand, Germany, and the Netherlands are the largest exporters of milk products. Between 750 and 900 million people live in dairy-farming households.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe term \"milk\" comes from \"Old English (West Saxon), (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic 'milk' (source also of Old Norse , Old Frisian , Old Saxon , Dutch , Old High German , German , Gothic )\".\nSince 1961, the term \"milk\" has been defined under Codex Alimentarius standards as \"the normal mammary secretion of milking animals obtained from one or more milkings without either addition to it or extraction from it, intended for consumption as liquid milk or for further processing.\" The term \"dairy\" refers to animal milk and animal milk production.\nTypes of consumption.\nThere are two distinct categories of milk consumption: all infant mammals drink milk directly from their mothers' bodies, and it is their primary source of nutrition; and humans obtain milk from other mammals for consumption by humans of all ages, as one component of a varied diet.\nNutrition for infant mammals.\nIn almost all mammals, milk is fed to infants through breastfeeding, either directly or by expressing the milk to be stored and consumed later. The early milk from mammals is called colostrum. Colostrum contains antibodies that provide protection to the newborn baby as well as nutrients and growth factors. The makeup of the colostrum and the period of secretion varies from species to species.\nFor humans, the World Health Organization recommends exclusive breastfeeding for six months and breastfeeding in addition to other food for up to two years of age or more. In some cultures it is common to breastfeed children for three to five years, and the period may be longer.\nFresh goats' milk is sometimes substituted for breast milk, which introduces the risk of the child developing electrolyte imbalances, metabolic acidosis, megaloblastic anemia, and a host of allergic reactions.\nFood product for humans.\nIn many cultures, especially in the West, humans continue to consume milk beyond infancy, using the milk of other mammals (especially cattle, goats and sheep) as a food product. Initially, the ability to digest milk was limited to children as adults did not produce lactase, an enzyme necessary for digesting the lactose in milk. People therefore converted milk to curd, cheese, and other products to reduce the levels of lactose. Thousands of years ago, a chance mutation spread in human populations in northwestern Europe that enabled the production of lactase in adulthood. This mutation allowed milk to be used as a new source of nutrition which could sustain populations when other food sources failed. Milk is processed into a variety of products such as cream, butter, yogurt, kefir, ice cream and cheese. Modern industrial processes use milk to produce casein, whey protein, lactose, condensed milk, powdered milk, and many other food-additives and industrial products.\nWhole milk, butter, and cream have high levels of saturated fat. The sugar lactose is found only in milk, and possibly in forsythia flowers and a few tropical shrubs. Lactase, the enzyme needed to digest lactose, reaches its highest levels in the human small intestine immediately after birth, and then begins a slow decline unless milk is consumed regularly. Those groups who continue to tolerate milk have often exercised great creativity in using the milk of domesticated ungulates, not only cattle, but also sheep, goats, yaks, water buffalo, horses, reindeer and camels. India is the largest producer and consumer of cattle milk and buffalo milk in the world.\nHistory.\nHumans first learned to consume the milk of other mammals regularly following the domestication of animals during the Neolithic Revolution or the development of agriculture. This development occurred independently in several global locations from as early as 9000\u20137000BC in Mesopotamia to 3500\u20133000BC in the Americas. People first domesticated the most important dairy animals\u00a0\u2013 cattle, sheep and goats\u00a0\u2013 in Southwest Asia, although domestic cattle had been independently derived from wild aurochs populations several times since. Initially animals were kept for meat, and archaeologist Andrew Sherratt has suggested that dairying, along with the exploitation of domestic animals for hair and labor, began much later in a separate secondary products revolution in the fourth millennium BC. Sherratt's model is not supported by recent findings, based on the analysis of lipid residue in prehistoric pottery, that shows that dairying was practiced in the early phases of agriculture in Southwest Asia, by at least the seventh millennium BC.\nFrom Southwest Asia domestic dairy animals spread to Europe (beginning around 7000 BC but did not reach Britain and Scandinavia until after 4000 BC), and South Asia (7000\u20135500\u00a0BC). The first farmers in central Europe and Britain milked their animals. Pastoral and pastoral nomadic economies, which rely predominantly or exclusively on domestic animals and their products rather than crop farming, were developed as European farmers moved into the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe in the fourth millennium BC, and subsequently spread across much of the Eurasian steppe. Sheep and goats were introduced to Africa from Southwest Asia, but African cattle may have been independently domesticated around 7000\u20136000BC. Camels, domesticated in central Arabia in the fourth millennium BC, have also been used as dairy animals in North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula. The earliest Egyptian records of burn treatments describe burn dressings using milk from mothers of male babies. In the rest of the world (i.e., East and Southeast Asia, the Americas and Australia), milk and dairy products were historically not a large part of the diet, either because they remained populated by hunter-gatherers who did not keep animals or the local agricultural economies did not include domesticated dairy species. Milk consumption became common in these regions comparatively recently, as a consequence of European colonialism and political domination over much of the world in the last 500 years.\nIn the Middle Ages, milk was called the \"virtuous white liquor\" because alcoholic beverages were safer to consume than the water generally available. Incorrectly thought to be blood diverted from the womb to the breast, it was also known as \"white blood\", and treated like blood for religious dietary purposes and in humoral theory.\nJames Rosier's record of the 1605 voyage made by George Weymouth to New England reported that the Wabanaki people Weymouth captured in Maine milked \"Rain-Deere and Fallo-Deere.\" But Journalist Avery Yale Kamila and food historians said Rosier \"misinterpreted the evidence.\" Historians report the Wabanaki did not domesticate deer. The tribes of the northern woodlands have historically been making nut milk. Cows were imported to New England in 1624.\nIndustrialization.\nThe growth in urban population, coupled with the expansion of the railway network in the mid-19th century, brought about a revolution in milk production and supply. Individual railway firms began transporting milk from rural areas to London from the 1840s and 1850s. Possibly the first such instance was in 1846, when St Thomas's Hospital in Southwark contracted with milk suppliers outside London to ship milk by rail. The Great Western Railway was an early and enthusiastic adopter, and began to transport milk into London from Maidenhead in 1860, despite much criticism. By 1900, the company was transporting over annually. The milk trade grew slowly through the 1860s, but went through a period of extensive, structural change in the 1870s and 1880s.\nUrban demand began to grow, as consumer purchasing power increased and milk became regarded as a required daily commodity. Over the last three decades of the 19th century, demand for milk in most parts of the country doubled or, in some cases, tripled. Legislation in 1875 made the adulteration of milk illegal\u2013 This combined with a marketing campaign to change the image of milk. The proportion of rural imports by rail as a percentage of total milk consumption in London grew from under 5% in the 1860s to over 96% by the early 20th century. By that point, the supply system for milk was the most highly organized and integrated of any food product. Milk was analyzed for infection with tuberculosis. In 1907 180 samples were tested in Birmingham and 13.3% were found to be infected.\nThe first glass bottle packaging for milk was used in the 1870s. The first company to do so may have been the New York Dairy Company in 1877. The Express Dairy Company in England began glass bottle production in 1880. In 1884, Hervey Thatcher, an American inventor from New York, invented a glass milk bottle, called Thatcher's Common Sense Milk Jar, which was sealed with a waxed paper disk. In 1932, plastic-coated paper milk cartons were introduced commercially.\nIn 1863, French chemist and biologist Louis Pasteur invented pasteurization, a method of killing harmful bacteria in beverages and food products. He developed this method while on summer vacation in Arbois, to remedy the frequent acidity of the local wines. He found out experimentally that it is sufficient to heat a young wine to only about for a brief time to kill the microbes, and that the wine could be nevertheless properly aged without sacrificing the final quality. In honor of Pasteur, the process became known as \"pasteurization\". Pasteurization was originally used as a way of preventing wine and beer from souring. Commercial pasteurizing equipment was produced in Germany in the 1880s, and producers adopted the process in Copenhagen and Stockholm by 1885.\nHomogenization, the process of distributing the milk fat evenly throughout the rest of the milk, was first invented in the late 1800s and exhibited by Auguste Gaulin at the 1900 World's Fair in Paris. Within 40 years, the use of homogenization spread to other countries and is now commonplace.\nSources.\nAll mammal species have females who can produce milk for some time after giving birth. Cow milk dominates the amount of milk produced. In 2011, FAO estimates 85% of all milk worldwide was produced from cows. Human milk is not produced or distributed industrially or commercially; however, human milk banks collect donated human breastmilk and redistribute it to infants who may benefit from human milk for various reasons (premature neonates, babies with allergies, metabolic diseases, etc.) but who cannot breastfeed. Actual inability to produce enough milk is rare, with studies showing that mothers from malnourished regions still produce amounts of milk of similar quality to that of mothers in developed countries. There are many reasons a mother may not produce enough breast milk. The amount of milk produced depends on how often the mother is nursing and/or pumping: the more the mother nurses her baby or pumps, the more milk is produced.\nIn the Western world, cow's milk is produced on an industrial scale and is, by far, the most commonly consumed form of milk. Commercial dairy farming using automated milking equipment produces the vast majority of milk in developed countries. Dairy cattle, such as the Holstein, have been bred selectively for increased milk production. About 90% of the dairy cows in the United States and 85% in Great Britain are Holsteins. Other dairy cows in the United States include Ayrshire, Brown Swiss, Guernsey, Jersey and Milking Shorthorn (Dairy Shorthorn).\nOther animal-based sources.\nAside from cattle, many kinds of livestock provide milk used by humans for dairy products. These animals include water buffalo, goat, sheep, camel, donkey, horse, reindeer and yak. The first four respectively produced about 11%, 2%, 1.4% and 0.2% of all milk worldwide in 2011.\nIn Russia and Sweden, small moose dairies also exist.\nAccording to the US National Bison Association, American bison (also called American buffalo) are not milked commercially; however, various sources report cows resulting from cross-breeding bison and domestic cattle are good milk producers, and have been used both during the European settlement of North America and during the development of commercial Beefalo in the 1970s and 1980s.\nSwine are almost never milked, even though their milk is similar to cow's milk and perfectly suitable for human consumption. The main reasons for this are that milking a sow's numerous small teats is very cumbersome, and that sows cannot store their milk as cows can. A few pig farms do sell pig cheese as a novelty item; these cheeses are exceedingly expensive.\nProduction worldwide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2012, the largest producer of milk and milk products was India, followed by the United States of America, China, Pakistan and Brazil. All 28 European Union members together produced of milk in 2013, the largest by any politico-economic union.\nIncreasing affluence in developing countries, as well as increased promotion of milk and milk products, has led to a rise in milk consumption in developing countries in recent years. In turn, the opportunities presented by these growing markets have attracted investments by multinational dairy firms. Nevertheless, in many countries production remains on a small scale and presents significant opportunities for diversification of income sources by small farms. Local milk collection centers, where milk is collected and chilled prior to being transferred to urban dairies, are a good example of where farmers have been able to work on a cooperative basis, particularly in countries such as India.\nProduction yields.\nFAO reports Israel dairy farms are the most productive in the world, with a yield of milk per cow per year. This survey over 2001 and 2007 was conducted by ICAR (International Committee for Animal Recording) across 17 developed countries. The survey found that the average herd size in these developed countries increased from 74 to 99 cows per herd between 2001 and 2007. A dairy farm had an average of 19 cows per herd in Norway, and 337 in New Zealand. Annual milk production in the same period increased from per cow in these developed countries. The lowest average production was in New Zealand at per cow. The milk yield per cow depended on production systems, nutrition of the cows, and only to a minor extent different genetic potential of the animals. What the cow ate made the most impact on the production obtained. New Zealand cows with the lowest yield per year grazed all year, in contrast to Israel with the highest yield where the cows ate in barns with an energy-rich mixed diet.\nThe milk yield per cow in the United States was per year in 2010. In contrast, the milk yields per cow in India and China\u2013 the second and third largest producers\u2013 were respectively and per year.\nThe IPCC Sixth Assessment Report mentions the possibility that the already recorded stagnation of dairy production in both China and West Africa can be attributed to persistent increases in heat stress caused by climate change. This is a plausible hypothesis, because even \"mild\" heat stress can reduce daily yields: research in Sweden found that average daily temperatures of reduce daily milk yield per cow by 0.2\u00a0kg, with the loss reaching 0.54\u00a0kg for . Research in a humid tropical climate describes a more linear relationship, with every unit of heat stress reducing yield by 2.13%. In the intensive farming systems, daily milk yield per cow declines by 1.8\u00a0kg during severe heat stress. In organic farming systems, the effect of heat stress on milk yields is limited, but milk \"quality\" suffers substantially, with lower fat and protein content. In China, daily milk production per cow is already lower than the average by between 0.7 and 4\u00a0kg in July (the hottest month of the year), and by 2070, it may decline by up to 50% (or 7.2\u00a0kg) due to climate change. Heatwaves can also reduce milk yield, with particularly acute impacts if the heatwave lasts for four or more days, as at that point the cow's thermoregulation capacity is usually exhausted, and its core body temperature starts to increase.\nPrice.\nIt was reported in 2007 that with increased worldwide prosperity and the competition of bio-fuel production for feed stocks, both the demand for and the price of milk had substantially increased worldwide. Particularly notable was the rapid increase of consumption of milk in China and the rise of the price of milk in the United States above the government subsidized price. In 2010 the Department of Agriculture predicted farmers would receive an average of of cow's milk, which is down from 2007 and below the break-even point for many cattle farmers.\nComposition.\nMilk is an emulsion or colloid of butterfat globules within a water-based fluid that contains dissolved carbohydrates and protein aggregates with minerals. Because it is produced as a food source for the young, all of its contents provide benefits for growth. Milk provides for energy (lipids, lactose, and protein), amino acids, the biosynthesis of non-essential amino acids (from essential amino acids and amino groups supplied by proteins), essential fatty acids, vitamins, inorganic elements, and water.\npH.\nThe pH of cow's milk, ranging from 6.7 to 6.9, is similar to other bovines and non-bovine mammals.\nLipids.\nFull fat milk contains about 33 grams of fat per liter, including about 19 grams of saturated fat, 1.2 grams of omega 6 fatty acids, and 0.75 grams of omega 3 fatty acids per liter. The amount of fat varies for products where (some of) the fat has been removed, such as in skimmed milk.\nInitially milk fat is secreted in the form of a fat globule surrounded by a membrane. Each fat globule is composed almost entirely of triacylglycerols and is surrounded by a membrane consisting of complex lipids such as phospholipids, along with proteins. These act as emulsifiers which keep the individual globules from coalescing and protect the contents of these globules from various enzymes in the fluid portion of the milk. Although 97\u201398% of lipids are triacylglycerols, small amounts of di- and monoacylglycerols, free cholesterol and cholesterol esters, free fatty acids, and phospholipids are also present. Unlike protein and carbohydrates, fat composition in milk varies widely due to genetic, lactational, and nutritional factor difference between different species.\nFat globules vary in size from less than 0.2 to about 15 micrometers in diameter between different species. Diameter may also vary between animals within a species and at different times within a milking of a single animal. In unhomogenized cow's milk, the fat globules have an average diameter of two to four micrometers and with homogenization, average around 0.4 micrometers. The fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K along with essential fatty acids such as linoleic and linolenic acid are found within the milk fat portion of the milk.\nProteins.\nNormal bovine milk contains 30\u201335\u00a0grams of protein per liter, of which about 80% is arranged in casein micelles. Total proteins in milk represent 3.2% of its composition (nutrition table).\nCaseins.\nThe largest structures in the aqueous portion of the milk are casein micelles: aggregates of thousands of protein molecules, with superficial resemblance to a surfactant micelle, held together with the help of nanometer-scale particles of calcium phosphate. Each casein micelle is roughly spherical and about a tenth of a micrometer across. There are four different types of casein proteins: \u03b1s1-, \u03b1s2-, \u03b2-, and \u03ba-caseins. Most of the casein proteins are bound into the micelles. There are several competing theories regarding the precise structure of the micelles, but they share one important feature: the outermost layer consists of strands of one type of protein, \u03ba-casein, reaching out from the body of the micelle into the surrounding fluid. These kappa-casein molecules all have a negative electrical charge and therefore repel each other, keeping the micelles separated under normal conditions and in a stable colloidal suspension in the water-based surrounding fluid.\nMilk contains dozens of other types of proteins beside caseins and including enzymes. These other proteins are more water-soluble than caseins and do not form larger structures. Because the proteins remain suspended in whey, remaining when caseins coagulate into curds, they are collectively known as \"whey proteins\". Lactoglobulin is the most common whey protein by a large margin. The ratio of caseins to whey proteins varies greatly between species; for example, it is 82:18 in cows and around 32:68 in humans.\nSalts, minerals, and vitamins.\nBovine milk contains a variety of cations and anions traditionally referred to as minerals or milk salts. Calcium, phosphate, magnesium, sodium, potassium, citrate, and chloride are all included and they typically occur at concentrations of 5\u201340mM. The milk salts strongly interact with casein, most notably calcium phosphate. It is present in excess and often, much greater excess of solubility of solid calcium phosphate. In addition to calcium, milk is a source of many vitamins: Vitamins A, B1, B2, B5 B6, B7, B12, and D.\nCalcium phosphate structure.\nFor many years the most widely accepted theory of the structure of a micelle was that it was composed of spherical casein aggregates, called submicelles, that were held together by calcium phosphate linkages. However, there are two recent models of the casein micelle that refute the distinct micellular structures within the micelle.\nThe first theory, attributed to de Kruif and Holt, proposes that nanoclusters of calcium phosphate and the phosphopeptide fraction of beta-casein are the centerpiece to micellar structure. Specifically in this view unstructured proteins organize around the calcium phosphate, giving rise to their structure, and thus no specific structure is formed.\nUnder the second theory, proposed by Horne, the growth of calcium phosphate nanoclusters begins the process of micelle formation, but is limited by binding phosphopeptide loop regions of the caseins. Once bound, protein-protein interactions are formed and polymerization occurs, in which \u03ba-casein is used as an end cap to form micelles with trapped calcium phosphate nanoclusters.\nSome sources indicate that the trapped calcium phosphate is in the form of Ca9(PO4)6;\nwhereas others say it is similar to the structure of the mineral brushite, CaHPO4\u00b72H2O.\nSugars and carbohydrates.\nMilk contains several different carbohydrates, including lactose, glucose, galactose, and other oligosaccharides. The lactose gives milk its sweet taste and contributes approximately 40% of the calories in whole cow's milk. Lactose is a disaccharide composite of two simple sugars: glucose and galactose. Bovine milk averages 4.8% anhydrous lactose, which amounts to about 50% of the total solids of skimmed milk. Levels of lactose are dependent upon the type of milk, as other carbohydrates can be present at higher concentrations than lactose in milks.\nMiscellaneous contents.\nOther components found in raw cow's milk are living white blood cells, mammary gland cells, various bacteria, vitamin C, and a large number of active enzymes.\nAppearance.\nBoth the fat globules and the smaller casein micelles, which are just large enough to deflect light, contribute to the opaque white color of milk. The fat globules contain some yellow-orange carotene, enough in some breeds (such as Guernsey and Jersey cattle) to impart a golden or \"creamy\" hue to a glass of milk. The riboflavin in the whey portion of milk has a greenish color, which sometimes can be discerned in skimmed milk or whey products. Fat-free skimmed milk has only the casein micelles to scatter light, and they tend to scatter shorter-wavelength blue light more than they do red, giving skimmed milk a bluish tint.\nProcessing.\nIn most Western countries, centralized dairy facilities process milk and products obtained from milk, such as cream, butter, and cheese. In the US, these dairies usually are local companies, while in the Southern Hemisphere facilities may be run by large multi-national corporations such as Fonterra.\nPasteurization.\nPasteurization is used to kill harmful pathogenic bacteria such as \"M. paratuberculosis\" and \"\" by heating the milk for a short time and then immediately cooling it. Types of pasteurized milk include full cream, reduced fat, skim milk, calcium enriched, flavored, and UHT. The standard high temperature short time (HTST) process of for 15 seconds completely kills pathogenic bacteria in milk, rendering it safe to drink for up to three weeks if continually refrigerated. Dairies print best before dates on each container, after which stores remove any unsold milk from their shelves.\nA side effect of the heating of pasteurization is that some vitamin and mineral content is lost. Soluble calcium and phosphorus decrease by 5%, thiamin and vitamin B12 by 10%, and vitamin C by 20% or greater (even to complete loss). Because losses are small in comparison to the large amount of the two B-vitamins present, milk continues to provide significant amounts of thiamin and vitamin B12. The loss of vitamin C is not nutritionally significant in a well-balanced diet, as milk is not an important dietary source of vitamin C.\nFiltration.\nMicrofiltration is a process that partially replaces pasteurization and produces milk with fewer microorganisms and longer shelf life without a change in the taste of the milk. In this process, cream is separated from the skimmed milk and is pasteurized in the usual way, but the skimmed milk is forced through ceramic microfilters that trap 99.9% of microorganisms in the milk (as compared to 99.999% killing of microorganisms in standard HTST pasteurization). The skimmed milk then is recombined with the pasteurized cream to reconstitute the original milk composition.\nUltrafiltration uses finer filters than microfiltration, which allow lactose and water to pass through while retaining fats, calcium and protein. As with microfiltration, the fat may be removed before filtration and added back in afterwards. Ultrafiltered milk is used in cheesemaking, since it has reduced volume for a given protein content, and is sold directly to consumers as a higher protein, lower sugar content, and creamier alternative to regular milk.\nCreaming and homogenization.\nUpon standing for 12 to 24 hours, fresh milk has a tendency to separate into a high-fat cream layer on top of a larger, low-fat milk layer. The cream often is sold as a separate product with its own uses. Today the separation of the cream from the milk usually is accomplished rapidly in centrifugal cream separators. The fat globules rise to the top of a container of milk because fat is less dense than water.\nThe smaller the globules, the more other molecular-level forces prevent this from happening. The cream rises in cow's milk much more quickly than a simple model would predict: rather than isolated globules, the fat in the milk tends to form into clusters containing about a million globules, held together by a number of minor whey proteins. These clusters rise faster than individual globules can. The fat globules in milk from goats, sheep, and water buffalo do not form clusters as readily and are smaller to begin with, resulting in a slower separation of cream from these milks.\nMilk often is homogenized, a treatment that prevents a cream layer from separating out of the milk. The milk is pumped at high pressures through very narrow tubes, breaking up the fat globules through turbulence and cavitation. A greater number of smaller particles possess more total surface area than a smaller number of larger ones, and the original fat globule membranes cannot completely cover them. Casein micelles are attracted to the newly exposed fat surfaces.\nNearly one-third of the micelles in the milk end up participating in this new membrane structure. The casein weighs down the globules and interferes with the clustering that accelerated separation. The exposed fat globules are vulnerable to certain enzymes present in milk, which could break down the fats and produce rancid flavors. To prevent this, the enzymes are inactivated by pasteurizing the milk immediately before or during homogenization.\nHomogenization was first invented in France in 1892 by Auguste Gaulin and introduced ten years later. Over the following 30 years, the use of homogenizers spread to other countries such as Canada, the United States, and Norway. Almost all milk sold in the United States is homogenized, and the US was the first country in which homogenization became essentially universal. \nHomogenized milk tastes blander but feels creamier in the mouth than unhomogenized. It is whiter and more resistant to developing off flavors. Creamline (or cream-top) milk is unhomogenized. It may or may not have been pasteurized. Milk that has undergone high-pressure homogenization, sometimes labeled as \"ultra-homogenized\", has a longer shelf life than milk that has undergone ordinary homogenization at lower pressures.\nUHT.\nUltra-heat treatment (UHT) is a type of milk processing where all bacteria are destroyed with high heat to extend its shelf life for up to six months, as long as the package is not opened. Milk is firstly homogenized and then is heated to for 2\u20134seconds. The milk is immediately cooled down and packed into a sterile container. As a result of this treatment, all the pathogenic bacteria within the milk are destroyed, unlike when the milk is just pasteurized. The treated milk will keep for up to 6 months if unopened. UHT milk does not need to be refrigerated until the package is opened, which makes it easier to ship and store. However, in this process there is a loss of vitamin B1 and vitamin C, and there is also a slight change in the taste of the milk.\nNutrition and health.\nThe composition of milk differs widely among species. Factors such as the type of protein; the proportion of protein, fat, and sugar; the levels of various vitamins and minerals; and the size of the butterfat globules, and the strength of the curd are among those that may vary. For example:\nDonkey and horse milk have the lowest fat content, while the milk of seals and whales may contain more than 50% fat.\nCow's milk: variation by breed.\nThese compositions vary by breed, animal, and point in the lactation period.\nThe protein range for these four breeds is 3.3% to 3.9%, while the lactose range is 4.7% to 4.9%.\nMilk fat percentages may be manipulated by dairy farmers' stock diet formulation strategies. The infection known as mastitis, especially in dairy cattle, can cause fat levels to decline.\nNutritional value.\nProcessed cow's milk was formulated to contain differing amounts of fat during the 1950s. One cup (250\u00a0mL) of 2%-fat cow's milk contains 285\u00a0mg of calcium, which represents 22% to 29% of the daily recommended intake (DRI) of calcium for an adult. Depending on its age, milk contains 8\u00a0grams of protein, and a number of other nutrients (either naturally or through fortification).\nWhole milk has a glycemic index of 39\u00b13. A food is considered to have a low GI if it is 55 or less.\nFor protein quality, whole milk has a Digestible Indispensable Amino Acid Score (DIAAS) of 1.43, with the limiting amino acid for those groups being methionine and cysteine. A DIAAS of 1 or more is considered to be an excellent/high protein quality source.\nDisease.\nThere is no reliable evidence that drinking milk increases the risk of cancer in general, and there is good evidence that milk drinking may have a protective effect specifically against bowel cancer.\nAllergy.\nOne of the most common food allergies in infants is to cow's milk. This is an immunologically mediated adverse reaction, rarely fatal, to one or more cow's milk proteins. Milk allergy affects between 2% and 3% of babies and young children. To reduce risk, recommendations are that babies should be exclusively breastfed for at least four months, preferably six months, before introducing cow's milk. The majority of children outgrow milk allergy, but for about 0.4% the condition persists into adulthood.\nLactose intolerance.\nLactose intolerance is a condition in which people have symptoms due to deficiency or absence of the enzyme lactase in the small intestine, causing poor absorption of milk lactose. People affected vary in the amount of lactose they can tolerate before symptoms develop, which may include abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, gas, and nausea. Severity depends on the amount of milk consumed. Those affected are usually able to drink at least one cup of milk without developing significant symptoms, with greater amounts tolerated if drunk with a meal or throughout the day.\nEvolution of lactation.\nThe mammary gland is thought to have derived from apocrine skin glands. It has been suggested that the original function of lactation (milk production) was keeping eggs moist. Much of the argument is based on monotremes (egg-laying mammals). The original adaptive significance of milk secretions may have been nutrition and immunological protection.\nTritylodontid cynodonts seem to have displayed lactation, based on their dental replacement patterns.\nBovine growth hormone supplementation.\nSince November 1993, recombinant bovine somatotropin (rbST), also called rBGH, has been sold to dairy farmers in the US with Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. Cows produce bovine growth hormone naturally, but some producers administer an additional recombinant version of BGH which is produced through genetically engineered E. coli to increase milk production. Bovine growth hormone also stimulates liver production of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1).\nHuman health.\nThe US Food and Drug Administration, the National Institutes of Health and the World Health Organization have reported that both of these compounds are safe for human consumption at the amounts present.\nMilk from cows given rBST may be sold in the United States, and the FDA stated that no significant difference has been shown between milk derived from rBST-treated and that from non-rBST-treated cows.\nMilk that advertises that it comes from cows not treated with rBST is required to state this finding on its label.\nAnimal welfare.\nCows receiving rBGH supplements may more frequently contract an udder infection known as mastitis. Problems with mastitis have led to Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan banning milk from rBST-treated cows. Mastitis, among other diseases, may be responsible for the fact that levels of white blood cells in milk vary naturally.\nrBGH is also banned in the European Union for reasons of animal welfare.\nVarieties and brands.\nMilk products are sold in a number of varieties based on types/degrees of:\nMilk preserved by the UHT process does not need to be refrigerated before opening and has a much longer shelf life (six months) than milk in ordinary packaging. It is typically sold unrefrigerated in the UK, US, Europe, Latin America, and Australia.\nFat content.\nThe fat content of whole milk varies, and is adjusted to make different varieties by separating skim milk from cream, and then using either to mix different ratios, potentially even from the whole milk base. Thereby the different fat content categories are created. These may be described by percentage, e.g. 1%, 2%, 3% or be known by named description, e.g. whole, semi-skimmed, skimmed, \"half and half\" (half whole milk and half cream).\nReduction or elimination of lactose.\nLactose-free milk can be produced by passing milk over lactase enzyme bound to an inert carrier. Once the molecule is cleaved, there are no lactose ill effects. Forms are available with reduced amounts of lactose (typically 30% of normal), and alternatively with nearly 0%. The only noticeable difference from regular milk is a slightly sweeter taste due to the cleavage of lactose into glucose and galactose. Lactose-reduced milk can also be produced via ultra filtration, which removes smaller molecules such as lactose and water while leaving calcium and proteins behind. Milk produced via these methods has a lower sugar content than regular milk. To aid digestion in those with lactose intolerance, another alternative is dairy foods, milk and yogurt, with added bacterial cultures such as \"Lactobacillus acidophilus\" (\"acidophilus milk\") and bifidobacteria. Another milk with \"Lactococcus lactis\" bacteria cultures (\"cultured buttermilk\") often is used in cooking to replace the traditional use of naturally soured milk, which has become rare due to the ubiquity of pasteurization, which also kills the naturally occurring Lactococcus bacteria.\nAdditives and flavoring.\nCommercially sold milk commonly has vitamin D added to it to make up for lack of exposure to UVB radiation. Reduced-fat milks often have added vitamin A palmitate to compensate for the loss of the vitamin during fat removal; in the United States this results in reduced fat milks having a higher vitamin A content than whole milk. Milk often has flavoring added to it for better taste or as a means of improving sales. Chocolate milk has been sold for many years and has been followed more recently by strawberry milk and others. Some nutritionists have criticized flavored milk for adding sugar, usually in the form of high-fructose corn syrup, to the diets of children who are already commonly obese in the US.\nDistribution.\nDue to the short shelf life of normal milk, it used to be delivered to households daily in many countries; however, improved refrigeration at home, changing food shopping patterns because of supermarkets, and the higher cost of home delivery mean that daily deliveries by a milkman are no longer available in most countries.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nIn Australia and New Zealand, prior to metrication, milk was generally distributed in 1 pint (568mL) glass bottles. In Australia and Ireland there was a government funded \"free milk for school children\" program, and milk was distributed at morning recess in 1/3 pint bottles. With the conversion to metric measures, the milk industry was concerned that the replacement of the pint bottles with 500mL bottles would result in a 13.6% drop in milk consumption; hence, all pint bottles were recalled and replaced by 600mL bottles. With time, due to the steadily increasing cost of collecting, transporting, storing and cleaning glass bottles, they were replaced by cardboard cartons. A number of designs were used, including a tetrahedron which could be close-packed without waste space, and could not be knocked over accidentally (slogan: \"No more crying over spilt milk\"). However, the industry eventually settled on a design similar to that used in the United States.\nMilk is now available in a variety of sizes in paperboard milk cartons (250\u00a0mL, 375\u00a0mL, 600\u00a0mL, 1 liter and 1.5 liters) and plastic bottles (1, 2 and 3 liters). A significant addition to the marketplace has been \"long-life\" milk (UHT), generally available in 1 and 2 liter rectangular cardboard cartons. In urban and suburban areas where there is sufficient demand, home delivery is still available, though in suburban areas this is often three times per week rather than daily. Another significant and popular addition to the marketplace has been flavored milks; for example, as mentioned above, Farmers Union Iced Coffee outsells Coca-Cola in South Australia.\nIndia.\nIn rural India, milk is home delivered, daily, by local milkmen carrying bulk quantities in a metal container, usually on a bicycle. In other parts of metropolitan India, milk is usually bought or delivered in plastic bags or cartons via shops or supermarkets.\nThe current milk chain flow in India is from milk producer to milk collection agent. Then it is transported to a milk chilling center and bulk transported to the processing plant, then to the sales agent and finally to the consumer.\nA 2011 survey by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India found that nearly 70% of samples had not conformed to the standards set for milk. The study found that due to lack of hygiene and sanitation in milk handling and packaging, detergents (used during cleaning operations) were not washed properly and found their way into the milk. About 8% of samples in the survey were found to have detergents, which are hazardous to health.\nAlthough India is the world's largest milk producer and a major exporter, the country's ever-increasing demand for dairy products could eventually make it a net importer.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, milk is supplied in jugs. Milk has been a staple food, especially among the pastoral tribes in this country.\nUnited Kingdom.\nSince the late 1990s, milk-buying patterns have changed drastically in the UK. The classic milkman, who travels his local milk round (route) using a milk float (often battery powered) during the early hours and delivers milk in 1-pint glass bottles with aluminum foil tops directly to households, has almost disappeared. Two of the main reasons for the decline of UK home deliveries by milkmen are household refrigerators (which lessen the need for daily milk deliveries) and private car usage (which has increased supermarket shopping). Another factor is that it is cheaper to purchase milk from a supermarket than from home delivery. In 1996, more than 2.5 billion liters of milk were still being delivered by milkmen, but by 2006 only 637 million liters (13% of milk consumed) was delivered by some 9,500 milkmen. By 2010, the estimated number of milkmen had dropped to 6,000. Assuming that delivery per milkman is the same as it was in 2006, this means milkmen deliveries now only account for 6\u20137% of all milk consumed by UK households (6.7 billion liters in 2008/2009).\nAlmost 95% of all milk in the UK is thus sold in shops today, most of it in plastic bottles of various sizes, but some also in milk cartons. Milk is hardly ever sold in glass bottles in UK shops.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, glass milk bottles have been replaced mostly with milk cartons and plastic jugs. Gallons of milk are almost always sold in jugs, while half gallons and quarts may be found in both paper cartons and plastic jugs, and smaller sizes are almost always in cartons.\nThe \"half pint\" () milk carton is the traditional unit as a component of school lunches, though some companies have replaced that unit size with a plastic bottle, which is also available at retail in 6- and 12-pack size.\nPackaging.\nGlass milk bottles are now rare. Most people purchase milk in bags, plastic bottles, or plastic-coated paper cartons. Ultraviolet (UV) light from fluorescent lighting can alter the flavor of milk, so many companies that once distributed milk in transparent or highly translucent containers are now using thicker materials that block the UV light.\nMilk comes in a variety of containers with local variants:\n Commonly sold in 1-liter bags and cardboard boxes. The bag is then placed in a plastic jug and the corner cut off before the milk is poured.\n Distributed in a variety of sizes, most commonly in aseptic cartons for up to 1.5 liters, and plastic screw-top bottles beyond that with the following volumes; 1.1\u00a0L, 2\u00a0L, and 3\u00a0L. 1-liter milk bags are starting to appear in supermarkets, but have not yet proved popular. Most UHT-milk is packed in 1 or 2 liter paper containers with a sealed plastic spout.\n Used to be sold in cooled 1-liter bags, just like in South Africa. Today the most common form is 1-liter aseptic cartons containing UHT skimmed, semi-skimmed or whole milk, although the plastic bags are still in use for pasteurized milk. Higher grades of pasteurized milk can be found in cartons or plastic bottles. Sizes other than 1-liter are rare.\n 1.33 liter plastic bags (sold as 4 liters in 3 bags) are widely available in some areas (especially the Maritimes, Ontario and Quebec), although the 4 liter plastic jug has supplanted them in western Canada. Other common packaging sizes are 2 liter, 1 liter, 500 mL, and 250 mL cartons, as well as 4 liter, 1 liter, 250\u00a0mL aseptic cartons and 500\u00a0mL plastic jugs.\n Distributed most commonly in aseptic cartons for up to 1 liter, but smaller, snack-sized cartons are also popular. The most common flavors, besides the natural presentation, are chocolate, strawberry and vanilla.\n Sweetened milk is a drink popular with students of all ages and is often sold in small plastic bags complete with straw. Adults not wishing to drink at a banquet often drink milk served from cartons or milk tea.\nSells milk in 1-liter plastic bags.\n UHT milk (\"trajno mlijeko/trajno mleko/\"\u0442\u0440\u0430\u0458\u043d\u043e \u043c\u043b\u0435\u043a\u043e) is sold in 500\u00a0mL and 1\u00a0L (sometimes also 200 mL) aseptic cartons. Non-UHT pasteurized milk (\"svje\u017ee mlijeko/sve\u017ee mleko/\"\u0441\u0432\u0435\u0436\u0435 \u043c\u043b\u0435\u043a\u043e) is most commonly sold in 1\u00a0L and 1.5\u00a0L PET bottles, though in Serbia one can still find milk in plastic bags.\n Commonly sold in 1 L bags or 0.33 L, 0.5 L, 1 L or 1.5 L cartons.\n Sizes of 500 mL, 1 liter (the most common), 1.5 liters, 2 liters and 3 liters are commonplace.\n Commonly sold in 1 L or 1.5 L cartons, in some places also in 2\u00a0dl and 5\u00a0dl cartons.\n Commonly sold in 1-liter cartons. Sale in 1-liter plastic bags (common in the 1980s) is now rare.\n Milk is sold in glass bottles (220 mL), cartons (236 mL and 1\u00a0L), plastic jugs (2 liters) and aseptic cartons (250\u00a0mL).\n Commonly sold in 500 mL plastic bags and in bottles in some parts like in the West. It is still customary to serve the milk boiled, despite pasteurization. Milk is often buffalo milk. Flavored milk is sold in most convenience stores in waxed cardboard containers. Convenience stores also sell many varieties of milk (such as flavored and ultra-pasteurized) in various sizes, usually in aseptic cartons.\n Usually sold in 1-liter cartons, but smaller, snack-sized cartons are available.\n Commonly sold in 1-liter cartons or bottles and less commonly in 0.5 or 0.25-liter cartons. Whole milk, semi-skimmed milk, skimmed, lactose-free, and flavored (usually in small packages) milk is available. Milk is sold fresh or UHT. Goat's milk is also available in small amounts. UHT semi-skimmed milk is the most sold, but caf\u00e9s use almost exclusively fresh whole milk.\n Commonly sold in 1-liter waxed paperboard cartons. In most city centers there is also home delivery of milk in glass jugs. As seen in China, sweetened and flavored milk drinks are commonly seen in vending machines.\nMilk in Kenya is mostly sold in plastic-coated aseptic paper cartons supplied in 300 mL, 500 mL or 1 liter volumes. In rural areas, milk is stored in plastic bottles or gourds. The standard unit of measuring milk quantity in Kenya is a liter.\n Milk is supplied in 500 mL plastic bags and carried in jugs from rural to cities for selling\n Milk is supplied in 1000 mL plastic bottles and delivered from factories to cities for selling.\n UHT milk is mostly sold in aseptic cartons (500\u00a0mL, 1\u00a0L, 2\u00a0L), and non-UHT in 1\u00a0L plastic bags or plastic bottles. Milk, UHT is commonly boiled, despite being pasteurized.\n Commonly sold in 1-liter bags. The bag is then placed in a plastic jug and the corner cut off before the milk is poured.\n Sold in cartons (180\u00a0mL, 200\u00a0mL, 500\u00a0mL 900\u00a0mL, 1\u00a0L, 1.8\u00a0L, 2.3\u00a0L), plastic jugs (1\u00a0L and 1.8\u00a0L), aseptic cartons (180 mL and 200 mL) and plastic bags (1 L).\n Commonly sold in 0.3\u00a0L, 1\u00a0L or 1.5\u00a0L cartons and sometimes as plastic or glass milk bottles.\n Commonly sold in 500 mL or 1 L cartons or special plastic bottles. UHT milk is more popular. Milkmen also serve in smaller towns and villages.\n Most stores stock imperial sizes: 1 pint (568\u00a0mL), 2 pints (1.136\u00a0L), 4 pints (2.273\u00a0L), 6 pints (3.408\u00a0L) or a combination including both metric and imperial sizes. Glass milk bottles delivered to the doorstep by the milkman are typically pint-sized and are returned empty by the householder for repeated reuse. Milk is sold at supermarkets in either aseptic cartons or HDPE bottles.\n Commonly sold in gallon (3.78\u00a0L), half-gallon (1.89\u00a0L) and quart (0.94\u00a0L) containers of natural-colored HDPE resin, or, for sizes less than one gallon, cartons of waxed paperboard. Bottles made of opaque PET are also becoming commonplace for smaller, particularly metric, sizes such as one liter. The US single-serving size is usually the half-pint (about 240 mL). Less frequently, dairies deliver milk directly to consumers, from coolers filled with glass bottles which are typically half-gallon sized and returned for reuse. Some convenience store chains in the United States (such as Kwik Trip in the Midwest) sell milk in half-gallon bags, while another rectangular cube gallon container design used for easy stacking in shipping and displaying is used by warehouse clubs such as Costco and Sam's Club, along with some Walmart stores.\n Pasteurized milk is commonly sold in 1-liter bags and ultra-pasteurized milk is sold in cardboard boxes called Tetra Briks. Non-pasteurized milk is forbidden. Until the 1960s no treatment was applied; milk was sold in bottles. As of 2017[ [update]], plastic jugs used for pouring the bags, or \"sachets\", are in common use.\nPractically everywhere, condensed milk and evaporated milk are distributed in metal cans, 250 and 125\u00a0mL paper containers and 100 and 200\u00a0mL squeeze tubes, and powdered milk (skim and whole) is distributed in boxes or bags.\nSpoilage and fermented milk products.\nWhen raw milk is left standing for a while, it turns \"sour\". This is the result of fermentation, where lactic acid bacteria ferment the lactose in the milk into lactic acid. Prolonged fermentation may render the milk unpleasant to consume. This fermentation process is exploited by the introduction of bacterial cultures (e.g. \"Lactobacilli sp., Streptococcus sp., Leuconostoc sp.\", etc.) to produce a variety of fermented milk products. The reduced pH from lactic acid accumulation denatures proteins and causes the milk to undergo a variety of different transformations in appearance and texture, ranging from an aggregate to smooth consistency. Some of these products include sour cream, yogurt, cheese, buttermilk, viili, kefir, and kumis. \"See Dairy product\" for more information.\nPasteurization of cow's milk initially destroys any potential pathogens and increases the shelf life, but eventually results in spoilage that makes it unsuitable for consumption. This causes it to assume an unpleasant odor, and the milk is deemed non-consumable due to unpleasant taste and an increased risk of food poisoning. In raw milk, the presence of lactic acid-producing bacteria, under suitable conditions, ferments the lactose present to lactic acid. The increasing acidity in turn prevents the growth of other organisms, or slows their growth significantly. During pasteurization, however, these lactic acid bacteria are mostly destroyed.\nIn order to prevent spoilage, milk can be kept refrigerated and stored between in bulk tanks. Most milk is pasteurized by heating briefly and then refrigerated to allow transport from factory farms to local markets. The spoilage of milk can be forestalled by using ultra-high temperature (UHT) treatment. Milk so treated can be stored unrefrigerated for several months until opened but has a characteristic \"cooked\" taste. Condensed milk, made by removing most of the water, can be stored in cans for many years, unrefrigerated, as can evaporated milk, although condensed milk typically has added sugar for sweetness.\nPowdered milk.\nThe most durable form of milk is powdered milk, which is produced from milk by removing almost all water. The moisture content is usually less than 5% in both drum- and spray-dried powdered milk.\nFreezing of milk can cause fat globule aggregation upon thawing, resulting in milky layers and butterfat lumps. These can be dispersed again by warming and stirring the milk. It can change the taste by destruction of milk-fat globule membranes, releasing oxidized flavors.\nUse in other food products.\nMilk is used to make yogurt, cheese, ice milk, pudding, hot chocolate and french toast, among many other products. Milk is often added to dry breakfast cereal, porridge and granola. Milk is mixed with ice cream and flavored syrups in a blender to make milkshakes. Milk is often served in coffee and tea. Frothy steamed milk is used to prepare espresso-based drinks such as cafe latte.\nIn language and culture.\nIn Greek mythology, the Milky Way was formed after the trickster god Hermes suckled the infant Heracles at the breast of Hera, the queen of the gods, while she was asleep. When Hera awoke, she tore Heracles away from her breast and splattered her breast milk across the heavens. In another version of the story, Athena, the patron goddess of heroes, tricked Hera into suckling Heracles voluntarily, but he bit her nipple so hard that she flung him away, spraying milk everywhere.\nIn many African and Asian countries, butter is traditionally made from fermented milk rather than cream. It can take several hours of churning to produce workable butter grains from fermented milk.\nHoly books have also mentioned milk. The Bible contains references to the \"Land of Milk and Honey\" as a metaphor for the bounty of the Promised Land. In the Qur'an, there is a request to wonder on milk as follows: \"And surely in the livestock there is a lesson for you, We give you to drink of that which is in their bellies from the midst of digested food and blood, pure milk palatable for the drinkers\" (16-The Honeybee, 66). The Ramadan fast is traditionally broken with a glass of milk and dates. In Jewish religious law, Chalav Yisrael is the term regulating consumption of milk.\nAbhisheka is conducted by Hindu and Jain priests, by pouring libations on the idol of a deity being worshipped, amidst the chanting of mantras. Usually offerings such as milk, yogurt, ghee, honey may be poured among other offerings depending on the type of abhishekam being performed.\nA milksop is an \"effeminate spiritless man\", an expression which is attested to in the late 14th century. Milk toast is a dish consisting of milk and toast. Its soft blandness served as inspiration for the name of the timid and ineffectual comic strip character Caspar Milquetoast, drawn by H. T. Webster from 1924 to 1952. Thus, the term \"milquetoast\" entered the language as the label for a timid, shrinking, apologetic person. Milk toast also appeared in Disney's \"Follow Me Boys\" as an undesirable breakfast for the aging main character Lem Siddons.\nTo \"milk\" someone, in the vernacular of many English-speaking countries, is to take advantage of the person, by analogy to the way a farmer \"milks\" a cow and takes its milk. The word \"milk\" has had many slang meanings over time. In the 19th century, milk was used to describe a cheap and very poisonous alcoholic drink made from methylated spirits (methanol) mixed with water. The word was also used to mean defraud, to be idle, to intercept telegrams addressed to someone else, and a weakling or \"milksop.\" In the mid-1930s, the word was used in Australia to refer to siphoning gas from a car.\nNon-culinary uses.\nBesides serving as a beverage or source of food, milk has been described as used by farmers and gardeners as an organic fungicide and fertilizer, however, its effectiveness is debated. Diluted milk solutions have been demonstrated to provide an effective method of preventing powdery mildew on grape vines, while showing it is unlikely to harm the plant.\nMilk paint is a nontoxic water-based paint. It can be made from milk and lime, generally with pigments added for color. In other recipes, borax is mixed with milk's casein protein in order to activate the casein and as a preservative.\nMilk has been used for centuries as a hair and skin treatment. \n Hairstylist Richard Marin states that some women rinse their hair with milk to add a shiny appearance to their hair. Cosmetic chemist Ginger King states that milk can \"help exfoliate and remove debris [from skin] and make hair softer. Hairstylist Danny Jelaca states that milk's keratin proteins may \"add weight to the hair\". Some commercial hair products contain milk.\nA milk bath is a bath taken in milk rather than just water. Often additives such as oatmeal, honey, and scents such as rose, daisies and essential oils are mixed in. Milk baths use lactic acid, an alpha hydroxy acid, to dissolve the proteins which hold together dead skin cells.\nInterspecies milk consumption.\nThe consumption of milk between species is not unique to humans. Seagulls, sheathbills, skuas, western gulls and feral cats have been reported to directly pilfer milk from the elephant seals' teats.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19715", "revid": "49238482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19715", "title": "Miss Congeniality (film)", "text": "2000 film by Donald Petrie\nMiss Congeniality is a 2000 American action comedy film directed by Donald Petrie, written by Marc Lawrence, Katie Ford, and Caryn Lucas, and produced by and starring Sandra Bullock as Gracie Hart, a tomboy agent who is asked by the FBI to go undercover as a contestant when a terrorist threatens to bomb the Miss United States pageant. Michael Caine, Benjamin Bratt, Candice Bergen, William Shatner, and Ernie Hudson star in supporting roles.\n\"Miss Congeniality\" was released in the United States by Warner Bros. Pictures on December 22, 2000. It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $212 million worldwide against its $45 million budget. The film earned Bullock a nomination for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress \u2013 Motion Picture Comedy or Musical. It was followed by the sequel \"\" in 2005.\nPlot.\nIn 1982, 10-year-old Gracie Hart breaks up a school fight between two boys, one of whom is a bully and the other, her crush. The boy she likes is humiliated, as he was saved by a girl. He rudely rejects her, so she punches him before he leaves.\n18 years later, 28-year-old Gracie is a tough but uncouth special agent for the FBI. During a sting against Russian mobsters, she ignores protocol to save a mob boss who appears to be choking, causing one of her fellow FBI agents to be shot; Gracie is then demoted to a desk job.\nSoon, the agency receives news of a bomb threat from notorious domestic terrorist \"the Citizen\", alluding to an act of terrorism at the upcoming Miss United States beauty pageant in San Antonio, Texas. Gracie's partner, Eric Matthews, is put in charge of the mission; he relies on Gracie's suggestions, only to take credit for them himself.\nOne of Gracie's ideas is to plant an agent undercover at the event who becomes one of the top five contestants so they have access to everything in the pageant. When all possible candidates are deemed unfit, Eric suggests that Gracie take on the role, replacing Miss New Jersey, who was to be disqualified for acting in a pornographic film.\nBeauty pageant coach Victor Melling teaches Gracie how to dress, walk, and behave in a conventionally ladylike manner. Although she is initially appalled, she comes to appreciate Victor's thoroughness. Gracie enters the pageant as \"Gracie Lou Freebush\", representing New Jersey, and becomes friends with Cheryl Frasier, Miss Rhode Island. As the competition begins, she impresses the judges during the talent competition with her glass harp skills.\nSeveral suspects are identified as possible to be \"the Citizen\". These include: the current competition director and former pageant winner Kathy Morningside, her assistant Frank Tobin, veteran MC Stan Fields, and even Cheryl, who has a history of involvement with a radical animal rights activist group.\nGracie convinces Cheryl and the other contestants to go out one night and drink. She uses the chance to try prying into Cheryl's past, and learns from the others that Kathy's past as a pageant contestant is truly suspicious, including the fact that the year she won, the original winner came down with food poisoning.\nGracie deduces Kathy is a \"Citizen\" copycat. However, when she reports this to Eric and the team, she learns that \"the Citizen\" has been arrested on an unrelated charge. As there is no perceived threat, their superior, Harry McDonald, pulls the mission. Gracie insists that something is off, but Eric and the team leave, unconvinced.\nWhile on their way home, Victor mentions to Eric that Frank is actually Kathy's son, a fact they had tried to hide from the FBI because of his criminal record. Eric returns to Texas to help continue the investigation, against FBI orders.\nIn the final round of the pageant, Gracie is stunned when she is named first runner-up. Cheryl is named Miss United States, but as she goes to accept the tiara, Gracie realizes that \"the Citizen\" was impersonated to make the pageant bomb threat, and that the bomb is in the crown. She fights Cheryl for the crown as Eric wrestles with Frank, who is about to detonate the bomb. Finally, Gracie throws the tiara up at the stage scenery, where it explodes, setting the stage on fire.\nAs Kathy and Frank are arrested, Gracie determines that the two wanted to kill the pageant winner on stage as revenge for Kathy's own termination from the pageant organization. Afterwards, Eric asks Gracie out on a date, and they kiss. Soon thereafter, he and Victor trick Gracie into attending the pageant's farewell breakfast, where Cheryl names her \"Miss Congeniality\". Gracie tearfully accepts the honor, finally understanding the true spirit of pageantry.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Sandra Bullock as FBI Special Agent Gracie Hart/Gracie Lou Freebush\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nEllen DeGeneres claims that the writer was inspired when watching her training to walk in high heels and a dress in preparation for her role co-hosting the Emmys. Although DeGeneres's first time hosting the ceremony on her own was not until November 2001, nearly a year after the film had been released, she did co-host the 46th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1994 alongside Patricia Richardson.\nCasting.\nEight actors read for the part of Eric Matthews, including Hugh Jackman. Matt Dillon came close to getting cast as Eric Matthews, but the part went to Benjamin Bratt.\nFilming.\nThe story is set in New York City and San Antonio. Scenes showing the exterior of the St. Regis New York, as well as a few street scenes, were shot on location in New York, and Weehawken, New Jersey. The Alamo and River Walk scenes were shot on location in San Antonio. The majority of the film was shot in Austin, Texas: scenes depicting the interior of the St. Regis were shot in Austin's Driskill Hotel; the pageant scenes were shot at the Bass Concert Hall at the University of Texas at Austin; and scenes depicting the pageant contestants in their hotel rooms were shot in the Omni Austin at South Park.\nDistribution.\n\"Miss Congeniality\" was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures in most countries, and by Roadshow Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film was the fifth highest-grossing film in North America on its opening weekend, making US$13.9 million. It had a 5% increase in earnings the following week\u2014enough to make the film reach #3. Overall, it was a box office hit, grossing more than $106 million in the United States, and more than $212 million worldwide.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 41% based on review from 116 critics. The critical consensus reads: \"Though critics say Bullock is funny and charming, she can't overcome a bad script that makes the movie feel too much like a fluffy, unoriginal sitcom.\" On Metacritic the film has a score of 43 out of 100, based on reviews from 20 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of \"A\u2212\".\nA. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\" described it as \"a standard-issue fish-out-of-water comedy\" which \"seems happily, deliberately second-rate, as if its ideal audience consisted of weary airline passengers\". Roger Ebert for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" wrote: \"It isn't bad so much as it lacks any ambition to be more than it so obviously is\" although he had some praise for Sandra Bullock's performance.\nIt was nominated for several awards, including two Golden Globes: Sandra Bullock for Best Performance by an Actress in a Motion Picture \u2013 Comedy/Musical, and Bosson's \"One in a Million\" for Best Original Song in a Motion Picture.\nHome media.\nThe film's first DVD edition, released in 2001, included two audio commentaries, some deleted scenes, the theatrical trailer, and two documentaries about the making of the film. A deluxe-edition DVD, released in 2005, featured different cover art and contained the same features as the other DVD version plus a quiz hosted by William Shatner and a sneak peek at the upcoming sequel. In 2009, a double feature edition was released that included the .\nSequel.\nA sequel, \"\", was released on March 24, 2005. The film starred Sandra Bullock, Regina King, Enrique Murciano, William Shatner, Ernie Hudson, Heather Burns, Diedrich Bader, and Treat Williams. The sequel was less successful both critically and commercially, earning only $101.3 million.\nThe song \"Miss United States\" was written by the writer Marc Lawrence's son Clyde Lawrence when he was only 6 years old.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19716", "revid": "50323242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19716", "title": "Magnetism", "text": "Class of physical phenomena\nMagnetism is the class of physical attributes that occur through a magnetic field, which allows objects to attract or repel each other. Because both electric currents and magnetic moments of elementary particles give rise to a magnetic field, magnetism is one of two aspects of electromagnetism.\nThe most familiar effects occur in ferromagnetic materials, which are strongly attracted by magnetic fields and can be magnetized to become permanent magnets, producing magnetic fields themselves. Demagnetizing a magnet is also possible. Only a few substances are ferromagnetic; the most common ones are iron, cobalt, nickel, and their alloys.\nAll substances exhibit some type of magnetism. Magnetic materials are classified according to their bulk susceptibility. Ferromagnetism is responsible for most of the effects of magnetism encountered in everyday life, but there are actually several types of magnetism. Paramagnetic substances, such as aluminium and oxygen, are weakly attracted to an applied magnetic field; diamagnetic substances, such as copper and carbon, are weakly repelled; while antiferromagnetic materials, such as chromium, have a more complex relationship with a magnetic field. The force of a magnet on paramagnetic, diamagnetic, and antiferromagnetic materials is usually too weak to be felt and can be detected only by laboratory instruments, so in everyday life, these substances are often described as non-magnetic.\nThe strength of a magnetic field always decreases with distance from the magnetic source, though the exact mathematical relationship between strength and distance varies. Many factors can influence the magnetic field of an object including the magnetic moment of the material, the physical shape of the object, both the magnitude and direction of any electric current present within the object, and the temperature of the object.\nHistory.\nMagnetism was first discovered in the ancient world when people noticed that lodestones, naturally magnetized pieces of the mineral magnetite, could attract iron. The word \"magnet\" comes from the Greek term \u03bc\u03b1\u03b3\u03bd\u1fc6\u03c4\u03b9\u03c2 \u03bb\u03af\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2 \"magn\u0113tis lithos\", \"the Magnesian stone, lodestone\". In ancient Greece, Aristotle attributed the first of what could be called a scientific discussion of magnetism to the philosopher Thales of Miletus, who lived from about 625\u00a0BCE to about 545\u00a0BCE. The ancient Indian medical text \"Sushruta Samhita\" describes using magnetite to remove arrows embedded in a person's body.\nIn ancient China, the earliest literary reference to magnetism lies in a 4th-century BCE book named after its author, \"Guiguzi\".\nThe 2nd-century BCE annals, \"L\u00fcshi Chunqiu\", also notes:\n\"The lodestone makes iron approach; some (force) is attracting it.\" \nThe earliest mention of the attraction of a needle is in a 1st-century work \"Lunheng\" (\"Balanced Inquiries\"): \"A lodestone attracts a needle.\" \nThe 11th-century Chinese scientist Shen Kuo was the first person to write\u2014in the \"Dream Pool Essays\"\u2014of the magnetic needle compass and that it improved the accuracy of navigation by employing the astronomical concept of true north.\nBy the 12th century, the Chinese were known to use the lodestone compass for navigation. They sculpted a directional spoon from lodestone in such a way that the handle of the spoon always pointed south.\nAlexander Neckam, by 1187, was the first in Europe to describe the compass and its use for navigation. In 1269, Peter Peregrinus de Maricourt wrote the \"Epistola de magnete\", the first extant treatise describing the properties of magnets. In 1282, the properties of magnets and the dry compasses were discussed by Al-Ashraf Umar II, a Yemeni physicist, astronomer, and geographer.\nLeonardo Garzoni's only extant work, the \"Due trattati sopra la natura, e le qualit\u00e0 della calamita\" (\"Two treatises on the nature and qualities of the magnet\"), is the first known example of a modern treatment of magnetic phenomena. Written in years near 1580 and never published, the treatise had a wide diffusion. In particular, Garzoni is referred to as an expert in magnetism by Niccol\u00f2 Cabeo, whose Philosophia Magnetica (1629) is just a re-adjustment of Garzoni's work. Garzoni's treatise was known also to Giovanni Battista Della Porta.\nIn 1600, William Gilbert published his \"De Magnete, Magneticisque Corporibus, et de Magno Magnete Tellure\" (\"On the Magnet and Magnetic Bodies, and on the Great Magnet the Earth\"). In this work he describes many of his experiments with his model earth called the terrella. From his experiments, he concluded that the Earth was itself magnetic and that this was the reason compasses pointed north whereas, previously, some believed that it was the pole star Polaris or a large magnetic island on the north pole that attracted the compass.\nAn understanding of the relationship between electricity and magnetism began in 1819 with work by Hans Christian \u00d8rsted, a professor at the University of Copenhagen, who discovered, by the accidental twitching of a compass needle near a wire, that an electric current could create a magnetic field. This landmark experiment is known as \u00d8rsted's Experiment. Jean-Baptiste Biot and F\u00e9lix Savart, both of whom in 1820 came up with the Biot\u2013Savart law giving an equation for the magnetic field from a current-carrying wire. Around the same time, Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re carried out numerous systematic experiments and discovered that the magnetic force between two DC current loops of any shape is equal to the sum of the individual forces that each current element of one circuit exerts on each other current element of the other circuit.\nIn 1831, Michael Faraday discovered that a time-varying magnetic flux induces a voltage through a wire loop. In 1835, Carl Friedrich Gauss hypothesized, based on Amp\u00e8re's force law in its original form, that all forms of magnetism arise as a result of elementary point charges moving relative to each other. Wilhelm Eduard Weber advanced Gauss's theory to Weber electrodynamics. \nFrom around 1861, James Clerk Maxwell synthesized and expanded many of these insights into Maxwell's equations, unifying electricity, magnetism, and optics into the field of electromagnetism. However, Gauss's interpretation of magnetism is not fully compatible with Maxwell's electrodynamics. In 1905, Albert Einstein used Maxwell's equations in motivating his theory of special relativity, requiring that the laws hold true in all inertial reference frames. Gauss's approach of interpreting the magnetic force as a mere effect of relative velocities thus found its way back into electrodynamics to some extent.\nElectromagnetism has continued to develop into the 21st century, being incorporated into the more fundamental theories of gauge theory, quantum electrodynamics, electroweak theory, and finally the Standard Model.\nSources.\nMagnetism, at its root, arises from three sources:\nThe magnetic properties of materials are mainly due to the magnetic moments of their atoms' orbiting electrons. The magnetic moments of the nuclei of atoms are typically thousands of times smaller than the electrons' magnetic moments, so they are negligible in the context of the magnetization of materials. Nuclear magnetic moments are nevertheless very important in other contexts, particularly in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).\nOrdinarily, the enormous number of electrons in a material are arranged such that their magnetic moments (both orbital and intrinsic) cancel out. This is due, to some extent, to electrons combining into pairs with opposite intrinsic magnetic moments as a result of the Pauli exclusion principle (see \"electron configuration\"), and combining into filled subshells with zero net orbital motion. In both cases, the electrons preferentially adopt arrangements in which the magnetic moment of each electron is canceled by the opposite moment of another electron. Moreover, even when the electron configuration \"is\" such that there are unpaired electrons and/or non-filled subshells, it is often the case that the various electrons in the solid will contribute magnetic moments that point in different, random directions so that the material will not be magnetic.\nSometimes\u2014either spontaneously, or owing to an applied external magnetic field\u2014each of the electron magnetic moments will be, on average, lined up. A suitable material can then produce a strong net magnetic field.\nThe magnetic behavior of a material depends on its structure, particularly its electron configuration, for the reasons mentioned above, and also on the temperature. At high temperatures, random thermal motion makes it more difficult for the electrons to maintain alignment.\nTypes.\nDiamagnetism.\nDiamagnetism appears in all materials and is the tendency of a material to oppose an applied magnetic field, and therefore, to be repelled by a magnetic field. However, in a material with paramagnetic properties (that is, with a tendency to enhance an external magnetic field), the paramagnetic behavior dominates. Thus, despite its universal occurrence, diamagnetic behavior is observed only in a purely diamagnetic material. In a diamagnetic material, there are no unpaired electrons, so the intrinsic electron magnetic moments cannot produce any bulk effect. In these cases, the magnetization arises from the electrons' orbital motions, which can be understood classically as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a material is put in a magnetic field, the electrons circling the nucleus will experience, in addition to their Coulomb attraction to the nucleus, a Lorentz force from the magnetic field. Depending on which direction the electron is orbiting, this force may increase the centripetal force on the electrons, pulling them in towards the nucleus, or it may decrease the force, pulling them away from the nucleus. This effect systematically increases the orbital magnetic moments that were aligned opposite the field and decreases the ones aligned parallel to the field (in accordance with Lenz's law). This results in a small bulk magnetic moment, with an opposite direction to the applied field.\nThis description is meant only as a heuristic; the Bohr\u2013Van Leeuwen theorem shows that diamagnetism is impossible according to classical physics, and that a proper understanding requires a quantum-mechanical description.\nAll materials undergo this orbital response. However, in paramagnetic and ferromagnetic substances, the diamagnetic effect is overwhelmed by the much stronger effects caused by the unpaired electrons.\nParamagnetism.\nIn a paramagnetic material there are unpaired electrons; i.e., atomic or molecular orbitals with exactly one electron in them. While paired electrons are required by the Pauli exclusion principle to have their intrinsic ('spin') magnetic moments pointing in opposite directions, causing their magnetic fields to cancel out, an unpaired electron is free to align its magnetic moment in any direction. When an external magnetic field is applied, these magnetic moments will tend to align themselves in the same direction as the applied field, thus reinforcing it.\nFerromagnetism.\nA ferromagnet, like a paramagnetic substance, has unpaired electrons. However, in addition to the electrons' intrinsic magnetic moment's tendency to be parallel to an applied field, there is also in these materials a tendency for these magnetic moments to orient parallel to each other to maintain a lowered-energy state. Thus, even in the absence of an applied field, the magnetic moments of the electrons in the material spontaneously line up parallel to one another.\nEvery ferromagnetic substance has its own individual temperature, called the Curie temperature, or Curie point, above which it loses its ferromagnetic properties. This is because the thermal tendency to disorder overwhelms the energy-lowering due to ferromagnetic order.\nFerromagnetism only occurs in a few substances; common ones are iron, nickel, cobalt, their alloys, and some alloys of rare-earth metals.\nMagnetic domains.\nThe magnetic moments of atoms in a ferromagnetic material cause them to behave something like tiny permanent magnets. They stick together and align themselves into small regions of more or less uniform alignment called magnetic domains or Weiss domains. Magnetic domains can be observed with a magnetic force microscope to reveal magnetic domain boundaries that resemble white lines in the sketch. There are many scientific experiments that can physically show magnetic fields.\nWhen a domain contains too many molecules, it becomes unstable and divides into two domains aligned in opposite directions so that they stick together more stably.\nWhen exposed to a magnetic field, the domain boundaries move, so that the domains aligned with the magnetic field grow and dominate the structure (dotted yellow area), as shown at the left. When the magnetizing field is removed, the domains may not return to an unmagnetized state. This results in the ferromagnetic material's being magnetized, forming a permanent magnet.\nWhen magnetized strongly enough that the prevailing domain overruns all others to result in only one single domain, the material is magnetically saturated. When a magnetized ferromagnetic material is heated to the Curie point temperature, the molecules are agitated to the point that the magnetic domains lose the organization, and the magnetic properties they cause cease. When the material is cooled, this domain alignment structure spontaneously returns, in a manner roughly analogous to how a liquid can freeze into a crystalline solid.\nAntiferromagnetism.\nIn an antiferromagnet, unlike a ferromagnet, there is a tendency for the intrinsic magnetic moments of neighboring valence electrons to point in \"opposite\" directions. When all atoms are arranged in a substance so that each neighbor is anti-parallel, the substance is antiferromagnetic. Antiferromagnets have a zero net magnetic moment because adjacent opposite moment cancels out, meaning that no field is produced by them. Antiferromagnets are less common compared to the other types of behaviors and are mostly observed at low temperatures. In varying temperatures, antiferromagnets can be seen to exhibit diamagnetic and ferromagnetic properties.\nIn some materials, neighboring electrons prefer to point in opposite directions, but there is no geometrical arrangement in which \"each\" pair of neighbors is anti-aligned. This is called a canted antiferromagnet or spin ice and is an example of geometrical frustration.\nFerrimagnetism.\nLike ferromagnetism, ferrimagnets retain their magnetization in the absence of a field. However, like antiferromagnets, neighboring pairs of electron spins tend to point in opposite directions. These two properties are not contradictory, because in the optimal geometrical arrangement, there is more magnetic moment from the sublattice of electrons that point in one direction, than from the sublattice that points in the opposite direction.\nMost ferrites are ferrimagnetic. The first discovered magnetic substance, magnetite, is a ferrite and was originally believed to be a ferromagnet; Louis N\u00e9el disproved this, however, after discovering ferrimagnetism.\nSuperparamagnetism.\nWhen a ferromagnet or ferrimagnet is sufficiently small, it acts like a single magnetic spin that is subject to Brownian motion. Its response to a magnetic field is qualitatively similar to the response of a paramagnet, but much larger.\nNagaoka magnetism.\nJapanese physicist Yosuke Nagaoka conceived of a type of magnetism in a square, two-dimensional lattice where every lattice node had one electron. If one electron was removed under specific conditions, the lattice's energy would be minimal only when all electrons' spins were parallel.\nA variation on this was achieved experimentally by arranging the atoms in a triangular moir\u00e9 lattice of molybdenum diselenide and tungsten disulfide monolayers. Applying a weak magnetic field and a voltage led to ferromagnetic behavior when 100\u2013150% more electrons than lattice nodes were present. The extra electrons delocalized and paired with lattice electrons to form doublons. Delocalization was prevented unless the lattice electrons had aligned spins. The doublons thus created localized ferromagnetic regions. The phenomenon took place at 140 millikelvins.\nElectromagnet.\nAn electromagnet is a type of magnet in which the magnetic field is produced by an electric current. The magnetic field disappears when the current is turned off. Electromagnets usually consist of a large number of closely spaced turns of wire that create the magnetic field. The wire turns are often wound around a magnetic core made from a ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic material such as iron; the magnetic core concentrates the magnetic flux and makes a more powerful magnet.\nThe main advantage of an electromagnet over a permanent magnet is that the magnetic field can be quickly changed by controlling the amount of electric current in the winding. However, unlike a permanent magnet that needs no power, an electromagnet requires a continuous supply of current to maintain the magnetic field.\nElectromagnets are widely used as components of other electrical devices, such as motors, generators, relays, solenoids, loudspeakers, hard disks, MRI machines, scientific instruments, and magnetic separation equipment. Electromagnets are also employed in industry for picking up and moving heavy iron objects such as scrap iron and steel. Electromagnetism was discovered in 1820.\nMagnetism, electricity, and special relativity.\nAs a consequence of Einstein's theory of special relativity, electricity and magnetism are fundamentally interlinked. Both magnetism lacking electricity, and electricity without magnetism, are inconsistent with special relativity, due to such effects as length contraction, time dilation, and the fact that the magnetic force is velocity-dependent. However, when both electricity and magnetism are taken into account, the resulting theory (electromagnetism) is fully consistent with special relativity. In particular, a phenomenon that appears purely electric or purely magnetic to one observer may be a mix of both to another, or more generally the relative contributions of electricity and magnetism are dependent on the frame of reference. Thus, special relativity \"mixes\" electricity and magnetism into a single, inseparable phenomenon called electromagnetism, analogous to how general relativity \"mixes\" space and time into spacetime.\nAll observations on electromagnetism apply to what might be considered to be primarily magnetism, e.g. perturbations in the magnetic field are necessarily accompanied by a nonzero electric field, and propagate at the speed of light.\nMagnetic fields in a material.\nIn vacuum,\nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03bc\"0 is the vacuum permeability.\nIn a material,\nformula_2\nThe quantity \"\u03bc\"0M is called \"magnetic polarization\".\nIf the field H is small, the response of the magnetization M in a diamagnet or paramagnet is approximately linear:\nformula_3\nthe constant of proportionality being called the magnetic susceptibility. If so,\nformula_4\nIn a hard magnet such as a ferromagnet, M is not proportional to the field and is generally nonzero even when H is zero (see Remanence).\nMagnetic force.\nThe phenomenon of magnetism is \"mediated\" by the magnetic field. An electric current or magnetic dipole creates a magnetic field, and that field, in turn, imparts magnetic forces on other particles that are in the fields.\nMaxwell's equations, which simplify to the Biot\u2013Savart law in the case of steady currents, describe the origin and behavior of the fields that govern these forces. Therefore, magnetism is seen whenever electrically charged particles are in motion\u2014for example, from movement of electrons in an electric current, or in certain cases from the orbital motion of electrons around an atom's nucleus. They also arise from \"intrinsic\" magnetic dipoles arising from quantum-mechanical spin.\nThe same situations that create magnetic fields\u2014charge moving in a current or in an atom, and intrinsic magnetic dipoles\u2014are also the situations in which a magnetic field has an effect, creating a force. Following is the formula for moving charge; for the forces on an intrinsic dipole, see magnetic dipole.\nWhen a charged particle moves through a magnetic field B, it feels a Lorentz force F given by the cross product:\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 is the electric charge of the particle, and formula_7 is the velocity vector of the particle.\nBecause this is a cross product, the force is perpendicular to both the motion of the particle and the magnetic field. The magnitude of the force is\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 is the angle between v and B.\nOne tool for determining the direction of the velocity vector of a moving charge, the magnetic field, and the force exerted is labeling the index finger \"V\", the middle finger \"B\", and the thumb \"F\" with your right hand. When making a gun-like configuration, with the middle finger crossing under the index finger, the fingers represent the velocity vector, magnetic field vector, and force vector, respectively. See also right-hand rule.\nMagnetic dipoles.\nAll known magnets are dipoles, meaning that they have a \"north\" and \"south\" pole, so named as the Earth's magnetic field applies a force to point a magnet's poles toward areas near the Earth's respective North Pole and South Pole, specifically the north magnetic pole and south magnetic pole. A magnet's north pole is attracted to another magnet's south pole.\nA magnetic field contains energy, and physical systems move toward configurations with lower energy. When diamagnetic material is placed in a magnetic field, a \"magnetic dipole\" tends to align itself in opposed polarity to that field, thereby lowering the net field strength. When ferromagnetic material is placed within a magnetic field, the magnetic dipoles align to the applied field, thus expanding the domain walls of the magnetic domains.\nMagnetic monopoles.\nSince a bar magnet gets its ferromagnetism from electrons distributed evenly throughout the bar, when a bar magnet is cut in half, each of the resulting pieces is a smaller bar magnet. Even though a magnet is said to have a north pole and a south pole, these two poles cannot be separated from each other. A monopole\u2014if such a thing exists\u2014would be a new and fundamentally different kind of magnetic object. It would act as an isolated north pole, not attached to a south pole, or vice versa. Monopoles would carry \"magnetic charge\" analogous to electric charge. Despite systematic searches since 1931, they have never been observed.\nNevertheless, some theoretical physics models predict the existence of these magnetic monopoles. Paul Dirac observed in 1931 that, because electricity and magnetism show a certain symmetry, just as quantum theory predicts that individual positive or negative electric charges can be observed without the opposing charge, isolated South or North magnetic poles should be observable. Using quantum theory Dirac showed that if magnetic monopoles exist, then one could explain the quantization of electric charge\u2014that is, why the observed elementary particles carry charges that are multiples of the charge of the electron.\nCertain grand unified theories predict the existence of monopoles which, unlike elementary particles, are solitons (localized energy packets). The initial results of using these models to estimate the number of monopoles created in the Big Bang contradicted cosmological observations\u2014the monopoles would have been so plentiful and massive that they would have long since halted the expansion of the universe. However, the idea of inflation (for which this problem served as a partial motivation) was successful in solving this problem, creating models in which monopoles existed but were rare enough to be consistent with current observations.\nLiving things.\nSome organisms can detect magnetic fields, a phenomenon known as magnetoception. Some materials in living things are ferromagnetic, though it is unclear if the magnetic properties serve a special function or are merely a byproduct of containing iron. For instance, chitons, a type of marine mollusk, produce magnetite to harden their teeth, and even humans produce magnetite in bodily tissue. \nMagnetobiology studies the effects of magnetic fields on living organisms; fields naturally produced by an organism are known as biomagnetism. Many biological organisms are mostly made of water, and because water is diamagnetic, extremely strong magnetic fields can repel these living things.\nInterpretation of magnetism by means of relative velocities.\nIn the years after 1820, Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re carried out numerous experiments in which he measured the forces between direct currents. In particular, he also studied the magnetic forces between non-parallel wires. The final result of his work was a force law that is now named after him. In 1835, Carl Friedrich Gauss realized that Ampere's force law in its original form can be explained by a generalization of Coulomb's law. \nGauss's force law states that the electromagnetic force formula_10 experienced by a point charge, formula_11 with trajectory formula_12, in the vicinity of another point charge, formula_13 with trajectory formula_14, in a vacuum is equal to the central force\nformula_15,\nwhere formula_16 is the distance between the charges and formula_17 is the relative velocity. Wilhelm Eduard Weber confirmed Gauss's hypothesis in numerous experiments. By means of Weber electrodynamics it is possible to explain the static and quasi-static effects in the non-relativistic regime of classical electrodynamics without magnetic field and Lorentz force.\nSince 1870, Maxwell electrodynamics has been developed, which postulates that electric and magnetic fields exist. In Maxwell's electrodynamics, the actual electromagnetic force can be calculated using the Lorentz force, which, like the Weber force, is speed-dependent. However, Maxwell's electrodynamics is not fully compatible with the work of Amp\u00e8re, Gauss and Weber in the quasi-static regime. In particular, Amp\u00e8re's original force law and the Biot-Savart law are only equivalent if the field-generating conductor loop is closed. Maxwell's electrodynamics therefore represents a break with the interpretation of magnetism by Gauss and Weber, since in Maxwell's electrodynamics it is no longer possible to deduce the magnetic force from a central force.\nQuantum-mechanical origin of magnetism.\nWhile heuristic explanations based on classical physics can be formulated, diamagnetism, paramagnetism and ferromagnetism can be fully explained only using quantum theory.\nA successful model was developed already in 1927, by Walter Heitler and Fritz London, who derived, quantum-mechanically, how hydrogen molecules are formed from hydrogen atoms, i.e. from the atomic hydrogen orbitals formula_18 and formula_19 centered at the nuclei \"A\" and \"B\", see below. That this leads to magnetism is not at all obvious, but will be explained in the following.\nAccording to the Heitler\u2013London theory, so-called two-body molecular formula_20-orbitals are formed, namely the resulting orbital is:\nformula_21\nHere the last product means that a first electron, r1, is in an atomic hydrogen-orbital centered at the second nucleus, whereas the second electron runs around the first nucleus. This \"exchange\" phenomenon is an expression for the quantum-mechanical property that particles with identical properties cannot be distinguished. It is specific not only for the formation of chemical bonds, but also for magnetism. That is, in this connection the term exchange interaction arises, a term which is essential for the origin of magnetism, and which is stronger, roughly by factors 100 and even by 1000, than the energies arising from the electrodynamic dipole-dipole interaction.\nAs for the \"spin function\" formula_22, which is responsible for the magnetism, we have the already mentioned Pauli's principle, namely that a symmetric orbital (i.e. with the + sign as above) must be multiplied with an antisymmetric spin function (i.e. with a \u2212 sign), and \"vice versa\". Thus:\nformula_23,\nI.e., not only formula_24 and formula_19 must be substituted by \"\u03b1\" and \"\u03b2\", respectively (the first entity means \"spin up\", the second one \"spin down\"), but also the sign + by the \u2212 sign, and finally ri by the discrete values \"s\"i (=\u00a0\u00b1&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442); thereby we have formula_26 and formula_27. The \"singlet state\", i.e. the \u2212 sign, means: the spins are \"antiparallel\", i.e. for the solid we have antiferromagnetism, and for two-atomic molecules one has diamagnetism. The tendency to form a (homoeopolar) chemical bond (this means: the formation of a \"symmetric\" molecular orbital, i.e. with the + sign) results through the Pauli principle automatically in an \"antisymmetric\" spin state (i.e. with the \u2212 sign). In contrast, the Coulomb repulsion of the electrons, i.e. the tendency that they try to avoid each other by this repulsion, would lead to an \"antisymmetric\" orbital function (i.e. with the \u2212 sign) of these two particles, and complementary to a \"symmetric\" spin function (i.e. with the + sign, one of the so-called \"triplet functions\"). Thus, now the spins would be \"parallel\" (ferromagnetism in a solid, paramagnetism in two-atomic gases).\nThe last-mentioned tendency dominates in the metals iron, cobalt and nickel, and in some rare earths, which are \"ferromagnetic\". Most of the other metals, where the first-mentioned tendency dominates, are \"nonmagnetic\" (e.g. sodium, aluminium, and magnesium) or \"antiferromagnetic\" (e.g. manganese). Diatomic gases are also almost exclusively diamagnetic, and not paramagnetic. However, the oxygen molecule, because of the involvement of \u03c0-orbitals, is an exception important for the life-sciences.\nThe Heitler\u2013London considerations can be generalized to the Heisenberg model of magnetism (Heisenberg 1928).\nThe explanation of the phenomena is thus essentially based on all subtleties of quantum mechanics, whereas the electrodynamics covers mainly the phenomenology.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19719", "revid": "39177298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19719", "title": "Filter (mathematics)", "text": "Special subset of a partially ordered set\nIn mathematics, a filter or order filter is a special subset of a partially ordered set (poset), describing \"large\" or \"eventual\" elements. Filters appear in order and lattice theory, but also topology, whence they originate. The notion dual to a filter is an order ideal.\nSpecial cases of filters include ultrafilters, which are filters that cannot be enlarged, and describe nonconstructive techniques in mathematical logic.\nFilters on sets were introduced by Henri Cartan in 1937. Nicolas Bourbaki, in their book \"Topologie G\u00e9n\u00e9rale\", popularized filters as an alternative to E. H. Moore and Herman L. Smith's 1922 notion of a net; order filters generalize this notion from the specific case of a power set under inclusion to arbitrary partially ordered sets. Nevertheless, the theory of power-set filters retains interest in its own right, in part for substantial applications in topology.\nMotivation.\nFix a partially ordered set (poset)\u00a0P. Intuitively, a filter\u00a0F is a subset of P whose members are elements large enough to satisfy some criterion. For instance, if \"x\" \u2208 \"P\", then the set of elements above x is a filter, called the principal filter at x. (If x and y are incomparable elements of P, then neither the principal filter at x nor y is contained in the other.)\nSimilarly, a filter on a set\u00a0S contains those subsets that are sufficiently large to contain some given thing. For example, if S is the real line and \"x\" \u2208 \"S\", then the family of sets including x in their interior is a filter, called the neighborhood filter at x. The thing in this case is slightly larger than x, but it still does not contain any other specific point of the line.\nThe above considerations motivate the upward closure requirement in the definition below: \"large enough\" objects can always be made larger.\nTo understand the other two conditions, reverse the roles and instead consider F as a \"locating scheme\" to find x. In this interpretation, one searches in some space\u00a0X, and expects F to describe those subsets of X that contain the goal. The goal must be located somewhere; thus the empty set\u00a0&amp;emptyset; can never be in F. And if two subsets both contain the goal, then should \"zoom in\" to their common region.\nAn ultrafilter describes a \"perfect locating scheme\" where each scheme component gives new information (either \"look here\" or \"look elsewhere\"). Compactness is the property that \"every search is fruitful,\" or, to put it another way, \"every locating scheme ends in a search result.\"\nA common use for a filter is to define properties that are satisfied by \"generic\" elements of some topological space. This application generalizes the \"locating scheme\" to find points that might be hard to write down explicitly.\nDefinition.\nA subset\u00a0F of a partially ordered set\u00a0(\"P\", &amp;leq;) is a filter or dual ideal if the following are satisfied:\nIf, additionally, \"F\" &amp;NotEqual; \"P\", then F is said to be a proper filter. Authors in set theory and mathematical logic often require all filters to be proper; this article will \"eschew\" that convention. An ultrafilter is a proper filter contained in no other proper filter except itself.\nFilter bases.\nA subset\u00a0S of F is a base or basis for F if the upwards closure of S (i.e., the smallest upwards-closed set containing S) is equal to F. Since every filter is upwards-closed, every filter is a base for itself.\nMoreover, if \"B\" &amp;subseteq; \"P\" is downward directed, then B generates an upper set\u00a0F that is a filter (for which B is a base). Such sets are called prefilters, as well as the aforementioned filter base/basis, and F is said to be generated or spanned by B. A prefilter is proper if and only if it generates a proper filter.\nGiven \"p\" \u2208 \"P\", the set {\"x\" : \"p\" &amp;leq; \"x\"} is the smallest filter containing \"p\", and sometimes written &amp;uparrow; \"p\". Such a filter is called a principal filter; \"p\" is said to be the principal element of F, or generate F.\nRefinement.\nSuppose B and C are two prefilters on P, and, for each \"c\" \u2208 \"C\", there is a \"b\" \u2208 \"B\", such that \"b\" &amp;leq; \"c\". Then we say that B is &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;finer than (or refines) C; likewise, C is coarser than (or coarsens) B. Refinement is a preorder on the set of prefilters. In fact, if C also refines B, then B and C are called equivalent, for they generate the same filter. Thus passage from prefilter to filter is an instance of passing from a preordering to associated partial ordering.\nSpecial cases.\nHistorically, filters generalized to order-theoretic lattices before arbitrary partial orders. In the case of lattices, downward direction can be written as closure under finite meets: for all \"x\", \"y\" \u2208 \"F\", one has \"x\" \u2227 \"y\" \u2208 \"F\".\nLinear filters.\nA linear (ultra)filter is an (ultra)filter on the lattice of vector subspaces of a given vector space, ordered by inclusion. Explicitly, a linear filter on a vector space\u00a0X is a family\u00a0 of vector subspaces of X such that if \"A\", \"B\" \u2208 B and C is a vector subspace of X that contains A, then \"A\" \u2229 \"B\" \u2208 B and \"C\" \u2208 B.\nA linear filter is proper if it does not contain {0}.\nFilters on a set; subbases.\nGiven a set\u00a0S, the power set\u00a0 is partially ordered by set inclusion; filters on this poset are often just called \"filters on S,\" in an abuse of terminology. For such posets, downward direction and upward closure reduce to:\nA proper or non-degenerate filter is one that does not contain &amp;emptyset;, and these three conditions (including non-degeneracy) are Henri Cartan's original definition of a filter. It is common, though not universal, to require filters on sets to be proper (whatever one's stance on poset filters); we shall again eschew this convention.\nPrefilters on a set are proper if and only if they do not contain &amp;emptyset; either.\nFor every subset\u00a0T of , there is a smallest filter\u00a0F containing T. As with prefilters, T is said to generate or span F; a base for F is the set\u00a0U of all finite intersections of T. The set T is said to be a filter subbase when F (and thus U) is proper.\nProper filters on sets have the finite intersection property.\nIf formula_1, then formula_2 admits only the improper filter formula_3.\nFree filters.\nA filter is said to be a free filter if the intersection of its members is empty. A proper principal filter is not free.\nSince the intersection of any finite number of members of a filter is also a member, no proper filter on a finite set is free, and indeed is the principal filter generated by the common intersection of all of its members. But a nonprincipal filter on an infinite set is not necessarily free: a filter is free if and only if it includes the Fr\u00e9chet filter (see ).\nExamples.\nSee the image at the top of this article for a simple example of filters on the finite poset\u00a0.\nPartially order \u211d \u2192 \u211d, the space of real-valued functions on \u211d, by pointwise comparison. Then the set of functions \"large at infinity,\"formula_4is a filter on \u211d \u2192 \u211d. One can generalize this construction quite far by compactifying the domain and completing the codomain: if X is a set with distinguished subset\u00a0S and Y is a poset with distinguished element\u00a0m, then {\"f\" : \"f\"\u2009|\"S\" &amp;geq; \"m\"} is a filter in \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\".\nThe set {{\"k\" : \"k\" &amp;geq; \"N\"} : \"N\" \u2208 \u2115} is a filter in . More generally, if D is any directed set, thenformula_5is a filter in , called the tail filter. Likewise any net\u00a0{\"x\"\u03b1}\u03b1\u2208\u0391 generates the eventuality filter {{\"x\"\u03b2 : \u03b1 &amp;leq; \u03b2} : \u03b1 \u2208 \u0391}. A tail filter is the eventuality filter for \"x\"\u03b1 \n \u03b1.\nThe Fr\u00e9chet filter on an infinite set\u00a0X isformula_6If (\"X\", \u03bc) is a measure space, then the collection {\"A\" : \u03bc(\"X\" &amp;setminus; \"A\") \n 0} is a filter. If \u03bc(\"X\") \n \u221e, then {\"A\" : \u03bc(\"X\" &amp;setminus; \"A\") &lt; \u221e} is also a filter; the Fr\u00e9chet filter is the case where \u03bc is counting measure.\nGiven an ordinal\u00a0a with uncountable cofinality, a subset of a is called a club if it is closed in the order topology of a but has net-theoretic limit a. The clubs of a, and their supersets, form a filter: the club filter,\u00a0\u2663(\"a\").\nThe previous construction generalizes as follows: any club\u00a0C is also a collection of dense subsets (in the ordinal topology) of a, and \u2663(\"a\") meets each element of C. Replacing C with an arbitrary collection\u00a0C\u0303 of dense sets, there \"typically\" exists a filter meeting each element of C\u0303, called a generic filter. For countable C\u0303, the Rasiowa\u2013Sikorski lemma implies that such a filter must exist; for \"small\" uncountable C\u0303, the existence of such a filter can be forced through Martin's axiom.\nLet \"P\" denote the set of partial orders of limited cardinality, modulo isomorphism. Partially order P by: \n\"A\" &amp;leq; \"B\" if there exists a strictly increasing \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\". \nThen the subset of non-atomic partial orders forms a filter. Likewise, if I is the set of injective modules over some given commutative ring, of limited cardinality, modulo isomorphism, then a partial order on I is: \n\"A\" &amp;leq; \"B\" if there exists an injective linear map \"f\" : \"A\" \u2192 \"B\". \nGiven any infinite cardinal\u00a0\u03ba, the modules in I that cannot be generated by fewer than \u03ba elements form a filter.\nEvery uniform structure on a set\u00a0X is a filter on \"X\" \u00d7 \"X\".\nRelationship to ideals.\nThe dual notion to a filter\u00a0\u2014 that is, the concept obtained by reversing all &amp;leq; and exchanging \u2227 with \u2228\u00a0\u2014 is an order ideal. Because of this duality, any question of filters can be mechanically translated to a question about ideals and vice versa; in particular, a prime or maximal filter is a filter whose corresponding ideal is (respectively) prime or maximal.\nA filter is an ultrafilter if and only if the corresponding ideal is minimal.\nIn model theory.\nFor every filter\u00a0F on a set\u00a0S, the set function defined byformula_7is finitely additive\u00a0\u2014 a \"measure,\" if that term is construed rather loosely. Moreover, the measures so constructed are defined everywhere if F is an ultrafilter. Therefore, the statementformula_8can be considered somewhat analogous to the statement that \u03c6 holds \"almost everywhere.\" That interpretation of membership in a filter is used (for motivation, not actual proofs) in the theory of ultraproducts in model theory, a branch of mathematical logic.\nIn topology.\nIn general topology and analysis, filters are used to define convergence in a manner similar to the role of sequences in a metric space. They unify the concept of a limit across the wide variety of arbitrary topological spaces.\nTo understand the need for filters, begin with the equivalent concept of a net. A sequence is usually indexed by the natural numbers\u00a0\u2115, which are a totally ordered set. Nets generalize the notion of a sequence by replacing \u2115 with an arbitrary directed set. In certain categories of topological spaces, such as first-countable spaces, sequences characterize most topological properties, but this is not true in general. However, nets\u00a0\u2014 as well as filters\u00a0\u2014 always do characterize those topological properties.\nFilters do not involve any set external to the topological space\u00a0X, whereas sequences and nets rely on other directed sets. For this reason, the collection of all filters on X is always a set, whereas the collection of all X-valued nets is a proper class.\nNeighborhood bases.\nAny point\u00a0x in the topological space\u00a0X defines a neighborhood filter or system\u00a0: namely, the family of all sets containing x in their interior. A set\u00a0 of neighborhoods of x is a neighborhood base at x if generates . Equivalently, \"S\" &amp;subseteq; \"X\" is a neighborhood of x if and only if there exists \"N\" \u2208 N such that \"N\" &amp;subseteq; \"S\".\nConvergent filters and cluster points.\nA prefilter\u00a0B converges to a point\u00a0x, written \"B\" \u2192 \"x\", if and only if B generates a filter\u00a0F that contains the neighborhood filter \u00a0\u2014 explicitly, for every neighborhood\u00a0U of x, there is some \"V\" \u2208 \"B\" such that \"V\" &amp;subseteq; \"U\". Less explicitly, \"B\" \u2192 \"x\" if and only if B refines , and any neighborhood base at x can replace in this condition. Clearly, every neighborhood base at x converges to x.\nA filter\u00a0F (which generates itself) converges to x if . The above can also be reversed to characterize the neighborhood filter : is the finest filter coarser than each filter converging to x.\nIf \"B\" \u2192 \"x\", then x is called a limit (point) of B. The prefilter B is said to cluster at x (or have x as a cluster point) if and only if each element of B has non-empty intersection with each neighborhood of x. Every limit point is a cluster point but the converse is not true in general. However, every cluster point of an ultrafilter is a limit point.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19722", "revid": "50865928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19722", "title": "Metallurgy", "text": "Field of science that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metals\nMetallurgy is a domain of materials science and engineering that studies the physical and chemical behavior of metallic elements, their inter-metallic compounds, and their mixtures, which are known as alloys.\nMetallurgy encompasses both the science and the technology of metals, including the production of metals and the engineering of metal components used in products for both consumers and manufacturers. Metallurgy is distinct from the craft of metalworking. Metalworking relies on metallurgy in a similar manner to how medicine relies on medical science for technical advancement. A specialist practitioner of metallurgy is known as a metallurgist.\nThe science of metallurgy is further subdivided into two broad categories: chemical metallurgy and physical metallurgy. Chemical metallurgy is chiefly concerned with the reduction and oxidation of metals, and the chemical performance of metals. Subjects of study in chemical metallurgy include mineral processing, the extraction of metals, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, and chemical degradation (corrosion). In contrast, physical metallurgy focuses on the mechanical properties of metals, the physical properties of metals, and the physical performance of metals. Topics studied in physical metallurgy include crystallography, material characterization, mechanical metallurgy, phase transformations, and failure mechanisms.\nHistorically, metallurgy has predominantly focused on the production of metals. Metal production begins with the processing of ores to extract the metal, and includes the mixture of metals to make alloys. Metal alloys are often a blend of at least two different metallic elements. However, non-metallic elements are often added to alloys in order to achieve properties suitable for an application. The study of metal production is subdivided into ferrous metallurgy (also known as \"black metallurgy\") and non-ferrous metallurgy, also known as colored metallurgy.\nFerrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on iron, while non-ferrous metallurgy involves processes and alloys based on other metals. The production of ferrous metals accounts for 95% of world metal production.\nModern metallurgists work in both emerging and traditional areas as part of an interdisciplinary team alongside material scientists and other engineers. Some traditional areas include mineral processing, metal production, heat treatment, failure analysis, and the joining of metals (including welding, brazing, and soldering). Emerging areas for metallurgists include nanotechnology, superconductors, composites, biomedical materials, electronic materials (semiconductors) and surface engineering.\nEtymology and pronunciation.\n\"Metallurgy\" derives from the Ancient Greek , , \"worker in metal\", from , , \"mine, metal\" + , , \"work\" The word was originally an alchemist's term for the extraction of metals from minerals, the ending \"-urgy\" signifying a process, especially manufacturing: it was discussed in this sense in the 1797 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nIn the late 19th century, metallurgy's definition was extended to the more general scientific study of metals, alloys, and related processes. In English, the pronunciation is the more common one in the United Kingdom. The pronunciation is the more common one in the US and is the first-listed variant in various American dictionaries, including \"Merriam-Webster Collegiate\" and \"American Heritage\".\nHistory.\nThe earliest metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found \"native\". Small amounts of natural gold, dating to the late Paleolithic period, 40,000 BCE, have been found in Spanish caves. Silver, copper, tin and meteoric iron can also be found in native form, allowing a limited amount of metalworking in early cultures. Early cold metallurgy, using native copper not melted from mineral has been documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tell Maghzaliyah in Iraq, dating from the 7th~6th millennia BCE.\nThe earliest archaeological support of smelting (hot metallurgy) in Eurasia is found in the Balkans and Carpathian Mountains, as evidenced by findings of objects made by metal casting and smelting dated to around 6,200 ~ 5,000 BCE, with the invention of copper metallurgy. Certain metals, such as tin, lead, and copper can be recovered from their ores by simply heating the rocks in a comparatively moderate-temperature fire or blast furnace in a process known as \"smelting\". The first evidence of copper smelting, dating from the 6th millennium BCE, has been found at archaeological sites in Majdanpek, Jarmovac, and Plo\u010dnik, in present-day Serbia. The site of Plo\u010dnik has produced a smelted copper axe dating from 5,500 BCE, belonging to the Vin\u010da culture. The Balkans and adjacent Carpathian region were the location of major Chalcolithic cultures including Vin\u010da, Varna, Karanovo, Gumelni\u021ba and Hamangia, which are often grouped together under the name of 'Old Europe'. With the Carpatho-Balkan region described as the 'earliest metallurgical province in Eurasia', its scale and technical quality of metal production in the 6th~5th millennia BCE totally overshadowed that of any other contemporary production centre.\nThe earliest documented use of lead (possibly native or smelted) in the Near East dates from the 6th millennium BCE, is from the late Neolithic settlements of Yarim Tepe and Arpachiyah in Iraq. The artifacts suggest that lead smelting may have predated copper smelting. Metallurgy of lead has also been found in the Balkans during the same period.\nCopper smelting is documented at sites in Anatolia and at the site of Tal-i Iblis in southeastern Iran from \nCopper smelting is first documented in the Delta region of northern Egypt in associated with the Maadi culture. This represents the earliest evidence for smelting in Africa.\nThe Varna Necropolis, Bulgaria, is a burial site located in the western industrial zone of Varna, approximately 4\u00a0km from the city centre, internationally considered one of the key archaeological sites in world prehistory. The oldest gold treasure in the world, dating from 4,600 BC \u2013 4,200 BCE, was discovered at Varna. The gold piece dating from 4,500 BCE, found in 2019 in Durankulak, near Varna is another important example. Other signs of early metals are found from the 3rd millennium BCE in Palmela, Portugal, Los Millares, Spain, and Stonehenge, United Kingdom. The precise beginnings, however, have not been clearly ascertained and new discoveries are both continuous and ongoing.\nIn approximately 1,900 BCE, ancient iron smelting sites existed in Tamil Nadu.\nIn the Near East, about 3,500 BCE, it was discovered that by combining copper and tin, a superior metal could be made, an alloy called bronze. This represented a major technological shift known as the Bronze Age.\nThe extraction of iron from its ore into a workable metal is much more difficult than for copper or tin. The process appears to have been invented by the Hittites in about 1,200 BCE, beginning the Iron Age. The secret of extracting and working iron was a key factor in the success of the Philistines.\nHistorical developments in ferrous metallurgy can be found in a wide variety of past cultures and civilizations. This includes the ancient and medieval kingdoms and empires of the Middle East and Near East, ancient Iran, ancient Egypt, ancient Nubia, and Anatolia in present-day Turkey, Ancient Nok, Carthage, the Celts, Greeks and Romans of ancient Europe, medieval Europe, ancient and medieval China, ancient and medieval India, ancient and medieval Japan, amongst others.\nA 16th century book by Georg Agricola, \"De re metallica\", describes the highly developed and complex processes of mining metal ores, metal extraction, and metallurgy of the time. Agricola has been described as the \"father of metallurgy\".\nExtraction.\nExtractive metallurgy is the practice of removing valuable metals from an ore and refining the extracted raw metals into a purer form. In order to convert a metal oxide or sulphide to a purer metal, the ore must be reduced physically, chemically, or electrolytically. Extractive metallurgists are interested in three primary streams: feed, concentrate (metal oxide/sulphide) and tailings (waste).\nAfter mining, large pieces of the ore feed are broken through crushing or grinding in order to obtain particles small enough, where each particle is either mostly valuable or mostly waste. Concentrating the particles of value in a form supporting separation enables the desired metal to be removed from waste products.\nMining may not be necessary, if the ore body and physical environment are conducive to leaching. Leaching dissolves minerals in an ore body and results in an enriched solution. The solution is collected and processed to extract valuable metals. Ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal.\nTailings of a previous process may be used as a feed in another process to extract a secondary product from the original ore. Additionally, a concentrate may contain more than one valuable metal. That concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents.\nMetal and its alloys.\nMuch effort has been placed on understanding iron\u2013carbon alloy system, which includes steels and cast irons. Plain carbon steels (those that contain essentially only carbon as an alloying element) are used in low-cost, high-strength applications, where neither weight nor corrosion are a major concern. Cast irons, including ductile iron, are also part of the iron-carbon system. Iron-Manganese-Chromium alloys (Hadfield-type steels) are also used in non-magnetic applications such as directional drilling.\nOther engineering metals include aluminium, chromium, copper, magnesium, nickel, titanium, zinc, and silicon. These metals are most often used as alloys with the noted exception of silicon, which is not a metal. Other forms include:\nProduction.\nIn production engineering, metallurgy is concerned with the production of metallic components for use in consumer or engineering products. This involves production of alloys, shaping, heat treatment and surface treatment of product. The task of the metallurgist is to achieve balance between material properties, such as cost, weight, strength, toughness, hardness, corrosion, fatigue resistance and performance in temperature extremes. To achieve this goal, the operating environment must be carefully considered.\nDetermining the hardness of the metal using the Rockwell, Vickers, and Brinell hardness scales is a commonly used practice that helps better understand the metal's elasticity and plasticity for different applications and production processes. In a saltwater environment, most ferrous metals and some non-ferrous alloys corrode quickly. Metals exposed to cold or cryogenic conditions may undergo a ductile to brittle transition and lose their toughness, becoming more brittle and prone to cracking. Metals under continual cyclic loading can suffer from metal fatigue. Metals under constant stress at elevated temperatures can creep.\nMetalworking processes.\nCold-working processes, in which the product's shape is altered by rolling, fabrication or other processes, while the product is cold, can increase the strength of the product by a process called work hardening. Work hardening creates microscopic defects in the metal, which resist further changes of shape.\nHeat treatment.\nMetals can be heat-treated to alter the properties of strength, ductility, toughness, hardness and resistance to corrosion. Common heat treatment processes include annealing, precipitation strengthening, quenching, and tempering:\nOften, mechanical and thermal treatments are combined in what are known as thermo-mechanical treatments for better properties and more efficient processing of materials. These processes are common to high-alloy special steels, superalloys and titanium alloys.\nPlating.\nElectroplating is a chemical surface-treatment technique. It involves bonding a thin layer of another metal such as gold, silver, chromium or zinc to the surface of the product. This is done by selecting the coating material electrolyte solution, which is the material that is going to coat the workpiece (gold, silver, zinc). There needs to be two electrodes of different materials: one the same material as the coating material and one that is receiving the coating material. Two electrodes are electrically charged and the coating material is stuck to the work piece. It is used to reduce corrosion as well as to improve the product's aesthetic appearance. It is also used to make inexpensive metals look like the more expensive ones (gold, silver).\nShot peening.\nShot peening is a cold working process used to finish metal parts. In the process of shot peening, small round shot is blasted against the surface of the part to be finished. This process is used to prolong the product life of the part, prevent stress corrosion failures, and also prevent fatigue. The shot leaves small dimples on the surface like a peen hammer does, which cause compression stress under the dimple. As the shot media strikes the material over and over, it forms many overlapping dimples throughout the piece being treated. The compression stress in the surface of the material strengthens the part and makes it more resistant to fatigue failure, stress failures, corrosion failure, and cracking.\nThermal spraying.\nThermal spraying techniques are another popular finishing option, and often have better high temperature properties than electroplated coatings. Thermal spraying, also known as a spray welding process, is an industrial coating process that consists of a heat source (flame or other) and a coating material; the coating can be in a powder or wire form, either of which is melted and then sprayed at a high velocity onto the surface of the material being treated. The spray treating process is known by many different names such as HVOF (\"high velocity oxygen fuel\"), plasma spray, flame spray, arc spray and metalizing.\nElectroless deposition.\n\"Electroless deposition\" (ED) or \"electroless plating\" is defined as the autocatalytic process, through which metals and metal alloys are deposited onto nonconductive surfaces. These nonconductive surfaces include plastics, ceramics, glass, etc., which can then become decorative, anti-corrosive, and conductive, depending on the method of deposition and the designed use. Electroless deposition is a chemical processes that create metal coatings on various materials by autocatalytic chemical reduction of metal cations in a liquid bath.\nCharacterization.\n Metallurgists study the microscopic and macroscopic structure of metals using metallography, a technique invented by Henry Clifton Sorby.\nIn metallography, an alloy of interest is ground flat and polished to a mirror finish. The sample can then be etched to reveal the microstructure and macrostructure of the metal. The sample is then examined in an optical or electron microscope, and the image contrast provides details on the composition, mechanical properties, and processing history.\nCrystallography, often using diffraction of X-rays or electrons, is another valuable tool available to the modern metallurgist. Crystallography allows identification of unknown materials and reveals the crystal structure of the sample. Quantitative crystallography can be used to calculate the amount of phases present as well as the degree of strain to which a sample has been subjected.\nCurrent advanced characterization techniques, which are used frequently in this field are: \"Scanning electron microscopy\" (SEM), \"transmission electron microscopy\" (TEM), \"electron backscatter diffraction\" (EBSD) and \"atom-probe tomography\" (APT).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19723", "revid": "51065917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19723", "title": "MUMPS", "text": "Programming language\nMUMPS (\"Massachusetts General Hospital Utility Multi-Programming System\"), or M, is an imperative, high-level programming language with an integrated transaction processing key\u2013value database. It was originally developed at Massachusetts General Hospital for managing patient medical records and hospital laboratory information systems.\nMUMPS technology has since expanded as the predominant database for health information systems and electronic health records in the United States. MUMPS-based information systems, such as Epic Systems, provide health information services for over 78% of patients across the U.S.\nA unique feature of the MUMPS technology is its integrated database language, allowing direct, high-speed read-write access to permanent disk storage.\nHistory.\n1960s-1970s - Genesis.\nMUMPS was developed by Neil Pappalardo, Robert A. Greenes, and Curt Marble in Dr. Octo Barnett's lab at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) in Boston during 1966 and 1967. It grew out of frustration, during a National Institutes of Health (NIH) supported hospital information systems project at the MGH, with the development in assembly language on a time-shared PDP-1 by primary contractor Bolt, Beranek and Newman (BBN). MUMPS came out of an internal \"skunkworks\" project at MGH by Pappalardo, Greenes, and Marble to create an alternative development environment. As a result of initial demonstration of capabilities, Dr. Barnett's proposal to NIH in 1967 for renewal of the hospital computer project grant took the bold step of proposing that the system be built in MUMPS going forward, rather than relying on the BBN approach. The project was funded, and serious implementation of the system in MUMPS began.\nThe original MUMPS system was, like Unix a few years later, built on a DEC PDP-7. Octo Barnett and Neil Pappalardo obtained a backward compatible PDP-9, and began using MUMPS in the admissions cycle and laboratory test reporting. MUMPS was then an interpreted language, yet even then, it incorporated a hierarchical database file system to standardize interaction with the data and abstract disk operations so they were only done by the MUMPS language itself. MUMPS was also used in its earliest days in an experimental clinical progress note entry system and a radiology report entry system.\nSome aspects of MUMPS can be traced from RAND Corporation's JOSS through BBN's TELCOMP and STRINGCOMP. The MUMPS team chose to include portability between machines as a design goal.\nAn advanced feature of the MUMPS language not widely supported in operating systems or in computer hardware of the era was multitasking. Although time-sharing on mainframe computers was increasingly common in systems such as Multics, most mini-computers did not run parallel programs and threading was not available at all. Even on mainframes, the variant of batch processing where a program was run to completion was the most common implementation for an operating system of multi-programming.\nIt was a few years until Unix was developed. The lack of memory management hardware also meant that all multi-processing was fraught with the possibility that a memory pointer could change some other process. MUMPS programs do not have a standard way to refer to memory directly at all, in contrast to C language, so since the multitasking was enforced by the language, not by any program written in the language it was impossible to have the risk that existed for other systems.\nDan Brevik's DEC MUMPS-15 system was adapted to a DEC PDP-15, where it lived for some time. It was first installed at Health Data Management Systems of Denver in May 1971. The portability proved to be useful and MUMPS was awarded a government research grant, and so MUMPS was released to the public domain which was a requirement for grants. MUMPS was soon ported to a number of other systems including the popular DEC PDP-8, the Data General Nova and on DEC PDP-11 and the Artronix PC12 minicomputer. Word about MUMPS spread mostly through the medical community, and was in widespread use, often being locally modified for their own needs.\nVersions of the MUMPS system were rewritten by technical leaders Dennis \"Dan\" Brevik and Paul Stylos of DEC in 1970 and 1971. By the early 1970s, there were many and varied implementations of MUMPS on a range of hardware platforms. Another noteworthy platform was Paul Stylos' DEC MUMPS-11 on the PDP-11, and MEDITECH's MIIS. In the Fall of 1972, many MUMPS users attended a conference in Boston which standardized the then-fractured language, and created the MUMPS Users Group and MUMPS Development Committee (MDC) to do so. These efforts proved successful; a standard was complete by 1974, and was approved, on September 15, 1977, as ANSI standard, X11.1-1977. At about the same time DEC launched DSM-11 (Digital Standard MUMPS) for the PDP-11. This quickly dominated the market, and became the reference implementation of the time. Also, InterSystems sold ISM-11 for the PDP-11 (which was identical to DSM-11).\n1980s.\nDuring the early 1980s several vendors brought MUMPS-based platforms that met the ANSI standard to market. The most significant were:\nThis period also saw considerable MDC activity. The second revision of the ANSI standard for MUMPS (X11.1-1984) was approved on November 15, 1984.\nName.\nThe chief executive of InterSystems disliked the name MUMPS and felt that it represented a serious marketing obstacle. Thus, favoring M to some extent became identified as alignment with InterSystems. The 1990 ANSI Standard was open to both M and MUMPS and after a \"world-wide\" discussion in 1992 the Mumps User Groups officially changed the name to M. The dispute also reflected rivalry between organizations (the M Technology Association, the MUMPS Development Committee, the ANSI and ISO Standards Committees) as to who determines the \"official\" name of the language.\nAs of 2020, the ISO still mentions both M and MUMPS as officially accepted names.\nMassachusetts General Hospital registered \"MUMPS\" as a trademark with the USPTO on November 28, 1971, and renewed it on November 16, 1992, but let it expire on August 30, 2003.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nMUMPS is a language intended for and designed to build database applications. Secondary language features were included to help programmers make applications using minimal computing resources. The original implementations were interpreted, though modern implementations may be fully or partially compiled. Individual \"programs\" run in memory \"partitions\". Early MUMPS memory partitions were limited to 2048 bytes so aggressive abbreviation greatly aided multi-programming on severely resource limited hardware, because more than one MUMPS job could fit into the very small memories extant in hardware at the time. The ability to provide multi-user systems was another language design feature. The word \"Multi-Programming\" in the acronym points to this. Even the earliest machines running MUMPS supported multiple jobs running at the same time. With the change from mini-computers to micro-computers a few years later, even a \"single user PC\" with a single 8-bit CPU and 16K or 64K of memory could support multiple users, who could connect to it from (non-graphical) video display terminals.\nSince memory was tight originally, the language design for MUMPS valued very terse code. Thus, every MUMPS command or function name could be abbreviated from one to three letters in length, e.g. Quit (exit program) as Q, $P = $Piece function, R = Read command, $TR = $Translate function. Spaces and end-of-line markers are significant in MUMPS because line scope promoted the same terse language design. Thus, a single line of program code could express, with few characters, an idea for which other programming languages could require 5 to 10 times as many characters. Abbreviation was a common feature of languages designed in this period (e.g., FOCAL-69, early BASICs such as Tiny BASIC, etc.). An unfortunate side effect of this, coupled with the early need to write minimalist code, was that MUMPS programmers routinely did not comment code and used extensive abbreviations. This meant that even an expert MUMPS programmer could not just skim through a page of code to see its function but would have to analyze it line by line.\nDatabase interaction is transparently built into the language. The MUMPS language provides a hierarchical database made up of persistent sparse arrays, which is implicitly \"opened\" for every MUMPS application. All variable names prefixed with the caret character () use permanent (instead of RAM) storage, will maintain their values after the application exits, and will be visible to (and modifiable by) other running applications. Variables using this shared and permanent storage are called \"Globals\" in MUMPS, because the scoping of these variables is \"globally available\" to all jobs on the system. The more recent and more common use of the name \"global variables\" in other languages is a more limited scoping of names, coming from the fact that unscoped variables are \"globally\" available to any programs running in the same process, but not shared among multiple processes. The MUMPS Storage mode (i.e. globals stored as persistent sparse arrays), gives the MUMPS database the characteristics of a document-oriented database.\nAll variable names which are not prefixed with caret character () are temporary and private. Like global variables, they also have a hierarchical storage model, but are only \"locally available\" to a single job, thus they are called \"locals\". Both \"globals\" and \"locals\" can have child nodes (called \"subscripts\" in MUMPS terminology). Subscripts are not limited to numerals\u2014any ASCII character or group of characters can be a subscript identifier. While this is not uncommon for modern languages such as Perl or JavaScript, it was a highly unusual feature in the late 1970s. This capability was not universally implemented in MUMPS systems before the 1984 ANSI standard, as only canonically numeric subscripts were required by the standard to be allowed. Thus, the variable named 'Car' can have subscripts \"Door\", \"Steering Wheel\", and \"Engine\", each of which can contain a value and have subscripts of their own. The variable could have a nested variable subscript of \"Color\" for example. Thus, you could say\nSET ^Car(\"Door\",\"Color\")=\"BLUE\"\nto modify a nested child node of . In MUMPS terms, \"Color\" is the 2nd subscript of the variable (both the names of the child-nodes and the child-nodes themselves are likewise called subscripts). Hierarchical variables are similar to objects with properties in many object-oriented languages. Additionally, the MUMPS language design requires that all subscripts of variables are automatically kept in sorted order. Numeric subscripts (including floating-point numbers) are stored from lowest to highest. All non-numeric subscripts are stored in alphabetical order following the numbers. In MUMPS terminology, this is \"canonical order\". By using only non-negative integer subscripts, the MUMPS programmer can emulate the arrays data type from other languages. Although MUMPS does not natively offer a full set of DBMS features such as mandatory schemas, several DBMS systems have been built on top of it that provide application developers with flat-file, relational, and network database features.\nAdditionally, there are built-in operators which treat a delimited string (e.g., comma-separated values) as an array. Early MUMPS programmers would often store a structure of related information as a delimited string, parsing it after it was read in; this saved disk access time and offered considerable speed advantages on some hardware.\nMUMPS has no data types. Numbers can be treated as strings of digits, or strings can be treated as numbers by numeric operators (\"coerced\", in MUMPS terminology). Coercion can have some odd side effects, however. For example, when a string is coerced, the parser turns as much of the string (starting from the left) into a number as it can, then discards the rest. Thus the statement codice_1 is evaluated as codice_2 in MUMPS.\nOther features of the language are intended to help MUMPS applications interact with each other in a multi-user environment. Database locks, process identifiers, and atomicity of database update transactions are all required of standard MUMPS implementations.\nIn contrast to languages in the C or Wirth traditions, some space characters between MUMPS statements are significant. A single space separates a command from its argument, and a space, or newline, separates each argument from the next MUMPS token. Commands which take no arguments (e.g., codice_3) require two following spaces. The concept is that one space separates the command from the (nonexistent) argument, the next separates the \"argument\" from the next command. Newlines are also significant; an codice_4, codice_3 or codice_6 command processes (or skips) everything else till the end-of-line. To make those statements control multiple lines, you must use the codice_7 command to create a code block.\nHello, World! example.\nA simple \"Hello, World!\" program in MUMPS might be:\n write \"Hello, World!\",!\nand would be run with the command codice_8 after it has been saved to disk. For direct execution of the code a kind of \"label\" (any alphanumeric string) on the first position of the program line is needed to tell the mumps interpreter where to start execution. Since MUMPS allows commands to be strung together on the same line, and since commands can be abbreviated to a single letter, this routine could be made more compact:\nw \"Hello, World!\",! \nThe 'codice_9' after the text generates a newline. This code would return to the prompt.\nFeatures.\nANSI X11.1-1995 gives a complete, formal description of the language; an annotated version of this standard is available online.\nLanguage features include:\nGREPTHIS()\n NEW SET,NEW,THEN,IF,KILL,QUIT SET IF=\"KILL\",SET=\"11\",KILL=\"11\",QUIT=\"RETURN\",THEN=\"KILL\"\n IF IF=THEN DO THEN\n QUIT:$QUIT QUIT QUIT ; (quit)\nTHEN IF IF,SET&amp;KILL SET SET=SET+KILL QUIT\nMUMPS can be made more obfuscated by using the contracted operator syntax, as shown in this terse example derived from the example above:\nGREPTHIS()\n N S,N,T,I,K,Q S I=\"K\",S=\"11\",K=\"11\",Q=\"R\",T=\"K\"\n I I=T D T\n Q:$Q Q Q\nT I I,S&amp;K S S=S+K Q\nfor i=10000:1:12345 set sqtable(i)=i*i\nset address(\"Smith\",\"Daniel\")=\"dpbsmith@world.std.com\"\ncodice_17 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;std&lt;/samp&gt;.\nAfter\nSET X=\"dpbsmith@world.std.com\"\ncodice_18 causes X to become \"office@world.std.com\" (note that $P is equivalent to $PIECE and could be written as such).\nSet stuff(6)=\"xyz\",stuff(10)=26,stuff(15)=\"\"\ncodice_19 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;6&lt;/samp&gt;, codice_20 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;10&lt;/samp&gt;, codice_21 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;10&lt;/samp&gt;, codice_22 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;15&lt;/samp&gt;, codice_23 yields &lt;samp style=\"padding-left:0.4em; padding-right:0.4em; color:var( --color-subtle, #666666); \" &gt;\"\"&lt;/samp&gt;.\nSet i=\"\" For Set i=$O(stuff(i)) Quit:i=\"\" Write !,i,10,stuff(i)\nHere, the argument-less For repeats until stopped by a terminating Quit. This line prints a table of i and where i is successively 6, 10, and 15.\nFor iterating the database, the Order function returns the next key to use.\nGTM&gt;S n=\"\"\nGTM&gt;S n=$order(^nodex(n))\nGTM&gt;zwr n\nn=\" building\"\nGTM&gt;S n=$order(^nodex(n))\nGTM&gt;zwr n\nn=\" name:gd\"\nGTM&gt;S n=$order(^nodex(n))\nGTM&gt;zwr n\nn=\"%kml:guid\"\nMUMPS supports multiple simultaneous users and processes even when the underlying operating system does not (e.g., MS-DOS). Additionally, there is the ability to specify an environment for a variable, such as by specifying a machine name in a variable (as in codice_24), which can allow you to access data on remote machines.\nCriticism.\nSome aspects of MUMPS syntax differ strongly from that of more modern languages, which can cause confusion, although those aspects vary between different versions of the language. On some versions, whitespace is not allowed within expressions, as it ends a statement: codice_25 is an error, and must be written codice_26. All operators have the same precedence and are left-associative (codice_27 evaluates to 50). The operators for \"less than or equal to\" and \"greater than or equal to\" are codice_28 and codice_29 (that is, the Boolean negation operator codice_30 plus a strict comparison operator in the opposite direction), although some versions allow the use of the more standard codice_31 and codice_32 respectively. Periods (codice_33) are used to indent the lines in a DO block, not whitespace. The ELSE command does not need a corresponding IF, as it operates by inspecting the value in the built-in system variable codice_34.\nMUMPS scoping rules are more permissive than other modern languages. Declared local variables are scoped using the stack. A routine can normally see all declared locals of the routines below it on the call stack, and routines cannot prevent routines they call from modifying their declared locals, unless the caller manually creates a new stack level (codice_35) and aliases each of the variables they wish to protect (codice_36) before calling any child routines. By contrast, undeclared variables (variables created by using them, rather than declaration) are in scope for all routines running in the same process, and remain in scope until the program exits.\nBecause MUMPS database references differ from internal variable references only in the caret prefix, it is dangerously easy to unintentionally edit the database, or even to delete a database \"table\".\nUsers.\nThe US Department of Veterans Affairs (formerly the Veterans Administration) was one of the earliest major adopters of the MUMPS language. Their development work (and subsequent contributions to the free MUMPS application codebase) was an influence on many medical users worldwide. In 1995, the Veterans Affairs' patient Admission/Tracking/Discharge system, Decentralized Hospital Computer Program (DHCP), was the recipient of the Computerworld Smithsonian Award for best use of Information Technology in Medicine. In July 2006, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) / Veterans Health Administration (VHA) was the recipient of the Innovations in American Government Award presented by the Ash Institute of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University for its extension of DHCP into the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA). Nearly the entire VA hospital system in the United States, the Indian Health Service, and major parts of the Department of Defense CHCS hospital system use MUMPS databases for clinical data tracking.\nOther healthcare IT companies using MUMPS include:\nMany reference laboratories, such as DASA, Quest Diagnostics, and Dynacare, use MUMPS software written by or based on Antrim Corporation code. Antrim was purchased by Misys Healthcare (now Sunquest Information Systems) in 2001.\nMUMPS is also widely used in financial applications. MUMPS gained an early following in the financial sector and is in use at many banks and credit unions. It is used by the Bank of England and Barclays Bank.\nImplementations.\nSince 2005, the most popular implementations of MUMPS have been Greystone Technology MUMPS (GT.M) from Fidelity National Information Services, and Cach\u00e9, from Intersystems Corporation. The European Space Agency announced on May 13, 2010, that it will use the InterSystems Cach\u00e9 database to support the \"Gaia\" mission. This mission aims to map the Milky Way with unprecedented precision. InterSystems is in the process of phasing out Cach\u00e9 in favor of Iris.\nOther current implementations include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19724", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19724", "title": "Max Zorn", "text": ""}
{"id": "19726", "revid": "4246661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19726", "title": "Mercury (programming language)", "text": "Functional logic programming language\nMercury is a functional logic programming language made for real-world uses. The first version was developed at the University of Melbourne, Computer Science department, by Fergus Henderson, Thomas Conway, and Zoltan Somogyi, under Somogyi's supervision, and released on April 8, 1995.\nMercury is a purely declarative logic programming language. It is related to both Prolog and Haskell. It features a strong, static, polymorphic type system, and a strong mode and determinism system.\nThe official implementation, the Melbourne Mercury Compiler, is available for most Unix and Unix-like platforms, including Linux, macOS, and for Windows.\nOverview.\nMercury is based on the logic programming language Prolog. It has the same syntax and the same basic concepts such as the selective linear definite clause resolution (SLD) algorithm. It can be viewed as a pure subset of Prolog with strong types and modes. As such, it is often compared to its predecessor in features and run-time efficiency.\nThe language is designed using software engineering principles. Unlike the original implementations of Prolog, it has a separate compilation phase, rather than being directly interpreted. This allows a much wider range of errors to be detected before running a program. It features a strict static type and mode system and a module system.\nBy using information obtained at compile time (such as type and mode), programs written in Mercury typically perform significantly faster than equivalent programs written in Prolog. Its authors claim that Mercury is the fastest logic language in the world, by a wide margin.\nMercury is a purely declarative language, unlike Prolog, since it lacks \"extra-logical\" Prolog statements such as codice_1 (cut) and imperative input/output (I/O). This enables advanced static program analysis and program optimization, including compile-time garbage collection, but it can make certain programming constructs (such as a switch over a number of options, with a default) harder to express. While Mercury does allow impure functionality, it serves mainly as a way to call foreign language code. All impure code must be explicitly marked. Operations which would typically be impure (such as input/output) are expressed using pure constructs in Mercury using linear types, by threading a dummy \"world\" value through all relevant code.\nNotable programs written in Mercury include the Mercury compiler and the Prince XML formatter. The Software company ODASE has also been using Mercury to develop its Ontology-Centric software development platform, ODASE.\nBack-ends.\nMercury has several back-ends, which enable compiling Mercury code into several languages, including:\nPast.\nMercury also features a foreign language interface, allowing code in other languages (depending on the chosen back-end) to be linked with Mercury code. The following foreign languages are possible:\nOther languages can then be interfaced to by calling them from these languages. However, this means that foreign language code may need to be written several times for the different backends, otherwise portability between backends will be lost.\nThe most commonly used back-end is the original low-level C back-end.\nExamples.\nHello World:\n :- module hello.\n :- interface.\n :- import_module io.\n :- pred main(io::di, io::uo) is det.\n :- implementation.\n main(!IO) :-\n io.write_string(\"Hello, World!\\n\", !IO).\nCalculating the 10th Fibonacci number (in the most obvious way):\n :- module fib.\n :- interface.\n :- import_module io.\n :- pred main(io::di, io::uo) is det.\n :- implementation.\n :- import_module int.\n :- func fib(int) = int.\n fib(N) = (if N =&lt; 2 then 1 else fib(N - 1) + fib(N - 2)).\n main(!IO) :-\n io.write_string(\"fib(10) = \", !IO),\n io.write_int(fib(10), !IO),\n io.nl(!IO).\n % Could instead use io.format(\"fib(10) = %d\\n\", [i(fib(10))], !IO).\ncodice_2 is a \"state variable\", which is syntactic sugar for a pair of variables which are assigned concrete names at compilation; for example, the above is desugared to something like:\n main(IO0, IO) :-\n io.write_string(\"fib(10) = \", IO0, IO1),\n io.write_int(fib(10), IO1, IO2),\n io.nl(IO2, IO).\nRelease schedule.\nThe stable release naming scheme was 0.1 up to 0.13 for the first thirteen stable releases. In February 2010 the Mercury project decided to name each stable release by using the year and month of the release. For example 10.04 is for a release made in April 2010.\nThere is often also a periodic snapshot of the development system \"release of the day\" (ROTD)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19727", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19727", "title": "Michael Faraday", "text": "English chemist and physicist (1791\u20131867)\nMichael Faraday ( , ; 22 September 1791 \u2013 25 August 1867) was an English chemist and physicist who contributed to the study of electrochemistry and electromagnetism. His main discoveries include the principles underlying electromagnetic induction, diamagnetism, and electrolysis. Although Faraday received little formal education, as a self-made man, he was one of the most influential scientists in history. It was by his research on the magnetic field around a conductor carrying a direct current that Faraday established the concept of the electromagnetic field in physics. Faraday also established that magnetism could affect rays of light and that there was an underlying relationship between the two phenomena. He similarly discovered the principles of electromagnetic induction, diamagnetism, and the laws of electrolysis. His inventions of electromagnetic rotary devices formed the foundation of electric motor technology, and it was largely due to his efforts that electricity became practical for use in technology. The SI unit of capacitance, the farad, is named after him.\nAs a chemist, Faraday discovered benzene and carbon tetrachloride, investigated the clathrate hydrate of chlorine, invented an early form of the Bunsen burner and the system of oxidation numbers, and popularised terminology such as \"anode\", \"cathode\", \"electrode\" and \"ion\". Faraday ultimately became the first and foremost Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution, a lifetime position.\nFaraday was an experimentalist who conveyed his ideas in clear and simple language. His mathematical abilities did not extend as far as trigonometry and were limited to the simplest algebra. Physicist and mathematician James Clerk Maxwell took the work of Faraday and others and summarised it in a set of equations which is accepted as the basis of all modern theories of electromagnetic phenomena. On Faraday's uses of lines of force, Maxwell wrote that they show Faraday \"to have been in reality a mathematician of a very high order \u2013 one from whom the mathematicians of the future may derive valuable and fertile methods.\"\nA highly principled scientist, Faraday devoted considerable time and energy to public service. He worked on optimising lighthouses and protecting ships from corrosion. With Charles Lyell, he produced a forensic investigation on a colliery explosion at Haswell, County Durham, indicating for the first time that coal dust contributed to the severity of the explosion, and demonstrating how ventilation could have prevented it. Faraday also investigated industrial pollution at Swansea, air pollution at the Royal Mint, and wrote to \"The Times\" on the foul condition of the River Thames during the Great Stink. He refused to work on developing chemical weapons for use in the Crimean War, citing ethical reservations. He declined to have his lectures published, preferring people to recreate the experiments for themselves, to better experience the discovery, and told a publisher: \"I have always loved science more than money &amp; because my occupation is almost entirely personal I cannot afford to get rich.\"\nAlbert Einstein kept a portrait of Faraday on his study wall, alongside those of Isaac Newton and James Clerk Maxwell. Physicist Ernest Rutherford stated, \"When we consider the magnitude and extent of his discoveries and their influence on the progress of science and of industry, there is no honour too great to pay to the memory of Faraday, one of the greatest scientific discoverers of all time.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nMichael Faraday was born on September 21, 1791 in Newington Butts, Surrey, which is now part of the London Borough of Southwark. His family was not well off. His father, James, was a member of the Glasite sect of Christianity. James Faraday moved his wife, Margaret (n\u00e9e Hastwell), and two children to London during the winter of 1790 from Outhgill in Westmorland, where he had been an apprentice to the village blacksmith. Michael was born in the autumn of the following year, the third of four children. The young Michael Faraday, having only the most basic school education, had to educate himself.\nAt the age of 14, he became an apprentice to George Riebau, a local bookbinder and bookseller in Blandford Street. During his seven-year apprenticeship Faraday read many books, including Isaac Watts's \"The Improvement of the Mind\", and he enthusiastically implemented the principles and suggestions contained therein. During this period, Faraday held discussions with his peers in the City Philosophical Society, where he attended lectures about various scientific topics. He also developed an interest in science, especially in electricity. Faraday was particularly inspired by the book \"Conversations on Chemistry\" by Jane Marcet.\nAdult life.\nIn 1812, at the age of 20 and at the end of his apprenticeship, Faraday attended lectures by the eminent English chemist Humphry Davy of the Royal Institution and the Royal Society, and John Tatum, founder of the City Philosophical Society. Many of the tickets for these lectures were given to Faraday by William Dance, who was one of the founders of the Royal Philharmonic Society. Faraday subsequently sent Davy a 300-page book based on notes that he had taken during these lectures. Davy's reply was immediate, kind, and favourable. In 1813, when Davy damaged his eyesight in an accident with nitrogen trichloride, he decided to employ Faraday as an assistant. Coincidentally one of the Royal Institution's assistants, John Payne, was sacked and Sir Humphry Davy had been asked to find a replacement; thus he appointed Faraday as Chemical Assistant at the Royal Institution on 1 March 1813. Very soon, Davy entrusted Faraday with the preparation of nitrogen trichloride samples, and they both were injured in an explosion of this very sensitive substance.\nFaraday married Sarah Barnard (1800\u20131879) on 12 June 1821. They met through their families at the Sandemanian church, and he confessed his faith to the Sandemanian congregation the month after they were married. They had no children. Faraday was a devout Christian; his Sandemanian denomination was an offshoot of the Church of Scotland. Well after his marriage, he served as deacon and for two terms as an elder in the meeting house of his youth. His church was located at Paul's Alley in the Barbican. This meeting house relocated in 1862 to Barnsbury Grove, Islington; this North London location was where Faraday served the final two years of his second term as elder prior to his resignation from that post. Biographers have noted that \"a strong sense of the unity of God and nature pervaded Faraday's life and work.\"\nLater life.\nIn June 1832, the University of Oxford granted Faraday an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree. During his lifetime, he was offered a knighthood in recognition for his services to science, which he turned down on religious grounds, believing that it was against the word of the Bible to accumulate riches and pursue worldly reward, and stating that he preferred to remain \"plain Mr Faraday to the end\". Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1824, he twice refused to become President. He became the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution in 1833.\nIn 1832, Faraday was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in 1838. In 1840, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society. He was one of eight foreign members elected to the French Academy of Sciences in 1844. In 1849 he was elected as associated member to the Royal Institute of the Netherlands, which two years later became the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and he was subsequently made foreign member.\nFaraday had a nervous breakdown in 1839 but eventually returned to his investigations into electromagnetism. In 1848, as a result of representations by the Prince Consort, Faraday was awarded a grace and favour house in Hampton Court in Middlesex, free of all expenses and upkeep. This was the Master Mason's House, later called Faraday House, and now No. 37 Hampton Court Road. In 1858 Faraday retired to live there.\nHaving provided a number of various service projects for the British government, when asked by the government to advise on the production of chemical weapons for use in the Crimean War (1853\u20131856), Faraday refused to participate, citing ethical reasons. He also refused offers to publish his lectures, believing that they would lose impact if not accompanied by the live experiments. His reply to an offer from a publisher in a letter ends with: \"I have always loved science more than money &amp; because my occupation is almost entirely personal I cannot afford to get rich.\"\nFaraday died at his house at Hampton Court on 25 August 1867, aged 75. He had some years before turned down an offer of burial in Westminster Abbey upon his death, but he has a memorial plaque there, near Isaac Newton's tomb. Faraday was interred in the dissenters' (non-Anglican) section of Highgate Cemetery.\nScientific achievements.\nChemistry.\nFaraday's earliest chemical work was as an assistant to Humphry Davy. Faraday was involved in the study of chlorine; he discovered two new compounds of chlorine and carbon: hexachloroethane which he made via the chlorination of ethylene and carbon tetrachloride from the decomposition of the former. He also conducted the first rough experiments on the diffusion of gases, a phenomenon that was first pointed out by John Dalton. The physical importance of this phenomenon was more fully revealed by Thomas Graham and Joseph Loschmidt. Faraday succeeded in liquefying several gases, investigated the alloys of steel, and produced several new kinds of glass intended for optical purposes. A specimen of one of these heavy glasses subsequently became historically important; when the glass was placed in a magnetic field Faraday determined the rotation of the plane of polarisation of light. This specimen was also the first substance found to be repelled by the poles of a magnet.\nFaraday invented an early form of what was to become the Bunsen burner, which is still in practical use in science laboratories around the world as a convenient source of heat.\nFaraday worked extensively in the field of chemistry, discovering chemical substances such as benzene (which he called bicarburet of hydrogen) and liquefying gases such as chlorine. The liquefying of gases helped to establish that gases are the vapours of liquids possessing a very low boiling point and gave a more solid basis to the concept of molecular aggregation. In 1820 Faraday reported the first synthesis of compounds made from carbon and chlorine, C2Cl6 and CCl4, and published his results the following year. Faraday also determined the composition of the chlorine clathrate hydrate, which had been discovered by Humphry Davy in 1810. Faraday is also responsible for discovering the laws of electrolysis, and for popularising terminology such as anode, cathode, electrode, and ion, terms proposed in large part by William Whewell.\nFaraday was the first to report what later came to be called metallic nanoparticles. In 1857 he discovered that the optical properties of gold colloids differed from those of the corresponding bulk metal. This was probably the first reported observation of the effects of quantum size, and might be considered to be the birth of nanoscience.\nElectricity and magnetism.\nFaraday is best known for his work on electricity and magnetism. His first recorded experiment was the construction of a voltaic pile with seven British halfpenny coins, stacked together with seven discs of sheet zinc, and six pieces of paper moistened with salt water. With this pile he passed the electric current through a solution of sulfate of magnesia and succeeded in decomposing the chemical compound (recorded in first letter to Abbott, 12 July 1812).\nIn 1821, soon after the Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian \u00d8rsted discovered the phenomenon of electromagnetism, Davy and William Hyde Wollaston tried, but failed, to design an electric motor. Faraday, having discussed the problem with the two men, went on to build two devices to produce what he called \"electromagnetic rotation\". One of these, now known as the homopolar motor, caused a continuous circular motion that was engendered by the circular magnetic force around a wire that extended into a pool of mercury wherein was placed a magnet; the wire would then rotate around the magnet if supplied with current from a chemical battery. These experiments and inventions formed the foundation of modern electromagnetic technology. In his excitement, Faraday published results without acknowledging his work with either Wollaston or Davy. The resulting controversy within the Royal Society strained his mentor relationship with Davy and may well have contributed to Faraday's assignment to other activities, which consequently prevented his involvement in electromagnetic research for several years.\nFrom his initial discovery in 1821, Faraday continued his laboratory work, exploring electromagnetic properties of materials and developing requisite experience. In 1824, Faraday briefly set up a circuit to study whether a magnetic field could regulate the flow of a current in an adjacent wire, but he found no such relationship. This experiment followed similar work conducted with light and magnets three years earlier that yielded identical results. During the next seven years, Faraday spent much of his time perfecting his recipe for optical quality (heavy) glass, borosilicate of lead, which he used in his future studies connecting light with magnetism. In his spare time, Faraday continued publishing his experimental work on optics and electromagnetism; he conducted correspondence with scientists whom he had met on his journeys across Europe with Davy, and who were also working on electromagnetism. Two years after the death of Davy, in 1831, he began his great series of experiments in which he discovered electromagnetic induction, recording in his laboratory diary on 28 October 1831 that he was \"making many experiments with the great magnet of the Royal Society\".\nFaraday's breakthrough came when he wrapped two insulated coils of wire around an iron ring, and found that, upon passing a current through one coil, a momentary current was induced in the other coil. This phenomenon is now known as mutual inductance. The iron ring-coil apparatus is still on display at the Royal Institution. In subsequent experiments, he found that if he moved a magnet through a loop of wire an electric current flowed in that wire. The current also flowed if the loop was moved over a stationary magnet. His demonstrations established that a changing magnetic field produces an electric field; this relation was modelled mathematically by James Clerk Maxwell as Faraday's law, which subsequently became one of the four Maxwell equations, and which have in turn evolved into the generalization known today as field theory. Faraday would later use the principles he had discovered to construct the electric dynamo, the ancestor of modern power generators and the electric motor.\nIn 1832, he completed a series of experiments aimed at investigating the fundamental nature of electricity; Faraday used \"static\", batteries, and \"animal electricity\" to produce the phenomena of electrostatic attraction, electrolysis, magnetism, etc. He concluded that, contrary to the scientific opinion of the time, the divisions between the various \"kinds\" of electricity were illusory. Faraday instead proposed that only a single \"electricity\" exists, and the changing values of quantity and intensity (current and voltage) would produce different groups of phenomena.\nNear the end of his career, Faraday proposed that electromagnetic forces extended into the empty space around the conductor. This idea was rejected by his fellow scientists, and Faraday did not live to see the eventual acceptance of his proposition by the scientific community. It would be another half a century before electricity was used in technology, with the West End's Savoy Theatre, fitted with the incandescent light bulb developed by Sir Joseph Swan, the first public building in the world to be lit by electricity. As recorded by the Royal Institution, \"Faraday invented the generator in 1831 but it took nearly 50 years before all the technology, including Joseph Swan's incandescent filament light bulbs used here, came into common use\".\nDiamagnetism.\nIn 1845, Faraday discovered that many materials exhibit a weak repulsion from a magnetic field: an effect he termed diamagnetism.\nFaraday also discovered that the plane of polarization of linearly polarised light can be rotated by the application of an external magnetic field aligned with the direction in which the light is moving. This is now termed the Faraday effect. In Sept 1845 he wrote in his notebook, \"I have at last succeeded in \"illuminating a magnetic curve\" or \"line of force\" and in \"magnetising a ray of light\"\".\nLater on in his life, in 1862, Faraday used a spectroscope to search for a different alteration of light, the change of spectral lines by an applied magnetic field. The equipment available to him was, however, insufficient for a definite determination of spectral change. Pieter Zeeman later used an improved apparatus to study the same phenomenon, publishing his results in 1897 and receiving the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics for his success. In both his 1897 paper and his Nobel acceptance speech, Zeeman made reference to Faraday's work.\nFaraday cage.\nIn his work on static electricity, Faraday's ice pail experiment demonstrated that the charge resided only on the exterior of a charged conductor, and exterior charge had no influence on anything enclosed within a conductor. This is because the exterior charges redistribute such that the interior fields emanating from them cancel one another. This shielding effect is used in what is now known as a Faraday cage. In January 1836, Faraday had put a wooden frame, 12\u00a0ft square, on four glass supports and added paper walls and wire mesh. He then stepped inside and electrified it. When he stepped out of his electrified cage, Faraday had shown that electricity was a force, not an imponderable fluid as was believed at the time.\nRoyal Institution and public service.\nFaraday had a long association with the Royal Institution of Great Britain. He was appointed Assistant Superintendent of the House of the Royal Institution in 1821. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1824. In 1825, he became Director of the Laboratory of the Royal Institution. Six years later, in 1833, Faraday became the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, a position to which he was appointed for life without the obligation to deliver lectures. His sponsor and mentor was John 'Mad Jack' Fuller, who created the position at the Royal Institution for Faraday.\nBeyond his scientific research into areas such as chemistry, electricity, and magnetism at the Royal Institution, Faraday undertook numerous, and often time-consuming, service projects for private enterprise and the British government. This work included investigations of explosions in coal mines, being an expert witness in court, and along with two engineers from Chance Brothers c.\u20091853, the preparation of high-quality optical glass, which was required by Chance for its lighthouses. In 1846, together with Charles Lyell, he produced a lengthy and detailed report on a serious explosion in the colliery at Haswell, County Durham, which killed 95 miners. Their report was a meticulous forensic investigation and indicated that coal dust contributed to the severity of the explosion. The first-time explosions had been linked to dust, Faraday gave a demonstration during a lecture on how ventilation could prevent it. The report should have warned coal owners of the hazard of coal dust explosions, but the risk was ignored for over 60 years until the 1913 Senghenydd Colliery Disaster.\nAs a respected scientist in a nation with strong maritime interests, Faraday spent extensive amounts of time on projects such as the construction and operation of lighthouses and protecting the bottoms of ships from corrosion. His workshop still stands at Trinity Buoy Wharf above the Chain and Buoy Store, next to London's only lighthouse where he carried out the first experiments in electric lighting for lighthouses.\nFaraday was also active in what would now be called environmental science, or engineering. He investigated industrial pollution at Swansea and was consulted on air pollution at the Royal Mint. In July 1855, Faraday wrote a letter to \"The Times\" on the subject of the foul condition of the River Thames, which resulted in an often-reprinted cartoon in \"Punch\". (See also The Great Stink).\nFaraday assisted with the planning and judging of exhibits for the Great Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park, London. He also advised the National Gallery on the cleaning and protection of its art collection, and served on the National Gallery Site Commission in 1857. Education was another of Faraday's areas of service; he lectured on the topic in 1854 at the Royal Institution, and, in 1862, he appeared before a Public Schools Commission to give his views on education in Great Britain. Faraday also weighed in negatively on the public's fascination with table-turning, mesmerism, and seances, and in so doing chastised both the public and the nation's educational system.\nBefore his famous Christmas lectures, Faraday delivered chemistry lectures for the City Philosophical Society from 1816 to 1818 in order to refine the quality of his lectures.\nBetween 1827 and 1860 at the Royal Institution in London, Faraday gave a series of nineteen Christmas lectures for young people, a series which continues today. The objective of the lectures was to present science to the general public in the hopes of inspiring them and generating revenue for the Royal Institution. They were notable events on the social calendar among London's gentry. Over the course of several letters to his close friend Benjamin Abbott, Faraday outlined his recommendations on the art of lecturing, writing \"a flame should be lighted at the commencement and kept alive with unremitting splendour to the end\". His lectures were joyful and juvenile, he delighted in filling soap bubbles with various gasses (in order to determine whether or not they are magnetic), but the lectures were also deeply philosophical. In his lectures he urged his audiences to consider the mechanics of his experiments: \"you know very well that ice floats upon water\u00a0... Why does the ice float? Think of that, and philosophise\". The subjects in his lectures consisted of Chemistry and Electricity, and included: 1841: \"The Rudiments of Chemistry\", 1843: \"First Principles of Electricity\", 1848: \"The Chemical History of a Candle\", 1851: \"Attractive Forces\", 1853: \"Voltaic Electricity\", 1854: \"The Chemistry of Combustion\", 1855: \"The Distinctive Properties of the Common Metals\", 1857: \"Static Electricity\", 1858: \"The Metallic Properties\", 1859: \"The Various Forces of Matter and their Relations to Each Other\".\nCommemorations.\nA statue of Michael Faraday stands in Savoy Place, along Victoria Embankment, London, outside the Institution of Engineering and Technology. The Faraday Memorial, designed by brutalist architect Rodney Gordon and completed in 1961, is at the Elephant &amp; Castle gyratory system, near Faraday's birthplace at Newington Butts, London. Faraday School is located on Trinity Buoy Wharf where his workshop still stands above the Chain and Buoy Store, next to London's only lighthouse. Faraday Gardens is a small park in Walworth, London, not far from his birthplace at Newington Butts. It lies within the local council ward of Faraday in the London Borough of Southwark. Michael Faraday Primary school is situated on the Aylesbury Estate in Walworth.\nA building at London South Bank University, which houses the institute's electrical engineering departments is named the Faraday Wing, due to its proximity to Faraday's birthplace in Newington Butts. A hall at Loughborough University was named after Faraday in 1960. Near the entrance to its dining hall is a bronze casting, which depicts the symbol of an electrical transformer, and inside there hangs a portrait, both in Faraday's honour. An eight-storey building at the University of Edinburgh's science &amp; engineering campus is named for Faraday, as is a recently built hall of accommodation at Brunel University, the main engineering building at Swansea University, and the instructional and experimental physics building at Northern Illinois University. The former UK Faraday Station in Antarctica was named after him.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWithout such freedom there would have been no Shakespeare, no Goethe, no Newton, no Faraday, no Pasteur and no Lister.\n\u2014Albert Einstein's speech on intellectual freedom at the Royal Albert Hall, London having fled Nazi Germany, 3 October 1933\nStreets named for Faraday can be found in many British cities (e.g., London, Glenrothes, Swindon, Basingstoke, Nottingham, Whitby, Kirkby, Crawley, Newbury, Swansea, Aylesbury and Stevenage) as well as in France (Paris), Germany (Berlin-Dahlem, Hermsdorf), Canada (Quebec City, Quebec; Deep River, Ontario; Ottawa, Ontario), the United States (The Bronx, New York and Reston, Virginia), Australia (Carlton, Victoria), and New Zealand (Hawke's Bay).\nA Royal Society of Arts blue plaque, unveiled in 1876, commemorates Faraday at 48 Blandford Street in London's Marylebone district. From 1991 until 2001, Faraday's picture featured on the reverse of Series E \u00a320 banknotes issued by the Bank of England. He was portrayed conducting a lecture at the Royal Institution with the magneto-electric spark apparatus. In 2002, Faraday was ranked number 22 in the BBC's list of the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK-wide vote.\nFaraday has been commemorated on postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail. In 1991, as a pioneer of electricity he featured in their Scientific Achievements issue along with pioneers in three other fields (Charles Babbage (computing), Frank Whittle (jet engine) and Robert Watson-Watt (radar)). In 1999, under the title \"Faraday's Electricity\", he featured in their World Changers issue along with Charles Darwin, Edward Jenner and Alan Turing.\nThe Faraday Institute for Science and Religion derives its name from the scientist, who saw his faith as integral to his scientific research. The logo of the institute is also based on Faraday's discoveries. It was created in 2006 by a $2,000,000 grant from the John Templeton Foundation to carry out academic research, to foster understanding of the interaction between science and religion, and to engage public understanding in both these subject areas.\nThe Faraday Institution, an independent energy storage research institute established in 2017, also derives its name from Michael Faraday. The organisation serves as the UK's primary research programme to advance battery science and technology, education, public engagement and market research.\nFaraday's life and contributions to electromagnetics was the principal topic of the tenth episode, titled \"The Electric Boy\", of the 2014 American science documentary series, \"\", which was broadcast on Fox and the National Geographic Channel.\nThe writer Aldous Huxley wrote about Faraday in an essay entitled, \"A Night in Pietramala\": \"He is always the natural philosopher. To discover truth is his sole aim and interest\u00a0... even if I could be Shakespeare, I think I should still choose to be Faraday.\" Calling Faraday her \"hero\", in a speech to the Royal Society, Margaret Thatcher declared: \"The value of his work must be higher than the capitalisation of all the shares on the Stock Exchange!\" She borrowed his bust from the Royal Institution and had it placed in the hall of 10 Downing Street.\nAwards named in Faraday's honour.\nIn honor and remembrance of his great scientific contributions, several institutions have created prizes and awards in his name. This include:\nBibliography.\nFaraday's books, with the exception of \"Chemical Manipulation\", were collections of scientific papers or transcriptions of lectures. Since his death, Faraday's diary has been published, as have several large volumes of his letters and Faraday's journal from his travels with Davy in 1813\u20131815.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "19728", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19728", "title": "Marriage", "text": "Culturally recognised union between people\nMarriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a culturally and often legally recognised union between people called spouses. It establishes rights and obligations between them, as well as between them and their children (if any), and between them and their in-laws. It is nearly a cultural universal, but the definition of marriage varies between cultures and religions, and over time. Typically, it is an institution in which interpersonal relationships, usually sexual, are acknowledged or sanctioned. In some cultures, marriage is recommended or considered to be compulsory before pursuing sexual activity. A marriage ceremony is called a wedding, while a private marriage is sometimes called an elopement.\nAround the world, there has been a general trend towards ensuring equal rights for women and ending discrimination and harassment against couples who are interethnic, interracial, interfaith, interdenominational, interclass, intercommunity, transnational, and same-sex as well as immigrant couples, couples with an immigrant spouse, and other minority couples. Debates persist regarding the legal status of married women, leniency towards violence within marriage, customs such as dowry and bride price, marriageable age, and criminalization of premarital and extramarital sex. Individuals may marry for several reasons, including legal, social, libidinal, emotional, financial, spiritual, cultural, economic, political, religious, sexual, and romantic purposes. In some areas of the world, arranged marriage, forced marriage, polygyny marriage, polyandry marriage, group marriage, coverture marriage, child marriage, cousin marriage, sibling marriage, teenage marriage, avunculate marriage, incestuous marriage, and bestiality marriage are practiced and legally permissible, while others areas outlaw them to protect human rights. Female age at marriage has proven to be a strong indicator for female autonomy and is continuously used by economic history research.\nMarriage can be recognized by a state, an organization, a religious authority, a tribal group, a local community, or peers. It is often viewed as a legal contract. A religious marriage ceremony is performed by a religious institution to recognize and create the rights and obligations intrinsic to matrimony in that religion. Religious marriage is known variously as \"sacramental marriage\" in Christianity (especially Catholicism), \"nikah\" in Islam, \"nissuin\" in Judaism, and various other names in other faith traditions, each with their own constraints as to what constitutes, and who can enter into, a valid religious marriage.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"marriage\" appeared around 1300 and is borrowed from Old French (12th century), ultimately tracing to the Latin 'married', past participle of 'to marry'. The adjective ' 'matrimonial, nuptial' could also be used, through nominalization, in the masculine form as a noun for 'husband' and in the feminine form for 'wife'. The related word \"matrimony\" is borrowed from the Old French word ', which appears around 1300 CE and is in turn ultimately a learned borrowing from Latin ', which is derived from ' 'mother' with the suffix for an action, state, or condition.\nDefinitions.\nAnthropologists have proposed several competing definitions of marriage in an attempt to encompass the wide variety of marital practices observed across cultures. Even within Western culture, \"definitions of marriage have careened from one extreme to another and everywhere in between\" (as Evan Gerstmann has put it).\nRelation recognized by custom or law.\nIn \"The History of Human Marriage\" (1891), Edvard Westermarck defined marriage as \"a more or less durable connection between male and female lasting beyond the mere act of propagation till after the birth of the offspring.\" In \"The Future of Marriage in Western Civilization\" (1936), he rejected his earlier definition, instead provisionally defining marriage as \"a relation of one or more men to one or more women that is recognized by custom or law\".\nLegitimacy of offspring.\nThe anthropological handbook \"Notes and Queries\" (1951) defined marriage as \"a union between a man and a woman such that children born to the woman are the recognized legitimate offspring of both partners.\" In recognition of a practice by the Nuer people of Sudan allowing women to act as a husband in certain circumstances (the ghost marriage), Kathleen Gough suggested modifying this to \"a woman and one or more other persons.\"\nIn an analysis of marriage among the Nayar, a polyandrous society in India, Gough found that the group lacked a husband role in the conventional sense. The husband role, unitary in the west, was instead divided between a non-resident \"social father\" of the woman's children, and her lovers, who were the actual procreators. None of these men had legal rights to the woman's child. This forced Gough to disregard sexual access as a key element of marriage and to define it in terms of legitimacy of offspring alone.\nEconomic anthropologist Duran Bell has criticized the legitimacy-based definition on the basis that some societies do not require marriage for legitimacy. He argued that a legitimacy-based definition of marriage is circular in societies where illegitimacy has no other legal or social implications for a child other than the mother being unmarried.\nCollection of rights.\nEdmund Leach criticized Gough's definition for being too restrictive in terms of recognized legitimate offspring and suggested that marriage be viewed in terms of the different types of rights it serves to establish. In a 1955 article in \"Man\", Leach argued that no one definition of marriage applied to all cultures. He offered a list of ten rights associated with marriage, including sexual monopoly and rights with respect to children, with specific rights differing across cultures. Those rights, according to Leach, included:\nRight of sexual access.\nIn a 1997 article in \"Current Anthropology\", Duran Bell describes marriage as \"a relationship between one or more men (male or female) in severalty to one or more women that provides those men with a demand-right of sexual access within a domestic group and identifies women who bear the obligation of yielding to the demands of those specific men.\" In referring to \"men in severalty\", Bell is referring to corporate kin groups such as lineages which, in having paid bride price, retain a right in a woman's offspring even if her husband (a lineage member) deceases (Levirate marriage). In referring to \"men (male or female)\", Bell is referring to women within the lineage who may stand in as the \"social fathers\" of the wife's children born of other lovers. (See Nuer \"ghost marriage\".)\nTypes.\nMonogamy.\nMonogamy is a form of marriage in which an individual has only one spouse during their lifetime or at any one time (serial monogamy).\nAnthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas found a strong correlation between intensive plough agriculture, dowry and monogamy. This pattern was found in a broad swath of Eurasian societies from Japan to Ireland. The majority of Sub-Saharan African societies that practice extensive hoe agriculture, in contrast, show a correlation between \"bride price\" and polygamy. A further study drawing on the Ethnographic Atlas showed a statistical correlation between increasing size of the society, the belief in \"high gods\" to support human morality, and monogamy.\nIn the countries which do not permit polygamy, a person who marries in one of those countries a person while still being lawfully married to another commits the crime of bigamy. In all cases, the second marriage is considered legally null and void. Besides the second and subsequent marriages being void, the bigamist is also liable to other penalties, which also vary between jurisdictions.\nSerial monogamy.\nGovernments that support monogamy may allow easy divorce. In a number of Western countries, divorce rates approach 50%. Those who remarry do so usually no more than three times. Divorce and remarriage can thus result in \"serial monogamy\", i.e. having multiple marriages but only one legal spouse at a time. This can be interpreted as a form of plural mating, as are those societies dominated by female-headed families in the Caribbean, Mauritius and Brazil where there is frequent rotation of unmarried partners. In all, these account for 16 to 24% of the \"monogamous\" category.\nSerial monogamy creates a new kind of relative, the \"ex-\". The \"ex-wife\", for example, may remain an active part of her \"ex-husband's\" or \"ex-wife's\" life, as they may be tied together by transfers of resources (alimony, child support), or shared child custody.\nPolygamy.\nPolygamy is a marriage which includes more than two spouses. When a man is married to more than one wife at a time, the relationship is called polygyny, and there is no marriage bond between the wives; and when a woman is married to more than one husband at a time, it is called polyandry, and there is no marriage bond between the husbands. If a marriage includes multiple husbands or wives, it can be called group marriage.\nA molecular genetic study of global human genetic diversity argued that sexual polygyny was typical of human reproductive patterns until the shift to sedentary farming communities approximately 10,000 to 5,000 years ago in Europe and Asia, and more recently in Africa and the Americas. As noted above, Anthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world utilizing the Ethnographic Atlas found that the majority of Sub-Saharan African societies that practice extensive hoe agriculture show a correlation between \"Bride price\" and polygamy. A survey of other cross-cultural samples has confirmed that the absence of the plough was the only predictor of polygamy, although other factors such as high male mortality in warfare (in non-state societies) and pathogen stress (in state societies) had some impact.\nMarriages are classified according to the number of legal spouses an individual has. The suffix \"-gamy\" refers specifically to the number of spouses, as in bi-gamy (two spouses, generally illegal in most nations), and poly-gamy (more than one spouse).\nSocieties show variable acceptance of polygamy as a cultural ideal and practice. According to the Ethnographic Atlas, of 1,231 societies noted, 186 were monogamous; 453 had occasional polygyny; 588 had more frequent polygyny, and 4 had polyandry. However, as Miriam Zeitzen writes, social tolerance for polygamy is different from the practice of polygamy, since it requires wealth to establish multiple households for multiple wives. The actual practice of polygamy in a tolerant society may actually be low, with the majority of aspirant polygamists practicing monogamous marriage. Tracking the occurrence of polygamy is further complicated in jurisdictions where it has been banned, but continues to be practiced (\"de facto polygamy\").\nZeitzen also notes that Western perceptions of African society and marriage patterns are biased by \"contradictory concerns of nostalgia for traditional African culture versus critique of polygamy as oppressive to women or detrimental to development.\" Polygamy has been condemned as being a form of human rights abuse, with concerns arising over domestic abuse, forced marriage, and neglect. The vast majority of countries do not permit polygamy.\nPolygyny.\nPolygyny usually grants wives equal status, although the husband may have personal preferences. One type of de facto polygyny is concubinage, where only one woman gets a wife's rights and status, while other women remain legal house mistresses.\nAlthough a society may be classified as polygynous, not all marriages in it necessarily are; monogamous marriages may in fact predominate. It is to this flexibility that Anthropologist Robin Fox attributes its success as a social support system: This has often meant \u2013 given the imbalance in the sex ratios, the higher male infant mortality, the shorter life span of males, the loss of males in wartime, etc. \u2013 that often women were left without financial support from husbands. To correct this condition, females had to be killed at birth, remain single, become prostitutes, or be siphoned off into celibate religious orders. Polygynous systems have the advantage that they can promise, as did the Mormons, a home and family for every woman.\nNonetheless, polygyny is a gender issue which offers men asymmetrical benefits. In some cases, there is a large age discrepancy (as much as a generation) between a man and his youngest wife, compounding the power differential between the two. Tensions not only exist \"between\" genders, but also \"within\" genders; senior and junior men compete for wives, and senior and junior wives in the same household may experience radically different life conditions, and internal hierarchy. Several studies have suggested that the wive's relationship with other women, including co-wives and husband's female kin, are more critical relationships than that with her husband for her productive, reproductive and personal achievement. In some societies, the co-wives are relatives, usually sisters, a practice called \"sororal polygyny\"; the pre-existing relationship between the co-wives is thought to decrease potential tensions within the marriage.\nFox argues that \"the major difference between polygyny and monogamy could be stated thus: while plural mating occurs in both systems, under polygyny several unions may be recognized as being legal marriages while under monogamy only one of the unions is so recognized. Often, however, it is difficult to draw a hard and fast line between the two.\"\nAs polygamy in Africa is increasingly subject to legal limitations, a variant form of \"de facto\" (as opposed to legal or \"de jure\") polygyny is being practiced in urban centers. Although it does not involve multiple (now illegal) formal marriages, the domestic and personal arrangements follow old polygynous patterns. The de facto form of polygyny is found in other parts of the world as well (including some Mormon sects and Muslim families in the United States).\nIn some societies such as the Lovedu of South Africa, or the Nuer of the Sudan, aristocratic women may become female 'husbands.' In the Lovedu case, this female husband may take a number of polygamous wives. This is not a lesbian relationship, but a means of legitimately expanding a royal lineage by attaching these wives' children to it. The relationships are considered polygynous, not polyandrous, because the female husband is in fact assuming masculine gendered political roles.\nReligious groups have differing views on the legitimacy of polygyny. It is allowed in Islam and Confucianism. Judaism and Christianity have mentioned practices involving polygyny in the past, however, outright religious acceptance of such practices was not addressed until its rejection in later passages. They do explicitly prohibit polygyny today.\nPolyandry.\nPolyandry is notably more rare than polygyny, though less rare than the figure commonly cited in the \"Ethnographic Atlas\" (1980) which listed only those polyandrous societies found in the Himalayan Mountains. More recent studies have found 53 societies outside the 28 found in the Himalayans which practice polyandry. It is most common in egalitarian societies marked by high male mortality or male absenteeism. It is associated with \"partible paternity\", the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father.\nThe explanation for polyandry in the Himalayan Mountains is related to the scarcity of land; the marriage of all brothers in a family to the same wife (\"fraternal polyandry\") allows family land to remain intact and undivided. If every brother married separately and had children, family land would be split into unsustainable small plots. In Europe, this was prevented through the social practice of impartible inheritance (the dis-inheriting of most siblings, some of whom went on to become celibate monks and priests).\nPlural marriage.\nGroup marriage (also known as \"multi-lateral marriage\") is a form of polyamory in which more than two persons form a family unit, with all the members of the group marriage being considered to be married to all the other members of the group marriage, and all members of the marriage share parental responsibility for any children arising from the marriage. No country legally condones group marriages, neither under the law nor as a common law marriage, but historically it has been practiced by some cultures of Polynesia, Asia, Papua New Guinea and the Americas \u2013 as well as in some intentional communities and alternative subcultures such as the Oneida Perfectionists in up-state New York. Of the 250 societies reported by the American anthropologist George Murdock in 1949, only the Kaingang of Brazil had any group marriages at all.\nChild marriage.\nA child marriage is a marriage where one or both spouses are under the age of 18. It is related to child betrothal and teenage pregnancy.\nChild marriage was common throughout history, even up until the 1900s in the United States, where in 1880, in the state of Delaware, the age of consent for marriage was 7 years old. Still, in 2017, over half of the 50 United States have no explicit minimum age to marry and several states set the age as low as 14. Today it is condemned by international human rights organizations. Child marriages are often arranged between the families of the future bride and groom, sometimes as soon as the girl is born. However, in the late 1800s in England and the United States, feminist activists began calling for raised age of consent laws, which was eventually handled in the 1920s, having been raised to 16\u201318.\nChild marriages can also occur in the context of bride kidnapping.\nWhile child marriage is observed for both boys and girls, the overwhelming majority of child spouses are girls. In many cases, only one marriage-partner is a child, usually the female, due to the importance placed upon female virginity. Causes of child marriage include poverty, bride price, dowry, laws that allow child marriages, religious and social pressures, regional customs, fear of remaining unmarried, and perceived inability of women to work for money.\nToday, child marriages are widespread in parts of the world; being most common in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, with more than half of the girls in some countries in those regions being married before 18. The incidence of child marriage has been falling in most parts of the world. In developed countries, child marriage is outlawed or restricted.\nGirls who marry before 18 are at greater risk of becoming victims of domestic violence, than those who marry later, especially when they are married to a much older man.\nSame-sex and third-gender marriages.\nSeveral kinds of same-sex marriages have been documented in Indigenous and lineage-based cultures. In the Americas, We'wha (Zuni), was a \"lhamana\" (male individuals who, at least some of the time, dress and live in the roles usually filled by women in that culture); a respected artist, We'wha served as an emissary of the Zuni to Washington, where he met President Grover Cleveland. We'wha had at least one husband who was generally recognized as such.\nWhile it is a relatively new practice to grant same-sex couples the same form of legal marital recognition as commonly granted to mixed-sex couples, there is some history of recorded same-sex unions around the world. Ancient Greek same-sex relationships were like modern companionate marriages, unlike their different-sex marriages in which the spouses had few emotional ties, and the husband had freedom to engage in outside sexual liaisons. The Codex Theodosianus (\"C. Th.\" 9.7.3) issued in 438 CE imposed severe penalties or death on same-sex relationships, but the exact intent of the law and its relation to social practice is unclear, as only a few examples of same-sex relationships in that culture exist. Same-sex unions were celebrated in some regions of China, such as Fujian. Possibly the earliest documented same-sex wedding in Latin Christendom occurred in Rome, Italy, at the San Giovanni a Porta Latina basilica in 1581.\nTemporary marriages.\nSeveral cultures have practised temporary and conditional marriages. Examples include the Celtic practice of handfasting and fixed-term marriages in the Muslim community. Pre-Islamic Arabs practiced a form of temporary marriage that carries on today in the practice of Nikah mut'ah, a fixed-term marriage contract. The Islamic prophet Muhammad sanctioned a temporary marriage \u2013 sigheh in Iran and muta'a in Iraq \u2013 which can provide a legitimizing cover for sex workers. The same forms of temporary marriage have been used in Egypt, Lebanon and Iran to make the donation of a human ova legal for in vitro fertilisation; a woman cannot, however, use this kind of marriage to obtain a sperm donation. Muslim controversies related to Nikah Mut'ah have resulted in the practice being confined mostly to Shi'ite communities. The matrilineal Mosuo of China practice what they call \"walking marriage\".\nCohabitation.\nIn some jurisdictions cohabitation, in certain circumstances, may constitute a common-law marriage, an unregistered partnership, or otherwise provide the unmarried partners with various rights and responsibilities; and in some countries, the laws recognize cohabitation in lieu of institutional marriage for taxation and social security benefits. This is the case, for example, in Australia. Cohabitation may be an option pursued as a form of resistance to traditional institutionalized marriage. However, in this context, some nations reserve the right to define the relationship as marital, or otherwise to regulate the relation, even if the relation has not been registered with the state or a religious institution.\nConversely, institutionalized marriages may not involve cohabitation. In some cases, couples living together do not wish to be recognized as married. This may occur because pension or alimony rights are adversely affected; because of taxation considerations; because of immigration issues, or for other reasons. Such marriages have also been increasingly common in Beijing. Guo Jianmei, director of the center for women's studies at Beijing University, told a Newsday correspondent, \"Walking marriages reflect sweeping changes in Chinese society.\" A \"walking marriage\" refers to a type of temporary marriage formed by the Mosuo of China, in which male partners live elsewhere and make nightly visits. A similar arrangement in Saudi Arabia, called misyar marriage, also involves the husband and wife living separately but meeting regularly.\nPartner selection.\nThere is wide cross-cultural variation in the social rules governing the selection of a partner for marriage. There is variation in the degree to which partner selection is an individual decision by the partners or a collective decision by the partners' kin groups, and there is variation in the rules regulating which partners are valid choices.\nThe United Nations World Fertility Report of 2003 reports that 89% of all people get married before age forty-nine. The percent of women and men who marry before age forty-nine drops to nearly 50% in some nations and reaches near 100% in other nations.\nIn other cultures with less strict rules governing the groups from which a partner can be chosen the selection of a marriage partner may involve either the couple going through a selection process of courtship or the marriage may be arranged by the couple's parents or an outside party, a matchmaker.\nAge difference.\nSome people want to marry a person that is older or younger than they. This may impact marital stability and partners with more than a 10-year gap in age tend to experience social disapproval. In addition, older women (older than 35) have increased health risks when getting pregnant.\nSocial status and wealth.\nSome people want to marry a person with higher or lower status than them. Others want to marry people who have similar status. In many societies, women marry men who are of higher social status. There are marriages where each party has sought a partner of similar status. There are other marriages in which the man is older than the woman.\nSome persons also wish to engage in transactional relationship for money rather than love (thus a type of marriage of convenience). Such people are sometimes referred to as gold diggers. Separate property systems can however be used to prevent property of being passed on to partners after divorce or death.\nHigher income men are more likely to marry and less likely to divorce. High income women are more likely to divorce.\nIncest taboo, exogamy and endogamy.\nSocieties have often placed restrictions on marriage to relatives, though the degree of prohibited relationship varies widely. Marriages between parents and children, or between full siblings, with few exceptions, have been considered incest and forbidden. However, marriages between more distant relatives have been much more common, with one estimate being that 80% of all marriages in history have been between second cousins or closer. This proportion has fallen dramatically, but still, more than 10% of all marriages are believed to be between people who are second cousins or more closely related. In the United States, such marriages are now highly stigmatized, and laws ban most or all first-cousin marriage in 30 states. Specifics vary: in South Korea, historically it was illegal to marry someone with the same last name and same ancestral line.\nAn Avunculate marriage is a marriage that occurs between an uncle and his niece or between an aunt and her nephew. Such marriages are illegal in most countries due to incest restrictions. However, a small number of countries have legalized it, including Argentina, Australia, Austria, Malaysia, and Russia.\nIn various societies, the choice of partner is often limited to suitable persons from specific social groups. In some societies the rule is that a partner is selected from an individual's own social group \u2013 endogamy, this is often the case in class- and caste-based societies. But in other societies a partner must be chosen from a different group than one's own \u2013 exogamy, this may be the case in societies practicing totemic religion where society is divided into several exogamous totemic clans, such as most Aboriginal Australian societies. In other societies a person is expected to marry their cross-cousin, a woman must marry her father's sister's son and a man must marry his mother's brother's daughter \u2013 this is often the case if either a society has a rule of tracing kinship exclusively through patrilineal or matrilineal descent groups as among the Akan people of West Africa. Another kind of marriage selection is the levirate marriage in which widows are obligated to marry their husband's brother, mostly found in societies where kinship is based on endogamous clan groups.\nReligion has commonly weighed in on the matter of which relatives, if any, are allowed to marry. Relations may be by consanguinity or affinity, meaning by blood or by marriage. On the marriage of cousins, Catholic policy has evolved from initial acceptance, through a long period of general prohibition, to the contemporary requirement for a dispensation. Islam has always allowed it, while Hindu texts vary widely.\nPrescriptive marriage.\nIn a wide array of lineage-based societies with a classificatory kinship system, potential spouses are sought from a specific class of relative as determined by a prescriptive marriage rule. This rule may be expressed by anthropologists using a \"descriptive\" kinship term, such as a \"man's mother's brother's daughter\" (also known as a \"cross-cousin\"). Such descriptive rules mask the participant's perspective: a man should marry a woman from his mother's lineage. Within the society's kinship terminology, such relatives are usually indicated by a specific term which sets them apart as potentially marriageable. Pierre Bourdieu notes, however, that very few marriages ever follow the rule, and that when they do so, it is for \"practical kinship\" reasons such as the preservation of family property, rather than the \"official kinship\" ideology.\nInsofar as regular marriages following prescriptive rules occur, lineages are linked together in fixed relationships; these ties between lineages may form political alliances in kinship dominated societies. French structural anthropologist Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss developed alliance theory to account for the \"elementary\" kinship structures created by the limited number of prescriptive marriage rules possible.\nA pragmatic (or 'arranged') marriage is made easier by formal procedures of family or group politics. A responsible authority sets up or encourages the marriage; they may, indeed, engage a professional matchmaker to find a suitable spouse for an unmarried person. The authority figure could be parents, family, a religious official, or a group consensus.\nForced marriage.\nA forced marriage is a marriage in which one or both of the parties is married against their will. Forced marriages continue to be practiced in parts of the world, especially in South Asia and Africa. The line between forced marriage and consensual marriage may become blurred, because the social norms of these cultures dictate that one should never oppose the desire of one's parents/relatives in regard to the choice of a spouse; in such cultures, it is not necessary for violence, threats, intimidation etc. to occur, the person simply \"consents\" to the marriage even if they do not want it, out of the implied social pressure and duty. The customs of bride price and dowry, that exist in parts of the world, can lead to bride buying and selling people into marriage.\nIn some societies, ranging from Central Asia to the Caucasus to Africa, the custom of bride kidnapping still exists, in which a woman is captured by a man and his friends. Sometimes this covers an elopement, but sometimes it depends on sexual violence. In previous times, \"raptio\" was a larger-scale version of this, with groups of women captured by groups of men, sometimes in war; the most famous example is The Rape of the Sabine Women, which provided the first citizens of Rome with their wives.\nOther marriage partners are more or less imposed on an individual. For example, widow inheritance provides a widow with another man from her late husband's brothers.\nIn rural areas of India, child marriage is practiced, with parents often arranging the wedding, sometimes even before the child is born. This practice was made illegal under the Child Marriage Restraint Act of 1929.\nEconomic considerations.\nThe financial aspects of marriage vary between cultures and have changed over time.\nIn some cultures, dowries and bride wealth continue to be required today. In both cases, the financial arrangements are usually made between the groom (or his family) and the bride's family; with the bride often not being involved in the negotiations, and often not having a choice in whether to participate in the marriage.\nIn Early modern Britain, the social status of the couple was supposed to be equal. After the marriage, all the property (called \"fortune\") and expected inheritances of the wife belonged to the husband.\nDowry.\nA dowry is a process whereby parental property is distributed to a daughter at her marriage (i.e. \"inter vivos\") rather than at the holder's death (\"mortis causa\")\u2026 A dowry establishes some variety of conjugal fund, the nature of which may vary widely. This fund ensures her support (or endowment) in widowhood and eventually goes to provide for her sons and daughters.\nIn some cultures, especially in countries such as Turkey, India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Morocco, Nepal, dowries continue to be expected. In India, thousands of dowry-related deaths have taken place on yearly basis, to counter this problem, several jurisdictions have enacted laws restricting or banning dowry (see Dowry law in India). In Nepal, dowry was made illegal in 2009. Some authors believe that the giving and receiving of dowry reflects the status and even the effort to climb high in social hierarchy.\nDower.\nDirect Dowry contrasts with bride wealth, which is paid by the groom or his family to the bride's parents, and with indirect dowry (or dower), which is property given to the bride herself by the groom at the time of marriage and which remains under her ownership and control.\nIn the Jewish tradition, the rabbis in ancient times insisted on the marriage couple entering into a prenuptial agreement, called a \"ketubah\". Besides other things, the \"ketubah\" provided for an amount to be paid by the husband in the event of a divorce or his estate in the event of his death. This amount was a replacement of the biblical dower or bride price, which was payable at the time of the marriage by the groom to the father of the bride, because many young prospective husbands could not raise the bride price at the time when they would normally be expected to marry. It is the predecessor to the wife's present-day entitlement to maintenance in the event of the breakup of marriage, and family maintenance in the event of the husband not providing adequately for the wife in his will. Another function performed by the \"ketubah\" amount was to provide a disincentive for the husband contemplating divorcing his wife.\nMorning gifts, which might also be arranged by the bride's father rather than the bride, are given to the bride herself; the name derives from the Germanic tribal custom of giving them the morning after the wedding night. She might have control of this morning gift during the lifetime of her husband, but is entitled to it when widowed. If the amount of her inheritance is settled by law rather than agreement, it may be called dower. Depending on legal systems and the exact arrangement, she may not be entitled to dispose of it after her death, and may lose the property if she remarries. Morning gifts were preserved for centuries in morganatic marriage, a union where the wife's inferior social status was held to prohibit her children from inheriting a noble's titles or estates. In this case, the morning gift would support the wife and children. Another legal provision for widowhood was jointure, in which property, often land, would be held in joint tenancy, so that it would automatically go to the widow on her husband's death.\nIslamic tradition has similar practices. A 'mahr', either immediate or deferred, is the woman's portion of the groom's wealth (divorce) or estate (death). These amounts are usually set on the basis of the groom's own and family wealth and incomes, but in some parts these are set very high so as to provide a disincentive for the groom exercising the divorce, or the husband's family 'inheriting' a large portion of the estate, especially if there are no male offspring from the marriage. In some countries, including Iran, the mahr or alimony can amount to more than a man can ever hope to earn, sometimes up to US$1,000,000 (4000 official Iranian gold coins). If the husband cannot pay the mahr, either in case of a divorce or on demand, according to the current laws in Iran, he will have to pay it by installments. Failure to pay the mahr might even lead to imprisonment.\nBridewealth.\nBridewealth is a common practice in parts of Southeast Asia (Thailand, Cambodia), parts of Central Asia, and in much of sub-Saharan Africa. It is also known as brideprice although this has fallen in disfavor as it implies the purchase of the bride. Bridewealth is the amount of money or property or wealth paid by the groom or his family to the parents of a woman upon the marriage of their daughter to the groom. In anthropological literature, bride price has often been explained as payment made to compensate the bride's family for the loss of her labor and fertility. In some cases, bridewealth is a means by which the groom's family's ties to the children of the union are recognized.\nTaxation.\nIn some countries a married person or couple benefits from various taxation advantages not available to a single person. For example, spouses may be allowed to average their combined incomes. This is advantageous to a married couple with disparate incomes. To compensate for this, countries may provide a higher tax bracket for the averaged income of a married couple. While income averaging might still benefit a married couple with a stay-at-home spouse, such averaging would cause a married couple with roughly equal personal incomes to pay more total tax than they would as two single persons. In the United States, this is called the marriage penalty.\nWhen the rates applied by the tax code are not based income averaging, but rather on the \"sum\" of individuals' incomes, higher rates will usually apply to each individual in a two-earner households in a progressive tax systems. This is most often the case with high-income taxpayers and is another situation called a marriage penalty.\nConversely, when progressive tax is levied on the individual with no consideration for the partnership, dual-income couples fare much better than single-income couples with similar household incomes. The effect can be increased when the welfare system treats the same income as a shared income thereby denying welfare access to the non-earning spouse. Such systems apply in Australia and Canada, for example.\nPost-marital residence.\nIn many Western cultures, marriage usually leads to the formation of a new household comprising the married couple, with the married couple living together in the same home, often sharing the same bed, but in some other cultures this is not the tradition. Among the Minangkabau of West Sumatra, residency after marriage is matrilocal, with the husband moving into the household of his wife's mother. Residency after marriage can also be patrilocal or avunculocal. In these cases, married couples may not form an independent household, but remain part of an extended family household.\nEarly theories explaining the determinants of postmarital residence connected it with the sexual division of labor. However, to date, cross-cultural tests of this hypothesis using worldwide samples have failed to find any significant relationship between these two variables. However, Korotayev's tests show that the female contribution to subsistence does correlate significantly with matrilocal residence in general. However, this correlation is masked by a general polygyny factor.\nAlthough, in different-sex marriages, an increase in the female contribution to subsistence tends to lead to matrilocal residence, it also tends simultaneously to lead to general non-sororal polygyny which effectively destroys matrilocality. If this polygyny factor is controlled (e.g., through a multiple regression model), division of labor turns out to be a significant predictor of postmarital residence. Thus, Murdock's hypotheses regarding the relationships between the sexual division of labor and postmarital residence were basically correct, though the actual relationships between those two groups of variables are more complicated than he expected.\nThere has been a trend toward the neolocal residence in western societies.\nLaw.\nMarriage laws refer to the legal requirements which determine the validity of a marriage, which vary considerably between countries. Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights declares that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;1. Men and women of full age, without any limitation due to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. \n2. Marriage shall be entered into only with the free and full consent of the intending spouses.\n3. The family is the natural and fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to protection by society and the State.\nRights and obligations.\nA marriage bestows rights and obligations on the married parties, and sometimes on relatives as well, being the sole mechanism for the creation of affinal ties (in-laws). These may include, depending on jurisdiction:\nThese rights and obligations vary considerably between societies, and between groups within society. These might include arranged marriages, family obligations, the legal establishment of a nuclear family unit, the legal protection of children and public declaration of commitment.\nProperty regime.\nIn many countries today, each marriage partner has the choice of keeping his or her property separate or combining properties. In the latter case, called community property, when the marriage ends by divorce each owns half. In lieu of a will or trust, property owned by the deceased generally is inherited by the surviving spouse.\nIn some legal systems, the partners in a marriage are \"jointly liable\" for the debts of the marriage. This has a basis in a traditional legal notion called the \"Doctrine of Necessities\" whereby, in a heterosexual marriage, a husband was responsible to provide necessary things for his wife. Where this is the case, one partner may be sued to collect a debt for which they did not expressly contract. Critics of this practice note that debt collection agencies can abuse this by claiming an unreasonably wide range of debts to be expenses of the marriage. The cost of defense and the burden of proof is then placed on the non-contracting party to prove that the expense is not a debt of the family. The respective maintenance obligations, both during and eventually after a marriage, are regulated in most jurisdictions; alimony is one such method.\nRestrictions.\nMarriage is an institution that is historically filled with restrictions. From age, to race, to social status, to consanguinity, to gender, restrictions are placed on marriage by society for reasons of benefiting the children, passing on healthy genes, maintaining cultural values, or because of prejudice and fear. Almost all cultures that recognize marriage also recognize adultery as a violation of the terms of marriage.\nAge.\nMost jurisdictions set a minimum age for marriage; that is, a person must attain a certain age to be legally allowed to marry. This age may depend on circumstances, for instance exceptions from the general rule may be permitted if the parents of a young person express their consent and/or if a court decides that said marriage is in the best interest of the young person (often this applies in cases where a girl is pregnant). Although most age restrictions are in place in order to prevent children from being forced into marriages, especially to much older partners \u2013 marriages which can have negative education and health related consequences, and lead to child sexual abuse and other forms of violence \u2013 such child marriages remain common in parts of the world. According to the UN, child marriages are most common in rural sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia. The ten countries with the highest rates of child marriage are: Niger (75%), Chad, Central African Republic, Bangladesh, Guinea, Mozambique, Mali, Burkina Faso, South Sudan, and Malawi.\nKinship.\nTo prohibit incest and eugenic reasons, marriage laws have set restrictions for relatives to marry. Direct blood relatives are usually prohibited to marry, while for branch line relatives, laws are wary.\nKinship relations through marriage is also called \"affinity\", relationships that arise in one's group of origin, can also be called one's descent group. Some cultures in kinship relationships may be considered to extend out to those who they have economic or political relationships with; or other forms of social connections. Within some cultures they may lead you back to gods or animal ancestors (totems). This can be conceived of on a more or less literal basis.\nRace.\nLaws banning \"race-mixing\" were enforced in certain North American jurisdictions from 1691 until 1967, in Nazi Germany (the Nuremberg Laws) from 1935 until 1945, and in South Africa during most part of the apartheid era (1949\u20131985). All these laws primarily banned marriage between persons of different racially or ethnically defined groups, which was termed \"amalgamation\" or \"miscegenation\" in the U.S. The laws in Nazi Germany and many of the U.S. states, as well as South Africa, also banned sexual relations between such individuals.\nIn the United States, laws in some but not all of the states prohibited the marriage of whites and blacks, and in many states also the intermarriage of whites with Native Americans or Asians. In the U.S., such laws were known as anti-miscegenation laws. From 1913 until 1948, 30 out of the then 48 states enforced such laws. Although an \"Anti-Miscegenation Amendment\" to the United States Constitution was proposed in 1871, in 1912\u20131913, and in 1928, no nationwide law against racially mixed marriages was ever enacted. In 1967, the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously ruled in \"Loving v. Virginia\" that anti-miscegenation laws are unconstitutional. With this ruling, these laws were no longer in effect in the remaining 16 states that still had them.\nThe Nazi ban on interracial marriage and interracial sex was enacted in September 1935 as part of the Nuremberg Laws, the \"Gesetz zum Schutze des deutschen Blutes und der deutschen Ehre\" (The Law for the Protection of German Blood and German Honour). The Nuremberg Laws classified Jews as a race and forbade marriage and extramarital sexual relations at first with people of Jewish descent, but was later ended to the \"Gypsies, Negroes or their bastard offspring\" and people of \"German or related blood\". Such relations were marked as \"Rassenschande\" (lit.\u2009'race-disgrace') and could be punished by imprisonment (usually followed by deportation to a concentration camp) and even by death.\nIn South Africa, the Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act, 1949 prohibited marriage between persons of different races, and the Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations with a person of a different race a crime.\nSex.\nSame-sex marriage is legally performed and recognized in countries such as Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Uruguay. Israel recognizes same-sex marriages entered into abroad as full marriages.\nThe introduction of same-sex marriage has varied by jurisdiction, being variously accomplished through legislative change to marriage law, a court ruling based on constitutional guarantees of equality, or by direct popular vote (via ballot initiative or referendum). The recognition of same-sex marriage is considered to be a human right and a civil right as well as a political, social, and religious issue. The most prominent supporters of same-sex marriage are human rights and civil rights organizations as well as the medical and scientific communities, while the most prominent opponents are religious groups. Various faith communities around the world support same-sex marriage, while many religious groups oppose it. Polls consistently show continually rising support for the recognition of same-sex marriage in all developed democracies and in some developing democracies.\nThe establishment of recognition in law for the marriages of same-sex couples is one of the most prominent objectives of the LGBT rights movement.\nNumber of spouses.\nPolygyny is widely practiced in mostly Muslim and African countries. In the Middle Eastern region, Israel, Turkey and Tunisia are notable exceptions.\nIn most other jurisdictions, polygamy is illegal. For example, In the United States, polygamy is illegal in all 50 states.\nIn the late-19th century, citizens of the self-governing territory of what is present-day Utah were forced by the United States federal government to abandon the practice of polygamy through the vigorous enforcement of several Acts of Congress, and eventually complied. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints formally abolished the practice in 1890, in a document labeled 'The Manifesto' (see Latter Day Saint polygamy in the late-19th century). Among American Muslims, a small minority of around 50,000 to 100,000 people are estimated to live in families with a husband maintaining an illegal polygamous relationship.\nSeveral countries such as India and Sri Lanka, permit only their Islamic citizens to practice polygamy. Some Indians have converted to Islam in order to bypass such legal restrictions. Predominantly Christian nations usually do not allow polygamous unions, with a handful of exceptions being the Republic of the Congo, Uganda, and Zambia.\nState recognition.\nWhen a marriage is performed and carried out by a government institution in accordance with the marriage laws of the jurisdiction, without religious content, it is a civil marriage. Civil marriage recognizes and creates the rights and obligations intrinsic to matrimony in the eyes of the state. Some countries do not recognize locally performed religious marriage on its own, and require a separate civil marriage for official purposes. Conversely, civil marriage does not exist in some countries governed by a religious legal system, such as Saudi Arabia, where marriages contracted abroad might not be recognized if they were contracted contrary to Saudi interpretations of Islamic religious law. In countries governed by a mixed secular-religious legal system, such as Lebanon and Israel, locally performed civil marriage does not exist within the country, which prevents interfaith and various other marriages that contradict religious laws from being entered into in the country; however, civil marriages performed abroad may be recognized by the state even if they conflict with religious laws. For example, in the case of recognition of marriage in Israel, this includes recognition of not only interfaith civil marriages performed abroad, but also overseas same-sex civil marriages.\nIn various jurisdictions, a civil marriage may take place as part of the religious marriage ceremony, although they are theoretically distinct. Some jurisdictions allow civil marriages in circumstances which are notably not allowed by particular religions, such as same-sex marriages or civil unions. Churches may have less strict limits than the civil jurisdictions. It is possible for two people to be recognized as married by a religious or other institution, but not by the state, and hence without the legal rights and obligations of marriage; or to have a civil marriage deemed invalid and sinful by a religion. Similarly, a couple may remain married in religious eyes after a civil divorce.\nMost sovereign states and other jurisdictions limit legally recognized marriage to opposite-sex couples and a diminishing number of these permit polygyny marriage, polyandry marriage, group marriage, coverture marriage, arranged marriages, forced marriages, child marriages, cousin marriages, sibling marriages, teenage marriages, avunculate marriages, incestuous marriages, and bestiality marriages. In modern times, a growing number of countries, primarily developed democracies, have lifted bans on, and have established legal recognition for, equal rights for women and the marriages of interethnic, interracial, interfaith, interdenominational, interclass, intercommunity, transnational, and same-sex couples as well as immigrant couples, couples with an immigrant spouse, and other minority couples. In some areas, child marriages and polygamy may occur in spite of national laws against the practice.\nMarriage license, civil ceremony and registration.\nA marriage is usually formalized at a wedding or marriage ceremony. The ceremony may be officiated either by a religious official, by a government official or by a state approved celebrant. In various European and Latin American countries, any religious ceremony must be held separately from the required civil ceremony. Some countries \u2013 such as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, the Netherlands, Romania and Turkey \u2013 require that a civil ceremony take place before any religious one. In some countries \u2013 notably the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Norway, and Spain \u2013 both ceremonies can be held together; the officiant at the religious and civil ceremony also serving as agent of the state to perform the civil ceremony. To avoid any implication that the state is \"recognizing\" a religious marriage (which is prohibited in some countries) \u2013 the \"civil\" ceremony is said to be taking place at the same time as the religious ceremony. Often this involves simply signing a register during the religious ceremony. If the civil element of the religious ceremony is omitted, the marriage ceremony is not recognized as a marriage by government under the law.\nSome countries, such as Australia, permit marriages to be held in private and at any location; others, including England and Wales, require that the civil ceremony be conducted in a place open to the public and specially sanctioned by law for the purpose. In England, the place of marriage formerly had to be a church or register office, but this was extended to any public venue with the necessary licence. An exception can be made in the case of marriage by special emergency license (UK: licence), which is normally granted only when one of the parties is terminally ill. Rules about where and when persons can marry vary from place to place. Some regulations require one of the parties to reside within the jurisdiction of the register office (formerly parish).\nEach religious authority has rules for the manner in which marriages are to be conducted by their officials and members. Where religious marriages are recognised by the state, the officiator must also conform with the law of the jurisdiction.\nCommon-law marriage.\nIn a small number of jurisdictions marriage relationships may be created by the operation of the law alone. Unlike the typical ceremonial marriage with legal contract, wedding ceremony, and other details, a common-law marriage may be called \"marriage by habit and repute (cohabitation).\" A de facto common-law marriage without a license or ceremony is legally binding in some jurisdictions but has no legal consequence in others.\nCivil unions.\nA \"civil union\", also referred to as a \"civil partnership\", is a legally recognized form of partnership similar to marriage. Beginning with Denmark in 1989, civil unions under one name or another have been established by law in several countries in order to provide same-sex couples rights, benefits, and responsibilities similar (in some countries, identical) to opposite-sex civil marriage. In some jurisdictions, such as Brazil, New Zealand, Uruguay, Ecuador, France and the U.S. states of Hawaii and Illinois, civil unions are also open to opposite-sex couples.\n\"Marriage of convenience\".\nSometimes people marry to take advantage of a certain situation, sometimes called a marriage of convenience or a sham marriage. In 2003, over 180,000 immigrants were admitted to the U.S. as spouses of U.S. citizens; more were admitted as fianc\u00e9s of US citizens for the purpose of being married within 90 days. These marriages had a diverse range of motives, including obtaining permanent residency, securing an inheritance that has a marriage clause, or to enroll in health insurance, among many others. While all marriages have a complex combination of conveniences motivating the parties to marry, a marriage of convenience is one that is devoid of normal reasons to marry. In certain countries like Singapore sham marriages are punishable criminal offences.\nContemporary legal and human rights criticisms of marriage.\nPeople have proposed arguments against marriage for reasons that include political, philosophical and religious criticisms; concerns about the divorce rate; individual liberty and gender equality; questioning the necessity of having a personal relationship sanctioned by government or religious authorities; or the promotion of celibacy for religious or philosophical reasons. Research has found that unhappily married couples are at 3\u201325 times the risk of developing clinical depression.\nPower and gender roles.\nHistorically, in most cultures, married women had very few rights of their own, being considered, along with the family's children, the property of the husband; as such, they could not own or inherit property, or represent themselves legally (see, for example, coverture). Since the late 19th century, in some (primarily Western) countries, marriage has undergone gradual legal changes, aimed at improving the rights of the wife. These changes included giving wives legal identities of their own, abolishing the right of husbands to physically discipline their wives, giving wives property rights, liberalizing divorce laws, providing wives with reproductive rights of their own, and requiring a wife's consent when sexual relations occur. In the 21st century, there continue to be controversies regarding the legal status of married women, legal acceptance of or leniency towards violence within marriage (especially sexual violence), traditional marriage customs such as dowry and bride price, forced marriage, marriageable age, and criminalization of consensual behaviors such as premarital and extramarital sex.\nFeminist theory approaches opposite-sex marriage as an institution traditionally rooted in patriarchy that promotes male superiority and power over women. This power dynamic conceptualizes men as \"the provider operating in the public sphere\" and women as \"the caregivers operating within the private sphere\". \"Theoretically, women ... [were] defined as the property of their husbands ... The adultery of a woman was always treated with more severity than that of a man.\" \"[F]eminist demands for a wife's control over her own property were not met [in parts of Britain] until ... [laws were passed in the late 19th century].\"\nTraditional heterosexual marriage imposed an obligation of the wife to be sexually available for her husband and an obligation of the husband to provide material/financial support for the wife. Numerous philosophers, feminists and other academic figures have commented on this throughout history, condemning the hypocrisy of legal and religious authorities in regard to sexual issues; pointing to the lack of choice of a woman in regard to controlling her own sexuality; and drawing parallels between marriage, an institution promoted as sacred, and prostitution, widely condemned and vilified (though often tolerated as a \"necessary evil\"). Mary Wollstonecraft, in the 18th century, described marriage as \"legal prostitution\". Bertrand Russell in his book \"Marriage and Morals\" wrote that: \"Marriage is for woman the commonest mode of livelihood, and the total amount of undesired sex endured by women is probably greater in marriage than in prostitution.\" Angela Carter in \"Nights at the Circus\" wrote: \"What is marriage but prostitution to one man instead of many?\"\nSome critics object to what they see as propaganda in relation to marriage \u2013 from the government, religious organizations, the media \u2013 which aggressively promote marriage as a solution for all social problems; such propaganda includes, for instance, marriage promotion in schools, where children, especially girls, are bombarded with positive information about marriage, being presented only with the information prepared by authorities.\nThe performance of dominant gender roles by men and submissive gender roles by women influence the power dynamic of a heterosexual marriage. In some American households, women internalize gender role stereotypes and often assimilate into the role of \"wife\", \"mother\", and \"caretaker\" in conformity to societal norms and their male partner. Author bell hooks states \"within the family structure, individuals learn to accept sexist oppression as 'natural' and are primed to support other forms of oppression, including heterosexist domination.\" \"[T]he cultural, economic, political and legal supremacy of the husband\" was \"[t]raditional ... under English law\". This patriarchal dynamic is contrasted with a conception of egalitarian or peer marriage in which power and labour are divided equally, and not according to gender roles.\nIn the US, studies have shown that, despite egalitarian ideals being common, less than half of respondents viewed their opposite-sex relationships as equal in power, with unequal relationships being more commonly dominated by the male partner. Studies also show that married couples find the highest level of satisfaction in egalitarian relationships and lowest levels of satisfaction in wife dominate relationships. In recent years, egalitarian or peer marriages have been receiving increasing focus and attention politically, economically and culturally in a number of countries, including the United States.\nExtra-marital sex.\nDifferent societies demonstrate variable tolerance of extramarital sex. The Standard Cross-Cultural Sample describes the occurrence of extramarital sex by gender in over 50 pre-industrial cultures. The occurrence of extramarital sex by men is described as \"universal\" in 6 cultures, \"moderate\" in 29 cultures, \"occasional\" in 6 cultures, and \"uncommon\" in 10 cultures. The occurrence of extramarital sex by women is described as \"universal\" in 6 cultures, \"moderate\" in 23 cultures, \"occasional\" in 9 cultures, and \"uncommon\" in 15 cultures. Three studies using nationally representative samples in the United States found that between 10 and 15% of women and 20\u201325% of men engage in extramarital sex.\nMany of the world's major religions look with disfavor on sexual relations outside marriage. In some non-secular Islamic countries, there are criminal penalties for sexual intercourse before marriage. Sexual relations by a married person with someone other than his/her spouse is known as adultery. Adultery is considered in many jurisdictions to be a crime and grounds for divorce.\nIn some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, Kuwait, Maldives, Morocco, Oman, Mauritania, United Arab Emirates, Sudan, Yemen, any form of sexual activity outside marriage is illegal.\nIn some parts of the world, women and girls accused of having sexual relations outside marriage are at risk of becoming victims of honor killings committed by their families. In 2011 several people were sentenced to death by stoning after being accused of adultery in Iran, Somalia, Afghanistan, Sudan, Mali and Pakistan. Practices such as honor killings and stoning continue to be supported by mainstream politicians and other officials in some countries. In Pakistan, after the 2008 Balochistan honour killings in which five women were killed by tribesmen of the Umrani Tribe of Balochistan, Pakistani Federal Minister for Postal Services Israr Ullah Zehri defended the practice.\nSexual violence.\nAn issue that is a serious concern regarding marriage and which has been the object of international scrutiny is that of sexual violence within marriage. Throughout much of the history, in most cultures, sex in marriage was considered a 'right', that could be taken by force (often by a man from a woman), if 'denied'. As the concept of human rights started to develop in the 20th century, and with the arrival of second-wave feminism, such views, and laws, have become less widely held.\nThe legal and social concept of marital rape has developed in most industrialized countries in the mid- to late 20th century; in many other parts of the world it is not recognized as a form of abuse, socially or legally. Several countries in Eastern Europe and Scandinavia made marital rape illegal before 1970, and other countries in Western Europe and the English-speaking Western world outlawed it in the 1980s and 1990s. In England and Wales, marital rape was made illegal in 1991. Although marital rape is being increasingly criminalized in developing countries too, cultural, religious, and traditional ideologies about \"conjugal rights\" remain very strong in many parts of the world; and even where countries may have adequate laws against rape in marriage, these laws may rarely be enforced.\nApart from the issue of rape committed against one's spouse, marriage is, in many parts of the world, closely connected with other forms of sexual violence: in some places, like Morocco, unmarried girls and women who are raped are often forced by their families to marry their rapist. Because being the victim of rape and losing virginity carry extreme social stigma, and the victims are deemed to have their \"reputation\" tarnished, a marriage with the rapist is arranged. This is claimed to be in the advantage of both the victim \u2013 who does not remain unmarried and does not lose social status \u2013 and of the rapist, who avoids punishment. In 2012, after a Moroccan 16-year-old girl committed suicide after having been forced by her family to marry her rapist and enduring further abuse by the rapist after they married, there have been protests from activists against this practice which is common in Morocco.\nIn some societies, the very high social and religious importance of marital fidelity, especially female fidelity, has as result the criminalization of adultery, often with harsh penalties such as stoning or flogging; as well as leniency towards punishment of violence related to infidelity (such as honor killings). In the 21st century, criminal laws against adultery have become controversial with international organizations calling for their abolition. Opponents of adultery laws argue that these laws are a major contributor to discrimination and violence against women, as they are enforced selectively mostly against women; that they prevent women from reporting sexual violence; and that they maintain social norms which justify violent crimes committed against women by husbands, families and communities. A Joint Statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that \"Adultery as a criminal offence violates women's human rights\". Some human rights organizations argue that the criminalization of adultery also violates internationally recognized protections for private life, as it represents an arbitrary interference with an individual's privacy, which is not permitted under international law.\nLaws, human rights and gender status.\nThe laws surrounding heterosexual marriage in many countries have come under international scrutiny because they contradict international standards of human rights; institutionalize violence against women, child marriage and forced marriage; require the permission of a husband for his wife to work in a paid job, sign legal documents, file criminal charges against someone, sue in civil court etc.; sanction the use by husbands of violence to \"discipline\" their wives; and discriminate against women in divorce.\nSuch things were legal even in many Western countries until recently: for instance, in France, married women obtained the right to work without their husband's permission in 1965, and in West Germany women obtained this right in 1977 (by comparison women in East Germany had many more rights). In Spain, during Franco's era, a married woman needed her husband's consent, referred to as the \"permiso marital\", for almost all economic activities, including employment, ownership of property, and even traveling away from home; the \"permiso marital\" was abolished in 1975.\nAn absolute submission of a wife to her husband is accepted as natural in many parts of the world, for instance surveys by UNICEF have shown that the percentage of women aged 15\u201349 who think that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife under certain circumstances is as high as 90% in Afghanistan and Jordan, 87% in Mali, 86% in Guinea and Timor-Leste, 81% in Laos, 80% in Central African Republic. Detailed results from Afghanistan show that 78% of women agree with a beating if the wife \"goes out without telling him [the husband]\" and 76% agree \"if she argues with him\".\nThroughout history, and still today in many countries, laws have provided for extenuating circumstances, partial or complete defenses, for men who killed their wives due to adultery, with such acts often being seen as crimes of passion and being covered by legal defenses such as provocation or defense of family honor.\nRight and ability to divorce.\nWhile international law and conventions recognize the need for consent for entering a marriage \u2013 namely that people cannot be forced to get married against their will \u2013 the right to obtain a divorce is not recognized; therefore holding a person in a marriage against their will (if such person has consented to entering in it) is not considered a violation of human rights, with the issue of divorce being left at the appreciation of individual states.\nIn the EU, the last country to allow divorce was Malta, in 2011. Around the world, the only countries to forbid divorce are Philippines and Vatican City, although in practice in many countries which use a fault-based divorce system obtaining a divorce is very difficult. The ability to divorce, in law and practice, has been and continues to be a controversial issue in many countries, and public discourse involves different ideologies such as feminism, social conservatism, religious interpretations.\nDowry and bridewealth.\nIn recent years, the customs of dowry and bride price have received international criticism for inciting conflicts between families and clans; contributing to violence against women; promoting materialism; increasing property crimes (where men steal goods such as cattle in order to be able to pay the bride price); and making it difficult for poor people to marry. African women's rights campaigners advocate the abolishing of bride price, which they argue is based on the idea that women are a form of property which can be bought. Bride price has also been criticized for contributing to child trafficking as impoverished parents sell their young daughters to rich older men. A senior Papua New Guinea police officer has called for the abolishing of bride price arguing that it is one of the main reasons for the mistreatment of women in that country. The opposite practice of dowry has been linked to a high level of violence (see Dowry death) and to crimes such as extortion.\nChildren born outside marriage.\nHistorically, and still in many countries, children born outside marriage suffered severe social stigma and discrimination. In England and Wales, such children were known as bastards and whoresons.\nThere are significant differences between world regions in regard to the social and legal position of non-marital births, ranging from being fully accepted and uncontroversial to being severely stigmatized and discriminated.\nThe 1975 European Convention on the Legal Status of Children Born out of Wedlock protects the rights of children born to unmarried parents. The convention states, among others, that: \"The father and mother of a child born out of wedlock shall have the same obligation to maintain the child as if it were born in wedlock\" and that \"A child born out of wedlock shall have the same right of succession in the estate of its father and its mother and of a member of its father's or mother's family, as if it had been born in wedlock.\"\nWhile in most Western countries legal inequalities between children born inside and outside marriage have largely been abolished, this is not the case in some parts of the world.\nThe legal status of an unmarried father differs greatly from country to country. Without voluntary formal recognition of the child by the father, in most cases there is a need of due process of law in order to establish paternity. In some countries however, unmarried cohabitation of a couple for a specific period of time does create a presumption of paternity similar to that of formal marriage. This is the case in Australia. Under what circumstances can a paternity action be initiated, the rights and responsibilities of a father once paternity has been established (whether he can obtain parental responsibility and whether he can be forced to support the child) as well as the legal position of a father who voluntarily acknowledges the child, vary widely by jurisdiction. A special situation arises when a married woman has a child by a man other than her husband. Some countries, such as Israel, refuse to accept a legal challenge of paternity in such a circumstance, in order to avoid the stigmatization of the child (see Mamzer, a concept under Jewish law). In 2010, the European Court of Human Rights ruled in favor of a German man who had fathered twins with a married woman, granting him right of contact with the twins, despite the fact that the mother and her husband had forbidden him to see the children.\nThe steps that an unmarried father must take in order to obtain rights to his child vary by country. In some countries (such as the UK \u2013 since 2003 in England and Wales, 2006 in Scotland, and 2002 in Northern Ireland) it is sufficient for the father to be listed on the birth certificate for him to have parental rights; in other countries, such as Ireland, simply being listed on the birth certificate does not offer any rights, additional legal steps must be taken (if the mother agrees, the parents can both sign a \"statutory declaration\", but if the mother does not agree, the father has to apply to court).\nChildren born outside marriage have become more common, and in some countries, the majority. Recent data from Latin America showed figures for non-marital childbearing to be 74% for Colombia, 69% for Peru, 68% for Chile, 66% for Brazil, 58% for Argentina, 55% for Mexico. In 2012, in the European Union, 40% of births were outside marriage, and in the United States, in 2013, the figure was similar, at 41%. In the United Kingdom 48% of births were to unmarried women in 2012; in Ireland the figure was 35%.\nDuring the first half of the 20th century, unmarried women in some Western countries were coerced by authorities to give their children up for adoption. This was especially the case in Australia, through the forced adoptions in Australia, with most of these adoptions taking place between the 1950s and the 1970s. In 2013, Julia Gillard, then Prime Minister of Australia, offered a national apology to those affected by the forced adoptions.\nSome married couples choose not to have children. Others are unable to have children because of infertility or other factors preventing conception or the bearing of children. In some cultures, marriage imposes an \"obligation\" on women to bear children. In northern Ghana, for example, payment of bridewealth signifies a woman's requirement to bear children, and women using birth control face substantial threats of physical abuse and reprisals.\nReligion.\nReligions develop in specific geographic and social milieux. Religious attitudes and practices relating to marriage vary, but have many similarities.\nAbrahamic religions.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith encourages marriage and views it as a mutually strengthening bond. A Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed marriage is contingent on the consent of all living parents.\nChristianity.\nModern Christianity bases its views on marriage upon the teachings of Jesus and the Paul the Apostle. Many of the largest Christian denominations regard marriage as a sacrament, sacred institution, or covenant.\nThe first known decrees on marriage were during the Roman Catholic Council of Trent (twenty-fourth session of 1563), decrees that made the validity of marriage dependent on the wedding occurring in the presence of a priest and two witnesses. The absence of a requirement of parental consent ended a debate that proceeded from the 12th century. In the case of a civil divorce, the innocent spouse had and has no right to marry again until the death of the other spouse terminates the still valid marriage, even if the other spouse was guilty of adultery.\nThe Christian Church performed marriages in the narthex of the church prior to the 16th century, when the emphasis was on the marital contract and betrothal. Subsequently, the ceremony moved inside the sacristy of the church.\nCatholics, Eastern Orthodox, as well as many Anglicans and Methodists, consider marriage termed \"holy matrimony\" to be an expression of divine grace, termed a \"sacrament\" and \"mystery\" in the first two Christian traditions. In Western ritual, the ministers of the sacrament are the spouses themselves, with a bishop, priest, or deacon merely witnessing the union on behalf of the Church and blessing it. In Eastern ritual churches, the bishop or priest functions as the actual minister of the Sacred Mystery; Eastern Orthodox deacons may not perform marriages. Western Christians commonly refer to marriage as a vocation, while Eastern Christians consider it an ordination and a martyrdom, though the theological emphases indicated by the various names are not excluded by the teachings of either tradition. Marriage is commonly celebrated in the context of a Eucharistic service (a nuptial Mass or Divine Liturgy).\nThe Roman Catholic tradition of the 12th and 13th centuries defined marriage as a sacrament ordained by God, signifying the mystical marriage of Christ to his Church.\nThe matrimonial covenant, by which a man and a woman establish between themselves a partnership of the whole of life, is by its nature ordered toward the good of the spouses and the procreation and education of offspring; this covenant between baptized persons has been raised by Christ the Lord to the dignity of a sacrament.\nFor Catholic and Methodist Christians, the mutual love between husband and wife becomes an image of the eternal love with which God loves humankind. In the United Methodist Church, the celebration of Holy Matrimony ideally occurs in the context of a Service of Worship, which includes the celebration of the Eucharist. Likewise, the celebration of marriage between two Catholics normally takes place during the public liturgical celebration of the Holy Mass, because of its sacramental connection with the unity of the Paschal mystery of Christ (Communion). Sacramental marriage confers a perpetual and exclusive bond between the spouses. By its nature, the institution of marriage and conjugal love is ordered to the procreation and upbringing of offspring. Marriage creates rights and duties in the Church between the spouses and towards their children: \"[e]ntering marriage with the intention of never having children is a grave wrong and more than likely grounds for an annulment\". According to Roman Catholic legislation, progeny of annulled relationships are considered legitimate. Civilly remarried persons who civilly divorced a living and lawful spouse are not separated from the Church, but they cannot receive Eucharistic Communion.\nDivorce and remarriage, while generally not encouraged, are regarded differently by each Christian denomination, with certain traditions, such as the Catholic Church, teaching the concept of an annulment. For example, the Reformed Church in America permits divorce and remarriage, while connexions such as the Evangelical Methodist Church Conference forbid divorce except in the case of fornication and do not allow for remarriage in any circumstance. The Eastern Orthodox Church allows divorce for a limited number of reasons, and in theory, but usually not in practice, requires that a marriage after divorce be celebrated with a penitential overtone. With respect to marriage between a Christian and a pagan, the early Church \"sometimes took a more lenient view, invoking the so-called Pauline privilege of permissible separation (1 Cor. 7) as legitimate grounds for allowing a convert to divorce a pagan spouse and then marry a Christian.\"\nThe Catholic Church adheres to the proscription of Jesus in \"Matthew\", 19: 6 that married spouses who have consummated their marriage \"are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, no human being must separate.\" Consequently, the Catholic Church understands that it is wholly without authority to terminate a sacramentally valid and consummated marriage, and its \"Codex Iuris Canonici\" (1983 Code of Canon Law) confirms this in Canons 1055\u20137. Specifically, Canon 1056 declares that \"the essential properties of marriage are unity and \"indissolubility\"; in [C]hristian marriage they acquire a distinctive \"firmness\" by reason of the sacrament.\" Canon 1057, \u00a72 declares that marriage is \"an \"irrevocable\" covenant\". Therefore, divorce of such a marriage is a metaphysical, moral, and legal impossibility. However, the Church has the authority to annul a presumed \"marriage\" by declaring it to have been invalid from the beginning, i. e., declaring it not to be and never to have been a marriage, in an annulment procedure, which is basically a fact-finding and fact-declaring effort.\nFor Protestant denominations, the purposes of marriage include intimate companionship, rearing children, and mutual support for both spouses to fulfill their life callings. Most Reformed Christians did not regard marriage to the status of a sacrament but considered it a covenant between spouses before God. In addition, some Protestant denominations (such as the Methodist Churches) affirmed that Holy Matrimony is a \"means of grace, thus, sacramental in character\".\nSince the 16th century, five competing models have shaped marriage in the Western tradition, as described by John Witte, Jr.:\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that \"marriage between a man and a woman is ordained of God and that the family is central to the Creator's plan for the eternal destiny of His children.\" Their view of marriage is that family relationships can endure beyond the grave. This is known as 'eternal marriage' which can be eternal only when authorized priesthood holders perform the sealing ordinance in sacred temples.\nWith respect to religion, historic Christian belief emphasizes that Christian weddings should occur in a church as Christian marriage should begin where one also starts their faith journey (Christians receive the sacrament of baptism in church in the presence of their congregation). Catholic Christian weddings must \"take place in a church building\" as holy matrimony is a sacrament; sacraments normatively occur in the presence of Christ in the house of God, and \"members of the faith community [should be] present to witness the event and provide support and encouragement for those celebrating the sacrament.\" Bishops never grant permission \"to those requesting to be married in a garden, on the beach, or some other place outside of the church\" and a dispensation is only granted \"in extraordinary circumstances (for example, if a bride or groom is ill or disabled and unable to come to the church).\" Marriage in the church, for Christians, is seen as contributing to the fruit of the newlywed couple regularly attending church each Lord's Day and raising children in the faith.\nChristian attitudes to same-sex marriage.\nAlthough many Christian denominations do not currently perform same-sex marriages, many do, such as the Presbyterian Church (USA), some dioceses of the Episcopal Church, the Metropolitan Community Church, Quakers, United Church of Canada, and United Church of Christ congregations, and some Anglican dioceses, for example. Same-sex marriage is recognized by various religious denominations.\nIslam.\nIslam also commends marriage, with the age of marriage being whenever the individuals feel ready, financially and emotionally.\nIn Islam, polygyny is allowed while polyandry is not, with the specific limitation that a man can have no more than four legal wives at any one time and an unlimited number of female slaves as concubines who may have rights similar wives, with the exception of not being free unless the man has children with them, with the requirement that the man is able and willing to partition his time and wealth equally among the respective wives and concubines (this practice of concubinage, as in Judaism, is not applicable in contemporary times and has been deemed by scholars as invalid due to shifts in views about the role of slavery in the world).\nFor a Muslim wedding to take place, the bridegroom and the guardian of the bride (\"wali\") must both agree on the marriage. Should the guardian disagree on the marriage, it may not legally take place. If the \"wali\" of the girl is her father or paternal grandfather, he has the right to force her into marriage even against her proclaimed will, if it is her first marriage, the exercise of this power is, however, very strictly regulated in the interests of the bride. A guardian who is allowed to force the bride into marriage is called \"wali mujbir\". As minors are not in a position to make a declaration of their wishes which is valid in law, they can only be married at all by a wali mudjbir, but a woman married in this way by another than her ascendant is entitled on coming of age to demand that her marriage be declared void (faskh) by the qadi.\nFrom an Islamic (Sharia) law perspective, the minimum requirements and responsibilities in a Muslim marriage are that the groom provide living expenses to the bride, and in return, the bride's main responsibility is raising children to be proper Muslims. All other rights and responsibilities are to be decided between the husband and wife, and may even be included as stipulations in the marriage contract, so long as they do not go against the minimum requirements of the marriage.\nIn Sunni Islam, marriage must take place in the presence of at least two reliable witnesses, with the consent of the guardian of the bride and the consent of the groom. Following the marriage, the couple may consummate the marriage. To create an 'urf marriage, it is sufficient that a man and a woman indicate an intention to marry each other and recite the requisite words in front of a suitable Muslim. The wedding party usually follows but can be held days, or months later, whenever the couple and their families want to; however, there can be no concealment of the marriage as it is regarded as public notification due to the requirement of witnesses.\nIn Shia Islam, marriage may take place without the presence of witnesses as is often the case in temporary Nikah mut'ah (prohibited in Sunni Islam), but with the consent of both the bride and the groom. Following the marriage, they may consummate their marriage.\nJudaism.\nIn Judaism, marriage is based on the laws of the Torah and is a contractual bond between spouses in which the spouses agree to be consecrated to one another. This contract is called Kiddushin. Though procreation is not the sole purpose, a Jewish marriage is also expected to fulfill the commandment to have children, as it is written \"God blessed them and God said to them, 'Be fertile and increase.'\" The main focus centers around the relationship between the spouses. Kabbalistically, marriage is understood to mean that the spouses are merging into a single soul. In Kabbalistic thought, a man is considered \"incomplete\" if he is not married, as his soul is only one part of a larger whole that remains to be unified.\nThe Hebrew Bible describes a number of marriages, including those of Isaac, Jacob and Samson. Polygyny, or men having multiple wives at once, is one of the most common marital arrangements represented in the Hebrew Bible; another is that of concubinage (pilagshut) which was often arranged by a man, and a woman who generally enjoyed the same rights as a full legal wife. Other means of concubinage are observed by the author of Judges 19\u201320, or during war, as in Deuteronomy 21:10\u201312. The rabbis of the Talmud exhibited discomfort with abduction of women in war for the purpose of marriage, declaring it to be a \"compromise against man's evil inclination\" to be avoided. Today Ashkenazi Jews are prohibited to take more than one wife because of a ban instituted on this by Gershom ben Judah (d. 1040 CE). However, academic scholarship indicates that prohibitions on polygyny may have existed far earlier, based on the Damascus Covenant.\nAmong ancient Hebrews, marriage was a domestic affair and not a religious ceremony; no officiant or witness was required by law. The Rambam wrote that \"before the Torah was given, when a man would meet a woman in the marketplace and he and she decided to marry, he would bring her home, conduct relations in private and thus make her his wife.\" Subsequently, to the Torah being handed down at Sinai, however, the Jews received the commandment that a marriage must be witnessed.\nBetrothal (\"erusin\"), which refers to the time that this binding contract is made, is distinct from marriage itself (\"nissu'in\"), with the time between these events varying substantially. In biblical times, a wife was regarded as personal property, belonging to her husband; the descriptions of the Bible suggest that she would be expected to perform tasks such as spinning, sewing, weaving, manufacture of clothing, fetching of water, baking of bread, and animal husbandry. A husband's obligations to his wife are 1) to provide her with food and care; 2) to supply her clothing and shelter; 3) to share a home with her; 4) to provide the ketubah (marriage contract); 5) to supply medical care if she falls ill; 6) to ransom her back if she is kidnapped; 7) to provide proper burial when she dies; 8) to provide for her materially if he predeceases her; 9) to provide for the support of their daughters until they marry or become adults; and 10) to see that their sons inherit the money specified in her ketubah, in addition to their portion of his estate. Men are also obligated sexually to their wives, per BT Ketubot 61b:10, with the frequency of marital relations determined in part by the occupation (and hence availability) of the husband.\nBecause a wife was regarded as property, her husband was originally free to divorce her for any reason, at any time. However, Talmudic sources complicate this matter significantly, with Beit Shammai stating that a man may divorce his wife only if she has committed a sexual transgression (such as adultery). Divorcing a woman against her will was also banned by Gershom ben Judah for Ashkenazi Jews. A divorced couple were permitted to remarry, unless the wife had married someone else after her divorce.\nHinduism.\nHinduism regards \"Viv\u0101ha\" or \"Biye\" (marriage) to be a sacred duty that entails both religious and social obligations. It is regarded to be an important \"samskara\", or a rite of passage. Hindu texts describe four \"purusharthas\" (goals of existence): \"dharma\" (righteousness), \"artha\" (wealth), \"kama\" (desire), and \"moksha\" (liberation). The purpose of the marriage \"samskara\" is to fulfill the goal of \"kama\", allowing an adherent to gradually advance towards the attainment of \"moksha\". The Manusmriti describes many different types of marriages and their categorisation, ranging from the \"gandharva vivaha\" (a consensual marriage of love between a man and a woman without the performance of rituals or witnesses) to the \"rakshasa vivaha\" (a \"demoniac\" marriage, performed by abduction of one participant by the other participant, usually, but not always, with the help of other persons). In the Indian subcontinent, arranged marriages, in which the spouse's parents or an older family member choose the partner, are still predominant in comparison with love marriages in the contemporary period. The Hindu Widow's Remarriage Act 1856 empowers a Hindu widow to remarry.\nBuddhism.\nThe Buddhist view of marriage considers marriage a secular affair and thus not a sacrament. Buddhists are expected to follow the civil laws regarding marriage laid out by their respective governments. Gautama Buddha, being a kshatriya was required by Shakyan tradition to pass a series of tests to prove himself as a warrior, before he was allowed to marry.\nSikhism.\nIn a Sikh marriage, the couple walks around the \"Guru Granth Sahib\" holy book four times, and a holy man recites from it in the kirtan style. The ceremony is known as 'Anand Karaj' and represents the holy union of two souls united as one.\nWicca.\nWiccan marriages are commonly known as handfastings and are a celebration held by Wiccans. Handfasting was originally a medieval ritual and has been revived by contemporary Pagans. In the ritual, the couple's wrists are tied together to symbolize the binding of two lives. It is commonly used in Wicca and Pagan ceremonies, but it has become more mainstream and comes up in both religious and secular vows and readings. Although handfastings vary for each Wiccan they often involve honoring Wiccan deities. Some Wiccan traditions have a marriage vow \"for as long as love lasts\" instead of the traditional Christian \"till death do us part\". The first Wiccan wedding took place in 1960, between Frederic Lamond and his wife, Gillian. Most Wiccan traditions will celebrate same-sex and different-sex handfastings. The length of commitment varies from a year and a day (after which the vows may be renewed), \"as long as love shall last\", for a lifetime, or for future incarnations.\nConsensual sex is considered sacred for Wiccans. Some traditions perform the Great Rite, in which a High Priest and High Priestess invoke the God and Goddess on each other before making love. It can be used to raise magical energy for the use of spell work. It can also be performed symbolically, using the athame to symbolize masculine energy and the chalice to symbolize feminine energy.\nHealth.\nMarriage, like other close relationships, exerts considerable influence on health. Married people experience lower morbidity and mortality across such diverse health threats as cancer, heart attacks, and surgery. Research on marriage and health is part of the broader study of the benefits of social relationships.\nSocial ties provide people with a sense of identity, purpose, belonging, and support. Simply being married, as well as the quality of one's marriage, have been linked to diverse measures of health.\nThe health-protective effect of marriage is stronger for men than women. Marital status\u2014the simple fact of being married\u2014confers more health benefits to men than women.\nWomen's health is more strongly impacted than men's by marital conflict or satisfaction, such that unhappily married women do not enjoy better health relative to their single counterparts. Most research on marriage and health has focused on heterosexual couples; more work is needed to clarify the health impacts of same-sex marriage.\nDivorce and annulment.\nIn most societies, the death of one of the partners terminates the marriage, and in monogamous societies, this allows the other partner to remarry, though sometimes after a waiting or mourning period.\nIn some societies, a marriage can be annulled, when an authority declares that a marriage never happened. Jurisdictions often have provisions for void marriages or voidable marriages.\nA marriage may also be terminated through divorce. Countries that have relatively recently legalized divorce are Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Argentina (1987), Paraguay (1991), Colombia (1991), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011). The Philippines and the Vatican City are the only jurisdictions which do not allow divorce. After divorce, one spouse may have to pay alimony. Laws concerning divorce and the ease with which a divorce can be obtained vary widely around the world. After a divorce or an annulment, the people concerned are free to remarry (or marry).\nA statutory right of two married partners to mutually consent to divorce was enacted in western nations in the mid-20th century. In the United States, no-fault divorce was first enacted in California in 1969 and the final state to legalize it was New York in 1989.\nAbout 45% of marriages in Britain and, according to a 2009 study, 46% of marriages in the U.S. end in divorce.\nHistory.\nThe history of marriage is often considered under history of the family or legal history.\nAncient world.\nAncient Near East.\nMany cultures have legends concerning the origins of marriage. The way in which a marriage is conducted and its rules and ramifications have changed over time, as has the institution itself, depending on the culture or demographic of the time.\nThe first recorded evidence of marriage ceremonies uniting a man and a woman dates back to approximately 2350 BC, in ancient Mesopotamia. Wedding ceremonies, as well as dowry and divorce, can be traced back to Mesopotamia and Babylonia.\nAccording to ancient Hebrew tradition, a wife was seen as being property of high value and was, therefore, usually, carefully looked after. Early nomadic communities in the Middle East practiced a form of marriage known as \"beena\", in which a wife would own a tent of her own, within which she retains complete independence from her husband. The Covenant Code orders \"If he take him another; her food, her clothing, and her duty of marriage, shall he not diminish (or lessen)\". The Talmud interprets this as a requirement for a man to provide food and clothing to, and have sex with, each of his wives. However, \"duty of marriage\" is also interpreted as whatever one does as a married couple, which is more than just sexual activity. And the term diminish, which means to lessen, shows the man must treat her as if he was not married to another.\nAs a polygynous society, the Israelites did not have any laws that imposed marital fidelity on men. Adulterous married women, adulterous betrothed women, and the men who slept with them, however, were subject to the death penalty by the biblical laws against adultery. The literary prophets indicate that adultery was a frequent occurrence, despite these legal strictness's.\nClassical Greece and Rome.\nIn ancient Greece, no specific civil ceremony was required for the creation of a heterosexual marriage \u2013 only mutual agreement and the fact that the couple must regard each other as husband and wife accordingly. Men usually married when they were in their 20s and women in their teens. It has been suggested that these ages made sense for the Greeks because men were generally done with military service or financially established by their late 20s, and marrying a teenage girl ensured ample time for her to bear children, as life expectancies were significantly lower. Married Greek women had few rights in ancient Greek society and were expected to take care of the house and children. Time was an important factor in Greek marriage. For example, there were superstitions that being married during a full moon was good luck and Greeks married in the winter in honor of Hera. Inheritance was more important than feelings: a woman whose father dies without male heirs could be forced to marry her nearest male relative \u2013 even if she had to divorce her husband first.\nThere were several types of marriages in ancient Roman society. The traditional (\"conventional\") form called \"conventio in manum\" required a ceremony with witnesses and was also dissolved with a ceremony. In this type of marriage, a woman lost her family rights of inheritance of her old family and gained them with her new one. She now was subject to the authority of her husband. There was the free marriage known as \"sine manu\". In this arrangement, the wife remained a member of her original family; she stayed under the authority of her father, kept her family rights of inheritance with her old family and did not gain any with the new family. The minimum age of marriage for girls was 12.\nGermanic tribes.\nAmong ancient Germanic tribes, the bride and groom were roughly the same age and generally older than their Roman counterparts, at least according to Tacitus:\nThe youths partake late of the pleasures of love, and hence pass the age of puberty unexhausted: nor are the virgins hurried into marriage; the same maturity, the same full growth is required: the sexes unite equally matched and robust, and the children inherit the vigor of their parents.\nWhere Aristotle had set the prime of life at 37 years for men and 18 for women, the Visigothic Code of law in the 7th century placed the prime of life at 20 years for both men and women, after which both presumably married. Tacitus states that ancient Germanic brides were on average about 20 and were roughly the same age as their husbands. Tacitus, however, had never visited the German-speaking lands and most of his information on Germania comes from secondary sources. In addition, Anglo-Saxon women, like those of other Germanic tribes, are marked as women from the age of 12 and older, based on archaeological finds, implying that the age of marriage coincided with puberty.\nEurope.\nFrom the early Christian era (30 to 325 CE), marriage was thought of as primarily a private matter, with no uniform religious or other ceremony being required. However, bishop Ignatius of Antioch, writing around 110, exhorts, \"[I]t becomes both men and women who marry, to form their union with the approval of the bishop, that their marriage may be according to God, and not after their own lust.\"\nIn 12th-century Europe, women took the surname of their husbands and starting in the second half of the 16th century parental consent along with the church's consent was required for marriage.\nWith few local exceptions, until 1545, Christian marriages in Europe were by mutual consent, declaration of intention to marry and upon the subsequent physical union of the parties. The couple would promise verbally to each other that they would be married to each other; the presence of a priest or witnesses was not required. This promise was known as the \"verbum.\" If freely given and made in the present tense (e.g., \"I marry you\"), it was unquestionably binding; if made in the future tense (\"I will marry you\"), it would constitute a betrothal.\nOne of the functions of churches from the Middle Ages was to register marriages, which was not obligatory. There was no state involvement in marriage and personal status, with these issues being adjudicated in ecclesiastical courts. During the Middle Ages marriages were arranged, sometimes as early as birth, and these early pledges to marry were often used to ensure treaties between different royal families, nobles, and heirs of fiefdoms. The church resisted these imposed unions, and increased the number of causes for nullification of these arrangements. As Christianity spread during the Roman period and the Middle Ages, the idea of free choice in selecting marriage partners increased and spread with it. In 1563 the Council of Trent, twenty-fourth session, required that a valid marriage must be performed by a priest before two witnesses.\nIn medieval Western Europe, later marriage and higher rates of definitive celibacy (the so-called \"European marriage pattern\") helped to constrain patriarchy at its most extreme level. For example, Medieval England saw marriage age as variable depending on economic circumstances, with couples delaying marriage until the early twenties when times were bad and falling to the late teens after the Black Death, when there were labor shortages; by appearances, marriage of adolescents was not the norm in England. Where the strong influence of classical Celtic and Germanic cultures (which were not rigidly patriarchal) helped to offset the Judaeo-Roman patriarchal influence, in Eastern Europe the tradition of early and universal marriage (often in early adolescence), as well as traditional Slavic patrilocal custom, led to a greatly inferior status of women at all levels of society.\nThe average age of marriage for most of Northwestern Europe from 1500 to 1800 was around 25 years of age; as the Church dictated that both parties had to be at least 21 years of age to marry without the consent of their parents, the bride and groom were roughly the same age, with most brides in their early twenties and most grooms two or three years older, and a substantial number of women married for the first time in their thirties and forties, particularly in urban areas, with the average age at first marriage rising and falling as circumstances dictated. In better times, more people could afford to marry earlier and thus fertility rose and conversely marriages were delayed or forgone when times were bad, thus restricting family size; after the Black Death, the greater availability of profitable jobs allowed more people to marry young and have more children, but the stabilization of the population in the 16th century meant fewer job opportunities and thus more people delaying marriages.\nThe age of marriage was not absolute, however, as child marriages occurred throughout the Middle Ages and later, with just some of them including:\nAs part of the Protestant Reformation, the role of recording marriages and setting the rules for marriage passed to the state, reflecting Martin Luther's view that marriage was a \"worldly thing\". By the 17th century, many of the Protestant European countries had a state involvement in marriage.\nIn England, under the Anglican Church, marriage by consent and cohabitation was valid until the passage of Marriage Act 1753. This act instituted certain requirements for marriage, including the performance of a religious ceremony observed by witnesses.\nAs part of the Counter-Reformation, in 1563 the Council of Trent decreed that a Roman Catholic marriage would be recognized only if the marriage ceremony was officiated by a priest with two witnesses. The council also authorized a Catechism, issued in 1566, which defined marriage as \"The conjugal union of man and woman, contracted between two qualified persons, which obliges them to live together throughout life.\"\nIn the early modern period, John Calvin and his Protestant colleagues reformulated Christian marriage by enacting the Marriage Ordinance of Geneva, which imposed \"The dual requirements of state registration and church consecration to constitute marriage\" for recognition.\nIn England and Wales, Lord Hardwicke's Marriage Act 1753 required a formal ceremony of marriage, thereby curtailing the practice of Fleet Marriage, an irregular or a clandestine marriage. From the 1690s until the Marriage Act 1753 as many as 300,000 clandestine marriages were performed at Fleet Prison alone. The act required a marriage ceremony to be officiated by an Anglican priest in the Anglican Church with two witnesses and registration. The act did not apply to Jewish marriages or those of Quakers, whose marriages continued to be governed by their own customs.\nIn England and Wales, since 1837, civil marriages have been recognized as a legal alternative to church marriages under the Marriage Act 1836. In Germany, civil marriages were recognized in 1875. This law permitted a declaration of the marriage before an official clerk of the civil administration, when both spouses affirm their will to marry, to constitute a legally recognized valid and effective marriage, and allowed an optional private clerical marriage ceremony.\nIn contemporary English common law, a marriage is a voluntary contract by a man and a woman, in which by agreement they choose to become husband and wife. Edvard Westermarck proposed that \"the institution of marriage has probably developed out of a primeval habit\".\nSince the late twentieth century, major social changes in Western countries have led to changes in the demographics of marriage, with the age of first marriage increasing, fewer people marrying, and more couples choosing to cohabit rather than marry. For example, the number of marriages in Europe decreased by 30% from 1975 to 2005. As of 2000, the average marriage age range was 25\u201344 years for men and 22\u201339 years for women.\nChina.\nThe mythological origin of Chinese marriage is a story about N\u00fcwa and Fu Xi who invented proper marriage procedures after becoming married. In ancient Chinese society, people of the same surname are supposed to consult with their family trees prior to marriage to reduce the potential risk of unintentional incest. Marrying one's maternal relatives was generally not thought of as incest. Families sometimes intermarried from one generation to another. Over time, Chinese people became more geographically mobile. Individuals remained members of their biological families. When a couple died, the husband and the wife were buried separately in the respective clan's graveyard. In a maternal marriage, a male would become a son-in-law who lived in the wife's home.\nThe New Marriage Law of 1950 radically changed Chinese marriage traditions, enforcing monogamy, equality of men and women, and choice in marriage; arranged marriages were the most common type of marriage in China until then. Starting October 2003, it became legal to marry or divorce without authorization from the couple's work units. Although people with infectious diseases such as AIDS may now marry, marriage is still illegal for the mentally ill.\nKorea.\nThe practice of matrilocality in Korea started in the Goguryeo period and ended in the early Joseon period. The Korean saying that when a man gets married, he is \"entering \"jangga\"\" (the house of his father-in-law), stems from the Goguryeo period.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19730", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19730", "title": "Mjollnir", "text": ""}
{"id": "19731", "revid": "1028844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19731", "title": "Midgard", "text": "Location in Germanic cosmology\nIn Germanic cosmology, Midgard (an anglicised form of Old Norse ; Old English , Old Saxon , Old High German , and Gothic \"Midjun-gards\"; \"middle yard\", \"middle enclosure\") is the name for Earth (equivalent in meaning to the Greek term : oikoum\u00e9n\u0113, \"inhabited\") inhabited by and known to humans in early Germanic cosmology. The Old Norse form plays a notable role in Norse cosmology.\nEtymology.\nThe Old Norse name is cognate with Gothic (attested in the Gospel of Luke as a translation of the Greek ), Old Saxon (in \"Heliand\"), Old High German (in \"Muspilli\"), and Old English . The latter, which appears in both prose and poetry, was transformed to or (\"Middle-earth\") in Middle English literature.\nAll these forms stem from Common Germanic , a compound of (\"middle\") and (\"yard, enclosure\").\nIn early Germanic cosmology, it stands alongside the term \"world\" (cf. Old English , Old Saxon , Old High German , Old Frisian , Old Norse ), itself from a Common Germanic compound \"*wira-al\u0111iz\" (\"man-age\"), which refers to the inhabited world, i.e. the realm of humankind.\nOld Norse.\nIn Norse mythology, \"Mi\u00f0gar\u00f0r\" became applied to the wall around the world that the gods constructed from the eyebrows of the Ymir as a defense against the who lived in Jotunheim, east of \"Manheimr\", the \"home of men\", a word used to refer to the entire world. The gods slew the Ymir, the first created being, and put his body into the central void of the universe, creating the world out of his body: his flesh constituting the land, his blood the oceans, his bones the mountains, his teeth the cliffs, his hairs the trees, and his brains the clouds. Ymir's skull was held by four dwarfs, Nordri, Sudri, Austri, and Vestri, who represent the four points on the compass and became the dome of heaven. The sun, moon, and stars were said to be scattered sparks in the skull.\nAccording to the Eddas, Midgard will be destroyed at Ragnar\u00f6k, the battle at the end of the world. J\u00f6rmungandr (also known as the Midgard Serpent or World Serpent) will arise from the ocean, poisoning the land and sea with his venom and causing the sea to rear up and lash against the land. The final battle will take place on the plain of V\u00edgr\u00ed\u00f0r, following which Midgard and almost all life on it will be destroyed, with the earth sinking into the sea only to rise again, fertile and green when the cycle repeats and the creation begins again.\nAlthough most surviving instances of the word Midgard refer to spiritual matters, it was also used in more mundane situations, as in the Viking Age runestone poem from the inscription S\u00f6 56 from Fyrby:\nThe Danish and Swedish form or , the Norwegian or , as well as the Icelandic and Faroese form , all derive from the Old Norse term.\nEnglish.\nThe name \"middangeard\" occurs six times in the Old English epic poem \"Beowulf\", and is the same word as Midgard in Old Norse. The term is equivalent in meaning to the Greek term Oikoumene, as referring to the known and inhabited world.\nThe concept of Midgard occurs many times in Middle English. The association with \"earth\" (OE \"eor\u00f0e\") in Middle English \"middell\u00e6rd\", \"middelerde\" is by popular etymology; the modern English cognate of \"geard\" \"enclosure\" is \"yard\". An early example of this transformation is from the Ormulum:\n\"\u00featt ure Drihhtin wollde / ben borenn i \u00feiss middell\u00e6rd\"\nthat our Lord wanted / be born in this Middle-earth.\nThe usage of \"Middle-earth\" as a name for a setting was popularized by Old English scholar J. R. R. Tolkien in his \"The Lord of the Rings\" and other fantasy works; he was originally inspired by the references to \"middangeard\" and \"\u00c9arendel\" in the Old English poem \"Crist\u00a0A\".\nOther languages.\n\"Mittilagart\" is mentioned in the 9th-century Old High German \"Muspilli\" (v. 54) meaning \"the world\" as opposed to the sea and the heavens:\n\nSea is swallowed, flaming burn the heavens,\nMoon falls, Midgard burns\n\"Middilgard\" is also attested in the Old Saxon \"Heliand\":\n\nOver the middle earth;\nAnd all men He could help\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19734", "revid": "40781197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19734", "title": "Malcolm Fraser", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia from 1975 to 1983\nJohn Malcolm Fraser (; 21 May 1930 \u2013 20 March 2015) was an Australian farmer and politician who was the 22nd prime minister of Australia, serving from 1975 to 1983. He held office as the leader of the Liberal Party of Australia, and is the fourth longest-serving prime minister in Australian history.\nFraser was raised on his father's sheep stations, and after studying at Magdalen College, Oxford, returned to Australia to take over the family property in the Western District of Victoria. After an initial defeat in 1954, he was elected to the Australian House of Representatives at the 1955 federal election, as a member of parliament (MP) for the division of Wannon. He was 25 at the time, making him one of the youngest people ever elected to parliament. He is the latest Prime Minister as of 2025 to represent a rural constituency. When Harold Holt became prime minister in 1966, Fraser was appointed Minister for the Army. After Holt's disappearance and replacement by John Gorton, Fraser became Minister for Education and Science (1968\u20131969) and then Minister for Defence (1969\u20131971). In 1971, Fraser resigned from cabinet and denounced Gorton as \"unfit to hold the great office of prime minister\"; this precipitated the replacement of Gorton with William McMahon. He subsequently returned to his old education and science portfolio.\nAfter the Liberal\u2013National Coalition was defeated at the 1972 election, Fraser unsuccessfully stood for the Liberal leadership, losing to Billy Snedden. When the party lost the 1974 election, he began to move against Snedden, eventually mounting a successful challenge in March 1975. As Leader of the Opposition, Fraser used the Coalition's control of the Australian Senate to block supply to the Whitlam government, precipitating the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis. This culminated with Gough Whitlam being dismissed as prime minister by the governor-general, Sir John Kerr, a unique occurrence in Australian history. The correctness of Fraser's actions in the crisis and the exact nature of his involvement in Kerr's decision have since been a topic of debate. Fraser remains the only Australian prime minister to ascend to the position upon the dismissal of his predecessor.\nAfter Whitlam's dismissal, Fraser was sworn in as prime minister on an initial caretaker basis. The Coalition won a landslide victory at the 1975 election, and was re-elected in 1977 and 1980. Fraser took a keen interest in foreign affairs as prime minister, and was more active in the international sphere than many of his predecessors. He was a strong supporter of multiculturalism, and during his term in office Australia admitted significant numbers of non-white immigrants (including Vietnamese boat people) for the first time, effectively ending the White Australia policy. His government also established the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS). Particularly in his final years in office, Fraser came into conflict with the \"dry\" economic rationalist and fiscal conservative faction of his party. His government made few major changes to economic policy.\nAfter losing the 1983 election, Fraser retired from politics. In his post-political career, he held advisory positions with the United Nations (UN) and the Commonwealth of Nations, and was president of the aid agency CARE from 1990 to 1995. He resigned his membership of the Liberal Party in 2009 after the election of Tony Abbott as leader, Fraser having been a critic of the Liberals\u2019 policy direction for a number of years. Evaluations of Fraser's prime ministership have been mixed. He is generally credited with restoring stability to the country after a series of short-term leaders and has been praised for his commitment to multiculturalism and opposition to apartheid in South Africa, but the circumstances of his entry to office remains controversial and many have viewed his government as a lost opportunity for economic reform. He was the last Australian Prime Minister entitled to the style \"Right Honourable\" as a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom. His seven and a half-year tenure as prime minister is the fourth-longest in Australian history, only surpassed by Bob Hawke, John Howard and Robert Menzies.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nJohn Malcolm Fraser was born in Toorak, Melbourne, Victoria, on 21 May 1930. He was the second of two children born to Una Arnold (n\u00e9e Woolf) and John Neville Fraser; his older sister Lorraine had been born in 1928. Both he and his father were known exclusively by their middle names. His paternal grandfather, Sir Simon Fraser, was born in Nova Scotia, Canada, and arrived in Australia in 1853. He made his fortune as a railway contractor, and later acquired significant pastoral holdings, becoming a member of the \"squattocracy\". Fraser's maternal grandfather, Louis Woolf, was born in Dunedin, New Zealand, and arrived in Australia as a child. He was of Jewish origin, a fact which his grandson did not learn until he was an adult. A chartered accountant by trade, he married Amy Booth, who was related to the wealthy Hordern family of Sydney and was a first cousin of Sir Samuel Hordern.\nFraser had a political background on both sides of his family. His father served on the Wakool Shire Council, including as president for two years, and was an admirer of Billy Hughes and a friend of Richard Casey. Simon Fraser served in both houses of the colonial Parliament of Victoria, and represented Victoria at several of the constitutional conventions of the 1890s. He eventually become one of the inaugural members of the new federal Senate, serving from 1901 to 1913 as a member of the early conservative parties. Louis Woolf also stood for the Senate in 1901, standing as a Free Trader in Western Australia. He polled only 400 votes across the whole state, and was never again a candidate for public office.\nChildhood.\nFraser spent most of his early life at \"Balpool-Nyang\", a sheep station of on the Edward River near Moulamein, New South Wales. His father had a law degree from Magdalen College, Oxford, but never practised law and preferred the life of a grazier. Fraser contracted a severe case of pneumonia when he was eight years old, which nearly proved fatal. He was home-schooled until the age of ten, when he was sent to board at Tudor House School in the Southern Highlands. He attended Tudor House from 1940 to 1943, and then completed his secondary education at Melbourne Grammar School from 1944 to 1948 where he was a member of Rusden House. While at Melbourne Grammar, he lived in a flat that his parents owned on Collins Street. In 1943, Fraser's father sold \"Balpool-Nyang\" \u2013 which had been prone to drought \u2013 and bought \"Nareen\", in the Western District of Victoria. He was devastated by the sale of his childhood home, and regarded the day he found out about it as the worst of his life.\nUniversity.\nIn 1949, Fraser moved to England to study at Magdalen College, Oxford, which his father had also attended. He read Philosophy, Politics and Economics (PPE), graduating in 1952 with third-class honours. Although Fraser did not excel academically, he regarded his time at Oxford as his intellectual awakening, where he learned \"how to think\". His college tutor was Harry Weldon, who was a strong influence. His circle of friends at Oxford included Raymond Bonham Carter, Nicolas Browne-Wilkinson, and John Turner. In his second year, he had a relationship with Anne Reid, who as Anne Fairbairn later became a prominent poet. After graduating, Fraser considered taking a law degree or joining the British Army, but eventually decided to return to Australia and take over the running of the family property.\nEarly political career.\nFraser returned to Australia in mid-1952. He began attending meetings of the Young Liberals in Hamilton, and became acquainted with many of the local party officials. In November 1953, aged 23, Fraser unexpectedly won Liberal preselection for the Division of Wannon, which covered most of Victoria's Western District. The previous Liberal member, Dan Mackinnon, had been defeated in 1951 and moved to a different electorate. He was expected to be succeeded by Magnus Cormack, who had recently lost his place in the Senate. Fraser had put his name forward as a way of building a profile for future candidacies, but mounted a strong campaign and in the end won a narrow victory. In January 1954, he made the first of a series of weekly radio broadcasts on 3HA Hamilton and 3YB Warrnambool, titled \"One Australia\". His program \u2013 consisting of a pre-recorded 15-minute monologue \u2013 covered a wide range of topics, and was often reprinted in newspapers. It continued more or less uninterrupted until his retirement from politics in 1983, and helped him build a substantial personal following in his electorate.\nAt the 1954 election, Fraser lost to the sitting Labor member Don McLeod by just 17 votes (out of over 37,000 cast). However, he reprised his candidacy at the early 1955 election after a redistribution made Wannon notionally Liberal. McLeod concluded the reconfigured Wannon was unwinnable and retired. These factors, combined with the 1955 Labor Party split, allowed Fraser to win a landslide victory.\nBackbencher.\nFraser took his seat in parliament at the age of 25 \u2013 the youngest sitting MP by four years, and the first who had been too young to serve in World War II. He was re-elected at the 1958 election despite being restricted in his campaigning by a bout of hepatitis. Fraser was soon being touted as a future member of cabinet, but despite good relations with Robert Menzies never served in cabinet during Menzies' tenure. His long wait for ministerial preferment was probably due to a combination of his youth and the fact that Menzies' ministries already contained a disproportionately high number of Victorians.\nFraser spoke on a wide range of topics during his early years in parliament, but took a particular interest in foreign affairs. In 1964, he and Gough Whitlam were both awarded Leader Grants by the United States Department of State, allowing them to spend two months in Washington, D.C., getting to know American political and military leaders. The Vietnam War was the main topic of conversation, and on his return trip to Australia he spent two days in Saigon. Early in 1965, he also made a private seven-day visit to Jakarta, and with assistance from Ambassador Mick Shann secured meetings with various high-ranking officials.\nCabinet Minister and Gorton downfall.\nIn 1966, after Fraser had spent more than a decade on the backbench, Sir Robert Menzies retired as prime minister. His successor Harold Holt appointed Fraser to the ministry as Minister for the Army. In that position, Fraser presided over the controversial Vietnam War conscription program.\nUnder the new prime minister, John Gorton, he was elevated to Cabinet as Minister for Education and Science. In 1969 he was promoted to Minister for Defence, a particularly challenging post at the time, given the height of Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War and the protests against it.\nIn March 1971 Fraser abruptly resigned from the Cabinet in protest at what he called Gorton's \"interference in (his) ministerial responsibilities\", and denounced Gorton on the floor of the House of Representatives as \"not fit to hold the great office of Prime Minister\". This precipitated a series of events which eventually led to the downfall of Gorton and his replacement as prime minister by William McMahon. In the leadership contest that followed Gorton's resignation, Fraser unsuccessfully contested the deputy Liberal leadership against Gorton and David Fairbairn. Gorton never forgave Fraser for the role he played in his downfall; to the day Gorton died in 2002, he could not bear to be in the same room with Fraser.\nFraser remained on the backbenches until he was reinstated to Cabinet in his old position of Minister for Education and Science by McMahon in August 1971, immediately following Gorton's sacking as deputy Liberal leader by McMahon. When the Liberals were defeated at the 1972 election by the Labor Party under Gough Whitlam, McMahon resigned and Fraser became Shadow Minister for Labour under Billy Snedden.\nOpposition (1972\u20131975).\nAfter the Coalition lost the 1972 election, Fraser was one of five candidates for the Liberal leadership that had been vacated by McMahon. He outpolled John Gorton and James Killen, but was eliminated on the third ballot. Billy Snedden eventually defeated Nigel Bowen by a single vote on the fifth ballot. In the new shadow cabinet \u2013 which featured only Liberals \u2013 Fraser was given responsibility for primary industry. This was widely seen as a snub, as the new portfolio kept him mostly out of the public eye and was likely to be given to a member of the Country Party when the Coalition returned to government. In an August 1973 reshuffle, Snedden instead made him the Liberals' spokesman for industrial relations. He had hoped to be given responsibility for foreign affairs (in place of the retiring Nigel Bowen), but that role was given to Andrew Peacock. Fraser oversaw the development of the party's new industrial relations policy, which was released in April 1974. It was seen as more flexible and even-handed than the policy that the Coalition had pursued in government, and was received well by the media. According to Fraser's biographer Philip Ayres, by \"putting a new policy in place, he managed to modify his public image and emerge as an excellent communicator across a traditionally hostile divide\".\nLeader of the Opposition.\nAfter the Liberals lost the 1974 election, Fraser unsuccessfully challenged Snedden for the leadership in November. Despite surviving the challenge, Snedden's position in opinion polls continued to decline and he was unable to get the better of Whitlam in the Parliament. Fraser again challenged Snedden on 21 March 1975, this time succeeding and becoming Leader of the Liberal Party and Leader of the Opposition.\nRole in the Dismissal.\nFollowing a series of ministerial scandals engulfing the Whitlam government later that year, Fraser began to instruct Coalition senators to delay the government's budget bills, with the objective of forcing an early election that he believed he would win. After several months of political deadlock, during which time the government secretly explored methods of obtaining supply funding outside the Parliament, the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr, controversially dismissed Whitlam as prime minister on 11 November 1975.\nFraser was immediately sworn in as caretaker prime minister on the condition that he end the political deadlock and call an immediate double dissolution election.\nOn 19 November 1975, shortly after the election had been called, a letter bomb was sent to Fraser, but it was intercepted and defused before it reached him. Similar devices were sent to the governor-general and the Premier of Queensland, Joh Bjelke-Petersen.\nPrime Minister (1975\u20131983).\n1975 and 1977 federal elections.\nAt the 1975 election, Fraser led the Liberal-Country Party Coalition to a landslide victory. The Coalition won 91 seats of a possible 127 in the election to gain a 55-seat majority, which remains to date the largest in Australian history. Fraser subsequently led the Coalition to a second victory in 1977, with only a very small decrease in their vote. The Liberals actually won a majority in their own right in both of these elections, something that Menzies and Holt had never achieved. Although Fraser thus had no need for the support of the (National) Country Party to govern, he retained the formal Coalition between the two parties. This is likely because the Liberals needed the Country Party's support to pass bills in the Senate, since they came up just short of majorities in their own right in both 1975 and 1977.\nFiscal policy.\nFraser quickly dismantled some of the programs of the Whitlam government, such as the Ministry of the Media, and made major changes to the universal health insurance system Medibank. He initially maintained Whitlam's levels of tax and spending, but real per-person tax and spending soon began to increase. He did manage to rein in inflation, which had soared after the 1973 oil crisis, when OPEC nations refused to sell oil to nations that supported Israel in the Yom Kippur War. His so-called \"Razor Gang\" implemented stringent budget cuts across many areas of the Commonwealth Public Sector, including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).\nFraser practised Keynesian economics during his time as prime minister, in part demonstrated by running budget deficits throughout his term as prime minister. He was the Liberal Party's last Keynesian Prime Minister. Though he had long been identified with the Liberal Party's right wing, he did not carry out the radically conservative program that his political enemies had predicted, and that some of his followers wanted. Fraser's relatively moderate policies particularly disappointed the Treasurer, John Howard, as well as other ministers who were strong adherents of fiscal conservatism and economic liberalism, and therefore detractors of Keynesian economics. The government's economic record was marred by rising double-digit unemployment and double-digit inflation, creating \"stagflation\", caused in part by the ongoing effects of the 1973 oil crisis.\nForeign policy.\nFraser was particularly active in foreign policy as prime minister. He supported the Commonwealth in campaigning to abolish apartheid in South Africa and refused permission for the aircraft carrying the Springbok rugby team to refuel on Australian territory en route to their controversial 1981 tour of New Zealand. However, an earlier tour by the South African ski boat angling team was allowed to pass through Australia on the way to New Zealand in 1977 and the transit records were suppressed by Cabinet order.\nFraser also strongly opposed white minority rule in Rhodesia. During the 1979 Commonwealth Conference, Fraser, together with his Nigerian counterpart, convinced the newly elected British prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, to withhold recognition of the internal settlement Zimbabwe Rhodesia government; Thatcher had earlier promised to recognise it. Subsequently, the Lancaster House Agreement was signed and Robert Mugabe was elected leader of an independent Zimbabwe at the inaugural 1980 election. Duncan Campbell, a former deputy secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has stated that Fraser was \"the principal architect\" in the ending of white minority rule. The President of Tanzania, Julius Nyerere, said that he considered Fraser's role \"crucial in many parts\" and the President of Zambia, Kenneth Kaunda, called his contribution \"vital\".\nUnder Fraser, Australia recognised Indonesia's annexation of East Timor, although many East Timorese refugees were granted asylum in Australia.\nFraser was also a strong supporter of the United States and supported the boycott of the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow. However, although he persuaded some sporting bodies not to compete, Fraser did not try to prevent the Australian Olympic Committee sending a team to the Moscow Games.\nOther policy.\nFraser also surprised his critics over immigration policy; according to 1977 Cabinet documents, the Fraser government adopted a formal policy for \"a humanitarian commitment to admit refugees for resettlement\". Fraser's aim was to expand immigration from Asian countries and allow more refugees to enter Australia. He was a firm supporter of multiculturalism and established a government-funded multilingual radio and television network, the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS), building on their first radio stations which had been established under the Whitlam government.\nDespite Fraser's support for SBS, his government imposed stringent budget cuts on the national broadcaster, the ABC, which came under repeated attack from the Coalition for alleged \"left-wing bias\" and \"unfair\" coverage on their TV programs, including \"This Day Tonight\" and \"Four Corners\", and on the ABC's new youth-oriented radio station Double Jay. One result of the cuts was a plan to establish a national youth radio network, of which Double Jay was the first station. The network was delayed for many years and did not come to fruition until the 1990s.\nFraser also legislated to give Indigenous Australians control of their traditional lands in the Northern Territory, but resisted imposing land rights laws on conservative state governments.\n1980 federal election.\nAt the 1980 election, Fraser saw his majority more than halved, from 48 seats to 21. The Coalition also lost control of the Senate. Despite this, Fraser remained ahead of Labor leader Bill Hayden in opinion polls. However, the economy was hit by the early 1980s recession, and a protracted scandal over tax-avoidance schemes run by some high-profile Liberals also began to hurt the government.\nDisputes within the Liberal Party.\nIn April 1981, the Minister for Industrial Relations, Andrew Peacock, resigned from the Cabinet, accusing Fraser of \"constant interference in his portfolio\". Fraser, however, had accused former prime minister John Gorton of the same thing a decade earlier. Peacock subsequently challenged Fraser for the leadership; although Fraser defeated Peacock, these events left him politically weakened.\nLabor Party and 1983 federal election.\nBy early 1982, the popular former ACTU President, Bob Hawke, who had entered Parliament in 1980, was polling well ahead of both Fraser and the Labor Leader, Bill Hayden, on the question of who voters would rather see as prime minister. Fraser was well aware of the infighting this caused between Hayden and Hawke and had planned to call a snap election in autumn 1982, preventing the Labor Party changing leaders. These plans were derailed when Fraser suffered a severe back injury. Shortly after recovering from his injury, the Liberal Party narrowly won a by-election in the marginal seat of Flinders in December 1982. The failure of the Labor Party to win the seat convinced Fraser that he would be able to win an election against Hayden.\nAs leadership tensions began to grow in the Labor Party throughout January, Fraser subsequently resolved to call a double dissolution election at the earliest opportunity, hoping to capitalise on Labor's disunity. He knew that if the writs were issued soon enough, Labor would essentially be frozen into going into the subsequent election with Hayden as leader.\nOn 3 February 1983, Fraser arranged to visit the Governor-General of Australia, Sir Ninian Stephen, intending to ask for a surprise election. However, Fraser made his run too late. Without any knowledge of Fraser's plans, Hayden resigned as Labor leader just two hours before Fraser travelled to Government House. This meant that the considerably more popular Hawke was able to replace him at almost exactly the same time that the writs were issued for the election. Although Fraser reacted to the move by saying he looked forward to \"knock[ing] two Labor Leaders off in one go\" at the forthcoming election, Labor immediately surged in the opinion polls.\nAt the election on 5 March the Coalition was heavily defeated, suffering a 24-seat swing, the worst defeat of a non-Labor government since Federation. Fraser immediately announced his resignation as Liberal leader and formally resigned as prime minister on 11 March 1983; he retired from Parliament two months later. To date, he is the last non-interim prime minister from a rural seat.\nRetirement.\nIn retirement Fraser was Chairman of the UN Panel of Eminent Persons on the Role of Transnational Corporations in South Africa 1985, as Co-Chairman of the Commonwealth Group of Eminent Persons on South Africa in 1985\u201386 (appointed by Prime Minister Hawke), and as Chairman of the UN Secretary-General's Expert Group on African Commodity Issues in 1989\u201390. He was a distinguished international fellow at the American Enterprise Institute from 1984 to 1986. Fraser helped to establish the foreign aid group CARE organisation in Australia and became the agency's international president in 1991, and worked with a number of other charitable organisations. In 2006, he was appointed Professorial Fellow at the Asia Pacific Centre for Military Law, and in October 2007 he presented his inaugural professorial lecture, \"Finding Security in Terrorism's Shadow: The importance of the rule of law\".\nMemphis trousers affair.\nOn 14 October 1986, Fraser, then the Chairman of the Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group, was found in the foyer of the Admiral Benbow Inn, a Memphis hotel, wearing only a pair of underpants and confused as to where his trousers were. The hotel was an establishment popular with prostitutes and drug dealers. Though it was rumoured at the time that the former prime minister had been with a prostitute, his wife stated that Fraser had no recollection of the events and that she believes it more likely that he was the victim of a practical joke by his fellow delegates.\nEstrangement from the Liberal Party.\nIn 1993, Fraser made a bid for the Liberal Party presidency but withdrew at the last minute following opposition to his bid, which was raised due to his having been critical of then Liberal leader John Hewson for losing the election earlier that year.\nAfter 1996, Fraser was critical of the Howard Coalition government over foreign policy issues, particularly John Howard's alignment with the foreign policy of the Bush administration, which Fraser saw as damaging Australian relationships in Asia. He opposed Howard's policy on asylum-seekers, campaigned in support of an Australian Republic and attacked what he perceived as a lack of integrity in Australian politics, together with former Labor prime minister Gough Whitlam, finding much common ground with his predecessor and his successor Bob Hawke, another republican.\nThe 2001 election continued his estrangement from the Liberal Party. Many Liberals criticised the Fraser years as \"a decade of lost opportunity\" on deregulation of the Australian economy and other issues. In early 2004, a Young Liberal convention in Hobart called for Fraser's life membership of the Liberal Party to be ended.\nIn 2006, Fraser criticised Howard Liberal government policies on areas such as refugees, terrorism and civil liberties, and that \"if Australia continues to follow United States policies, it runs the risk of being embroiled in the conflict in Iraq for decades, and a fear of Islam in the Australian community will take years to eradicate\". Fraser claimed that the way the Howard government handled the David Hicks, Cornelia Rau and Vivian Solon cases was questionable.\nOn 20 July 2007, Fraser sent an open letter to members of the large activist group GetUp!, encouraging members to support GetUp's campaign for a change in policy on Iraq including a clearly defined exit strategy. Fraser stated: \"One of the things we should say to the Americans, quite simply, is that if the United States is not prepared to involve itself in high-level diplomacy concerning Iraq and other Middle East questions, our forces will be withdrawn before Christmas.\"\nAfter the defeat of the Howard government at the 2007 federal election, Fraser claimed Howard approached him in a corridor, following a cabinet meeting in May 1977 regarding Vietnamese refugees, and said: \"We don't want too many of these people. We're doing this just for show, aren't we?\" The claims were made by Fraser in an interview to mark the release of the 1977 cabinet papers. Howard, through a spokesman, denied having made the comment.\nIn October 2007 Fraser gave a speech to Melbourne Law School on terrorism and \"the importance of the rule of law,\" which Liberal MP Sophie Mirabella\ncondemned in January 2008, claiming errors and \"either intellectual sloppiness or deliberate dishonesty\", and claimed that he tacitly supported Islamic fundamentalism, that he should have no influence on foreign policy, and claimed his stance on the war on terror had left him open to caricature as a \"frothing-at-the-mouth leftie\".\nShortly after Tony Abbott won the 2009 Liberal Party leadership spill, Fraser ended his Liberal Party membership, stating the party was \"no longer a liberal party but a conservative party\".\nLater political activity.\nIn December 2011, Fraser was highly critical of the Australian government's decision (also supported by the Liberal Party Opposition) to permit the export of uranium to India, relaxing the Fraser government's policy of banning sales of uranium to countries that are not signatories of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.\nIn 2012, Fraser criticised the basing of US military forces in Australia.\nIn late 2012, Fraser wrote a foreword for the journal \"Jurisprudence\" where he openly criticised the current state of human rights in Australia and the Western World. \"It is a sobering thought that in recent times, freedoms hard won through centuries of struggle, in the United Kingdom and elsewhere have been whittled away. In Australia alone we have laws that allow the secret detention of the innocent. We have had a vast expansion of the power of intelligence agencies. In many cases the onus of proof has been reversed and the justice that once prevailed has been gravely diminished.\"\nIn July 2013, Fraser endorsed Australian Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young for re-election in a television advertisement, stating she had been a \"reasonable and fair-minded voice\".\nFraser's books include \"Malcolm Fraser: The Political Memoirs\" (with Margaret Simons \u2013 The Miegunyah Press, 2010) and \"Dangerous Allies\" (Melbourne University Press, 2014), which warns of \"strategic dependence\" on the United States. In the book and in talks promoting it, he criticised the concept of American exceptionalism and US foreign policy.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and children.\nOn 9 December 1956, Fraser married Tamara \"Tamie\" Beggs, who was almost six years his junior. They had met at a New Year's Eve party, and bonded over similar personal backgrounds and political views. The couple had four children together: Mark (b. 1958), Angela (b. 1960), Hugh (b. 1962), and Phoebe (b. 1964). Tamie frequently assisted her husband in campaigning, and her gregariousness was seen as complementing his more shy and reserved nature. She advised him on most of the important decisions in his career, and in retirement he observed that \"if she had been prime minister in 1983, we would have won\".\nHe was the former no. 1 ticket holder for the Carlton Football Club in the AFL.\nViews on religion.\nFraser attended Anglican schools, although his parents were Presbyterian. In university he was inclined towards atheism, once writing that \"the idea that God exists is a nonsense\". However, his beliefs became less definite over time and tended towards agnosticism. During his political career, he occasionally self-described as Christian, such as in a 1975 interview with \"The Catholic Weekly\". Margaret Simons, the co-author of Fraser's memoirs, thought that he was \"not religious, and yet thinks religion is a necessary thing\". In a 2010 interview with her, he said: \"I would probably like to be less logical and, you know, really able to believe there is a God, whether it is Allah, or the Christian God, or some other \u2013 but I think I studied too much philosophy ... you can never know\".\nDeath and legacy.\nFraser died on 20 March 2015 at the age of 84, after a brief illness. An obituary noted that there had been \"greater appreciation of the constructive and positive nature of his post-prime ministerial contribution\" as his retirement years progressed. Fraser's death came five months after that of his predecessor and political rival Gough Whitlam.\nUpon his death, Fraser's 1983 nemesis and often bitter opponent Bob Hawke fondly described him as a \"very significant figure in the history of Australian politics\" who, in his post-Prime Ministerial years, \"became an outstanding figure in the advancement of human rights issues in all respects\", praised him for being \"extraordinarily generous and welcoming to refugees from Indochina\" and concluded that Fraser had \"moved that far to the left that he was almost out of sight\". Andrew Peacock, who had challenged Fraser for the Liberal leadership and later succeeded him, said that he had \"a deep respect and pleasurable memories of the first five years of the Fraser government... I disagreed with him later on but during that period in the 1970s he was a very effective Prime Minister\", and lamented that \"despite all my arguments with him later on I am filled with admiration for his efforts on China\".\nFraser was given a state funeral at Scots' Church in Melbourne on 27 March 2015. His ashes are interred within the Prime Ministers Garden of Melbourne General Cemetery.\nIn 2004, Fraser designated the University of Melbourne the official custodian of his personal papers and library to create the Malcolm Fraser Collection at the university.\nA street in Abuja, Nigeria, is named after Malcolm Fraser.\nIn June 2018, he was honoured with the naming of the Australian Electoral Division of Fraser in the inner north-western suburbs of Melbourne.\nHonours.\nOrders\nForeign honours\nOrganisations\nAppointments.\nPersonal\nFellowships\nAcademic degrees\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19735", "revid": "47054281", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19735", "title": "Macquarie University", "text": "Public university in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia\nMacquarie University ( ) is a public research university in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Founded in 1964 by the New South Wales Government, it was the third university to be established in the Sydney metropolitan area.\nEstablished as a verdant university, Macquarie has four faculties, as well as the Macquarie University Hospital, which are on the university's main Wallumattagal campus in the suburb of Macquarie Park. \nThe university is the first in Australia to fully align its degree system with the Bologna Accord.\nHistory.\n20th century.\nThe idea of founding a third university in Sydney was flagged in the early 1960s when the New South Wales Government formed a committee of enquiry into higher education to deal with a perceived emergency in university enrolments in New South Wales. During this enquiry, the Senate of the University of Sydney put in a submission which highlighted 'the immediate need to establish a third university in the metropolitan area'. After much debate a future campus location was selected in what was then a semi-rural part of North Ryde, and it was decided that the future university be named after Lachlan Macquarie, an important early governor of the colony of New South Wales.\nMacquarie University was formally established in 1964 with the passage of the Macquarie University Act 1964 by the New South Wales parliament.\nThe initial concept of the campus was to create a new high-technology corridor, similar to the area surrounding Stanford University in Palo Alto, California, the goal being to provide for interaction between industry and the new university. The academic core was designed in the Brutalist style and developed by the town planner Walter Abraham who also oversaw the next 20 years of planning and development for the university. A committee appointed to advise the state government on the establishment of the new university at North Ryde nominated Abraham as the architect-planner. The fledgling Macquarie University Council decided that planning for the campus would be done within the university, rather than by consultants, and this led to the establishment of the architect-planners office.\nThe first vice-chancellor of Macquarie University, Alexander George Mitchell, was selected by the University Council which met for the first time on 17 June 1964. Members of the first university council included: Colonel Sir Edward Ford OBE, David Paver Mellor, Rae Else-Mitchell QC and Sir Walter Scott.\nThe university first opened to students on 6 March 1967 with more students than anticipated. The Australian Universities Commission had allowed for 510 effective full-time students (EFTS) but Macquarie had 956 enrolments and 622 EFTS. Between 1968 and 1969, enrolment at Macquarie increased dramatically with an extra 1200 EFTS, with 100 new academic staff employed. 1969 also saw the establishment of the Macquarie Graduate School of Management (MGSM).\nMacquarie grew during the seventies and eighties with rapid expansion in courses offered, student numbers and development of the site. In 1972, the university established the Macquarie Law School, the third law school in Sydney. In their book \"Liberality of Opportunity\", Bruce Mansfield and Mark Hutchinson describe the founding of Macquarie University as 'an act of faith and a great experiment'. An additional topic considered in this book is the science reform movement of the late 1970s that resulted in the introduction of a named science degree, thus facilitating the subsequent inclusion of other named degrees in addition to the traditional BA. An alternative view on this topic is given by theoretical physicist John Ward.\nIn 1973, the student union (MUSC) worked with the Builders Labourers Federation (BLF) to organise one of the first \"pink bans\". Similar in tactic to the green ban, the pink ban was recommended when one of the residential colleges at Macquarie University, Robert Menzies College, ordered a student to lead a celibate life and undertake therapy and confession to cure himself of his homosexuality. The BLF decided to stop all construction work at the college until the university and the College Master made statements committing to a non-discriminatory university environment. MUSC was successful in engaging with the BLF again in 1974 when a woman at Macquarie University had her NSW Department of Education scholarship cancelled on the basis that she was a lesbian and therefore unfit to be a teacher.\nAfter over a decade of service, the first vice-chancellor Mitchell was succeeded by Edwin C. Webb in December 1975. Webb was required to steer the university through one of its most difficult periods as the value of universities were debated and the governments introduced significant funding cuts. Webb left the university in 1986 and was succeeded by Di Yerbury, the first female vice-chancellor in Australia. Yerbury would go on to hold the position of vice-chancellor for nearly 20 years.\nIn 1990, the university absorbed the Institute of Early Childhood Studies of the Sydney College of Advanced Education, under the terms of the Higher Education (Amalgamation) Act 1989.\n21st century.\nSteven Schwartz replaced Di Yerbury as vice-chancellor at the beginning of 2006. Yerbury's departure was attended with much controversy, including a \"bitter dispute\" with Schwartz, disputed ownership of university artworks worth $13\u00a0million and Yerbury's salary package. In August 2006, Schwartz expressed concern about the actions of Yerbury in a letter to university auditors. Yerbury strongly denied any wrongdoing and claimed the artworks were hers.\nDuring 2007, Macquarie University restructured its student organisation after an audit raised questions about management of hundreds of thousands of dollars in funds by student organisations At the centre of the investigation was Victor Ma, president of the Macquarie University Students' Council, who was previously involved in a high-profile case of student election fixing at the University of Sydney.\nThe university Council resolved to immediately remove Ma from his position. Vice-chancellor Schwartz cited an urgent need to reform Macquarie's main student bodies.\nHowever, Ma strongly denied any wrongdoing and labelled the controversy a case of 'character assassination'.\nThe Federal Court ordered on 23 May 2007 that Macquarie University Union Ltd be wound up.\nFollowing the dissolution of Macquarie University Union Ltd, the outgoing student organisation was replaced with a new wholly owned subsidiary company of the university, known as U@MQ Ltd. The new student organisation originally lacked a true student representative union; however, following a complete review and authorisation from the university Council, a new student union known as Macquarie University Students Association (MUSRA) was established in 2009.\nWithin the first few hundred days of Schwartz's instatement as vice-chancellor, the 'Macquarie@50' strategic plan was launched, which positioned the university to enhance research, teaching, infrastructure and academic rankings by the university's 50th anniversary in 2014. Included in the university's plans for the future was the establishment of a sustainability office in order to more effectively manage environmental and social development at Macquarie. As part of this campaign, in 2009 Macquarie became the first Fair Trade accredited university in Australia. The beginning of 2009 also saw the introduction of a new logo for the university which retained the Sirius Star, present on both the old logo and the university crest, but now 'embedded in a stylised lotus flower'. In accordance with the university by-law, the crest continues to be used for formal purposes and is displayed on university testamurs. The by-law also prescribes the university's motto, taken from Chaucer: 'And gladly teche'.\nIn 2013, the university became the first in Australia to fully align its degree system with the Bologna Accord.\nCampuses and buildings.\nMacquarie University's main campus is about north-west of the Sydney CBD and is set on 126\u00a0hectares of rolling lawns and natural bushland. Macquarie's location within the high-technology corridor of Sydney's north-west, in close proximity to Macquarie Park and its surrounding industries, has been crucial in its development as a relatively research intensive university. \nBefore the development of the campus, most of the site was cultivated with peach orchards, market gardens and poultry farms. The university's first architect-planner was Walter Abraham, one of the first six administrators appointed to Macquarie University. As the site adapted from its former rural use to a busy collegiate environment, he implemented carefully designed planting programs across the campus. Abraham established a grid design comprising lots of running north\u2013south, with the aim of creating a compact academic core. The measure of was seen as one minute's walk, and grid design reflected the aim of having a maximum walk of 10\u00a0minutes between any two parts of the university. The main east\u2013west walkway that runs from the Macquarie University Research Park to the arts faculty buildings was named Wally's Walk in recognition of Abraham's contribution.\nApart from its centres of learning, the campus features the Macquarie University Research Park, museums, art galleries, a sculpture park, an observatory, a sport and aquatic centre and the private Macquarie University Hospital. The campus has its own postcode, 2109.\nMacquarie University Hospital.\nMacquarie became the first university in Australia to own and operate a private medical facility in 2010 when it opened a $300\u00a0million hospital on its campus. The hospital is the first and only private not-for-profit teaching hospital on an Australian university campus. The Macquarie University Hospital is north of the main campus area towards the university sports grounds. It comprises 183 beds, 13 operating theatres, 2 cardiac and vascular angiography suites. The hospital is co-located with the university's Australian School of Advanced Medicine.\nCommercial use.\nThe university hosts a number of high-technology companies on its campus. Primarily designed to encourage interaction between the university and industry, commercialisation of its campus has also given the institution an additional revenue stream. Tenants are selected based on their potential to collaborate with the university's researches or their ability to provide opportunities for its students and graduates. Cochlear has its headquarters in close proximity to the Australian Hearing Hub on the southern edge of campus. Other companies that have office space at the campus include Dow Corning, Goodman Fielder, Nortel, OPSM, and Siemens.\nThe Macquarie University Observatory was originally constructed in 1978 as a research facility but since 1997 has been accessible to the public through its Public Observing Program.\nGovernance and structure.\nUniversity Council.\nThe university is governed by a 17-member Council.\nThe University Council is the governing authority of the university under the \"Macquarie University Act 1989\". The Council takes primary responsibility for the control and management of the affairs of the university, and is empowered to make by-laws and rules relating to how the university is managed. Members of the Council include the university vice-chancellor, academic and non-academic staff, the vice president of the Academic Senate and a student representative. The Council is chaired by the chancellor of the university.\nThe Academic Senate is the primary academic body of the university. It has certain powers delegated to it by Council, such as the approving of examination results and the completion of requirements for the award of degrees. At the same time, it makes recommendations to the Council concerning all changes to degree rules, and all proposals for new awards. While the Academic Senate is an independent body, it is required to make recommendations to the university Council in relation to matters outside its delegated authority.\nChancellor and Vice-Chancellor.\nMacquarie's current vice-chancellor, Bruce Dowton, took over from Schwartz in September 2012. Prior to his appointment Dowton served as a senior medical executive having held a range of positions in university, healthcare and consulting organisations. He also served as a pediatrician at the Massachusetts General Hospital for Children, and as Clinical Professor of Pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. There have been five vice-chancellors in the university's history.\nFaculties and departments.\nThe university currently comprises 35 departments within four faculties:\nHeraldry and insignia.\nCoat of arms.\nMacquarie University's coat of arms (often erroneously referred to as a 'crest') was assumed through a 1967 amendment of the \"Macquarie University Act, 1964\" (Confirmed by Letters patent of the College of Arms, 16 August 1969), and the Grant of arms reads:\n\"Vert, the Macquarie lighthouse tower, masoned proper, in Chief the star Sirius, Or.\"\nThe escutcheon (in green taken from the tartan of Clan MacQuarrie) displays the Macquarie Lighthouse tower, the first major public building in the colony when completed in 1816, as well as the Sirius star (in gold), which was also the name of the flagship of the First Fleet. The motto chosen for the university, which following the rules of English heraldry does not form part of the original grant of arms, was \"And Gladly Teche\", a phrase taken from the general prologue of \"The Canterbury Tales\" by Geoffrey Chaucer (circa 1400), and symbolises the university's commitment to both learning and teaching.\nThe university's founders originally wanted to base the university's arms on Lachlan Macquarie's family arms, but they decided to go for a more conceptual approach that represented Lachlan Macquarie as a builder and administrator. They did however identify that the arms used by Governor Macquarie had never been formally granted by the Court of the Lord Lyon in Scotland, and was successful in having a grant of arms issued for Macquarie by the Lord Lyon King of Arms, as well as the right to display his arms. These arms, along with the new arms of the university, were formally unveiled on 31 May 1967 by the chancellor, Sir Garfield Barwick.\nThe coat of arms and the motto are used in a very limited number of formal communications.\nBranding.\nMacquarie has had a number of logos in its history. In 2014, the university launched a new logo as part of its Shared Identity Project. The logo reintroduced the Macquarie Lighthouse, a popular symbol of the university within the university community and maintained the Sirus Star.\nAcademic profile.\nResearch and publications.\nThe university positions itself as being research intensive. In 2012, 85% of Macquarie's broad fields of research was rated 'at or above world standard' in the Excellence in Research for Australia 2012 National report. The university is within the top 3 universities in Australia for the number of peer-reviewed publications produced per academic staff member.\nResearchers at Macquarie University, David Skellern and Neil Weste, and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation helped develop Wi-Fi. David Skellern has been a major donor to the university through the Skellern Family Trust. Macquarie physicists Frank Duarte and Jim Piper pioneered the laser designs adopted by researchers worldwide, in various major national programs, for atomic vapor laser isotope separation.\nMacquarie University's linguistics department developed the Macquarie Dictionary. The dictionary is regarded as the standard reference on Australian English.\nMacquarie University has a research partnership with the University of Hamburg in Germany and Fudan University in China. They offer dual and joint degree programs and engage in joint research.\nAccess Macquarie Limited was established in 1989 as the commercial arm of the university. It facilitates and supports the commercial needs of industry, business and government organisations seeking to utilise the academic expertise of the broader university community.\nResearch divisions.\nResearch centres, schools and institutes that are affiliated with the university:\nMacquarie University's Australian Hearing Hub is partnered with Cochlear. Cochlear Headquarters are on campus. The Australian Hearing Hub includes the head office of Australian Hearing.\nThe Australian Research Institute for Environment and Sustainability is a research centre that promotes change for environmental sustainability, is affiliated with the university and is located on its campus.\nLibrary and archives.\nThe library houses over 1.8\u00a0million items and uses the Library of Congress Classification System. It has several collections, including a Rare Book Collection, a Palaeontology Collection and the Brunner Collection of Egyptological materials. Macquarie University operated two libraries during the transition. The old library in building C7A (which has since been repurposed as a student support and study space) closed in July 2011, and the new library in building C3C became fully operational on 1 August 2011. The new library was Australia's first university library to possess an Automated Storage and Retrieval System (ASRS). The ASRS consists of an environmentally controlled vault with metal bins storing the items; robotic cranes retrieve an item on request and deliver it to the service desk for collection.\nMuseums and collections.\nThe museums and collections of Macquarie University are extensive and include nine museums and galleries. Each collection focuses on various historical, scientific or artistic interests. The most visible collection on campus is the sculpture park, which is exhibited across the entire campus. At close to 100 sculptures on display, it is the largest park of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere. All museums and galleries are open to the public and offer educational programs for students at primary, secondary and tertiary levels.\nOther sub-units.\nStart-up incubator.\nThe Macquarie University Incubator is a space to research and develop ideas that can be commercialised. It was established in 2017 as a part of the Macquarie Park Innovation District (MPID) project. Macquarie University received a $1 million grant from the New South Wales government to build the incubator. The university has also committed about $7 million to the incubator with financial support of the big businesses and the New South Wales government. It was officially opened by Andrew Mountbatten Windsor (then known as Prince Andrew, Duke of York) on 25 September 2017.\nAcademic reputation.\nIn the 2024 \"Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities\", which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #168 (10th nationally).\nIn the \"Australian Financial Review\" Best Universities Ranking 2025, the university was ranked #13 amongst Australian universities.\nIn the 2026 \"Quacquarelli Symonds\" World University Rankings (published 2025), the university attained a tied position of #138 (11th nationally).\nIn the \"Times Higher Education\" World University Rankings 2026 (published 2025), the university attained a tied position of #166 (9th nationally).\nIn the 2025 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", the university attained a position of #201\u2013300 (9\u201313th nationally).\nIn the 2025\u20132026 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities, the university attained a tied position of #178 (12th nationally).\nIn the \"CWTS Leiden Ranking\" 2024, the university attained a position of #291 (14th nationally).\nStudent outcomes.\nThe Australian Government's QILT conducts national surveys documenting the student life cycle from enrolment through to employment. These surveys place more emphasis on criteria such as student experience, graduate outcomes and employer satisfaction than perceived reputation, research output and citation counts.\nIn the 2023 Employer Satisfaction Survey, graduates of the university had an overall employer satisfaction rate of 83.5%.\nIn the 2023 Graduate Outcomes Survey, graduates of the university had a full-time employment rate of 78.7% for undergraduates and 87.3% for postgraduates. The initial full-time salary was A$ for undergraduates and A$ for postgraduates.\nIn the 2023 Student Experience Survey, undergraduates at the university rated the quality of their entire educational experience at 76.4% meanwhile postgraduates rated their overall education experience at 78.2%.\nAdmissions.\nInternational.\nThe Macquarie University International College offers Foundation Studies (Pre-University) and University-level Diplomas. Upon successful completion of a MUIC Diploma, students enter the appropriate bachelor's degree as a second year student.\nThe Centre for Macquarie English is the English-language centre that offers a range of specialised, direct entry English programs that are approved by Macquarie University.\nStudent life.\nCampus Life manages the university's non-academic services: food and retail, sport and recreation, student groups, child care, and entertainment. From late 2017 onward its Campus Hub facility has been closed for reconstruction; a 'pop-up'-style replacement, the Campus Common, has been opened for the duration.\nStudent demographics.\nMacquarie is the fourth largest university in Sydney (38,753 students in 2013). The university has the largest student exchange program in Australia.\nIn 2012, 9,802 students from Asia were enrolled at Macquarie University (Sydney campuses and offshore programs in China, Hong Kong, Korea and Singapore).\nStudent media and radio.\nMacquarie University has its own community radio station on campus, 2SER FM. The station is jointly owned by Macquarie University and the University of Technology Sydney.\nCampus traditions.\nMacquarie University students celebrate Conception Day each year since 1969 to \u2013 according to legend \u2013 commemorate the date of conception of Lachlan Macquarie, as his birthday fell at the wrong time of year for a celebration. Conception Day is traditionally held on the last day of classes before the September mid-semester break.\nSports and athletics.\nOn the western side of the campus is the Macquarie University Sport and Aquatic Centre. Previously a sports hall facility, the complex was renovated and reopened in 2007 with the addition of the new gym and aquatic centre. It houses a 50-metre FINA-compliant outdoor pool and a 25-metre indoor pool. The complex also contains a gymnasium and squash, badminton, basketball, volleyball and netball courts.\nMacquarie also has seven hectares of high-quality playing fields for football, cricket and tennis. Just north of the campus, the fields are used by the university as well as a number of elite sporting teams, such as Sydney FC and the Matildas.\nResidential colleges.\nMacquarie University has two residential colleges on its campus, Dunmore Lang College and Robert Menzies College, both founded in 1972. The colleges both offer academic support as well as a range of social and sporting activities in a communal environment.\nSeparate to the colleges is Student Village North Ryde in Marsfield, New South Wales. The village was developed by the university in 2001 for the purpose of housing students adjacent to the university campus and also housed Olympians for the Sydney 2000 Olympics. As of 2006, the village is now operated by Campus Living Villages, a company operating University Villages across Australia. It has over 900 rooms in mostly townhouse-style buildings north of the campus. The village encourages its students to interact in its communal spaces and has a number of social events throughout the year.\nLeadership and development.\nThe Global Leadership Program (GLP) is a university-funded co-curricular program that is open to all students and can be undertaken alongside any degree at Macquarie University. The GLP aims to instil leadership and innovation skills, cross-cultural understanding and a sense of global citizenship in its graduates. Upon successful completion of the GLP, students receive a formal notation on their academic transcript and a certificate.\nMacquarie's GLP was the first of its kind when it launched in the Australian university sector in 2005 and is the country's flagship tertiary global leadership program with more than 4000 active participants in more than 200 academic disciplines. GLP is a co-curricular learning and engagement program that students design according to their own interests and complete at their own pace. Students are required to complete a workshop series, attend tailored keynote speaker and networking events and complete an experiential credit component. This ranges from short-term study abroad, volunteering (domestic and/or international), internships (domestic and/or international), learning a new language or attending internationally themed seminars and study tours.\nThe GLP won the Institute for International Education's 2017 Heiskell award for Innovation in International Education - Internationalising the Campus. Macquarie University is the first Southern Hemisphere university to receive the award in its 17-year history.\nThe GLP was awarded the 2018 NSW International Student Community Engagement Award (Joint Winner) in the Education Provider category. This award recognises the innovative way in which the GLP facilitates connection and engagement with community for Macquarie University International GLP Students, and also recognises the contribution that the GLP makes to the International Student experience in New South Wales. In 2019, the GLP won the Global PIEoneer Award for International Education in the category of 'Progressive Education Delivery' in Guildhall, London. The PIEoneer Awards are the only global awards that celebrate innovation and achievement across the whole of the international education industry.\nTransportation.\nMacquarie University is served by Macquarie University railway station on the Sydney Metro Northwest. Macquarie is Australia's only university with a railway station on campus.\nThere is also a major bus interchange on the campus that provides close to 800 bus services daily. The M2 Motorway runs parallel to the campus's northern boundary and is accessible to traffic from the university.\nNotable people.\nNotable alumni.\nAlumni include Rhodes and John Monash Scholars and several Fulbright Scholars.\nNotable alumni include: Minister for the Environment and Water, Tanya Plibersek; Australian politician and former Lord Mayor of Brisbane, Jim Soorley; New South Wales Minister for Health, Brad Hazzard; Australian politician, Harini Amarasuriya; 16th prime minister of Sri Lanka, Mike Kelly; Australian basketball player, Lauren Jackson; Australian swimmer, Ian Thorpe; Australian water polo player, Holly Lincoln-Smith; three founding members of the Australian children's musical group The Wiggles, Murray Cook, Anthony Field, and Greg Page; former director-general of the National Library of Australia, Anne-Marie Schwirtlich AM; New Zealand conservationist, Pete Bethune; Miss Universe Australia 2008, Laura Dundovic; Australian journalist, Hugh Riminton and BBC Presenter, Yalda Hakim.\nNotable alumni in science include: Australian scientist Barry Brook, American physicist Frank Duarte, and Australian physicist Cathy Foley. Alumni notable in the business world include: Australian hedge fund manager Greg Coffey, Australian businesswoman Catherine Livingstone, founder of Freelancer.com Matt Barrie, businessman Napoleon Perdis; Australian venture capitalist Larry R. Marshall; former CEO of Seven West Media, David Leckie; Australian economist, Sean Turnell; former CEO of Commonwealth Bank and former chairman of the Australian Government Future Fund Board of Guardians, David Murray.\nAcademics and staff.\nNotable faculty members include: Indian neurosurgeon B. K. Misra\nAustralian writer and four time Miles Franklin Award winner, Thea Astley; Hungarian Australian mathematician, Esther Szekeres; Australian mathematician, Neil Trudinger; Australian environmentalist and activist, Tim Flannery; British physicist and author, Paul Davies; British-Australian physicist, John Clive Ward; Israeli-Australian mathematician, Jos\u00e9 Enrique Moyal; Australian linguist, Geoffrey Hull; Australian geologist, Fellow of the Australian Academy of Science, John Veevers; Australian climatologist, Ann Henderson-Sellers; Australian breakdancer and Olympian, Rachael Gunn; Australian sociologist, Raewyn Connell.\nFour Macquarie University academics were included in The World's Most Influential Minds 2014 report by Thomson Reuters, which identified the most highly cited researchers of the last 11 years.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19736", "revid": "22619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19736", "title": "Muspelheim", "text": "Realm of fire in Norse mythology\nIn Norse cosmology, Muspelheim (), also called Muspell (), is a realm of fire.\nThe etymology of \"Muspelheim\" is uncertain, but may come from \"Mund-spilli\", \"world-destroyers\", \"wreck of the world\".\nNarrative.\nMuspelheim was described as a hot and glowing land of fire, home to the fire giants, and guarded by Surtr, with his flaming sword. It is featured in both the creation and destruction stories of Norse myth. According to the Prose Edda, a great time before the Earth was made, Niflheim existed. Inside Niflheim was a well called Hvergelmir, from this well flowed numerous streams known as the \u00c9liv\u00e1gar. Their names were Svol, Gunnthro, Form, Finbul, Thul, Slid and Hrid, Sylg and Ylg, Vid, Leipt and Gjoll.\nAfter a time these streams had traveled sufficiently far from their source in Niflheim, that the venom that flowed within them hardened and turned to ice. When this ice eventually settled, rain rose up from it, and froze into rime. This ice then began to layer itself over the primordial void, Ginnungagap. This made the northern portion of Ginungagap thick with ice, and storms begin to form within.\nIn Norse mythology Muspelheim is located in the Southern east portion of Ginnungagap the Primordial void.\nIn the southern region of Ginnungagap, however, glowing sparks were still flying out of Muspelheim. When the heat and sparks from Muspelheim met the ice, it began to melt. The sparks would go on to create the Sun, Moon, and stars, and the drops of melted ice would form the primeval being Ymir: \"By the might of him who sent the heat, the drops quickened into life and took the likeness of a man, who got the name Ymir. But the Frost giants call him Aurgelmir\".\nThe \"Prose Edda\" section \"Gylfaginning\" foretells that the sons of Muspell will break the Bifr\u00f6st bridge as part of the events of Ragnar\u00f6k:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDepictions in popular culture.\nMuspelheim \u2013 called \"Surt's sea of fire\" \u2013 is mentioned in Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale \"The Marsh King's Daughter.\"\nComic books and their derived media.\nMuspelheim appears in different kinds of Marvel Entertainment media.\nRole playing games.\nThe game \"Puzzle &amp; Dragons\" features a monster entitled Flamedragon Muspelheim and Infernodragon Muspelheim.\nIn the game \"God of War\", players can travel to Muspelheim where they can complete the six Trials of Muspelheim. When completing each trial, the player will receive rewards and will advance Kratos and Atreus closer to the top of a large volcano.\nIn the \"Dawn of Ragnar\u00f6k\" expansion for Ubisoft's \"Assassin's Creed Valhalla\", Surtr and massive armies of muspels from Muspelheim invade the dwarven realm of Svartalfheim, infecting large parts of it with pools and streams of magma.\nIn the mobile game \"Fire Emblem Heroes\", the land of Muspell is a prevalent part of the game's second book, which heavily features the battle between Muspell and Niflheim.\nIn the MMORPG \"Dark Age of Camelot\" there are three different realms based on different mythologies the players can choose to play in, one of them is called Midgard and is based on the Norse mythology. In Midgard there is a large region called Muspelheim which is an ashen wasteland with rivers of lava populated largely by giants and fire elemental beings.\n\"God of War\" (2018) and \"God of War: Ragnar\u00f6k\" feature Muspelheim as a visitable realm. In the former, the player and their companion battle through a gauntlet known as \"Surtr's Trials,\" and in the latter, encounter Surtr himself and use him to begin Ragnar\u00f6k, turning him into a monster of the same name.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19737", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19737", "title": "Maxwell's equations", "text": "Equations describing classical electromagnetism\nMaxwell's equations, or Maxwell\u2013Heaviside equations, are a set of coupled partial differential equations that, together with the Lorentz force law, form the foundation of classical electromagnetism, classical optics, electric and magnetic circuits. \nThe equations provide a mathematical model for electric, optical, and radio technologies, such as power generation, electric motors, wireless communication, lenses, radar, etc. They describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated by charges, currents, and changes of the fields. The equations are named after the physicist and mathematician James Clerk Maxwell, who, in 1861 and 1862, published an early form of the equations that included the Lorentz force law. Maxwell first used the equations to propose that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon. The modern form of the equations in their most common formulation is credited to Oliver Heaviside.\nMaxwell's equations may be combined to demonstrate how fluctuations in electromagnetic fields (waves) propagate at a constant speed in vacuum, \"c\" (\u00a0m/s). Known as electromagnetic radiation, these waves occur at various wavelengths to produce a spectrum of radiation from radio waves to gamma rays.\nIn partial differential equation form and a coherent system of units, Maxwell's microscopic equations can be written as (top to bottom: Gauss's law, Gauss's law for magnetism, Faraday's law, Amp\u00e8re-Maxwell law)\nformula_1\nWith formula_2 the electric field, formula_3 the magnetic field, formula_4 the electric charge density and formula_5 the current density. formula_6 is the vacuum permittivity and formula_7 the vacuum permeability.\nThe equations have two major variants:\nThe term \"Maxwell's equations\" is often also used for equivalent alternative formulations. Versions of Maxwell's equations based on the electric and magnetic scalar potentials are preferred for explicitly solving the equations as a boundary value problem, analytical mechanics, or for use in quantum mechanics. The covariant formulation (on spacetime rather than space and time separately) makes the compatibility of Maxwell's equations with special relativity manifest. Maxwell's equations in curved spacetime, commonly used in high-energy and gravitational physics, are compatible with general relativity. In fact, Albert Einstein developed special and general relativity to accommodate the invariant speed of light, a consequence of Maxwell's equations, with the principle that only relative movement has physical consequences.\nThe publication of the equations marked the unification of a theory for previously separately described phenomena: magnetism, electricity, light, and associated radiation.\nSince the mid-20th century, it has been understood that Maxwell's equations do not give an exact description of electromagnetic phenomena, but are instead a classical limit of the more precise theory of quantum electrodynamics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConceptual descriptions.\nGauss's law.\nGauss's law describes the relationship between an electric field and electric charges: an electric field points away from positive charges and towards negative charges, and the net outflow of the electric field through a closed surface is proportional to the enclosed charge, including bound charge due to polarization of material. The coefficient of the proportion is the permittivity of free space.\nGauss's law for magnetism.\nGauss's law for magnetism states that electric charges have no magnetic analogues, called magnetic monopoles; no north or south magnetic poles exist in isolation. Instead, the magnetic field of a material is attributed to a dipole, and the net outflow of the magnetic field through a closed surface is zero. Magnetic dipoles may be represented as loops of current or inseparable pairs of equal and opposite \"magnetic charges\". Precisely, the total magnetic flux through a Gaussian surface is zero, and the magnetic field is a solenoidal vector field.\nFaraday's law.\nThe Maxwell\u2013Faraday version of Faraday's law of induction describes how a time-varying magnetic field corresponds to the negative curl of an electric field. In integral form, it states that the work per unit charge required to move a charge around a closed loop equals the rate of change of the magnetic flux through the enclosed surface.\nThe electromagnetic induction is the operating principle behind many electric generators: for example, a rotating bar magnet creates a changing magnetic field and generates an electric field in a nearby wire.\nAmp\u00e8re\u2013Maxwell law.\nThe original law of Amp\u00e8re states that magnetic fields relate to electric current. Maxwell's addition states that magnetic fields also relate to changing electric fields, which Maxwell called displacement current. The integral form states that electric and displacement currents are associated with a proportional magnetic field along any enclosing curve.\nMaxwell's modification of Amp\u00e8re's circuital law is important because the laws of Amp\u00e8re and Gauss must otherwise be adjusted for static fields. As a consequence, it predicts that a rotating magnetic field occurs with a changing electric field. A further consequence is the existence of self-sustaining electromagnetic waves which travel through empty space.\nThe speed calculated for electromagnetic waves, which could be predicted from experiments on charges and currents, matches the speed of light; indeed, light \"is\" one form of electromagnetic radiation (as are X-rays, radio waves, and others). Maxwell understood the connection between electromagnetic waves and light in 1861, thereby unifying the theories of electromagnetism and optics.\nFormulation in terms of electric and magnetic fields (microscopic or in vacuum version).\nIn the electric and magnetic field formulation there are four equations that determine the fields for given charge and current distribution. A separate law of nature, the Lorentz force law, describes how the electric and magnetic fields act on charged particles and currents. By convention, a version of this law in the original equations by Maxwell is no longer included. The vector calculus formalism below, the work of Oliver Heaviside, has become standard. It is rotationally invariant, and therefore mathematically more transparent than Maxwell's original 20 equations in \"x\", \"y\" and \"z\" components. The relativistic formulations are more symmetric and Lorentz invariant. For the same equations expressed using tensor calculus or differential forms (see \"\").\nThe differential and integral formulations are mathematically equivalent; both are useful. The integral formulation relates fields within a region of space to fields on the boundary and can often be used to simplify and directly calculate fields from symmetric distributions of charges and currents. On the other hand, the differential equations are purely \"local\" and are a more natural starting point for calculating the fields in more complicated (less symmetric) situations, for example using finite element analysis.\nKey to the notation.\nSymbols in bold represent vector quantities, and symbols in \"italics\" represent scalar quantities, unless otherwise indicated.\nThe equations introduce the electric field, E, a vector field, and the magnetic field, B, a pseudovector field, each generally having a time and location dependence.\nThe sources are\nThe universal constants appearing in the equations (the first two ones explicitly only in the SI formulation) are:\nDifferential equations.\nIn the differential equations, \nIntegral equations.\nIn the integral equations, \nThe equations are a little easier to interpret with time-independent surfaces and volumes. Time-independent surfaces and volumes are \"fixed\" and do not change over a given time interval. For example, since the surface is time-independent, we can bring the differentiation under the integral sign in Faraday's law:\nformula_9\nMaxwell's equations can be formulated with possibly time-dependent surfaces and volumes by using the differential version and using Gauss' and Stokes' theorems as appropriate. \nFormulation in the Gaussian system.\nThe definitions of charge, electric field, and magnetic field can be altered to simplify theoretical calculation, by absorbing dimensioned factors of \"\u03b5\"0 and \"\u03bc\"0 into the units (and thus redefining these). With a corresponding change in the values of the quantities for the Lorentz force law this yields the same physics, i.e. trajectories of charged particles, or work done by an electric motor. These definitions are often preferred in theoretical and high energy physics where it is natural to take the electric and magnetic field with the same units, to simplify the appearance of the electromagnetic tensor: the Lorentz covariant object unifying electric and magnetic field would then contain components with uniform unit and dimension. Such modified definitions are conventionally used with the Gaussian (CGS) units. Using these definitions, colloquially \"in Gaussian units\",\nthe Maxwell equations become:\nThe equations simplify slightly when a system of quantities is chosen in the speed of light, \"c\", is used for nondimensionalization, so that, for example, seconds and lightseconds are interchangeable, and \"c\" = 1.\nFurther changes are possible by absorbing factors of 4\"\u03c0\". This process, called rationalization, affects whether Coulomb's law or Gauss's law includes such a factor (see \"Heaviside\u2013Lorentz units\", used mainly in particle physics).\nRelationship between differential and integral formulations.\nThe equivalence of the differential and integral formulations are a consequence of the Gauss divergence theorem and the Kelvin\u2013Stokes theorem.\nFlux and divergence.\nAccording to the (purely mathematical) Gauss divergence theorem, the electric flux through the \nboundary surface \u2202\u03a9 can be rewritten as\n formula_18\nThe integral version of Gauss's equation can thus be rewritten as \nformula_19\nSince \u03a9 is arbitrary (e.g. an arbitrary small ball with arbitrary center), this is satisfied if and only if the integrand is zero everywhere. This is \nthe differential equations formulation of Gauss equation up to a trivial rearrangement.\nSimilarly rewriting the magnetic flux in Gauss's law for magnetism in integral form gives \n formula_20\nwhich is satisfied for all \u03a9 if and only if formula_21 everywhere.\nCirculation and curl.\nBy the Kelvin\u2013Stokes theorem we can rewrite the line integrals of the fields around the closed boundary curve \u2202\u03a3 to an integral of the \"circulation of the fields\" (i.e. their curls) over a surface it bounds, i.e.\nformula_22\nHence the Amp\u00e8re\u2013Maxwell law, the modified version of Amp\u00e8re's circuital law, in integral form can be rewritten as \nformula_23\nSince \u03a3 can be chosen arbitrarily, e.g. as an arbitrary small, arbitrary oriented, and arbitrary centered disk, we conclude that the integrand is zero if and only if the Amp\u00e8re\u2013Maxwell law in differential equations form is satisfied.\nThe equivalence of Faraday's law in differential and integral form follows likewise.\nThe line integrals and curls are analogous to quantities in classical fluid dynamics: the circulation of a fluid is the line integral of the fluid's flow velocity field around a closed loop, and the vorticity of the fluid is the curl of the velocity field.\nCharge conservation.\nThe invariance of charge can be derived as a corollary of Maxwell's equations. The left-hand side of the Amp\u00e8re\u2013Maxwell law has zero divergence by the div\u2013curl identity. Expanding the divergence of the right-hand side, interchanging derivatives, and applying Gauss's law gives:\nformula_24\ni.e.,\nformula_25\nBy the Gauss divergence theorem, this means the rate of change of charge in a fixed volume equals the net current flowing through the boundary:\n formula_26 formula_27\nIn particular, in an isolated system the total charge is conserved.\nVacuum equations, electromagnetic waves and speed of light.\nIn a region with no charges (\"\u03c1\" = 0) and no currents (J = 0), such as in vacuum, Maxwell's equations reduce to:\nformula_28\nTaking the curl (\u2207\u00d7) of the curl equations, and using the curl of the curl identity we obtain\nformula_29\nThe quantity formula_30 has the dimension (T/L)2. Defining formula_31, the equations above have the form of the standard wave equations\nformula_32\nAlready during Maxwell's lifetime, it was found that the known values for formula_6 and formula_7 give formula_35, then already known to be the speed of light in free space. This led him to propose that light and radio waves were propagating electromagnetic waves, since amply confirmed. In the old SI system of units, the values of formula_36 and formula_37 are defined constants, (which means that by definition formula_38) that define the ampere and the metre. In the new SI system, only \"c\" keeps its defined value, and the electron charge gets a defined value.\nIn materials with relative permittivity, \"\u03b5\"r, and relative permeability, \"\u03bc\"r, the phase velocity of light becomes\nformula_39\nwhich is usually less than \"c\".\nIn addition, E and B are perpendicular to each other and to the direction of wave propagation, and are in phase with each other. A sinusoidal plane wave is one special solution of these equations. Maxwell's equations explain how these waves can physically propagate through space. The changing magnetic field creates a changing electric field through Faraday's law. In turn, that electric field creates a changing magnetic field through Maxwell's modification of Amp\u00e8re's circuital law. This perpetual cycle allows these waves, now known as electromagnetic radiation, to move through space at velocity \"c\".\nMacroscopic formulation.\nThe above equations are the microscopic version of Maxwell's equations, expressing the electric and the magnetic fields in terms of the (possibly atomic-level) charges and currents present. This is sometimes called the \"general\" form, but the macroscopic version below is equally general, the difference being one of bookkeeping.\nThe microscopic version is sometimes called \"Maxwell's equations in vacuum\": this refers to the fact that the material medium is not built into the structure of the equations, but appears only in the charge and current terms. The microscopic version was introduced by Lorentz, who tried to use it to derive the macroscopic properties of bulk matter from its microscopic constituents.\n\"Maxwell's macroscopic equations\", also known as Maxwell's equations in matter, are more similar to those that Maxwell introduced himself.\nIn the macroscopic equations, the influence of bound charge \"Q\"b and bound current \"I\"b is incorporated into the displacement field D and the magnetizing field H, while the equations depend only on the free charges \"Q\"f and free currents \"I\"f. This reflects a splitting of the total electric charge \"Q\" and current \"I\" (and their densities \u03c1 and J) into free and bound parts:\nformula_40\nThe cost of this splitting is that the additional fields D and H need to be determined through phenomenological constituent equations relating these fields to the electric field E and the magnetic field B, together with the bound charge and current.\nSee below for a detailed description of the differences between the microscopic equations, dealing with \"total\" charge and current including material contributions, useful in air/vacuum;\nand the macroscopic equations, dealing with \"free\" charge and current, practical to use within materials.\nBound charge and current.\nWhen an electric field is applied to a dielectric material its molecules respond by forming microscopic electric dipoles \u2013 their atomic nuclei move a tiny distance in the direction of the field, while their electrons move a tiny distance in the opposite direction. This produces a \"macroscopic\" \"bound charge\" in the material even though all of the charges involved are bound to individual molecules. For example, if every molecule responds the same, similar to that shown in the figure, these tiny movements of charge combine to produce a layer of positive bound charge on one side of the material and a layer of negative charge on the other side. The bound charge is most conveniently described in terms of the polarization P of the material, its dipole moment per unit volume. If P is uniform, a macroscopic separation of charge is produced only at the surfaces where P enters and leaves the material. For non-uniform P, a charge is also produced in the bulk.\nSomewhat similarly, in all materials the constituent atoms exhibit magnetic moments that are intrinsically linked to the angular momentum of the components of the atoms, most notably their electrons. The connection to angular momentum suggests the picture of an assembly of microscopic current loops. Outside the material, an assembly of such microscopic current loops is not different from a macroscopic current circulating around the material's surface, despite the fact that no individual charge is traveling a large distance. These \"bound currents\" can be described using the magnetization M.\nThe very complicated and granular bound charges and bound currents, therefore, can be represented on the macroscopic scale in terms of P and M, which average these charges and currents on a sufficiently large scale so as not to see the granularity of individual atoms, but also sufficiently small that they vary with location in the material. As such, \"Maxwell's macroscopic equations\" ignore many details on a fine scale that can be unimportant to understanding matters on a gross scale by calculating fields that are averaged over some suitable volume.\nAuxiliary fields, polarization and magnetization.\nThe \"definitions\" of the auxiliary fields are:\nformula_41\nwhere P is the polarization field and M is the magnetization field, which are defined in terms of microscopic bound charges and bound currents respectively. The macroscopic bound charge density \"\u03c1\"b and bound current density Jb in terms of polarization P and magnetization M are then defined as\nformula_42\nIf we define the total, bound, and free charge and current density by\nformula_43\nand use the defining relations above to eliminate D, and H, the \"macroscopic\" Maxwell's equations reproduce the \"microscopic\" equations.\nConstitutive relations.\nIn order to apply 'Maxwell's macroscopic equations', it is necessary to specify the relations between displacement field D and the electric field E, as well as the magnetizing field H and the magnetic field B. Equivalently, we have to specify the dependence of the polarization P (hence the bound charge) and the magnetization M (hence the bound current) on the applied electric and magnetic field. The equations specifying this response are called constitutive relations. For real-world materials, the constitutive relations are rarely simple, except approximately, and usually determined by experiment. See the main article on constitutive relations for a fuller description.\nFor materials without polarization and magnetization, the constitutive relations are (by definition)\nformula_44\nwhere \"\u03b5\"0 is the permittivity of free space and \"\u03bc\"0 the permeability of free space. Since there is no bound charge, the total and the free charge and current are equal.\nAn alternative viewpoint on the microscopic equations is that they are the macroscopic equations \"together\" with the statement that vacuum behaves like a perfect linear \"material\" without additional polarization and magnetization.\nMore generally, for linear materials the constitutive relations are\nformula_45\nwhere \"\u03b5\" is the permittivity and \"\u03bc\" the permeability of the material. For the displacement field D the linear approximation is usually excellent because for all but the most extreme electric fields or temperatures obtainable in the laboratory (high power pulsed lasers) the interatomic electric fields of materials of the order of 1011 V/m are much higher than the external field. For the magnetizing field formula_46, however, the linear approximation can break down in common materials like iron leading to phenomena like hysteresis. Even the linear case can have various complications, however.\nEven more generally, in the case of non-linear materials (see for example nonlinear optics), D and P are not necessarily proportional to E, similarly H or M is not necessarily proportional to B. In general D and H depend on both E and B, on location and time, and possibly other physical quantities.\nIn applications one also has to describe how the free currents and charge density behave in terms of E and B possibly coupled to other physical quantities like pressure, and the mass, number density, and velocity of charge-carrying particles. E.g., the original equations given by Maxwell (see \"History of Maxwell's equations\") included Ohm's law in the form\nformula_47\nAlternative formulations.\nFollowing are some of the several other mathematical formalisms of Maxwell's equations, with the columns separating the two homogeneous Maxwell equations from the two inhomogeneous ones. Each formulation has versions directly in terms of the electric and magnetic fields, and indirectly in terms of the electrical potential \"\u03c6\" and the vector potential A. Potentials were introduced as a convenient way to solve the homogeneous equations, but it was thought that all observable physics was contained in the electric and magnetic fields (or relativistically, the Faraday tensor). The potentials play a central role in quantum mechanics, however, and act quantum mechanically with observable consequences even when the electric and magnetic fields vanish (Aharonov\u2013Bohm effect).\nEach table describes one formalism. See the main article for details of each formulation.\nThe direct spacetime formulations make manifest that the Maxwell equations are relativistically invariant, where space and time are treated on equal footing. Because of this symmetry, the electric and magnetic fields are treated on equal footing and are recognized as components of the Faraday tensor. This reduces the four Maxwell equations to two, which simplifies the equations, although we can no longer use the familiar vector formulation. Maxwell equations in formulation that do not treat space and time manifestly on the same footing have Lorentz invariance as a hidden symmetry. This was a major source of inspiration for the development of relativity theory. Indeed, even the formulation that treats space and time separately is not a non-relativistic approximation and describes the same physics by simply renaming variables. For this reason the relativistic invariant equations are usually called the Maxwell equations as well.\nEach table below describes one formalism.\nOther formalisms include the geometric algebra formulation and a matrix representation of Maxwell's equations. Historically, a quaternionic formulation was used.\nSolutions.\nMaxwell's equations are partial differential equations that relate the electric and magnetic fields to each other and to the electric charges and currents. Often, the charges and currents are themselves dependent on the electric and magnetic fields via the Lorentz force equation and the constitutive relations. These all form a set of coupled partial differential equations which are often very difficult to solve: the solutions encompass all the diverse phenomena of classical electromagnetism. Some general remarks follow.\nAs for any differential equation, boundary conditions and initial conditions are necessary for a unique solution. For example, even with no charges and no currents anywhere in spacetime, there are the obvious solutions for which E and B are zero or constant, but there are also non-trivial solutions corresponding to electromagnetic waves. In some cases, Maxwell's equations are solved over the whole of space, and boundary conditions are given as asymptotic limits at infinity. In other cases, Maxwell's equations are solved in a finite region of space, with appropriate conditions on the boundary of that region, for example an artificial absorbing boundary representing the rest of the universe, or periodic boundary conditions, or walls that isolate a small region from the outside world (as with a waveguide or cavity resonator).\nJefimenko's equations (or the closely related Li\u00e9nard\u2013Wiechert potentials) are the explicit solution to Maxwell's equations for the electric and magnetic fields created by any given distribution of charges and currents. It assumes specific initial conditions to obtain the so-called \"retarded solution\", where the only fields present are the ones created by the charges. However, Jefimenko's equations are unhelpful in situations when the charges and currents are themselves affected by the fields they create.\nNumerical methods for differential equations can be used to compute approximate solutions of Maxwell's equations when exact solutions are impossible. These include the finite element method and finite-difference time-domain method. For more details, see Computational electromagnetics.\nOverdetermination of Maxwell's equations.\nMaxwell's equations \"seem\" overdetermined, in that they involve six unknowns (the three components of E and B) but eight equations (one for each of the two Gauss's laws, three vector components each for Faraday's and Amp\u00e8re's circuital laws). (The currents and charges are not unknowns, being freely specifiable subject to charge conservation.) This is related to a certain limited kind of redundancy in Maxwell's equations: It can be proven that any system satisfying Faraday's law and Amp\u00e8re's circuital law \"automatically\" also satisfies the two Gauss's laws, as long as the system's initial condition does, and assuming conservation of charge and the nonexistence of magnetic monopoles. \nThis explanation was first introduced by Julius Adams Stratton in 1941.\nAlthough it is possible to simply ignore the two Gauss's laws in a numerical algorithm (apart from the initial conditions), the imperfect precision of the calculations can lead to ever-increasing violations of those laws. By introducing dummy variables characterizing these violations, the four equations become not overdetermined after all. The resulting formulation can lead to more accurate algorithms that take all four laws into account.\nBoth identities formula_52, which reduce eight equations to six independent ones, are the true reason of overdetermination.\nEquivalently, the overdetermination can be viewed as implying conservation of electric and magnetic charge, as they are required in the derivation described above but implied by the two Gauss's laws.\nFor linear algebraic equations, one can make 'nice' rules to rewrite the equations and unknowns. The equations can be linearly dependent. But in differential equations, and especially partial differential equations (PDEs), one needs appropriate boundary conditions, which depend in not so obvious ways on the equations. Even more, if one rewrites them in terms of vector and scalar potential, then the equations are underdetermined because of gauge fixing.\nMaxwell's equations as the classical limit of QED.\nMaxwell's equations and the Lorentz force law (along with the rest of classical electromagnetism) are extraordinarily successful at explaining and predicting a variety of phenomena. However, they do not account for quantum effects, and so their domain of applicability is limited. Maxwell's equations are thought of as the classical limit of quantum electrodynamics (QED).\nSome observed electromagnetic phenomena cannot be explained with Maxwell's equations if the source of the electromagnetic fields are the classical distributions of charge and current. These include photon\u2013photon scattering and many other phenomena related to photons or virtual photons, \"nonclassical light\" and quantum entanglement of electromagnetic fields (see \"Quantum optics\"). E.g. quantum cryptography cannot be described by Maxwell theory, not even approximately. The approximate nature of Maxwell's equations becomes more and more apparent when going into the extremely strong field regime (see \"Euler\u2013Heisenberg Lagrangian\") or to extremely small distances.\nFinally, Maxwell's equations cannot explain any phenomenon involving individual photons interacting with quantum matter, such as the photoelectric effect, Planck's law, the Duane\u2013Hunt law, and single-photon light detectors. However, many such phenomena may be explained using a halfway theory of quantum matter coupled to a classical electromagnetic field, either as external field or with the expected value of the charge current and density on the right hand side of Maxwell's equations. This is known as semiclassical theory or self-field QED and was initially discovered by de Broglie and Schr\u00f6dinger and later fully developed by E.T. Jaynes and A.O. Barut.\nVariations.\nPopular variations on the Maxwell equations as a classical theory of electromagnetic fields are relatively scarce because the standard equations have stood the test of time remarkably well.\nMagnetic monopoles.\nMaxwell's equations posit that there is electric charge, but no magnetic charge (also called magnetic monopoles), in the universe. Indeed, magnetic charge has never been observed, despite extensive searches, and may not exist. If they did exist, both Gauss's law for magnetism and Faraday's law would need to be modified, and the resulting four equations would be fully symmetric under the interchange of electric and magnetic fields.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19738", "revid": "38005489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19738", "title": "Metrizable space", "text": "Topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space\nIn topology and related areas of mathematics, a metrizable space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space. That is, a topological space formula_1 is said to be metrizable if there is a metric formula_2 such that the topology induced by formula_3 is formula_4 \"Metrization theorems\" are theorems that give sufficient conditions for a topological space to be metrizable.\nProperties.\nMetrizable spaces inherit all topological properties from metric spaces. For example, they are Hausdorff paracompact spaces (and hence normal and Tychonoff) and first-countable. However, some properties of the metric, such as completeness, cannot be said to be inherited. This is also true of other structures linked to the metric. A metrizable uniform space, for example, may have a different set of contraction maps than a metric space to which it is homeomorphic.\nMetrization theorems.\nOne of the first widely recognized metrization theorems was \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Urysohn's metrization theorem\". This states that every Hausdorff second-countable regular space is metrizable. So, for example, every second-countable manifold is metrizable. (Historical note: The form of the theorem shown here was in fact proved by Tikhonov in 1926. What Urysohn had shown, in a paper published posthumously in 1925, was that every second-countable \"normal\" Hausdorff space is metrizable.) The converse does not hold: there exist metric spaces that are not second countable, for example, an uncountable set endowed with the discrete metric. The Nagata\u2013Smirnov metrization theorem, described below, provides a more specific theorem where the converse does hold.\nSeveral other metrization theorems follow as simple corollaries to Urysohn's theorem. For example, a compact Hausdorff space is metrizable if and only if it is second-countable.\nUrysohn's Theorem can be restated as: A topological space is separable and metrizable if and only if it is regular, Hausdorff and second-countable. The Nagata\u2013Smirnov metrization theorem extends this to the non-separable case. It states that a topological space is metrizable if and only if it is regular, Hausdorff and has a \u03c3-locally finite base. A \u03c3-locally finite base is a base which is a union of countably many locally finite collections of open sets. For a closely related theorem see the Bing metrization theorem.\nSeparable metrizable spaces can also be characterized as those spaces which are homeomorphic to a subspace of the Hilbert cube formula_5 that is, the countably infinite product of the unit interval (with its natural subspace topology from the reals) with itself, endowed with the product topology.\nA space is said to be \"locally metrizable\" if every point has a metrizable neighbourhood. Smirnov proved that a locally metrizable space is metrizable if and only if it is Hausdorff and paracompact. In particular, a manifold is metrizable if and only if it is paracompact.\nExamples.\nThe group of unitary operators formula_6 on a separable Hilbert space formula_7 endowed\nwith the strong operator topology is metrizable (see Proposition II.1 in ).\nNon-normal spaces cannot be metrizable; important examples include\nThe real line with the lower limit topology is not metrizable. The usual distance function is not a metric on this space because the topology it determines is the usual topology, not the lower limit topology. This space is Hausdorff, paracompact and first countable.\nLocally metrizable but not metrizable.\nThe Line with two origins, also called the \"&lt;dfn &gt;bug-eyed line&lt;/dfn&gt;\" is a non-Hausdorff manifold (and thus cannot be metrizable). Like all manifolds, it is locally homeomorphic to Euclidean space and thus locally metrizable (but not metrizable) and locally Hausdorff (but not Hausdorff). It is also a T1 locally regular space but not a semiregular space.\nThe long line is locally metrizable but not metrizable; in a sense, it is \"too long\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This article incorporates material from Metrizable on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the .\""}
{"id": "19739", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19739", "title": "Martin Agricola", "text": "German Renaissance composer and music theorist (1486\u20131556)\nMartin Agricola (6 January 1486 \u2013 10 June 1556) was a German composer of Renaissance music and a music theorist.\nBiography.\nAgricola was born in \u015awiebodzin, a town in Western Poland, and took the name Agricola later in life, a common practice among Lutherans often meant to emphasize humble, peasant origins. From 1524 until his death, he lived in the German city of Magdeburg, where he was a teacher or cantor in the Protestant school. Georg Rhau, a publisher and senator in Wittenberg, was Agricola's close friend and publisher. \nAgricola's theoretical writing was valuable in expounding the change from the old to the new system of musical notation. His \"Musica instrumentalis deudsch\" (English: \"German Instrumental Music\"), published in 1528, 1530, 1532 and 1542, and then heavily revised in 1545, was one of the most important early works in organology and on the elements of music.\nAgricola was the first to harmonize in four parts Martin Luther's famous chorale, \"Ein feste Burg ist unser Gott\" (English: \"A Mighty Fortress Is Our God\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19740", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19740", "title": "Max August Zorn", "text": "German mathematician (1906\u20131993)\nMax August Zorn (; June 6, 1906 \u2013 March 9, 1993) was a German mathematician. He was an algebraist, group theorist, and numerical analyst. He is best known for Zorn's lemma, a method used in set theory that is applicable to a wide range of mathematical constructs such as vector spaces, and ordered sets amongst others. Zorn's lemma was first postulated by Kazimierz Kuratowski in 1922, and then independently by Zorn in 1935.\nLife and career.\nZorn was born in Krefeld, Germany. He attended the University of Hamburg. He received his PhD in April 1930 for a thesis on alternative algebras. He published his findings in \"Abhandlungen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Universit\u00e4t Hamburg\". Zorn showed that split-octonions could be represented by a mixed-style of matrices called Zorn's vector-matrix algebra.\nMax Zorn was appointed to an assistant position at the University of Halle. However, he did not have the opportunity to work there for long as he was forced to leave Germany in 1933 because of policies enacted by the Nazis. According to grandson Eric, \"[Max] spoke with a raspy, airy voice most of his life. Few people knew why, because he only told the story after significant prodding, but he talked that way because pro-Hitler thugs who objected to his politics, had battered his throat in a 1933 street fight.\"\nZorn immigrated to the United States and was appointed a Sterling Fellow at Yale University. While at Yale, Zorn wrote his paper \"A Remark on Method in Transfinite Algebra\" that stated his Maximum Principle, later called Zorn's lemma. It requires a set that contains the union of any chain of subsets to have one chain not contained in any other, called the maximal element. He illustrated the principle with applications in ring theory and field extensions. Zorn's lemma is an alternative expression of the axiom of choice, and thus a subject of interest in axiomatic set theory.\nIn 1936 he moved to UCLA and remained until 1946. While at UCLA Zorn revisited his study of alternative rings and proved the existence of the nilradical of certain alternative rings. According to Angus E. Taylor, Max was his most stimulating colleague at UCLA.\nIn 1946 Zorn became a professor at Indiana University, where he taught until retiring in 1971. He was thesis advisor for Israel Nathan Herstein.\nZorn died in Bloomington, Indiana, in March 1993, of congestive heart failure.\nFamily.\nMax Zorn married Alice Schlottau and they had one son, Jens, and one daughter, Liz. Jens (born June 19, 1931) is an emeritus professor of physics at the University of Michigan and an accomplished sculptor. Max Zorn's grandson Eric Zorn was a columnist for the \"Chicago Tribune\" from 1986 until 2021; after retirement Eric Zorn started a newsletter titled \"The Picayune Sentinel,\" named after the mathematics newsletter that Max Zorn had distributed during his years at Indiana University. Max's great-grandson, Alexander Wolken Zorn, received a PhD in mathematics from the University of California Berkeley in 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19741", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19741", "title": "Martin Luther/95 Theses", "text": ""}
{"id": "19743", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19743", "title": "Modern algebra", "text": ""}
{"id": "19745", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19745", "title": "Main (river)", "text": "River in Germany\nThe Main () is the longest tributary of the Rhine, one of the major European rivers. It rises as the White Main in the Fichtel Mountains of northeastern Bavaria and flows west through central Germany for to meet the Rhine below R\u00fcsselsheim, Hesse. The cities of Mainz and Wiesbaden are close to the confluence. \nThe largest cities on the Main are Frankfurt am Main, Offenbach am Main and W\u00fcrzburg. It is the longest river lying entirely in Germany (if the Weser-Werra are considered separate).\nGeography.\nThe Main flows through the north and north-west of the state of Bavaria and then across southern Hesse; against the latter it demarcates a third state, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, east and west of Wertheim am Main, the northernmost town of that state. \nThe upper end of its basin opposes that of the Danube where the watershed is recognised by natural biologists, sea salinity studies (and hydrology science more broadly) as the European Watershed.\nThe Main begins near Kulmbach in Franconia at the joining of its two headstreams, the Red Main (\"Roter Main\") and the White Main (\"Wei\u00dfer Main\"). The Red Main originates in the Franconian Jura mountain range, in length, and runs through Creussen and Bayreuth. The White Main originates in the Fichtel Mountains; it is long. In its upper and middle section, the Main runs through the valleys of the German Highlands. Its lower section crosses the Lower Main Lowlands (Hanau-Seligenstadt Basin and northern Upper Rhine Plain) to Wiesbaden, where it discharges into the Rhine. Major tributaries of the Main are the Regnitz, the Franconian Saale, the Tauber, and the Nidda.\nThe name \"Main\" originates from Latin \"Moenis\", \"Moenus\" or \"Menus\". It is not related to the name of the city Mainz (Latin: \"Mogontiacum\" or \"Moguntiacum\").\nNavigation.\nThe Main is navigable for shipping from its mouth at the Rhine close to Mainz for to Bamberg. Since 1992, the Main has been connected to the Danube via the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal and the highly regulated Altm\u00fchl river. The Main has been canalized with 34 large locks () to allow CEMT class V vessels () to navigate the total length of the river. The 16 locks in the adjacent Rhine-Main-Danube Canal and the Danube itself are of the same dimensions.\nWeirs and locks.\nThere are 34 weirs and locks along the 380\u00a0km navigable portion of the Main, from the confluence with the Regnitz near Bamberg, to the Rhine.\nHydroelectric power generation.\nMost of the weirs or dams along the Main also have turbines for power generation.\nTributaries.\nTributaries from source to mouth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPorts and municipalities.\nAround Frankfurt are several large inland ports. Because the river is rather narrow on many of the upper reaches, navigation with larger vessels and push convoys requires great skill.\nThe largest cities along the Main are Frankfurt am Main, Offenbach am Main and W\u00fcrzburg. The Main also passes the following towns: Burgkunstadt, Lichtenfels, Bad Staffelstein, Eltmann, Ha\u00dffurt, Schweinfurt, Volkach, Kitzingen, Marktbreit, Ochsenfurt, Karlstadt, Gem\u00fcnden, Lohr, Marktheidenfeld, Wertheim, Miltenberg, Obernburg, Erlenbach/Main, Aschaffenburg, Seligenstadt, Hainburg, Hanau, Hattersheim, Fl\u00f6rsheim, and R\u00fcsselsheim.\nThe river has gained enormous importance as a vital part of European \"Corridor VII\", the inland waterway link from the North Sea to the Black Sea.\nMain line.\nIn a historical and political sense, the Main line is referred to as the northern border of Southern Germany, with its predominantly Catholic population. The river roughly marked the southern border of the North German Federation, established in 1867 under Prussian leadership as the predecessor of the German Empire.\nThe river course also corresponds with the Speyer line isogloss between Central and Upper German dialects, sometimes mocked as \"Wei\u00dfwurst\u00e4quator\".\nRecreation.\nThe Main-Radweg is a major German bicycle path alongside the river. Approximately , it is the first long-distance instance awarded 5\u00a0stars by the General German Bicycle Club (ADFC) in 2008. It starts from Creu\u00dfen or Bischofsgr\u00fcn and ends in Mainz.\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19746", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19746", "title": "Modulo arithmetic", "text": ""}
{"id": "19747", "revid": "11042835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19747", "title": "Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa", "text": "Roman general and statesman (c. 63\u201312 BC)\nMarcus Vipsanius Agrippa (; c.\u200963 BC \u2013 12 BC) was a Roman general and statesman who was a close friend, son-in-law and lieutenant to the Roman emperor Augustus. Agrippa is well known for his important military victories, notably the Battle of Actium in 31 BC against the forces of Mark Antony and Cleopatra. He was also responsible for the construction of some of the most notable buildings of his era, including the original Pantheon.\nBorn to a plebeian family c.\u200963\u00a0BC, in an uncertain location in Roman Italy, he met the future emperor Augustus, then known as Octavian, at Apollonia, in Illyria. Following the assassination of Octavian's great-uncle Julius Caesar in 44 BC, Octavian returned to Italy. Around this time, Agrippa was elected tribune of the plebs. He served as a military commander, fighting alongside Octavian and Caesar's former general and right-hand man Mark Antony in the Battle of Philippi. In 40 BC, he was \"praetor urbanus\" and played a major role in the Perusine war against Lucius Antonius and Fulvia, respectively the brother and wife of Mark Antony. In 39 or 38 BC, Agrippa was appointed governor of Transalpine Gaul. In 38 BC, he put down a rising of the Aquitanians and fought the Germanic tribes. He was made consul for 37 BC, despite being well below the usual minimum age of 43, in order to oversee the preparations for war against Sextus Pompey, who had cut off grain shipments to Rome.\nAgrippa defeated Pompey in the battles of Mylae and Naulochus in 36 BC. In 33 BC, he served as \"curule aedile\". Agrippa commanded the victorious Octavian's fleet at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC. A few years after the victory at Actium, Octavian became emperor and took the title of Princeps, while Agrippa remained as his close friend and lieutenant. Agrippa assisted Augustus in making Rome \"a city of marble\". Agrippa renovated aqueducts to provide Roman citizens from every social class access to the highest quality public services, and was responsible for the creation of many baths, porticoes, and gardens. He was also awarded powers almost as great as those of Augustus. He had veto power over the acts of the Senate and the power to present laws for approval by the People. He died in 12 BC at the age of 50\u201351. Augustus honoured his memory with a magnificent funeral and spent over a month in mourning. His remains were placed in Augustus' own mausoleum.\nAgrippa was also known as a writer, especially on geography. Under his supervision, Julius Caesar's design of having a complete survey of the empire made was accomplished. From the materials at hand he constructed a circular chart, which was engraved on marble by Augustus and afterwards placed in the colonnade built by his sister Vipsania Polla. Agrippa was also husband to Julia the Elder (who had later married the second Emperor Tiberius), and was the maternal grandfather of Caligula and the maternal great-grandfather of the Emperor Nero.\nEarly life, family, and early career.\nEarly life and family.\nAgrippa was born c.\u200963\u00a0BC, in an uncertain location. His father was called Lucius Vipsanius. His mother's name is not known and Pliny the Elder claimed that his cognomen \"Agrippa\" derived from him having been born breech so it is possible that she died in childbirth. Pliny also stated that he suffered from lameness as a child. He had an elder brother whose name was also Lucius Vipsanius, and a sister named Vipsania Polla. His family originated in the Italian countryside, and was of humbler and plebeian origins when compared to the highest families of the Roman aristocracy. They had not been prominent in Roman public life (but were nevertheless massively wealthy if compared to the average Roman family). According to some scholars, including Victor Gardthausen, R. E. A. Palmer, and David Ridgway, Agrippa's family was originally from Pisa in Etruria.\nAgrippa's family most likely gained Roman citizenship after the Social War in 87 BC and, like many other Italians, immigrated to Rome to take advantage of the social mobility opportunities that arose at the war's end.\nEarly career.\nAgrippa was the same age as Octavian (later Augustus), and the two were educated together and became close friends. Despite Agrippa's association with the family of Julius Caesar, his elder brother chose the opposing side in the civil wars of the 40s BC, fighting under Cato against Caesar in Africa. When Cato's forces were defeated, Agrippa's brother was taken prisoner but freed after Octavian interceded on his behalf.\nIt is not known whether Agrippa fought against his brother in Africa, but he probably served in Caesar's campaign of 46 to 45 BC against Gnaeus Pompeius, which culminated in the Battle of Munda. Caesar regarded him highly enough to send him with Octavian in 45 BC to study in Apollonia (on the Illyrian coast) with the Macedonian legions, while Caesar consolidated his power in Rome. In the fourth month of their stay in Apollonia the news of Julius Caesar's assassination in March 44 BC reached them. Agrippa and another friend, Quintus Salvidienus Rufus, advised Octavian to march on Rome with the troops from Macedonia, but Octavian decided to sail to Italy with a small retinue. After his arrival, he learned that Caesar had adopted him as his legal heir.\nRise to power.\nFriend to Octavian.\nAfter Octavian's return to Rome, he and his supporters realised they needed the support of legions. Agrippa helped Octavian to levy troops in Campania. Once Octavian had his legions, he made a pact with Mark Antony and Lepidus, legally established in 43 BC as the Second Triumvirate. Octavian and his consular colleague Quintus Pedius arranged for Caesar's assassins to be prosecuted in their absence, and Agrippa was entrusted with the case against Gaius Cassius Longinus. It may have been in the same year that Agrippa began his political career, holding the position of tribune of the plebs, which granted him entry to the Senate.\nIn 42 BC, Agrippa probably fought alongside Octavian and Antony in the Battle of Philippi. After their return to Rome, he played a major role in Octavian's war against Lucius Antonius and Fulvia, respectively the brother and wife of Mark Antony, which began in 41 BC and ended in the capture of Perusia in 40 BC. However, Salvidienus remained Octavian's main general at this time. After the Perusine war, Octavian departed for Gaul, leaving Agrippa as urban praetor in Rome with instructions to defend Italy against Sextus Pompeius, an opponent of the Triumvirate who was now occupying Sicily. In July 40 BC, while Agrippa was occupied with the Ludi Apollinares that were the praetor's responsibility, Sextus began a raid in southern Italy. Agrippa advanced on him, forcing him to withdraw. However, the Triumvirate proved unstable, and in August 40 BC both Sextus and Antony invaded Italy (but not in an organized alliance). Agrippa's success in retaking Sipontum from Antony helped bring an end to the conflict. Agrippa was among the intermediaries through whom Antony and Octavian agreed once more upon peace. During the discussions Octavian learned that Salvidienus had offered to betray him to Antony, with the result that Salvidienus was prosecuted and either executed or committed suicide. Agrippa was now Octavian's leading general.\nGovernor of Transalpine Gaul.\nIn 39 or 38 BC, Octavian appointed Agrippa governor of Transalpine Gaul, where in 38 BC he put down a rising of the Aquitanians. He also fought the Germanic tribes, becoming the next Roman general to cross the Rhine after Julius Caesar. He was summoned back to Rome by Octavian to assume the consulship for 37 BC. He was well below the usual minimum age of 43, but Octavian had suffered a humiliating naval defeat against Sextus Pompey and needed his friend to oversee the preparations for further warfare. Agrippa refused the offer of a triumph for his exploits in Gaul \u2013 on the grounds, says Dio, that he thought it improper to celebrate during a time of trouble for Octavian. \nSince Sextus Pompeius had command of the sea on the coasts of Italy, Agrippa's first care was to provide a safe harbour for Octavian's ships. He accomplished this by cutting through the strips of land which separated the Lacus Lucrinus from the sea, thus forming an outer harbour, while joining the lake Avernus to the Lucrinus to serve as an inner harbour. The new harbour complex was named Portus Julius in Octavian's honour. Agrippa was also responsible for technological improvements, including larger ships and an improved form of grappling hook. About this time, he married Caecilia Pomponia Attica, daughter of Cicero's friend Titus Pomponius Atticus.\nWar with Sextus Pompeius.\nIn 36 BC, Octavian and Agrippa set sail against Sextus. The fleet was badly damaged by storms and had to withdraw; Agrippa was left in charge of the second attempt. Thanks to superior technology and training, Agrippa and his men won decisive victories at Mylae and Naulochus, destroying all but seventeen of Sextus' ships and compelling most of his forces to surrender. Octavian, with his power increased, forced the triumvir Lepidus into retirement and entered Rome in triumph. Agrippa received the unprecedented honour of a \"corona navalis\" decorated with the beaks of ships; as Dio remarks, this was \"a decoration given to nobody before or since\".\nPublic service.\nAgrippa participated in smaller military campaigns in 35 and 34 BC, but by the autumn of 34 BC he had returned to Rome. He rapidly set out on a campaign of public repairs and improvements, including renovation of the aqueduct known as the Aqua Marcia and an extension of its pipes to cover more of the city. He became the first Curator Aquarum of Rome in 33 BC. Through his actions after being elected in 33 BC as one of the aediles (officials responsible for Rome's buildings and festivals), the streets were repaired and the sewers were cleaned out, and lavish public spectacles were held. Agrippa signalled his tenure of office by effecting great improvements in the city of Rome, restoring and building aqueducts, enlarging and cleansing the Cloaca Maxima, constructing baths and porticos, and laying out gardens. He also gave a stimulus to the public exhibition of works of art. It was unusual for an ex-consul to hold the lower-ranking position of \"aedile\", but Agrippa's success bore out that break with tradition. As emperor, Augustus would later boast that \"he had found the city of brick but left it of marble\" in part because of the great services provided by Agrippa under his reign.\nBattle of Actium.\nAgrippa was again called away to take command of the fleet when the war with Antony and Cleopatra broke out. He captured the strategically important city of Methone at the southwest of the Peloponnese, then sailed north, raiding the Greek coast and capturing Corcyra (modern Corfu). Octavian then brought his forces to Corcyra, occupying it as a naval base. Antony drew up his ships and troops at Actium, where Octavian moved to meet him. Agrippa meanwhile defeated Antony's supporter Quintus Nasidius in a naval battle at Patrae. Dio relates that as Agrippa moved to join Octavian near Actium, he encountered Gaius Sosius, one of Antony's lieutenants, who was making a surprise attack on the squadron of Lucius Tarius, a supporter of Octavian. Agrippa's unexpected arrival turned the battle around.\nAs the decisive battle approached, according to Dio, Octavian received intelligence that Antony and Cleopatra planned to break past his naval blockade and escape. At first he wished to allow the flagships past, arguing that he could overtake them with his lighter vessels and that the other opposing ships would surrender when they saw their leaders' cowardice. Agrippa objected, saying that Antony's ships, although larger, could outrun Octavian's if they hoisted sails, and that Octavian ought to fight now because Antony's fleet had just been struck by storms. Octavian followed his friend's advice.\nOn 2 September 31 BC, the Battle of Actium was fought. Octavian's victory, which gave him the mastery of Rome and the empire, was mainly due to Agrippa. Octavian then bestowed upon him the hand of his niece Claudia Marcella Major in 28 BC. He also served a second consulship with Octavian the same year. In 27 BC, Agrippa held a third consulship with Octavian, and in that year, the Senate also bestowed upon Octavian the imperial title of \"Augustus\".\nIn commemoration of the Battle of Actium, Agrippa built and dedicated the building that served as the Roman Pantheon before its destruction in AD 80. Emperor Hadrian used Agrippa's design to build his own Pantheon, which survives in Rome. The inscription of the later building, which was built c.\u2009125, preserves the text of the inscription from Agrippa's building during his third consulship. The years following his third consulship, Agrippa spent in Gaul, reforming the provincial administration and taxation system, along with building an effective road system and aqueducts.\nLater life.\nAgrippa's friendship with Augustus seems to have been clouded by the jealousy of Augustus's nephew and son-in-law Marcus Claudius Marcellus. Traditionally it is said that the result of such jealousy was that Agrippa left Rome, ostensibly to take over the governorship of eastern provinces \u2013 a sort of honourable exile. He only sent his legate to Syria, while he remained at Lesbos and governed by proxy. He might have been on a secret mission to negotiate with the Parthians about the return of the Roman legions' standards. On the death of Marcellus, which took place within a year of his exile, he was recalled to Rome by Augustus, who found he could not dispense with his services. If one places the events in the context of the crisis of 23 BC it seems unlikely that, when facing significant opposition and about to make a political climb down, the emperor Augustus would place a man in exile in charge of the largest body of Roman troops. What is far more likely is that Agrippa's 'exile' was actually the careful political positioning of a loyal lieutenant in command of a significant army in case the settlement plans of 23 BC failed and Augustus needed military support.\nAfter 23 BC, as part of what became known as Augustus's \"Second Constitutional Settlement\", Agrippa's constitutional powers were greatly increased to provide the Principate of Augustus with greater constitutional stability by providing for a political heir or replacement for Augustus if he were to succumb to his habitual ill health or was assassinated. In the course of the year, proconsular imperium, similar to Augustus's power, was conferred upon Agrippa for five years. The exact nature of the grant is uncertain but it probably covered Augustus's imperial provinces, east and west, perhaps lacking authority over the provinces of the Senate. That was to come later, as was the jealously guarded \"tribunicia potestas\", or powers of a tribune of the plebeians. These great powers of state are not usually heaped upon a former exile. A later source stated that Augustus was advised by his confidant Maecenas to attach Agrippa still more closely to him by making him his son-in-law. In 21 BC, he induced Agrippa to divorce Marcella and marry his daughter, Julia the Elder\u2014the widow of Marcellus. In 19 BC, Agrippa was employed in putting down a rising of the Cantabrians in Hispania (Cantabrian Wars).\nIn 18 BC, Agrippa's powers were even further increased to almost match those of Augustus. That year his proconsular imperium was augmented to cover the senatorial provinces and was granted \"tribunicia potestas\", or powers of a tribune of the plebeians. As was the case with Augustus, Agrippa's grant of tribunician powers was conferred without his having to hold the office. These powers were considerable, giving him veto power over the acts of the Senate or other magistracies, including those of other tribunes, and the power to present laws for approval by the People. Just as important, a tribune's person was sacred, meaning that any person who harmfully touched them or impeded their actions, including political acts, could lawfully be killed. After the grant of these powers Agrippa was, on paper, almost as powerful as Augustus was; there was no doubt that Augustus was the man in charge.\nAgrippa was appointed governor of the eastern provinces a second time in 17 BC, where his just and prudent administration won him the respect and good-will of the provincials, especially from the Jewish population. Agrippa also restored Roman control over the Cimmerian Chersonnese (Crimean Peninsula).\nDeath.\nAgrippa's last public service was his beginning of the conquest of the upper Danube River region, which would become the Roman province of Pannonia in 13 BC. He died at Campania in 12 BC at the age of 50\u201351. His posthumous son, Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa Postumus, was named in his honour. Augustus honoured his memory by a magnificent funeral and spent over a month in mourning. Augustus oversaw the education of Agrippa's children. Agrippa had built a tomb for himself but Augustus had Agrippa's remains placed in the Mausoleum of Augustus.\nLegacy.\nAgrippa was not only Augustus' most skilled subordinate commander but also his closest companion, serving him faithfully for over three decades. Historian Glen Bowersock says of Agrippa:\nAgrippa deserved the honours Augustus heaped upon him. It is conceivable that without Agrippa, Octavian would never have become emperor. Rome would remember Agrippa for his generosity in attending to aqueducts, sewers, and baths.\nAgrippa was also a writer, especially on the subject of geography. Under his supervision, Julius Caesar's dream of having a complete survey of the Empire made was carried out. Agrippa constructed a circular chart, which was later engraved on marble by Augustus, and afterwards placed in the colonnade built by his sister Polla. Amongst his writings, an autobiography, now lost, is referenced.\nAgrippa established a standard for the Roman foot in 29\u00a0BC, and thus a definition of a pace as 5\u00a0feet. An imperial Roman mile denotes 5,000\u00a0Roman feet. The term Via Agrippa is used for any part of the network of roadways in Gaul built by Agrippa. Some of these still exist as paths or even as highways.\nThe Roman tribe Agrippia was named in his honour.\nMarriages and issue.\nAgrippa married three times: \nThrough his numerous children, Agrippa would become ancestor to many subsequent members of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, whose position he helped to attain, as well as many other distinguished Romans.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19757", "revid": "36378140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19757", "title": "Mariotto Albertinelli", "text": "Italian painter\nMariotto di Bindo di Biagio Albertinelli (13 October 1474 \u2013 5 November 1515) was an Italian Renaissance painter active in Florence. He was a close friend and collaborator of Fra Bartolomeo.\nSome of his works have been described as \"archaic\" or \"conservative\"; others are considered exemplary of the grandiose classicism of High Renaissance art.\nLife and work.\nAlbertinelli was born in Florence to a local gold beater. He was a pupil of Cosimo Rosselli, in whose workshop he met Baccio della Porta, later known as Fra Bartolomeo. The two were so close that in 1494 they formed a \"compagnia,\" or partnership, in which they operating a joint studio and divided the profits of anything produced within it. The partnership lasted until 1500, when Baccio joined the Dominican order and spent two years in cloister. \nAt the beginning of his career Albertinelli was placed on retainer by Alfonsina Orsini, the wife of Piero II de\u2019 Medici and mother of Lorenzo II de' Medici. His works from this period all small-scale works executed in a minute, delicate technique and a style derived from the works of Rosselli's main pupil Piero di Cosimo as well as Lorenzo di Credi and Perugino. Like many Florentine painters, Albertinelli was also receptive to the influence of contemporary Flemish painting.\nAlbertinelli's earliest works include a small triptych of the \"Madonna and Child with Saints Catherine and Barbara\" (1500) at the Museo Poldi Pezzoli, Milan, and another triptych of the Madonna and Child with Saints, Angels and Various Religious Scenes at the Mus\u00e9e des Beaux-Arts in Chartres. The several panels with \"Scenes from Genesis,\" at the Courtauld Institute in London, Strossmayer Gallery in Zagreb, Accademia Carrara in Bergamo and Harvard Art Museums in Cambridge, probably also date from this period.\nIn 1503 Albertinelli signed and dated his best-known work, an altarpiece for the chapel of Sant'Elisabetta della congrega dei Preti in San Michele alle Trombe, Florence (now in the Uffizi). The central panel of this work depicts the Visitation and the predella the Annunciation, Nativity, and Circumcision of Christ. The pyramidal composition, classical background architecture and pronounced contrasts of light and dark make the painting a quintessential example of High Renaissance art.\nAlso in 1503 Albertinelli entered a new partnership with Giuliano Bugiardini, which lasted until 1509, when Albertinelli resumed his partnership with Fra Bartolomeo. At this point Fra Bartolomeo and Albertinelli practiced similar styles and occasionally collaborated. For example, the \"Kress Tondo\", now in the Columbia Museum of Art, was previously attributed to Fra Bartolomeo but is now thought to be the work of Albertinelli using Fra Bartolomeo's cartoon, or scaled-preparatory drawing. The \"Annunciation\" at the Mus\u00e9e d'Art et d'Histoire in Geneva is signed and dated (1511) by both artists. The partnership was terminated in January 1513, as reported in a document stipulating the division of the workshop's properties.\nAccording to Giorgio Vasari's \"Life\" of Albertinelli, the painter lived as a libertine and was fond of good living and women. Albertinelli reportedly had experienced financial problems and operated a tavern to supplement his income as a painter. At the end of his life he was unable to repay some of his debts, including one to Raphael. His wife Antonia, whom he married in 1506, repaid some of his loans. Among his many students were Franciabigio, Jacopo da Pontormo, and Innocenzo da Imola.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19758", "revid": "49329771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19758", "title": "Beijing cuisine", "text": "Local cuisine of Beijing, the national capital of China\nBeijing cuisine, also known as Jing cuisine, Mandarin cuisine and Peking cuisine and formerly as Beiping cuisine, is the local cuisine of Beijing, the national capital of China.\nBackground.\nAs Beijing has been the capital of China for centuries, its cuisine is influenced by culinary traditions from all over China, but the style that has the greatest influence on Beijing cuisine is that of the eastern coastal province of Shandong. Beijing cuisine has itself, in turn, also greatly influenced other Chinese cuisines, particularly the cuisine of Liaoning, the Chinese imperial cuisine and the Chinese aristocrat cuisine.\nAnother tradition that influenced Beijing cuisine (as well as influenced by the latter itself) is the Chinese imperial cuisine that originated from the \"Emperor's Kitchen\" (), which referred to the cooking facilities inside the Forbidden City, where thousands of cooks from different parts of China showed their best culinary skills to please the imperial family and officials. Therefore, it is sometimes difficult to determine the actual origin of a dish as the term \"Mandarin\" is generalised and refers not only to Beijing, but other provinces as well. However, some generalisation of Beijing cuisine can be characterised as follows: Foods that originated in Beijing are often snacks rather than main courses, and they are typically sold by small shops or street vendors. There is emphasis on dark soy paste, sesame paste, sesame oil and scallions, and fermented tofu is often served as a condiment. In terms of cooking techniques, methods relating to different ways of frying are often used. There is less emphasis on rice as an accompaniment as compared to many other regions in China, as local rice production in Beijing is limited by the relatively dry climate.\nMany dishes in Beijing cuisine that are served as main courses are derived from a variety of Chinese Halal foods, particularly lamb and beef dishes, as well as from Huaiyang cuisine.\nHuaiyang cuisine has been praised since ancient times in China and it was a general practice for an official travelling to Beijing to take up a new post to bring along with him a chef specialising in Huaiyang cuisine. When these officials had completed their terms in the capital and returned to their native provinces, most of the chefs they brought along often remained in Beijing. They opened their own restaurants or were hired by wealthy locals. The imperial clan of the Ming dynasty, the House of Zhu, who had ancestry from Jiangsu Province, also contributed greatly in introducing Huaiyang cuisine to Beijing when the capital was moved from Nanjing to Beijing in the 15th century, because the imperial kitchen was mainly Huaiyang style. The element of traditional Beijing culinary and gastronomical cultures of enjoying artistic performances such as Beijing opera while dining directly developed from the similar practice in the culture of Jiangsu and Huaiyang cuisines.\nChinese Islamic cuisine is another important component of Beijing cuisine and was first prominently introduced when Beijing became the capital of the Yuan dynasty. However, the most significant contribution to the formation of Beijing cuisine came from Shandong cuisine, as most chefs from Shandong Province came to Beijing en masse during the Qing dynasty. Unlike the earlier two cuisines, which were brought by the ruling class such as nobles, aristocrats and bureaucrats and then spread to the general populace, the introduction of Shandong cuisine begun with serving the general populace, with much wider market segment, from wealthy merchants to the working class.\nHistory.\nThe Qing dynasty was a major period in the formation of Beijing cuisine. Before the Boxer Rebellion, the foodservice establishments in Beijing were strictly stratified by the foodservice guild. Each category of the establishment was specifically based on its ability to provide for a particular segment of the market. The top ranking establishments served nobles, aristocrats, and wealthy merchants and landlords, while lower ranking establishments served the populace of lower financial and social status. It was during this period when Beijing cuisine gained fame and became recognised by the Chinese culinary society, and the stratification of the foodservice was one of its most obvious characteristics as part of its culinary and gastronomic cultures during this first peak of its formation.\nThe official stratification was an integral part of the local culture of Beijing and it was not finally abolished officially after the end of the Qing dynasty, which resulted in the second peak in the formation of Beijing cuisine. Meals previously offered to nobles and aristocrats were made available to anyone who could afford them instead of being restricted only to the upper class. As chefs freely switched between jobs offered by different establishments, they brought their skills that further enriched and developed Beijing cuisine. Though the stratification of food services in Beijing was no longer effected by imperial laws, the structure more or less remained despite continuous weakening due to the financial background of the local clientele. The different classes are listed in the following subsections.\nZhuang.\n\"Zhuang\" (), or \"zhuang zihao\" () were the top-ranking foodservice establishments, not only in providing foods, but entertainment as well. The form of entertainment provided was usually Beijing opera, and establishments of this class always had long-term contracts with an opera troupe to perform onsite or contracts with famous performers, such as national-treasure-class performers, to perform onsite, though not on a daily basis. Establishments of this category only accepted customers who came as a group and ordered banquets by appointment, and the banquets provided by establishments of this category often included most, if not all tables, at the site. The bulk foodservice business was catering at customers' homes or other locations, often for birthdays, marriages, funerals, promotions and other important celebrations and festivals. When catering, these establishments not only provided what was on the menu, but fulfilled customers' requests.\n\"Leng zhuangzi\" () lacked any rooms to host banquets, and thus their business was purely catering.\nTang.\n\"Tang\" (), or \"tang zihao\" (), are similar to \"zhuang\" establishments, but the business of these second-class establishments were generally evenly divided among onsite banquet hosting and catering (at customers' homes). Establishments of this class would also have long-term contracts with Beijing opera troupes to perform onsite, but they did not have long-term contracts with famous performers, such as national-treasure-class performers, to perform onsite on regular basis; however these top performers would still perform at establishments of this category occasionally. In terms of catering at the customers' sites, establishments of this category often only provided dishes strictly according to their menu.\nTing.\n\"Ting\" (), or \"ting zihao\" () are foodservice establishments which had more business in onsite banquet hosting than catering at customers' homes. For onsite banquet hosting, entertainment was still provided, but establishments of this category did not have long-term contracts with Beijing opera troupes, so that performers varied from time to time, and top performers usually did not perform here or at any lower-ranking establishments. For catering, different establishments of this category were incapable of handling significant catering on their own, but generally had to combine resources with other establishments of the same ranking (or lower) to do the job.\nYuan.\n\"Yuan\" (), or \"yuan zihao\" () did nearly all their business in hosting banquets onsite. Entertainment was not provided on a regular basis, but there were stages built onsite for Beijing opera performers. Instead of being hired by the establishments like in the previous three categories, performers at establishments of this category were usually contractors who paid the establishment to perform and split the earnings according to a certain percentage. Occasionally, establishments of this category would be called upon to help cater at customers' homes, but had to work with others, never taking the lead as establishments like the \"ting\".\nLou.\n\"Lou\" (), or \"lou zihao\" () did the bulk of their business hosting banquets onsite by appointment. In addition, a smaller portion of the business was in serving different customers onsite on a walk-in basis. Occasionally, when catering at customers' homes, establishments of this category would only provide the few specialty dishes they were famous for.\nJu.\n\"Ju\" (), or \"ju zihao\" () generally divided their business evenly into two areas: serving different customers onsite on a walk-in basis, and hosting banquets by appointment for customers who came as one group. Occasionally, when catering at the customers' homes, establishments of this category would only provide the few specialty dishes they were famous for, just like the \"lou\". However, unlike those establishments, which always cooked their specialty dishes on location, establishment of this category would either cook on location or simply bring the already-cooked food to the location.\nZhai.\n\"Zhai\" (), or \"zhai zihao\" () were mainly in the business of serving different customers onsite on a walk-in basis, but a small portion of their income did come from hosting banquets by appointment for customers who came as one group. Similar to the \"ju\", when catering at customers\u2019 homes, establishments of this category would also only provide the few specialty dishes they are famous for, but they would mostly bring the already-cooked dishes to the location, and would only cook on location occasionally.\nFang.\n\"Fang\" (), or \"fang zihao\" (). Foodservice establishments of this category generally did not offer the service of hosting banquets made by appointment for customers who came as one group, but instead, often only offered to serve different customers onsite on a walk-in basis. Establishments of this category or lower would not be called upon to perform catering at the customers' homes for special events.\nGuan.\n\"Guan\" (), or \"guan zihao\" (). Foodservice establishments of this category mainly served different customers onsite on a walk-in basis, and in addition, a portion of the income would be earned from selling to-goes.\nDian.\n\"Dian\" (), or \"dian zihao\" (). Foodservice establishments of this category had their own place, like all previous categories, but serving different customers to dine onsite on a walk-in basis only provided half of the overall income, while the other half came from selling to-goes.\nPu.\n\"Pu\" (), or \"pu zihao\" (). Foodservice establishments of this category ranked next to the last, and they were often named after the owners' last names. Establishments of this category had fixed spots of business for having their own places, but smaller than \"dian\", and thus did not have tables, but only seats for customers. As a result, the bulk of the income of establishments of this category was from selling to-goes, while income earned from customers dining onsite only provided a small portion of the overall income.\nTan.\n\"Tan\" (), or \"tan zihao\" (). The lowest ranking foodservice establishments without any tables, and selling to-goes was the only form of business. In addition to name the food stand after the owners' last name or the food sold, these food stands were also often named after the owners' nicknames.\nRestaurants known for Beijing cuisine.\nNumerous traditional restaurants in Beijing are credited with great contributions in the formation of Beijing cuisine, but many of them have gone out of business. However, some of them managed to survive until today, and some of them are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19759", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19759", "title": "Mandaeanism", "text": ""}
{"id": "19760", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19760", "title": "Manichaeism", "text": "Persian religion founded in the 3rd century CE\nManichaeism (; in ; ) was a major world religion founded in the third century CE by the Parthian Iranian prophet Mani (216\u2013274) in the Sasanian Empire. Variably described as a Christian heresy and a Gnostic movement, Manichaeism was an organized and doctrinal religious tradition in its own right. It taught an elaborate dualistic cosmology describing the struggle between a good spiritual world of light, and an evil material world of darkness. Through an ongoing process in human history, light is gradually removed from the world of matter and returned to the world of the divine. \nMani's teachings were intended to integrate, succeed, and surpass the \"partial truths\" of various prior faiths and belief systems, including Platonism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Marcionism, Hellenistic and Rabbinic Judaism, Gnosticism, Ancient Greek religion, Babylonian religion, other ancient Mesopotamian religions, and the Greco-Roman mysteries. Some forms of Manichaeism viewed Mani as the final prophet after Zoroaster, the Buddha, and Jesus. The canon of Manichaean scripture included seven works attributed to Mani, written originally in the Syriac language. Manichaean sacramental rites included prayers, almsgiving, and fasting. Communal life centered on confession and the singing of hymns.\nWith its message of universal salvation and emphasis on active proselytism, Manichaeism was quickly successful and spread throughout Aramaic-speaking regions, the Mediterranean, and the Middle East. It thrived between the third and seventh centuries CE, and at its height was one of the most widespread religions in the world. Manichaean churches and scriptures existed as far east as China and as far west as Roman Iberia. Before the spread of Islam, Manichaeanism was briefly the main rival to early Christianity. It was increasingly persecuted both by the Roman state and the nascent Christian church, largely disappearing from Roman lands by the end of the sixth century.\nManichaeism survived and expanded in the East. It maintained its historic presence in West Asia until being repressed by the latter Abbasid Caliphate rulers in the 10th century. Trade and missionary activity brought Manichaeism to Tang China in the seventh century, where it developed into its own local form. Manichaeism was the official religion of the Uyghur Khaganate until its collapse in 830; shortly thereafter, it was banned by the Tang court but experienced a resurgence under the later Mongol Yuan dynasty during the 13th and 14th centuries. Continued persecution by Chinese emperors led to Manichaeism becoming subsumed into Buddhism and Taoism before the end of the 14th century. \nSome historic Manichaean sites still exist in China, including the temple of Cao'an in Jinjiang, Fujian, and the religion may have influenced later movements in the European Middle Ages, including Paulicianism, Bogomilism, and Catharism. While most original Manichean writings have been lost, numerous translations and fragmentary texts have survived.\nTerminology.\nThe spelling \"Manichaeism\" is a hypercorrection of \"Manichaism\", which derives from Koine Greek via Latin . The Greek word is built on ('Manichaeus'), one of the names of Mani in Greek sources.\nIn English, an adherent of Manichaeism is called a \"Manichaean\", \"Manichean\", or \"Manichee\".\nHistory.\nLife of Mani.\nMani was an Iranian born in 216\u00a0CE in or near Ctesiphon (now al-Mada'in, Iraq) in the Parthian Empire. According to the \"Cologne Mani-Codex\", Mani's parents were members of the Jewish Christian Gnostic sect known as the Elcesaites.\nMani composed seven works, six of which were written in the late-Aramaic Syriac language. The seventh, the \"Shabuhragan\", was written by Mani in Middle Persian and presented to the Sasanian emperor Shapur I by Mani himself. Although there is no evidence that Shapur I was a follower of Mani, he tolerated the spread of Manichaeism and refrained from persecuting it within his empire's boundaries.\nAccording to Michel Tardieu, Mani invented the unique version of the Syriac script known as the Manichaean alphabet, which was used in all Manichaean works written within the Sasanian Empire, whether in Syriac or Middle Persian, as well as in most works written within the Uyghur Khaganate. The primary language of Babylonia\u2014and the administrative and cultural language of the Empire\u2014at that time was Eastern Middle Aramaic, which had three principle dialects: Jewish Babylonian Aramaic, the language of the Babylonian Talmud; Mandaean, the language of Mandaeism; and Syriac, which was the language of Mani and the Syriac Christians.\nDuring the spread of Manichaeism, established religions like Zoroastrianism remained prevalent, while Christianity was gaining both social and political influence. Despite having fewer followers, Manichaeism attracted the support of several high-ranking political figures. With the backing of the Sasanian Empire, Mani embarked on missionary expeditions. However, after failing to gain the favor of the next generation of Persian royalty and facing disapproval from the Zoroastrian clergy, Mani was imprisoned and ultimately died awaiting execution by the Persian emperor Bahram I. His death is estimated to have occurred around 276\u2013277 CE.\nInfluences.\nMani believed that the teachings of the Buddha, Zoroaster, and Jesus of Nazareth were incomplete, that his revelations were meant to be shared universally, and that his teachings comprised a new \"religion of light\". Manichaean writings indicate that Mani received revelations when he was 12 and again at 24, and that over this period he grew dissatisfied with the Elcesaites, the Jewish Christian Gnostic sect he was born into. Iain Gardner, in \"The Founder of Manichaeism\", argues that Jain influence on Mani is likely due to the extreme asceticism and specific doctrines of Mah\u0101v\u012bra's community, making it even more plausible than influence from the Buddha. Richard C. C. Fynes, in 1996, argued that various Jain influences, particularly ideas on the existence of plant souls, were transmitted from Western Kshatrapa territories to Mesopotamia and then integrated into Manichaean beliefs. Mani wore colorful clothing, which was unusual for the time, and reminded some Romans of a stereotypical Persian magus or warlord, earning him ire in the Greco-Roman world.\nMani began preaching at an early age and was possibly influenced by contemporary Babylonian-Aramaic movements like Mandaeism; Aramaic translations of non-canonical Jewish apocalyptic works similar to those found at Qumran (e.g., the Enochic literature); and by the Syriac dualist Gnostic writer Bardaisan (who lived a generation before Mani). With the discovery of the Cologne Mani-Codex, it also became clear that his history with the Elcesaites influenced his writings.\nMani taught that the soul of a righteous individual returns to Paradise upon death. In contrast, the soul of someone who indulges in earthly desires\u2014such as fornication, procreation, accumulating possessions, cultivating the land, harvesting, eating meat, and drinking wine\u2014faces condemnation and is destined to be reborn in a cycle of different bodies.\nAccording to biographies preserved by ibn al-Nadim and the Persian polymath al-Biruni, Mani received a revelation as a youth from a spirit, whom he would later call his \"Twin\" (; ), \"Syzygos\" (, 'spouse' or 'partner\" in the Cologne Mani-Codex), \"Double,\" \"Protective Angel,\" or \"Divine Self.\" This spirit taught him wisdom, which he later developed into a religion. It was his \"twin\" who brought Mani to self-realization. Mani claimed to be the \"Paraclete of the Truth\" promised by Jesus in the New Testament.\nManichaeism's views on Jesus are described by historians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAugustine of Hippo also noted that Mani declared himself to be an \"apostle of Jesus Christ\". Manichaean tradition is also noted to have claimed that Mani was the reincarnation of religious figures from previous eras such as the Buddha, Krishna, and Zoroaster in addition to Jesus himself.\nAcademics note that much of what is known about Manichaeism comes from later 10th- and 11th-century Muslim historians like al-Biruni and ibn al-Nadim in his \"al-Fihrist\"; the latter \"ascribed to Mani the claim to be the Seal of the Prophets.\" However, given the Islamic milieu of Arabia and Persia at the time, it stands to reason that Manichaens would regularly assert in their evangelism that Mani, not Muhammad, was the \"Seal of the Prophets\". In reality, for Mani the metaphorical expression \"Seal of Prophets\" is not a reference to his finality in a long succession of prophets as it is used in Islam, but rather as final to his followers (who testify or attest to his message as a \"seal\").\nOther sources of Mani's scripture were the Aramaic originals of the Book of Enoch, 2 Enoch, and an otherwise unknown section of the Book of Enoch entitled \"The Book of Giants\". Mani quoted the latter directly and expanded upon it, making it one of the six original Syriac writings of the Manichaean Church. Besides short references by non-Manichaean authors through the centuries, no original sources of \"The Book of Giants\" (which is actually part six of the Book of Enoch) were available until the 20th century.\nScattered fragments of both the original Aramaic Book of Giants (which were analyzed and published by J\u00f3zef Milik in 1976) and the Manichaean version of the same name (analyzed and published by Walter Bruno Henning in 1943) were discovered along with the Dead Sea Scrolls in the Judaean desert in the 20th century and the Manichaean writings of the Uyghur Manichaean kingdom in Turpan. Henning wrote in his analysis of them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBy comparing the cosmology of the books of Enoch to the Book of Giants, as well as the description of the Manichaean myth, scholars have observed that the Manichaean cosmology can be described as being based, in part, on the description of the cosmology developed in detail within the Enochic literature. This literature describes the being that the prophets saw in their ascent to Heaven as a king who sits on a throne at the highest of the heavens. In the Manichaean description, this being, the \"Great King of Honor\", becomes a deity who guards the entrance to the World of Light placed at the seventh of ten heavens. In the Aramaic Book of Enoch, the Qumran writings, overall, and in the original Syriac section of Manichaean scriptures quoted by Theodore bar Konai, he is called \"malk\u0101 rabb\u0101 d-iq\u0101r\u0101\" (\"the Great King of Honor\").\nMani was also influenced by writings of the gnostic Bardaisan (154\u2013222 CE), who, like Mani, wrote in Syriac and presented a dualistic interpretation of the world in terms of light and darkness in combination with elements from Christianity.\nMani was heavily inspired by Iranian Zoroastrian theology.\nNoting Mani's travels to the Kushan Empire (several religious paintings in Bamyan are attributed to him) at the beginning of his proselytizing career, Richard Foltz postulates Buddhist influences in Manichaeism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Buddhist influences were significant in the formation of Mani's religious thought. The transmigration of souls became a Manichaean belief, and the quadripartite structure of the Manichaean community, divided between male and female monks (the \"elect\") and lay followers (the \"hearers\") who supported them, appears to be based on that of the Buddhist sangha.\nThe Kushan monk Lokak\u1e63ema began translating Pure Land Buddhist texts into Chinese in the century prior to Mani arriving there. The Chinese texts of Manichaeism are full of uniquely Buddhist terms taken directly from these Chinese Pure Land scriptures, including the term \"pure land\" () itself. However, the central object of veneration in Pure Land Buddhism, Amit\u0101bha, the Buddha of Infinite Light, does not appear in Chinese Manichaeism and seems to have been replaced by another deity.\nSpread.\nRoman Empire.\nManichaeism reached Rome through the apostle Psattiq in 280, who was also in Egypt in 244 and 251. It flourished in the Faiyum in 290.\nManichaean monasteries existed in Rome in 312 during the time of Pope Miltiades.\nIn 291, persecution arose in the Sasanian Empire with the murder of the apostle Sisin by Emperor Bahram II and the slaughter of many Manichaeans. Then, in 302, the first official reaction and legislation against Manichaeism from the Roman state was issued under Diocletian. In an official edict called the \"De Maleficiis et Manichaeis\" compiled in the \"Collatio Legum Mosaicarum et Romanarum\" and addressed to the proconsul of Africa, Diocletian wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have heard that the Manichaeans [...] have set up new and hitherto unheard-of sects in opposition to the older creeds so that they might cast out the doctrines vouchsafed to us in the past by the divine favour for the benefit of their own depraved doctrine. They have sprung forth very recently like new and unexpected monstrosities among the race of the Persians \u2013 a nation still hostile to us \u2013 and have made their way into our empire, where they are committing many outrages, disturbing the tranquility of our people and even inflicting grave damage to the civic communities. We have cause to fear that with the passage of time they will endeavour, as usually happens, to infect the modest and tranquil of an innocent nature with the damnable customs and perverse laws of the Persians as with the poison of a malignant (serpent) ... We order that the authors and leaders of these sects be subjected to severe punishment, and, together with their abominable writings, burnt in the flames. We direct their followers, if they continue recalcitrant, shall suffer capital punishment, and their goods be forfeited to the imperial treasury. And if those who have gone over to that hitherto unheard-of, scandalous and wholly infamous creed, or to that of the Persians, are persons who hold public office, or are of any rank or of superior social status, you will see to it that their estates are confiscated and the offenders sent to the (quarry) at Phaeno or the mines at Proconnesus. And in order that this plague of iniquity shall be completely extirpated from this our most happy age, let your devotion hasten to carry out our orders and commands.\nBy 354, Hilary of Poitiers wrote that Manichaeism was a significant force in Roman Gaul. In 381, Christians requested Theodosius I to strip Manichaeans of their civil rights. Starting in 382, the emperor issued a series of edicts to suppress Manichaeism and punish its followers.\nAugustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) converted to Christianity from Manichaeism in the year 387. This was shortly after the Roman emperor Theodosius I issued a decree of death for all Manichaean monks in 382 and shortly before he declared Christianity the only legitimate religion for the Roman Empire in 391. Due to the heavy persecution, the religion almost disappeared from Western Europe in the fifth century and from the eastern portion of the empire in the sixth century.\nAccording to his \"Confessions\", after nine or ten years of adhering to the Manichaean faith as a member of the group of \"hearers\", Augustine of Hippo became a Christian and potent adversary of Manichaeism (which he expressed in writing against his Manichaean opponent Faustus of Mileve), seeing their beliefs that knowledge was the key to salvation as too passive and unable to affect any change in one's life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I still thought that it is not we who sin but some other nature that sins within us. It flattered my pride to think that I incurred no guilt and, when I did wrong, not to confess it\u00a0... I preferred to excuse myself and blame this unknown thing which was in me but was not part of me. The truth, of course, was that it was all my own self, and my own impiety had divided me against myself. My sin was all the more incurable because I did not think myself a sinner.\nSome modern scholars have suggested that Manichaean ways of thinking influenced the development of some of Augustine's ideas, such as the nature of good and evil, the idea of hell, the separation of groups into elect, hearers, and sinners, and the hostility to the flesh and sexual activity, and his dualistic theology.\nCentral Asia.\nSome Sogdians in Central Asia believed in the religion. Uyghur khagan Boku Tekin (759\u2013780) converted to the religion in 763 after a three-day discussion with its preachers, the Babylonian headquarters sent high-rank clerics to Uyghur, and Manichaeism remained the state religion for about a century before the collapse of the Uyghur Khaganate in 840.\nSouth Siberia.\nAfter the defeat of the Uighur Khaganate by the Yenisei Kyrgyz, Manichaeism spread north to the Khakass-Minusinsk depression. Archaeological excavations in the valley revealed the existence of a Manichaean center there, which included 6 temples and 5 sanctuaries of the elements, and architecturally it was similar to the Sogdian structures in Tuva and Xinjiang. In the 1970s, a Manichaean temple that existed in the 8th-10th centuries was excavated 90\u00a0km from the Uybat center in the Puyur-sukh valley. interpreted these finds as evidence of the adoption of Manichaeism as an official religion in the Kyrgyz Kaganate. Few Khakass Manichaean epitaphs confirm this version; the Manichaean script also influenced the Yenisei runic script at a late stage of its development. South Siberian Manichaeism existed before the Mongol conquest. Later, it influenced the formation of the culture of the Sayano-Altai Turks (Altaians, Khakas, Tuvans), as well as the Khants, Selkups, Kets and Evenks. This influence affected the everyday beliefs of the indigenous peoples and the lexical composition of their languages.\nChina.\nIn the east it spread along trade routes as far as Chang'an, the capital of Tang China.\nAfter the Tang dynasty, some Manichaean groups participated in peasant movements. Many rebel leaders used religion to mobilize followers. In Song and Yuan China, remnants of Manichaeism continued to leave a legacy contributing to sects such as the Red Turbans. During the Song dynasty, the Manichaeans were derogatorily referred by the Chinese as \"Ch\u012bc\u00e0i sh\u00ecm\u00f3\" (, meaning that they \"abstain from meat and worship demons\").\nAn account in \"Fozu Tongji\", an important historiography of Buddhism in China compiled by Buddhist scholars during 1258\u20131269, says that the Manichaeans worshipped the \"White Buddha\" and their leader wore a violet headgear, while the followers wore white costumes. Many Manichaeans took part in rebellions against the Song government and were eventually quelled. After that, all governments were suppressive against Manichaeism and its followers, and the religion was banned in Ming China in 1370. While it had long been thought that Manichaeism arrived in China only at the end of the seventh century, a recent archaeological discovery demonstrated that it was already known there in the second half of the 6th century.\nThe nomadic Uyghur Khaganate lasted for less than a century (744\u2013840) in the southern Siberian steppe, with the fortified city of Ordu-Baliq on the Upper Orkhon River as its capital. Before the end of the year (763), Manichaeism was declared the official religion of the Uyghur state. Boku Tekin banned all the shamanistic rituals that had previously been in use. His subjects likely accepted his decision. That much results from a report that the proclamation of Manichaeism as the state religion was met with enthusiasm in Ordu-Baliq. In an inscription in which the Kaghan speaks for himself, he promised the Manichaen high priests (the \"Elect\") that if they gave orders, he would promptly follow them and respond to their requests. An incomplete manuscript found in the Turfan Oasis gives Boku Tekin the title of \"zahag-i Mani\" (\"Emanation of Mani\" or \"Descendant of Mani\"), a title of majestic prestige among the Manichaeans of Central Asia.\nNonetheless, and despite the apparently willing conversion of the Uyghurs to Manichaeanism, traces and signs of the previous shamanistic practices persisted. For instance, in 765, only two years after the official conversion, during a military campaign in China, the Uyghur troops called forth magicians to perform a number of specific rituals. Manichaean Uyghurs continued to treat with great respect a sacred forest in Otuken. The conversion to Manichaeism led to an explosion of manuscript production in the Tarim Basin and Gansu (the region between the Tibetan and the Huangtu plateaus), which lasted well into the early 11th century. In 840, the Uyghur Khaganate collapsed under the attacks of the Yenisei Kyrgyz, and the new Uyghur state of Qocho was established with a capital in the city of Qocho.\nAl-Jahiz (776\u2013868 or 869) believed that the peaceful lifestyle that Manicheism brought to the Uyghurs was responsible for their later lack of military skills and eventual decline. This, however, is contradicted by the political and military consequences of the conversion. After the migration of the Uyghurs to Turfan in the ninth century, the nobility maintained Manichaean beliefs for a while before converting to Buddhism. Traces of Manicheism among the Uyghurs in Turfan may be detected in fragments of Uyghur Manichaean manuscripts. In fact, Manicheism continued to rival the influence of Buddhism among the Uyghurs until the 13th century. The Mongols gave the final blow to the Manichaeism among the Uyghurs.\nTibet.\nManichaeism spread to Tibet during the Tibetan Empire. There was a serious attempt made to introduce the religion to the Tibetans as the text \"Criteria of the Authentic Scriptures\" (a text attributed to the Tibetan Emperor Trisong Detsen) makes a great effort to attack Manichaeism by stating that Mani was a heretic who engaged in religious syncretism into a deviating and inauthentic form.\nIran.\nManichaeans in Iran tried to assimilate their religion along with Islam in the Muslim caliphates. Relatively little is known about the religion during the first century of Islamic rule. During the early caliphates, Manichaeism attracted many followers. It had a significant appeal among Muslim society, especially among the elites. A part of Manichaeism that specifically appealed to the Sasanians was the Manichaean gods' names. The names Mani had assigned to the gods of his religion show identification with those of the Zoroastrian pantheon, even though some divine beings he incorporates are non-Iranian. For example, Jesus, Adam, and Eve were named Xradesahr, Gehmurd, and Murdiyanag. Because of these familiar names, Manichaeism did not feel completely foreign to the Zoroastrians. Due to the appeal of its teachings, many Sasanians adopted the ideas of its theology and some even became dualists.\nNot only were the citizens of the Sasanian Empire intrigued by Manichaeism, but so was the ruler at the time of its introduction, Sabuhr l. As the Denkard reports, Sabuhr, the first King of Kings, was very well-known for gaining and seeking knowledge of any kind. Because of this, Mani knew that Sabuhr would lend an ear to his teachings and accept him. Mani had explicitly stated while introducing his teachings to Sabuhr, that his religion should be seen as a reform of Zarathustra's ancient teachings. This was of great fascination to the king, for it perfectly fit Sabuhr's dream of creating a large empire that incorporated all people and their different creeds. Thus, Manichaeism became widespread and flourished throughout the Sasanian Empire for thirty years. An apologia for Manichaeism ascribed to ibn al-Muqaffa' defended its phantasmagorical cosmogony and attacked the fideism of Islam and other monotheistic religions. The Manichaeans had sufficient structure to have a head of their community.\nTolerance toward Manichaeism decreased after the death of Sabuhr I. His son, Ohrmazd, who became king, still allowed for Manichaeism in the empire, but he also greatly trusted the Zoroastrian priest, Kirdir. After Ohrmazd's short reign, his oldest brother, Wahram I, became king. Wahram I held Kirdir in high esteem, and he also had many different religious ideals than Ohrmazd and his father, Sabuhr I. Due to the influence of Kirdir, Zoroastrianism was strengthened throughout the empire, which in turn caused Manichaeism to be diminished. Wahram sentenced Mani to prison, and he died there.\nArab world.\nThat Manicheism went further on to the Arabian peninsula, up to the Hejaz and Mecca, where it could have possibly contributed to the formation of the doctrine of Islam, cannot be proven in pre-Islamic Arabia and there was no existence of Manichaeism in the Hejaz. Under the eighth-century Abbasid Caliphate, Arabic and the adjectival term could denote many different things, but it seems to have primarily\u2014or at least initially\u2014signified a follower of Manichaeism; however its true meaning is not known. From the ninth century, it is reported that Caliph al-Ma'mun tolerated a community of Manichaeans.\nDuring the early Abbasid period, the Manichaeans underwent persecution. The third Abbasid caliph, al-Mahdi, persecuted the Manichaeans, establishing an inquisition against dualists who, if found guilty of heresy, refused to renounce their beliefs, were executed. Their persecution was ended in the 780s by Harun al-Rashid. During the reign of the Caliph al-Muqtadir, many Manichaeans fled from Mesopotamia to Khorasan in fear of persecution, and the base of the religion was later shifted to Samarkand.\nBactria.\nThe first appearance of Manichaeism in Bactria was actually during Mani's lifetime. While he never physically traveled there, he did send a disciple by the name of Mar Ammo to spread his word. Mani \"called (upon) Mar Ammo, the teacher, who knew the Parthian language and script, and was well acquainted with lords and ladies and with many nobles in those places...\"\nMar Ammo indeed did travel to the old Parthian lands of eastern Iran, which bordered Bactria. A translation of Persian texts states the following from the perspective of Mar Ammo: \"They had arrived at the watch post of Kush\u0101n (Bactria), then the spirit of the border of the eastern province appeared in the shape of a girl, and he (the spirit) asked me 'Ammo what do you intend? From where have you come?' I said, 'I am a believer, a disciple of Mani, the Apostle.' That spirit said 'I do not receive you. Return from where you have come.'\"\nDespite the initial rejection Mar Ammo faced, the text records that Mani's spirit appeared to Mar Ammo and requested he persevere and read the chapter \"The Collecting of the Gates\" from \"The Treasure of the Living\". Once he did so, the spirit returned, transformed, and said, \"I am Bag Ard, the frontier guard of the Eastern Province. When I receive you, then the gate of the whole East will be opened in front of you.\" It seemed that this \"border spirit\" was a reference to the local Eastern Iranian goddess Ard-oxsho, who was prevalent in Bactria.\nSyncretism and translation.\nManichaeism claimed to present the complete version of teachings that were corrupted and misinterpreted by the followers of Mani's predecessors Adam, Abraham, Noah, Zoroaster, the Buddha, and Jesus. Accordingly, as it spread, it adapted deities from other religions into forms it could use for its scriptures. Its original Eastern Middle Aramaic texts already contained stories of Jesus.\nAs the faith moved eastward and its scriptures were translated into Iranian languages, the names of the Manichaean deities were often transformed into the names of Zoroastrian yazatas. Thus, \"Abb\u0101 \u1e0f\u0259Rabb\u016b\u1e6f\u0101\" (\"The Father of Greatness\"), the highest Manichaean deity of Light, in Middle Persian texts might either be translated literally as \"p\u012bd \u012b wuzurg\u012bh\" or substituted with the name of the deity \"Zurw\u0101n\".\nSimilarly, the Manichaean primordial figure \"N\u0101\u0161\u0101 Qa\u1e0fm\u0101y\u0101\" (\"The Original Man\") was rendered \"Ohrmazd Bay\" after the Zoroastrian god Ohrmazd. This process continued in Manichaeism's meeting with Chinese Buddhism, during which, for example, the original Aramaic (the \"call\" from the World of Light to those seeking rescue from the World of Darkness) is identified in the Chinese-language scriptures with Guanyin (\u89c0\u97f3 or Avalokite\u015bvara in Sanskrit, literally, \"watching/perceiving sounds [of the world]\", the bodhisattva of Compassion).\nManichaeism influenced some early texts and traditions of proto-orthodox and other forms of early Christianity, as well as doing the same for branches of Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Buddhism, and Islam.\nPersecution and suppression.\nManichaeism was repressed by the Sasanian Empire. In 291, persecution arose in the Persian empire with the murder of the apostle Sisin by Bahram II and the slaughter of many Manichaeans. In 296, the Roman emperor Diocletian decreed all the Manichaean leaders to be burnt alive along with the Manichaean scriptures, and many Manichaeans in Europe and North Africa were killed. It was not until 372 with Valentinian I and Valens that Manichaeism was legislated against again.\nTheodosius I issued a death decree for all Manichaean monks in 382. The religion was vigorously attacked and persecuted by both the Christian Church and the Roman state, and the religion almost disappeared from western Europe in the fifth century and from the eastern portion of the empire in the sixth century.\nIn 732, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang banned any Chinese from converting to the religion, saying it was a heretic religion, confusing people by claiming to be Buddhism. However, the foreigners who followed the religion were allowed to practice it without punishment. After the fall of the Uyghur Khaganate in 840, which was the chief patron of Manichaeism (which was also the state religion of the Khaganate) in China, all Manichaean temples in China except in the two capitals and Taiyuan were closed down and never reopened since these temples were viewed as a symbol of foreign arrogance by the Chinese (see Cao'an). Even those that were allowed to remain open did not for long.\nThe Manichaean temples were attacked by Chinese people who burned the images and idols of these temples. Manichaean priests were ordered to wear hanfu instead of traditional clothing, viewed as un-Chinese. In 843, Emperor Wuzong of Tang gave the order to kill all Manichaean clerics as part of the Huichang persecution of Buddhism, and over half died. They were made to look like Buddhists by the authorities; their heads were shaved, they were made to dress like Buddhist monks and then killed.\nMany Manichaeans took part in rebellions against the Song dynasty. They were quelled by Song China and were suppressed and persecuted by all successive governments before the Mongol Yuan dynasty. In 1370, the religion was banned through an edict of the Ming dynasty, whose Hongwu Emperor had a personal dislike for the religion. Its core teaching influences many religious sects in China, including the White Lotus movement.\nAccording to Wendy Doniger, Manichaeism may have continued to exist in the Xinjiang region until the Mongol conquest in the 13th century.\nManicheans also suffered persecution for some time under the Abbasid Caliphate of Baghdad. In 780, the third Abbasid Caliph, al-Mahdi, started a campaign of inquisition against those who were \"dualist heretics\" or \"Manichaeans\" called the \"zind\u012bq\". He appointed a \"master of the heretics\" ( ), an official whose task was to pursue and investigate suspected dualists, who the Caliph then examined. Those found guilty who refused to recant their beliefs were executed.\nThis persecution continued under his successor, Caliph al-Hadi, and continued for some time during the reign of Harun al-Rashid, who finally abolished it and ended it. During the reign of the 18th Abbasid Caliph al-Muqtadir, many Manichaeans fled from Mesopotamia to Khorasan from fear of persecution by him and about 500 of them assembled in Samarkand. The base of the religion was later shifted to this city, which became their new Patriarchate.\nManichaean pamphlets were still in circulation in Greek in 9th-century Byzantine Constantinople, as the patriarch Photios summarizes and discusses one that he has read by Agapius in his \"Bibliotheca\".\nLater movements associated with Manichaeism.\nDuring the Middle Ages, several movements emerged that were collectively described as \"Manichaean\" by the Catholic Church and persecuted as Christian heresies through the establishment of the Inquisition in 1184. They included the Cathar churches of Western Europe. Other groups sometimes referred to as \"neo-Manichaean\" were the Paulician movement, which arose in Armenia, and the Bogomils in Bulgaria and Serbia. An example of this usage can be found in the published edition of the Latin Cathar text, the (\"Book of the Two Principles\"), which was described as \"Neo-Manichaean\" by its publishers. As there is no presence of Manichaean mythology or church terminology in the writings of these groups, there has been some dispute among historians as to whether these groups were descendants of Manichaeism.\nManichaeism could have influenced the Bogomils, Paulicians, and Cathars. However, these groups left few records, and the link between them and Manichaeans is tenuous. Regardless of its accuracy, the charge of Manichaeism was leveled at them by contemporary orthodox opponents, who often tried to make contemporary heresies conform to those combatted by the church fathers.\nWhether the dualism of the Paulicians, Bogomils, and Cathars and their belief that the world was created by a Satanic demiurge was due to influence from Manichaeism is impossible to determine. The Cathars apparently adopted the Manichaean principles of church organization. Priscillian and his followers may also have been influenced by Manichaeism. The Manichaeans preserved many apocryphal Christian works, such as the Acts of Thomas, that would otherwise have been lost.\nLegacy in present-day.\nSome sites are preserved in Xinjiang, Zhejiang, and Fujian in China. The Cao'an temple is the most widely-known and best-preserved Manichaean building, though it later became associated with Buddhism. Local villagers near Cao'an still worship Mani, albeit with little distinction between Mani-as-Buddha and Gautama Buddha. Other temples in China associated with Manichaeism remain standing, including the Xuanzhen Temple, noted for its stele.\nSome platforms on the internet and social media are trying to spread some of the teachings of Manichaeism. Some people are registered in these electronic sources, and some scholars and students in the field of religious studies and the arts continue to study Manichaeism.\nIn 2018, rituals were conducted for the Lin Deng \u6797\u77aa (1003\u20131059), a Chinese Manichaean leader who lived during the Song dynasty in the three villages of Baiyang \u67cf\u6d0b\u6751, Shangwan \u4e0a\u4e07\u6751, and Tahou \u5854\u540e\u6751 in Baiyang Township, Xiapu County, Fujian.\nTeachings and beliefs.\nGeneral.\nMani's teaching dealt with the origin of evil by addressing a theoretical part of the problem of evil: denying the omnipotence of God and instead postulating two opposite divine powers. Manichaean theology teaches a dualistic view of good and evil. A fundamental belief in Manichaeism is that the powerful, though not omnipotent, good power (God) was opposed by the eternal evil power (the devil). Humanity, the world, and the soul are seen as the by-product of the battle between God's proxy\u2014Primal Man\u2014and the devil.\nThe human person is seen as a battleground for these powers: the soul defines the person but is influenced by light and dark. This contention plays out over the world and the human body\u2014neither the Earth nor the flesh were seen as intrinsically evil but instead possessed both light and dark portions. Natural phenomena such as rain were seen as the physical manifestation of this spiritual contention. Therefore, the Manichaean view explained the existence of evil by positing a flawed creation in the formation of which God took no part and which constituted instead the product of a battle by the devil against God.\nCosmogony.\nManichaeism presents an elaborate conflict between the spiritual world of light and the material world of darkness. The beings of both the world of darkness and the world of light have names. There are numerous sources for the details of the Manichaean belief. Two portions of the scriptures are probably the closest thing to the original writings, in their original languages, that will ever be available: the Syriac quotation by the Church of the East Christian Theodore bar Konai in his 8th century Syriac scholion, known as the \"Ketba de-Skolion\", and the Middle Persian sections of Mani's \"Shabuhragan\" discovered at Turpan\u2014a summary of Mani's teachings prepared for Shapur I.\nFrom these and other sources - the \"Acta Archelai\" and the writings of Alexander of Lycopolis, Titus of Bostra, Severus of Antiochia, Theodoret, and Saint Augustine of Hippo - Jonas Hans developed a working description of the Manichaean cosmogony. A complete list of Manichaean deities is outlined below. The unfolding of the universe in the Manichaean cosmogony took place in three phases:\n Originally, good and evil existed in two completely separate realms: one, the World of Light (), ruled by the Father of Greatness together with his five \"Shekhinas\" (i.e., divine attributes of light), and the other, the World of Darkness, ruled by the King of Darkness. At a point in the distant past, the Kingdom of Darkness noticed the World of Light, coveted it, and attacked it. The Father of Greatness, in the first of three \"calls\" or \"creations\", called to the Mother of Life, who sent her son, Original Man (), to battle with the attacking powers of Darkness, which included the Demon of Greed.\n The Original Man was armed with five different shields of light (reflections of the five \"Shekhinas\"), which he lost to the forces of Darkness in the ensuing battle\u2014described as a kind of \"bait\" to trick the forces of Darkness, who greedily consume as much light as they can. When the Original Man awakened, he was trapped among the forces of Darkness.\n The Father of Greatness then began the Second Creation. He called to the Living Spirit, who then called to his sons and the Original Man, after which Call became a Manichaean deity proper. An answer \u2014 Answer \u2014 became another Manichaean deity, then went out from the Original Man into the World of Light. The Mother of Life, the Living Spirit, and the latter's five sons began to create the universe from the bodies of the evil beings of the World of Darkness and the light they had swallowed. Ten heavens and eight earths were created, all consisting of various mixtures of the evil material beings from the World of Darkness and the swallowed light. The sun, moon, and stars were all created from light recovered from the World of Darkness. The waxing and waning of the moon are described as the \"moon filling with light\", which passed to the sun, then through the Milky Way, and eventually back to the World of Light.\n Great demons (called archons in bar-Konai's account) were hung over the heavens, and the Father of Greatness began the Third Creation. The light was recovered from the material bodies of the evil beings and demons by causing them to become sexually aroused in greed toward beautiful images of the beings of light, such as the Third Messenger and the Virgins of Light. In Augustine of Hippo's account of Mani's writings, the Virgins of Light recovered light from the female and male archons by taking on the forms of both \"beardless boys\" and \"beautiful virgins.\" According to other sources, including Al-Biruni's Kitab al-Hind and Ephrem the Syrian's \"Refutations of Mani\", the myth included only one being (the Maiden of Light) with a transient or androgynous gender who performed the seduction, and in other versions there were multiple beings (shining warriors) which were sexless. However, as soon as the light was expelled from their bodies and fell to the earth (sometimes in the form of abortions: the source of fallen angels in the Manichaean myth), the evil beings continued to swallow up as much of it as they could to keep the light inside themselves. The evil beings swallowed vast quantities of light, copulated, and produced Adam and Eve. The Father of Greatness then sent Jesus the Splendour to awaken Adam and enlighten him to the true source of the light trapped in his material body. Adam and Eve, however, also copulated and produced more human beings, trapping the light in the bodies of humankind throughout human history. The appearance of the Prophet Mani was another attempt by the World of Light to reveal to humanity the true source of the spiritual light imprisoned within their material bodies.\nCosmology.\nIn the sixth century, many Manichaeans saw the earth as \"a rectangular parallelepiped enclosed by walls of crystal, above which three [sky] domes\" existed, with the other two being above and larger than the first one and second one, respectively. These represented the \"three heavens\" in Chaldean religion.\nOutline of the beings and events in the Manichaean mythology.\nBeginning with the time of its creation by Mani, the Manichaean religion has had a detailed description of deities and events that took place within the Manichaean scheme of the universe. In every language and region that Manichaeism spread to, these same deities reappear, whether it is in the original Syriac quoted by Theodore bar Konai, or the Latin terminology given by Saint Augustine from Mani's \"Epistola Fundamenti\", or the Persian and Chinese translations found as Manichaeism spread eastward. While the original Syriac retained the original description that Mani created, the transformation of the deities through other languages and cultures produced incarnations of the gods not implied in the original Syriac writings. Chinese translations are especially syncretic, borrowing and adapting terminology common in Chinese Buddhism.\nThe Manichaean Church.\nOrganization.\nThe Manichaean Church was divided into the Elect, who had taken upon themselves the vows of Manichaeism, and the Hearers, those who had not, but still participated in the Church. The Elect were forbidden to consume alcohol and meat, as well as to harvest crops or prepare food, due to Mani's claim that harvesting was a form of murder against plants. The Hearers would therefore commit the sin of preparing food, and would provide it to the Elect, who would in turn pray for the Hearers and cleanse them of these sins.\nThe terms for these divisions were already common since the days of early Christianity, however, it had a different meaning in Christianity. In Chinese writings, the Middle Persian and Parthian terms are transcribed phonetically (instead of being translated into Chinese). These were recorded by Augustine of Hippo.\nReligious practices.\nPrayers.\nFrom Manichaean sources, Manichaeans observed daily prayers: four for the hearers or seven for the elect. The sources differ about the exact time of prayer. The \"Fihrist\" by al-Nadim appoints them afternoon, mid-afternoon, just after sunset, and at nightfall. Al-Biruni places the prayers at dawn, sunrise, noon, and dusk. The elect additionally prayed at mid-afternoon, half an hour after nightfall, and midnight. Al-Nadim's account of daily prayers is probably adjusted to coincide with the public prayers for the Muslims, while Al-Biruni's report may reflect an older tradition unaffected by Islam.\nWhen Al-Nadim's account of daily prayers was the only detailed source available, there was a concern that Muslims only adopted these practices during the Abbasid Caliphate. However, it is clear that the Arabic text provided by Al-Nadim corresponds with the descriptions of Egyptian texts from the fourth century.\nEvery prayer started with an ablution with water or, if water was not available, with other substances comparable to ablution in Islam, and consisted of several blessings to the apostles and spirits. The prayer consisted of prostrating oneself to the ground and rising again twelve times during every prayer. During the day, Manichaeans turned towards the Sun and during the night towards the Moon. If the Moon is not visible at night, they turned towards the north.\nEvident from Faustus of Mileve, Celestial bodies are not the subject of worship themselves but are \"ships\" carrying the light particles of the world to the supreme god, who cannot be seen, since he exists beyond time and space, and also the dwelling places for emanations of the supreme deity, such as Jesus the Splendour. According to the writings of Augustine of Hippo, ten prayers were performed, the first devoted to the Father of Greatness, and the following to lesser deities, spirits, and angels and finally towards the elect, to be freed from rebirth and pain and to attain peace in the realm of light. Comparably, in the Uyghur confession, four prayers are directed to the supreme God (\"\u00c4zrua\"), the God of the Sun and the Moon, and fivefold God and the buddhas.\nPrimary sources.\nMani wrote seven books, which contained the teachings of the religion. Only scattered fragments and translations of the originals remain, most having been discovered in Egypt and Turkistan during the 20th century.\nThe original six Syriac writings are not preserved, although their Syriac names have been. There are also fragments and quotations from them. A long quotation, preserved by the eighth century Nestorian Christian author Theodore Bar Konai, shows that in the original Syriac Aramaic writings of Mani there was no influence of Iranian or Zoroastrian terms. The terms for the Manichaean deities in the original Syriac writings are in Aramaic. The adaptation of Manichaeism to the Zoroastrian religion appears to have begun in Mani's lifetime however, with his writing of the Middle Persian \"Shabuhragan\", his book dedicated to the Sasanian emperor, Shapur I.\nIn it, there are mentions of Zoroastrian divinities such as Ahura Mazda, Angra Mainyu, and \u0100z. Manichaeism is often presented as a Persian religion, mostly due to the vast number of Middle Persian, Parthian, and Sogdian (as well as Turkish) texts discovered by German researchers near Turpan in what is now Xinjiang, China, during the early 1900s. However, from the vantage point of its original Syriac descriptions (as quoted by Theodore Bar Khonai and outlined above), Manichaeism may be better described as a unique phenomenon of Aramaic Babylonia, occurring in proximity to two other new Aramaic religious phenomena, Talmudic Judaism and Mandaeism, which also appeared in Babylonia in roughly the third century.\nThe original, but now lost, six sacred books of Manichaeism were composed in Syriac Aramaic, and translated into other languages to help spread the religion. As they spread to the east, the Manichaean writings passed through Middle Persian, Parthian, Sogdian, Tocharian, and ultimately Uyghur and Chinese translations. As they spread to the west, they were translated into Greek, Coptic, and Latin. Most Manichaean texts survived only as Coptic and Medieval Chinese translations of their original, lost versions.\nHenning describes how this translation process evolved and influenced the Manichaeans of Central Asia:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Beyond doubt, Sogdian was the national language of the Majority of clerics and propagandists of the Manichaean faith in Central Asia. Middle Persian (P\u0101rs\u012bg), and to a lesser degree, Parthian (Pahlav\u0101n\u012bg), occupied the position held by Latin in the medieval church. The founder of Manichaeism had employed Syriac (his own language) as his medium, but conveniently he had written at least one book in Middle Persian, and it is likely that he himself had arranged for the translation of some or all of his numerous writings from Syriac into Middle Persian. Thus the Eastern Manichaeans found themselves entitled to dispense with the study of Mani's original writings, and to continue themselves to reading the Middle Persian edition; it presented small difficulty to them to acquire a good knowledge of the Middle Persian language, owing to its affinity with Sogdian.\nLater works.\nIn later centuries, as Manichaeism passed through eastern Persian-speaking lands and arrived at the Uyghur Khaganate (\u56de\u9dbb\u5e1d\u570b), and eventually the Uyghur kingdom of Turpan (destroyed around 1335), Middle Persian and Parthian prayers (\"\u0101fr\u012bwan\" or \"\u0101furi\u0161n\") and the Parthian hymn-cycles (the \"Huw\u012bdagm\u0101n\" and \"Angad R\u014d\u0161nan\" created by Mar Ammo) were added to the Manichaean writings. A translation of a collection of these produced the \"Manichaean Chinese Hymnscroll\" (, which Lieu translates as \"Hymns for the Lower Section [i.e. the Hearers] of the Manichaean Religion\").\nIn addition to containing hymns attributed to Mani, it contains prayers attributed to Mani's earliest disciples, including M\u0101r Zaku, M\u0101r Ammo and M\u0101r S\u012bsin. Another Chinese work is a complete translation of the \"Sermon of the Light Nous\", presented as a discussion between Mani and his disciple Adda.\nCritical and polemic sources.\nUntil discoveries in the 1900s of original sources, the only sources for Manichaeism were descriptions and quotations from non-Manichaean authors, either Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, or Zoroastrian ones. While often criticizing Manichaeism, they also quoted directly from Manichaean scriptures. This enabled Isaac de Beausobre, writing in the 18th century, to create a comprehensive work on Manichaeism, relying solely on anti-Manichaean sources. Thus quotations and descriptions in Greek and Arabic have long been known to scholars, as have the long quotations in Latin by Saint Augustine, and the extremely important quotation in Syriac by Theodore Bar Konai.\nPatristic depictions of Mani and Manichaeism.\nEusebius commented as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The error of the Manichees, which commenced at this time.\"\u2014\u200a\n\"Acta Archelai\".\nAn example of how inaccurate some of these accounts could be can be seen in the account of the origins of Manichaeism contained in the \"Acta Archelai\". This was a Greek anti-Manichaean work written before 348, most well known in its Latin version, which was regarded as an accurate account of Manichaeism until refuted by Isaac de Beausobre in the 18th century:\nIn the time of the Apostles there lived a man named Scythianus, who is described as coming \"from Scythia\", and also as being \"a Saracen by race\" (\"ex genere Saracenorum\"). He settled in Egypt, where he became acquainted with \"the wisdom of the Egyptians\", and invented the religious system that was afterwards known as Manichaeism. Finally he emigrated to Palestine, and, when he died, his writings passed into the hands of his sole disciple, a certain Terebinthus. The latter betook himself to Babylonia, assumed the name of Budda, and endeavoured to propagate his master's teaching. But he, like Scythianus, gained only one disciple, who was an old woman. After a while he died, in consequence of a fall from the roof of a house, and the books that he had inherited from Scythianus became the property of the old woman, who, on her death, bequeathed them to a young man named Corbicius, who had been her slave. Corbicius thereupon changed his name to Manes, studied the writings of Scythianus, and began to teach the doctrines that they contained, with many additions of his own. He gained three disciples, named Thomas, Addas, and Hermas. About this time the son of the Persian king fell ill, and Manes undertook to cure him; the prince, however, died, whereupon Manes was thrown into prison. He succeeded in escaping, but eventually fell into the hands of the king, by whose order he was flayed, and his corpse was hung up at the city gate.\nA. A. Bevan, who quoted this story, commented that it \"has no claim to be considered historical\".\nView of Judaism in the \"Acta Archelai\".\nAccording to Hegemonius' portrayal of Mani, the evil demiurge who created the world was the Jewish Yahweh. Hegemonius reports that Mani said,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"It is the Prince of Darkness who spoke with Moses, the Jews and their priests. Thus the Christians, the Jews, and the Pagans are involved in the same error when they worship this God. For he leads them astray in the lusts he taught them.\" He goes on to state: \"Now, he who spoke with Moses, the Jews, and the priests he says is the archont of Darkness, and the Christians, Jews, and pagans (ethnic) are one and the same, as they revere the same god. For in his aspirations he seduces them, as he is not the god of truth. And so therefore all those who put their hope in the god who spoke with Moses and the prophets have (this in store for themselves, namely) to be bound with him, because they did not put their hope in the god of truth. For that one spoke with them (only) according to their own aspirations.\nCentral Asian and Iranian primary sources.\nIn the early 1900s, original Manichaean writings started to come to light when German scholars led by Albert Gr\u00fcnwedel, and then by Albert von Le Coq, began excavating at Gaochang, the ancient site of the Manichaean Uyghur Kingdom near Turpan, in Chinese Turkestan (destroyed around 1300\u00a0CE). While most of the writings they uncovered were in very poor condition, there were still hundreds of pages of Manichaean scriptures, written in three Iranian languages (Middle Persian, Parthian, and Sogdian) and old Uyghur. These writings were taken back to Germany and were analyzed and published at the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin, by Le Coq and others, such as Friedrich W. K. M\u00fcller and Walter Bruno Henning. While the vast majority of these writings were written in a version of the Syriac script known as Manichaean script, the German researchers, perhaps for lack of suitable fonts, published most of them using the Hebrew alphabet (which could easily be substituted for the 22 Syriac letters).\nPerhaps the most comprehensive of these publications was (\"Manichaean Dogma from Chinese and Iranian texts\"), by Ernst Waldschmidt and Wolfgang Lentz, published in Berlin in 1933. More than any other research work published before or since, this work printed, and then discussed, the original key Manichaean texts in the original scripts, and consists chiefly of sections from Chinese texts, and Middle Persian and Parthian texts transcribed with the Hebrew alphabet. After the Nazi Party gained power in Germany, the Manichaean writings continued to be published during the 1930s, but the publishers no longer used Hebrew letters, instead transliterating the texts into Latin letters.\nCoptic primary sources.\nAdditionally, in 1930, German researchers in Egypt found a large body of Manichaean works in Coptic. Though these were also damaged, hundreds of complete pages survived and, beginning in 1933, were analyzed and published in Berlin before World War II, by German scholars such as Hans Jakob Polotsky. Some of these Coptic Manichaean writings were lost during the war.\nChinese primary sources.\nAfter the success of the German researchers, French scholars visited China and discovered what is perhaps the most complete set of Manichaean writings, written in Chinese. These three Chinese writings, all found at the Mogao Caves among the Dunhuang manuscripts, and all written before the 9th century, are today kept in London, Paris, and Beijing. Some of the scholars involved with their initial discovery and publication were \u00c9douard Chavannes, Paul Pelliot, and Aurel Stein. The original studies and analyses of these writings, along with their translations, first appeared in French, English, and German, before and after World War II. The complete Chinese texts themselves were first published in Tokyo, Japan in 1927, in the Taish\u014d Tripi\u1e6daka, volume 54. While in the last thirty years or so they have been republished in both Germany (with a complete translation into German, alongside the 1927 Japanese edition), and China, the Japanese publication remains the standard reference for the Chinese texts.\nGreek life of Mani, Cologne codex.\nIn Egypt, a small codex was found and became known through antique dealers in Cairo. It was purchased by the University of Cologne in 1969. Two of its scientists, Henrichs and Koenen, produced the first edition known since as the Cologne Mani-Codex, which was published in four articles in the . The ancient papyrus manuscript contained a Greek text describing the life of Mani. Thanks to this discovery, much more is known about the man who founded one of the most influential world religions of the past.\nFigurative use.\nThe terms \"Manichaean\" and \"Manichaeism\" are sometimes used figuratively as a synonym of the more general term \"dualist\" with respect to a philosophy, outlook, or world-view. The terms are often used to suggest that the worldview in question simplistically reduces historical events to a struggle between good and evil. For example, Zbigniew Brzezinski used the phrase \"Manichaean paranoia\" in reference to U.S. president George W. Bush's worldview (in \"The Daily Show with Jon Stewart\", 14 March 2007); Brzezinski elaborated that he meant \"the notion that he [Bush] is leading the forces of good against the 'Axis of evil.'\" Author and journalist Glenn Greenwald followed up on the theme in describing Bush in his book \"A Tragic Legacy\" (2007).\nThe term is frequently used by critics to describe the attitudes and foreign policies of the United States and its leaders.\nPhilosopher Frantz Fanon frequently invoked the concept of Manicheanism in his discussions of violence between colonizers and the colonized.\nIn \"My Secret History\", author Paul Theroux's protagonist defines the word Manichaean for the protagonist's son as \"seeing that good and evil are mingled.\" Before explaining the word to his son, the protagonist mentions Joseph Conrad's short story \"The Secret Sharer\" at least twice in the book, the plot of which also examines the idea of the duality of good and evil.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19761", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19761", "title": "Moroccan cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of Morocco\nMoroccan cuisine () is the cuisine of Morocco, fueled by interactions and exchanges with many cultures and nations over the centuries. Moroccan cuisine is usually a mix of Arab, Berber, Andalusi, Mediterranean and African cuisines, with minimal European (French and Spanish) influences. Traditional communal eating habits and ceremonial tea service are central to social gatherings. Like the rest of the Maghrebi cuisine, Moroccan cuisine has more in common with Middle Eastern cuisine than with the rest of Africa.\nAccording to Moroccan chef and cuisine researcher Hossin Houari, the oldest traces of Moroccan cuisine that can still be observed today go back to the 7th century BC.\nIngredients.\nMorocco produces a large range of Mediterranean fruits and vegetables, as well as tropical products like snails. Common meats include beef, goat, mutton and lamb, which, together with chicken and seafood, serve as a base for the cuisine. Characteristic flavorings include lemon pickle, argan oil, preserved butter (smen), olive oil, and dried fruits.\nThe staple grains today are rice and wheat, used for bread and couscous, though until the mid-20th century, barley was an important staple, especially in the south. Grapes are mostly eaten fresh, as a dessert; wine consumption is only about 1 liter per capita per year. The traditional cooking fats are butter and animal fat, though olive oil is now replacing them. Butter is used both fresh, \"zebeda\", and preserved, \"smen\".\nFlavorings.\nSpices and ras el hanout are used extensively in Moroccan food. Although some spices have been imported to Morocco through the Arabs, introducing Persian and Arabic cooking influences, many ingredients\u2014like saffron from Talaouine, mint and olives from Meknes, and oranges and lemons from Fes\u2014are home-grown, and are being exported. After the Idrissids established Fes in 789, predominant in Arab culture, many spices were brought from the east. Common spices include cinnamon, cumin, turmeric, ginger, paprika, coriander, saffron, mace, cloves, fennel, anise, nutmeg, cayenne pepper, fenugreek, caraway, black pepper and sesame seeds. Twenty-seven spices are combined for the Moroccan spice mixture \"ras el hanout\".\nCommon herbs in Moroccan cuisine include mint, parsley, coriander, oregano, peppermint, marjoram, verbena, sage and bay laurel.\nStructure of meals.\nA typical lunch begins with a series of hot and cold salads, followed by a \"tagine\" or \"dwaz\". Often, for a formal meal, a lamb or chicken dish is next, or couscous topped with meat and vegetables. Traditionally, Moroccans eat with their hands and use bread. The consumption of pork and alcohol is uncommon due to religious restrictions.\nMain dishes.\nThe main Moroccan dish people are most familiar with is couscous; lamb is the most commonly eaten meat in Morocco, usually eaten in a \"tagine\" with a wide selection of vegetables. Chicken is also commonly used in \"tagines\" or roasted. They also use additional ingredients such as plums, boiled eggs, and lemon. Like their national food, the \"tagine\" is distinctly flavored with locally ubiquitous spices such as saffron, cumin, cinnamon, ginger, and cilantro, as well as ground red pepper.\nMoroccan cuisine features many seafood dishes. European pilchard is caught in large but declining quantities. Other fish species include mackerel, anchovy, sardinella, and horse mackerel.\nOther widely known Moroccan dishes are \"pastilla\" (also spelled \"basteeya\" or \"bestilla\"), \"tanjia\", and \"rfissa\".\nA significant part of the daily meal is bread. Bread in Morocco is principally made from durum wheat semolina known as \"khobz\". Bakeries are common throughout Morocco and fresh bread is a staple in every city, town, and village. The most common is whole-grain coarse-ground or white-flour bread or baguettes. There are also a number of flat breads and pulled unleavened pan-fried breads.\nIn addition, there are dried salted meats and salted preserved meats such as \"khlea\" and \"g'did\" (basically sheep bacon), which are used to flavor \"tagines\" or used in \"el rghaif\", a folded savory Moroccan pancake.\nSoups.\n\"Harira\", a typical heavy soup, is eaten during winter to warm up and is usually served for dinner. It is typically eaten with plain bread or with dates during the month of Ramadan. \"Bissara\" is a broad bean-based soup that is also consumed during the colder months of the year.\nBeboush, a savory and slightly spicy snail soup, is a traditional delicacy in Moroccan cuisine. It is made by simmering snails in broth infused with aromatic spices, including cumin, coriander, and mint.\nSalads.\nSalads include both raw and cooked vegetables, served either hot or cold. They include \"zaalouk,\" an aubergine and tomato mixture, and \"taktouka\", a mixture of tomatoes, smoked green peppers, garlic, and spices characteristic of the cities of Taza and Fes in the Atlas. Another salad is called \"bakoula\" or \"khoubiza\", consisting of braised mallow leaves, but can also be made with spinach or arugula, with parsley, cilantro, lemon, olive oil, and olives.\nDesserts.\nUsually, seasonal fruits rather than cooked desserts are served at the close of a meal. A common dessert is \"kaab el ghzal\" (, 'gazelle ankles'), a pastry stuffed with almond paste and topped with sugar. Another is \"halwa chebakia\", pretzel-shaped dough deep-fried, soaked in honey and sprinkled with sesame seeds; it is eaten during Ramadan. \"Jowhara\" is typical of Fes, made with fried \"waraq\" pastry, cream, and toasted almond slices. Coconut fudge cakes, 'zucre coco', are also common.\nSeafood.\nMorocco is endowed with over 3000\u00a0km of coastline. There is an abundance of fish in these coastal waters with the sardine being commercially significant as Morocco is the world's largest exporter. Sardines were used in the production of garum in Lixus.\nAt Moroccan fish markets, one can find sole, swordfish, tuna, turbot, mackerel, shrimp, conger eel, skate, red snapper, spider crab, lobster and a variety of mollusks.\nIn Moroccan cuisine, seafood is incorporated into, among others, \"tajines\", \"bastilla\", \"briouat\", and \"paella\".\nDrinks.\nThe most popular drink is Moroccan mint tea, locally called \"atay\". Traditionally, making good mint tea in Morocco is considered an art form and the drinking of it with friends and family is often a daily tradition. The pouring technique is as crucial as the quality of the tea itself. Moroccan tea pots have long, curved pouring spouts and this allows the tea to be poured evenly into tiny glasses from a height. For the best taste, glasses are filled in two stages. The Moroccans traditionally like tea with bubbles, so while pouring they hold the teapot high above the glasses. Finally, the tea is accompanied with hard sugar cones or lumps. Morocco has an abundance of oranges and tangerines, so fresh orange juice is easily found and inexpensive.\nSnacks and fast food.\nSelling fast food in the street has long been a tradition, and the best example is Djemaa el Fna square in Marrakesh. \"Ma'quda\" is a potato fritter eaten by students and people of modest means, particularly in Fes. Starting in the 1980s, new snack restaurants, primarily in the north, started serving \"bocadillos\" (Spanish for 'sandwich').\nDairy product shops locally called \"mhlaba\" (), are prevalent all around the country. Those dairy stores generally offer all types of dairy products, juices, smoothies, and local fare such as bocadillos, \"msemmen\" and \"harcha\".\nThe \"khanz u-bn\u012bn\" ( \"stinky and delicious\") is an inexpensive, frequently seen street sandwich.\nAnother common street food in Morocco is snails, served in their juices in small bowls and eaten using a toothpick.\nIn the late 1990s, several multinational fast-food franchises opened restaurants in major cities.\nChefs.\nAmong those who have brought Moroccan cuisine to a wider audience are TV chef Choumicha and Al-Am\u012bn al-Hajj Mustafa an-Nak\u012br, chef to the former king of Morocco Hassan II.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19763", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19763", "title": "Martin Van Buren", "text": "President of the United States from 1837 to 1841\nMartin Van Buren ( ; ; December 5, 1782 \u2013 July 24, 1862) was the eighth president of the United States, serving from 1837 to 1841. A primary founder of the Democratic Party, Van Buren held a number of prominent offices. He served as New York's attorney general and U.S. senator, then briefly as the ninth governor of New York. After joining Andrew Jackson's administration, he served as the tenth United States secretary of state, minister to the United Kingdom, and ultimately, as the eighth vice president from 1833 to 1837, after being elected on Jackson's ticket in 1832. Van Buren won the presidency in 1836 against divided Whig opponents. He lost re-election in 1840, and failed to win the Democratic nomination in 1844. Later in his life, Van Buren re-emerged as an elder statesman and an anti-slavery leader who led the Free Soil Party ticket in the 1848 presidential election.\nHe was born in Kinderhook, New York, where most residents were of Dutch descent and spoke Dutch as their primary language. Van Buren is the only president to have spoken English as a second language. He entered politics as a member of the Democratic-Republican Party, won a seat in the New York State Senate, and was elected to the United States Senate in 1821. As the leader of the Bucktails faction of the party, Van Buren established the political machine known as the Albany Regency. He ran successfully for governor of New York to support Andrew Jackson's candidacy in the 1828 presidential election but resigned shortly after Jackson was inaugurated so he could accept appointment as Jackson's secretary of state. In the cabinet, Van Buren was a key Jackson advisor and built the organizational structure for the coalescing Democratic Party. He ultimately resigned to help resolve the Petticoat affair and briefly served as ambassador to the United Kingdom. At Jackson's behest, the 1832 Democratic National Convention nominated Van Buren for vice president, and he took office after the Democratic ticket won the 1832 presidential election.\nWith Jackson's strong support and the organizational strength of the Democratic Party, Van Buren successfully ran for president in the 1836 presidential election. However, his popularity soon eroded because of his response to the Panic of 1837, which centered on his Independent Treasury system, a plan under which the federal government of the United States would store its funds in vaults rather than in banks. More conservative Democrats and Whigs in Congress ultimately delayed Van Buren's plan from being implemented until 1840. His presidency was further marred by the costly Second Seminole War and his refusal to admit Texas to the Union as a slave state. In 1840, he lost his re-election bid to William Henry Harrison. While Van Buren is praised for anti-slavery stances, in historical rankings, historians and political scientists often rank him as an average or below-average U.S. president, due to his handling of the Panic of 1837.\nHe was initially the leading candidate for the Democratic Party's nomination again in 1844, but his continued opposition to the annexation of Texas angered Southern Democrats, leading to the nomination of James K. Polk. Growing opposed to slavery, Van Buren was the newly formed Free Soil Party's presidential nominee in 1848, and his candidacy helped Whig nominee Zachary Taylor defeat Democrat Lewis Cass. Worried about sectional tensions, Van Buren returned to the Democratic Party after 1848 but was disappointed with the pro-southern presidencies of Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan. During the American Civil War, Van Buren was a War Democrat who supported the policies of President Abraham Lincoln, a Republican. He died of asthma at his home in Kinderhook in 1862, aged 79.\nEarly life and education.\nMartin Van Buren was born on December 5, 1782, in Kinderhook, New York, His father, Abraham Van Buren, was a descendant of Cornelis Maessen, a native of Buurmalsen, Netherlands, who had emigrated to New Netherland in 1631 and purchased a plot of land on Manhattan Island. He was the first President born after the Declaration of Independence and the last born prior to British ratification of the terms of the 1783 Treaty of Paris that ended the American Revolutionary War; as a result, Van Buren was the last President to be born, (but not last to serve) a 'jus soli' British Subject by birth in one of the Thirteen Colonies. Abraham Van Buren had been a Patriot during the American Revolution, and he later joined the Democratic-Republican Party. He owned an inn and tavern in Kinderhook and served as Kinderhook's town clerk for several years. In 1776, he married Maria Hoes (or Goes) Van Alen (1746\u20131818) in the town of Kinderhook, also of Dutch extraction and the widow of Johannes Van Alen (1744-c. 1773). She had three children from her first marriage, including future U.S. Representative James I. Van Alen. Her second marriage produced five children, of which Martin was the third.\nVan Buren received a basic education at the village schoolhouse, and briefly studied Latin at the Kinderhook Academy and at Washington Seminary in Claverack. Van Buren had entirely Dutch ancestry and was raised speaking primarily Dutch; he learned English while attending school and is the only president of the United States whose first language was not English. Also during his childhood, Van Buren learned at his father's inn how to interact with people from varied ethnic, income, and societal groups, which he used to his advantage as a political organizer. His formal education ended in 1796, when he began reading law at the office of Peter Silvester and his son Francis.\nVan Buren, at tall, was small in stature, and affectionately nicknamed \"Little Van\". He was also called the \"Red Fox\" due to his \"bushy reddish sideburns, striking forehead and prominent nose\". When he began his legal studies he wore rough, homespun clothing, causing the Silvesters to admonish him to pay greater heed to his clothing and personal appearance as an aspiring lawyer. He accepted their advice, and subsequently emulated the Silvesters' clothing, appearance, bearing, and conduct. The lessons he learned from the Silvesters were reflected in his career as a lawyer and politician, in which Van Buren was known for his amiability and fastidious appearance. Despite Kinderhook's strong affiliation with the Federalist Party, of which the Silvesters were also strong supporters, Van Buren adopted his father's Democratic-Republican leanings. The Silvesters and Democratic-Republican political figure John Peter Van Ness suggested that Van Buren's political leanings constrained him to complete his education with a Democratic-Republican attorney, so he spent a final year of apprenticeship in the New York City office of John Van Ness's brother William P. Van Ness, a political lieutenant of Aaron Burr. Van Ness introduced Van Buren to the intricacies of New York state politics, and Van Buren observed Burr's battles for control of the state Democratic-Republican party against George Clinton and Robert R. Livingston. He returned to Kinderhook in 1803, after his admission to the New York bar.\nVan Buren married Hannah Hoes in Catskill, New York, on February 21, 1807, when he was 24 years old and she was 23. She was his childhood sweetheart and a daughter of his maternal first cousin, Johannes Dircksen Hoes. She grew up in Valatie, and like Van Buren her home life was primarily Dutch; she spoke Dutch as her first language, and spoke English with a marked accent. The couple had six children, four of whom lived to adulthood: Abraham (1807\u20131873), unnamed daughter (stillborn around 1809), John (1810\u20131866), Martin Jr. (1812\u20131855), Winfield Scott (born and died in 1814), and Smith Thompson (1817\u20131876). Hannah contracted tuberculosis, and died in Kinderhook on February 5, 1819. Martin Van Buren never remarried.\nEarly political career.\nUpon returning to Kinderhook in 1803, Van Buren formed a law partnership with his half-brother, James Van Alen, and became financially secure enough to increase his focus on politics. Van Buren had been active in politics from age\u00a018, if not before. In 1801, he attended a Democratic-Republican Party convention in Troy, New York, where he worked successfully to secure for John Peter Van Ness the party nomination in a special election for the 6th Congressional District seat. Upon returning to Kinderhook, Van Buren broke with the Burr faction, becoming an ally of both DeWitt Clinton and Daniel D. Tompkins. After the faction led by Clinton and Tompkins dominated the 1807 elections, Van Buren was appointed Surrogate of Columbia County, New York. Seeking a better base for his political and legal career, Van Buren and his family moved to the town of Hudson, the seat of Columbia County, in 1808. Van Buren's legal practice continued to flourish, and he traveled all over the state to represent various clients.\nIn 1812, Van Buren won his party's nomination for a seat in the New York State Senate. Though several Democratic-Republicans, including John Peter Van Ness, joined with the Federalists to oppose his candidacy, Van Buren won election to the state senate in mid-1812. Later in the year, the United States entered the War of 1812 against Great Britain, while Clinton launched an unsuccessful bid to defeat President James Madison in the 1812 presidential election. After the election, Van Buren became suspicious that Clinton was working with the Federalist Party, and he broke from his former political ally.\nDuring the War of 1812, Van Buren worked with Clinton, Governor Tompkins, and Ambrose Spencer to support the Madison administration's prosecution of the war. In addition, he was a special judge advocate appointed to serve as a prosecutor of William Hull during Hull's court-martial following the surrender of Detroit. Anticipating another military campaign, he collaborated with Winfield Scott on ways to reorganize the New York Militia in the winter of 1814\u20131815, but the end of the war halted their work in early 1815. Van Buren was so favorably impressed by Scott that he named his fourth son after him. Van Buren's strong support for the war boosted his standing, and in 1815, he was elected New York Attorney General. Van Buren moved from Hudson to the state capital of Albany, where he established a legal partnership with Benjamin Butler, and shared a house with political ally Roger Skinner. In 1816, Van Buren won re-election to the state senate, and he continued to simultaneously serve as attorney general. In 1819, he played an active part in prosecuting the accused murderers of Richard Jennings, the first murder-for-hire case in the state of New York.\nAlbany Regency.\nAfter Tompkins was elected as vice president in the 1816 presidential election, Clinton defeated Van Buren's preferred candidate, Peter Buell Porter, in the 1817 New York gubernatorial election. Clinton threw his influence behind the construction of the Erie Canal, an ambitious project designed to connect Lake Erie to the Atlantic Ocean. Though many of Van Buren's allies urged him to block Clinton's canal bill, Van Buren believed the canal would benefit the state. His support for the bill helped it win approval from the New York legislature. Despite his support for the Erie Canal, Van Buren became the leader of an anti-Clintonian faction in New York known as the \"Bucktails\".\nThe Bucktails succeeded in emphasizing party loyalty. Through his use of patronage, loyal newspapers, and connections with local party officials and leaders, Van Buren established what became known as the \"Albany Regency\", a political machine that emerged as an important factor in New York politics. The Regency relied on a coalition of small farmers, but also enjoyed support from the Tammany Hall machine in New York City. During this era, Van Buren largely determined Tammany Hall's political policy for New York's Democratic-Republicans.\nA New York state referendum that expanded state voting rights to all white men in 1821, and which further increased the power of Tammany Hall, was guided by Van Buren. Although Governor Clinton remained in office until late 1822, Van Buren emerged as the leader of the state's Democratic-Republicans after the 1820 elections. Van Buren was a member of the 1820 state constitutional convention, where he favored expanded voting rights, but opposed universal suffrage and tried to maintain property requirements for voting.\nEntry into national politics.\nIn February 1821, the state legislature elected Van Buren to represent New York in the United States Senate. Van Buren arrived in Washington during the \"Era of Good Feelings\", a period in which partisan distinctions at the national level had faded. Van Buren quickly became a prominent figure in Washington, D.C., befriending Secretary of the Treasury William H. Crawford, among others. Though not an exceptional orator, Van Buren frequently spoke on the Senate floor, usually after extensively researching the subject at hand. Despite his commitments as a father and state party leader, Van Buren remained closely engaged in his legislative duties, and during his time in the Senate he was a member of the Senate Finance Committee and served as the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. As he gained renown, Van Buren earned monikers like \"Little Magician\" and \"Sly Fox\".\nVan Buren chose to back Crawford over John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, and Henry Clay in the presidential election of 1824. Crawford shared Van Buren's affinity for Jeffersonian principles of states' rights and limited government, and Van Buren believed that Crawford was the ideal figure to lead a coalition of New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia's \"Richmond Junto\". Van Buren's support for Crawford aroused strong opposition in New York in the form of the People's party, which drew support from Clintonians, Federalists, and others opposed to Van Buren. Nonetheless, Van Buren helped Crawford win the Democratic-Republican party's presidential nomination at the February\u00a01824 congressional nominating caucus. The other Democratic-Republican candidates in the race refused to accept the poorly attended caucus's decision, and as the Federalist Party had all but ceased to function as a national party, the 1824 campaign became a competition among four candidates of the same party. Though Crawford suffered a severe stroke that left him in poor health, Van Buren continued to support his chosen candidate. In May 1824, Van Buren met with 81-year-old former President Thomas Jefferson in an attempt to bolster Crawford's candidacy, and though he was unsuccessful in gaining a public endorsement for Crawford, he nonetheless cherished the chance to meet with his political hero.\nThe 1824 elections dealt a severe blow to the Albany Regency, as Clinton returned to the governorship with the support of the People's party. By the time the state legislature convened to choose the state's presidential electors, results from other states had made it clear that no individual would win a majority of the electoral vote, necessitating a contingent election in the United States House of Representatives. While Adams and Jackson finished in the top three and were eligible for selection in the contingent election, New York's electors would help determine whether Clay or Crawford would finish third. Though most of the state's electoral votes went to Adams, Crawford won one more electoral vote than Clay in the state, and Clay's defeat in Louisiana left Crawford in third place. With Crawford still in the running, Van Buren lobbied members of the House to support him. He hoped to engineer a Crawford victory on the second ballot of the contingent election, but Adams won on the first ballot with the help of Clay and Stephen Van Rensselaer, a Congressman from New York. Despite his close ties with Van Buren, Van Rensselaer cast his vote for Adams, thus giving Adams a narrow majority of New York's delegation and a victory in the contingent election.\nAfter the House contest, Van Buren shrewdly kept out of the controversy which followed, and began looking forward to 1828. Jackson was angered to see the presidency go to Adams despite Jackson having won more popular votes than Adams had, and he eagerly looked forward to a rematch. Jackson's supporters accused Adams and Clay of having made a \"corrupt bargain\" in which Clay helped Adams win the contingent election in return for Clay's appointment as Secretary of State. Van Buren was always courteous in his treatment of opponents and showed no bitterness toward either Adams or Clay, and he voted to confirm Clay's nomination to the cabinet. At the same time, Van Buren opposed the Adams-Clay plans for internal improvements like roads and canals and declined to support U.S. participation in the Congress of Panama. Van Buren considered Adams's proposals to represent a return to the Hamiltonian economic model favored by Federalists, which he strongly opposed. Despite his opposition to Adams's public policies, Van Buren easily secured re-election in his divided home state in 1827.\n1828 elections.\nVan Buren's overarching goal at the national level was to restore a two-party system with party cleavages based on philosophical differences, and he viewed the old divide between Federalists and Democratic-Republicans as beneficial to the nation. Van Buren believed that these national parties helped ensure that elections were decided on national, rather than sectional or local, issues; as he put it, \"party attachment in former times furnished a complete antidote for sectional prejudices\". After the 1824 election, Van Buren was initially somewhat skeptical of Jackson, who had not taken strong positions on most policy issues. Nonetheless, he settled on Jackson as the one candidate who could beat Adams in the 1828 presidential election, and he worked to bring Crawford's former backers into line behind Jackson.\nHe also forged alliances with other members of Congress opposed to Adams, including Vice President John C. Calhoun, Senator Thomas Hart Benton, and Senator John Randolph. Seeking to solidify his standing in New York and bolster Jackson's campaign, Van Buren helped arrange the passage of the Tariff of 1828, which opponents labeled as the \"Tariff of Abominations\". The tariff was intended to protect northern and western agricultural products from foreign competition, but the resulting tax on imports cut into the profits of New England businessmen, who imported raw materials including iron to make into finished goods for subsequent resale, as well as finished goods including clothing for distribution and resale throughout the United States. The tariff also raised the cost of living in the South, because Southern states had little manufacturing capacity, which required them to export raw materials including cotton or sell them to Northern manufacturers, then import higher-priced finished goods or purchase them from the North. The tariff thus satisfied many who sought protection from foreign competition, but angered Southern cotton interests and New England importers and manufacturers. Because Van Buren believed the South would never support Adams, and New England would never support Jackson, he was willing to alienate both regions through passage of the tariff.\nMeanwhile, Clinton's death from a heart attack in 1828 dramatically shook up the politics of Van Buren's home state, while the Anti-Masonic Party emerged as an increasingly important factor. After some initial reluctance, Van Buren chose to run for Governor of New York in the 1828 election. Hoping that a Jackson victory would lead to his elevation to Secretary of State or Secretary of the Treasury, Van Buren chose Enos T. Throop as his running mate and preferred successor. Van Buren's candidacy was aided by the split between supporters of Adams, who had adopted the label of National Republicans, and the Anti-Masonic Party.\nReflecting his public association with Jackson, Van Buren accepted the gubernatorial nomination on a ticket that called itself \"Jacksonian-Democrat\". He campaigned on local as well as national issues, emphasizing his opposition to the policies of the Adams administration. Van Buren ran ahead of Jackson, winning the state by 30,000\u00a0votes compared to a margin of 5,000 for Jackson. Nationally, Jackson defeated Adams by a wide margin, winning nearly every state outside of New England. After the election, Van Buren resigned from the Senate to start his term as governor, which began on January\u00a01, 1829. While his term as governor was short, he did manage to pass the Bank Safety Fund Law, an early form of deposit insurance, through the legislature. He also appointed several key supporters, including William L. Marcy and Silas Wright, to important state positions.\nJackson administration (1829\u20131837).\nSecretary of State.\nIn February 1829, Jackson wrote to Van Buren to ask him to become Secretary of State. Van Buren quickly agreed, and he resigned as governor the following month; his tenure of forty-three days is the shortest of any Governor of New York. No serious diplomatic crises arose during Van Buren's tenure as Secretary of State, but he achieved various successes, such as settling long-standing claims against France and winning reparations for property that had been seized during the Napoleonic Wars. He reached an agreement with the British to open trade with the British West Indies colonies and concluded a treaty with the Ottoman Empire that gained American merchants access to the Black Sea. Items on which he did not achieve success included settling the Maine-New Brunswick boundary dispute with Great Britain, gaining settlement of the U.S. claim to the Oregon Country, concluding a commercial treaty with Russia, and persuading Mexico to sell Texas.\nIn addition to his foreign policy duties, Van Buren quickly emerged as an important advisor to Jackson on major domestic issues like the tariff and internal improvements. The Secretary of State was instrumental in convincing Jackson to issue the Maysville Road veto, which both reaffirmed limited government principles and also helped prevent the construction of infrastructure projects that could potentially compete with New York's Erie Canal. He also became involved in a power struggle with Calhoun over appointments and other issues, including the Petticoat Affair. The Petticoat Affair arose because Peggy Eaton, wife of Secretary of War John H. Eaton, was ostracized by the other cabinet wives due to the circumstances of her marriage.\nLed by Floride Calhoun, wife of Vice President John Calhoun, the other cabinet wives refused to pay courtesy calls to the Eatons, receive them as visitors, or invite them to social events. As a widower, Van Buren was unaffected by the position of the cabinet wives. Van Buren initially sought to mend the divide in the cabinet, but most of the leading citizens in Washington continued to snub the Eatons. Jackson was close to Eaton, and he came to the conclusion that the allegations against Eaton arose from a plot against his administration led by Henry Clay. The Petticoat Affair, combined with a contentious debate over the tariff and Calhoun's decade-old criticisms of Jackson's actions in the First Seminole War, contributed to a split between Jackson and Calhoun. As the debate over the tariff and the proposed ability of South Carolina to nullify federal law consumed Washington, Van Buren, not Calhoun, increasingly emerged as Jackson's likely successor.\nThe Petticoat affair was finally resolved when Van Buren offered to resign. In April 1831, Jackson accepted and reorganized his cabinet by asking for the resignations of the anti-Eaton cabinet members. Postmaster General William T. Barry, who had sided with the Eatons in the Petticoat Affair, was the lone cabinet member to remain in office. The cabinet reorganization removed Calhoun's allies from the Jackson administration, and Van Buren had a major role in shaping the new cabinet. After leaving office, Van Buren continued to play a part in the Kitchen Cabinet, Jackson's informal circle of advisors.\nAmbassador to Britain and vice presidency.\nIn August 1831, Jackson gave Van Buren a recess appointment as the ambassador to Britain, and Van Buren arrived in London in September. He was cordially received, but in February\u00a01832, shortly after his 49th birthday, he learned that the Senate had rejected his nomination. The rejection of Van Buren was essentially the work of Calhoun. When the vote on Van Buren's nomination was taken, enough pro-Calhoun Jacksonians refrained from voting to produce a tie, which allowed Calhoun to cast the deciding vote against Van Buren.\nCalhoun was elated, convinced that he had ended Van Buren's career. \"It will kill him dead, sir, kill him dead. He will never kick, sir, never kick\", Calhoun exclaimed to a friend. Calhoun's move backfired; by making Van Buren appear the victim of petty politics, Calhoun raised Van Buren in both Jackson's regard and the esteem of others in the Democratic Party. Far from ending Van Buren's career, Calhoun's action gave greater impetus to Van Buren's candidacy for vice president.\nSeeking to ensure that Van Buren would replace Calhoun as his running mate, Jackson had arranged for a national convention of his supporters. The May\u00a01832 Democratic National Convention subsequently nominated Van Buren to serve as the party's vice presidential nominee. Van Buren won the nomination over Philip P. Barbour (Calhoun's favored candidate) and Richard Mentor Johnson due to the support of Jackson and the strength of the Albany Regency. Upon Van Buren's return from Europe in July\u00a01832, he became involved in the Bank War, a struggle over the renewal of the charter of the Second Bank of the United States.\nVan Buren had long been distrustful of banks, and he viewed the bank as an extension of the Hamiltonian economic program, so he supported Jackson's veto of the bank's re-charter. Henry Clay, the presidential nominee of the National Republicans, made the struggle over the bank the key issue of the presidential election of 1832. The Jackson\u2013Van Buren ticket won the 1832 election by a landslide, and Van Buren took office as the eighth Vice President of the United States on March 4, 1833, at the age of 50. During the Nullification Crisis, Van Buren counseled Jackson to pursue a policy of conciliation with South Carolina leaders. He played little direct role in the passage of the Tariff of 1833, but he quietly hoped that the tariff would help bring an end to the Nullification Crisis, which it did.\nAs vice president, Van Buren continued to be one of Jackson's primary advisors and confidants, and accompanied Jackson on his tour of the northeastern United States in 1833. Jackson's struggle with the Second Bank of the United States continued, as the president sought to remove federal funds from the bank. Though initially apprehensive of the removal due to congressional support for the bank, Van Buren eventually came to support Jackson's policy. He also helped undermine a fledgling alliance between Jackson and Daniel Webster, a senator from Massachusetts who could have potentially threatened Van Buren's project to create two parties separated by policy differences rather than personalities. During Jackson's second term, the president's supporters began to refer to themselves as members of the Democratic Party. Meanwhile, those opposed to Jackson, including Clay's National Republicans, followers of Calhoun and Webster, and many members of the Anti-Masonic Party, coalesced into the Whig Party.\nPresidential election of 1836.\nPresident Andrew Jackson declined to seek another term in the 1836 presidential election, but he remained influential within the Democratic Party as his second term came to an end. Jackson was determined to help elect Van Buren in 1836 so that the latter could continue the Jackson administration's policies. The two men\u2014the charismatic \"Old Hickory\" and the efficient \"Sly Fox\"\u2014had entirely different personalities but had become an effective team in eight years in office together. With Jackson's support, Van Buren won the presidential nomination of the 1835 Democratic National Convention without opposition. Two names were put forward for the vice-presidential nomination: Representative Richard M. Johnson of Kentucky, and former Senator William Cabell Rives of Virginia. Southern Democrats, and Van Buren himself, strongly preferred Rives. Jackson, on the other hand, strongly preferred Johnson. Again, Jackson's considerable influence prevailed, and Johnson received the required two-thirds vote after New York Senator Silas Wright prevailed upon non-delegate Edward Rucker to cast the 15 votes of the absent Tennessee delegation in Johnson's favor.\nVan Buren's competitors in the election of 1836 were three members of the Whig Party, which remained a loose coalition bound by mutual opposition to Jackson's anti-bank policies. Lacking the party unity or organizational strength to field a single ticket or define a single platform, the Whigs ran several regional candidates in hopes of sending the election to the House of Representatives. The three candidates were Hugh Lawson White of Tennessee, Daniel Webster of Massachusetts, and William Henry Harrison of Indiana. Besides endorsing internal improvements and a national bank, the Whigs tried to tie Democrats to abolitionism and sectional tension, and attacked Jackson for \"acts of aggression and usurpation of power\".\nSouthern voters represented the biggest potential impediment to Van Buren's quest for the presidency, as many were apprehensive at the prospect of a Northern president. Van Buren moved to obtain their support by assuring them that he opposed abolitionism and supported maintaining slavery in states where it already existed. To demonstrate consistency regarding his opinions on slavery, Van Buren cast the tie-breaking Senate vote for a bill to subject abolitionist mail to state laws, thus ensuring that its circulation would be prohibited in the South. Van Buren considered slavery to be immoral but sanctioned by the Constitution.\nVan Buren won the election with 764,198 popular votes, 50.9% of the total, and 170\u00a0electoral votes. Harrison led the Whigs with 73\u00a0electoral votes, White receiving 26, and Webster\u00a014. Willie Person Mangum received South Carolina's 11 electoral votes, which were awarded by the state legislature. Van Buren's victory resulted from a combination of his attractive political and personal qualities, Jackson's popularity and endorsement, the organizational power of the Democratic Party, and the inability of the Whig Party to muster an effective candidate and campaign. Despite their lack of organization, the Whigs came close to their goal of forcing the election into the House of Representatives, with Van Buren winning the decisive state of Pennsylvania by a little over 4,000 voters, indicating the fragility of the voting coalition that Van Buren had inherited from Jackson. Virginia's presidential electors voted for Van Buren for president, but voted for William Smith for vice president, leaving Johnson one electoral vote short of election. In accordance with the Twelfth Amendment, the Senate elected Johnson vice president in a contingent vote.\nThe election of 1836 marked an important turning point in American political history because it saw the establishment of the Second Party System. In the early 1830s, the political party structure was still changing rapidly, and factional and personal leaders continued to play a major role in politics. By the end of the campaign of 1836, the new Second Party System was almost complete, as nearly every faction had been absorbed by either the Democrats or the Whigs.\nPresidency (1837\u20131841).\nCabinet.\nMartin Van Buren was sworn in as the eighth President of the United States on March 4, 1837. He retained much of Jackson's cabinet and lower-level appointees, as he hoped that the retention of Jackson's appointees would stop Whig momentum in the South and restore confidence in the Democrats as a party of sectional unity. The cabinet holdovers represented the different regions of the country: Secretary of the Treasury Levi Woodbury came from New England, Attorney General Benjamin Franklin Butler and Secretary of the Navy Mahlon Dickerson hailed from New York and New Jersey, respectively, Secretary of State John Forsyth of Georgia represented the South, and Postmaster General Amos Kendall of Kentucky represented the West.\nFor the lone open position of Secretary of War, Van Buren first approached William Cabell Rives, who had sought the vice presidency in 1836. After Rives declined to join the cabinet, Van Buren appointed Joel Roberts Poinsett, a South Carolinian who had opposed secession during the Nullification Crisis. Van Buren's cabinet choices were criticized by Pennsylvanians such as James Buchanan, who argued that their state deserved a cabinet position as well as some Democrats who argued that Van Buren should have used his patronage powers to augment his power. However, Van Buren saw value in avoiding contentious patronage battles, and his decision to retain Jackson's cabinet made it clear that he intended to continue the policies of his predecessor. Additionally, Van Buren had helped select Jackson's cabinet appointees and enjoyed strong working relationships with them.\nVan Buren held regular formal cabinet meetings and discontinued the informal gatherings of advisors that had attracted so much attention during Jackson's presidency. He solicited advice from department heads, tolerated open and even frank exchanges between cabinet members, perceiving himself as \"a mediator, and to some extent an umpire between the conflicting opinions\" of his counselors. Such detachment allowed the president to reserve judgment and protect his prerogative for making final decisions. These open discussions gave cabinet members a sense of participation and made them feel part of a functioning entity, rather than isolated executive agents. Van Buren was closely involved in foreign affairs and matters pertaining to the Treasury Department; but the Post Office, War Department, and Navy Department had significant autonomy under their respective cabinet secretaries.\nPanic of 1837.\nWhen Van Buren entered office, the nation's economic health had taken a turn for the worse and the prosperity of the early 1830s was over. Two months into his presidency, on May\u00a010, 1837, some important state banks in New York, running out of hard currency reserves, refused to convert paper money into gold or silver, and other financial institutions throughout the nation quickly followed suit. This financial crisis would become known as the Panic of 1837. The Panic was followed by a five-year depression in which banks failed and unemployment reached record highs.\nVan Buren blamed the economic collapse on greedy American and foreign business and financial institutions, as well as the over-extension of credit by U.S. banks. Whig leaders in Congress blamed the Democrats, along with Andrew Jackson's economic policies, specifically his 1836 Specie Circular. Cries of \"rescind the circular!\" went up and former president Jackson sent word to Van Buren asking him not to rescind the order, believing that it had to be given enough time to work. Others, like Nicholas Biddle, believed that Jackson's dismantling of the Bank of the United States was directly responsible for the irresponsible creation of paper money by the state banks which had precipitated this panic. The Panic of 1837 loomed large over the 1838 election cycle, as the carryover effects of the economic downturn led to Whig gains in both the U.S. House and Senate. The state elections in 1837 and 1838 were also disastrous for the Democrats, and the partial economic recovery in 1838 was offset by a second commercial crisis later that year.\nTo address the crisis, the Whigs proposed rechartering the national bank. The president countered by proposing the establishment of an independent U.S. treasury, which he contended would take the politics out of the nation's money supply. Under the plan, the government would hold its money in gold or silver, and would be restricted from printing paper money at will; both measures were designed to prevent inflation. The plan would permanently separate the government from private banks by storing government funds in government vaults rather than in private banks. Van Buren announced his proposal in September\u00a01837, but an alliance of conservative Democrats and Whigs prevented it from becoming law until 1840. As the debate continued, conservative Democrats like Rives defected to the Whig Party, which itself grew more unified in its opposition to Van Buren. The Whigs would abolish the Independent Treasury system in 1841, but it was revived in 1846, and remained in place until the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913. More important for Van Buren's immediate future, the depression would be a major issue in his upcoming re-election campaign.\nIndian removal.\nFederal policy under Jackson had sought to move Indian tribes to lands west of the Mississippi River through the Indian Removal Act of 1830, and the federal government negotiated 19\u00a0treaties with Indian tribes during Van Buren's presidency. The 1835 Treaty of New Echota signed by government officials and representatives of the Cherokee tribe had established terms under which the Cherokees ceded their territory in the southeast and agreed to move west to Oklahoma. In 1838, Van Buren directed General Winfield Scott to forcibly move all those who had not yet complied with the treaty.\nThe Cherokees were herded violently into internment camps where they were kept for the summer of 1838. The actual transportation west was delayed by intense heat and drought, but in the fall, the Cherokee reluctantly agreed to transport themselves west. Some 20,000\u00a0people were relocated against their will during the Cherokee removal, part of the Trail of Tears. Ralph Waldo Emerson, who would go on to become America's foremost man of letters, wrote Van Buren a letter protesting his treatment of the Cherokee.\nAn estimated 4,000 Cherokee died during the Trail of Tears. Entire Indian nations were relocated, with some losing as much as half their populations. Van Buren claimed that America was \"perhaps in the beginning unjustifiable aggressors\" toward the Indians, but later became the \"guardians\". He told Congress that a \"mixed occupancy of the same territory by the white and red man is incompatible with the safety or happiness of either\", and also claimed the Cherokee had not protested their removal.\nPresident Jackson used the army to force Seminole Indians in Florida to move to the west. Many did surrender but they then escaped from detention camps. In December 1837, in the Second Seminole War the army launched a massive offensive, leading to the Battle of Lake Okeechobee and a new phase of attrition. Realizing it was almost impossible to remove the remaining Seminoles from Florida, the administration negotiated a compromise allowing them to remain in southwest Florida.\nTexas.\nJust before leaving office in March 1837, Andrew Jackson extended diplomatic recognition to the Republic of Texas, which had won independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution. By suggesting the prospect of quick annexation, Jackson raised the danger of war with Mexico and heightened sectional tensions at home. New England abolitionists charged that there was a \"slaveholding conspiracy to acquire Texas\", and Daniel Webster eloquently denounced annexation. Many Southern leaders, meanwhile, strongly desired the expansion of slave-holding territory in the United States.\nBoldly reversing Jackson's policies, Van Buren sought peace abroad and harmony at home. He proposed a diplomatic solution to a long-standing financial dispute between American citizens and the Mexican government, rejecting Jackson's threat to settle it by force. Likewise, when the Texas minister at Washington, D.C., proposed annexation to the administration in August\u00a01837, he was told that the proposition could not be entertained. Constitutional scruples and fear of war with Mexico were the reasons given for the rejection, but concern that it would precipitate a clash over the extension of slavery undoubtedly influenced Van Buren and continued to be the chief obstacle to annexation. Northern and Southern Democrats followed an unspoken rule: Northerners helped quash anti-slavery proposals and Southerners refrained from agitating for the annexation of Texas. Texas withdrew the annexation offer in 1838.\nBorder violence with Canada.\nCaroline episode.\nBritish subjects in Lower Canada (now Quebec) and Upper Canada (now Ontario) rose in rebellion in 1837 and 1838, protesting their lack of responsible government. While the initial insurrection in Upper Canada ended quickly (following the December\u00a01837 Battle of Montgomery's Tavern), many of the rebels fled across the Niagara River into New York, and Upper Canadian rebel leader William Lyon Mackenzie began recruiting volunteers in Buffalo. Mackenzie declared the establishment of the Republic of Canada and put into motion a plan whereby volunteers would invade Upper Canada from Navy Island on the Canadian side of the Niagara River. Several hundred volunteers traveled to Navy Island in the weeks that followed. They procured the steamboat \"Caroline\" to deliver supplies to Navy Island from Fort Schlosser. Seeking to deter an imminent invasion, British forces crossed to the American bank of the river in late December\u00a01837, and they burned and sank the \"Caroline\". In the melee, one American was killed and others were wounded.\nConsiderable sentiment arose within the United States to declare war, and a British ship was burned in revenge. Van Buren, looking to avoid a war with Great Britain, sent General Winfield Scott to the Canada\u2013United States border with large discretionary powers for its protection and its peace. Scott impressed upon American citizens the need for a peaceful resolution to the crisis, and made it clear that the U.S. government would not support adventuresome Americans attacking the British. In early January\u00a01838, the president proclaimed neutrality in the Canadian independence issue, a declaration which Congress endorsed by passing a neutrality law designed to discourage the participation of American citizens in foreign conflicts.\nPatriot War of 1837\u20131838.\nDuring the Canadian rebellions, Charles Duncombe and Robert Nelson created an armed secret society in Vermont, the Hunters' Lodge. It carried out several small attacks in Upper Canada between December 1837 and December 1838, collectively known as the Patriot War. Washington responded using the Neutrality Act. It prosecuted the leaders and actively deterred Americans from subversive activities abroad. In the long term, Van Buren's opposition to the Patriot War contributed to the construction of healthy Anglo-American and Canada\u2013United States relations. It also led, more immediately, to a backlash among citizens regarding the seeming overreach of federal authority, which hurt congressional Democrats in the 1838 midterm elections.\nNorthern Maine: the Aroostook \"War\".\nA new crisis surfaced in late 1838, in the disputed territory on the thinly settled Maine\u2013New Brunswick frontier. Americans were settling on long-disputed land claimed by the United States and the United Kingdom. The British considered possession of the area vital to the defense of Canada. Both American and New Brunswick lumberjacks cut timber in the disputed territory during the winter of 1838\u20131839. On December\u00a029, New Brunswick lumbermen were spotted cutting down trees on an American estate near the Aroostook River. When American woodcutters rushed to stand guard, a shouting match, known as the Battle of Caribou, ensued. Tensions escalated with officials from both Maine and New Brunswick arresting each other's citizens. British troops began gathering along the Saint John River. Maine Governor John Fairfield mobilized the state militia.\nThe American press clamored for war; \"Maine and her soil, or BLOOD!\" screamed one editorial. \"Let the sword be drawn and the scabbard thrown away!\" In June, Congress authorized 50,000\u00a0troops and a $10\u00a0million budget in the event foreign military troops crossed into United States territory.\nVan Buren wanted peace and met with the British minister to the United States. The two men agreed to resolve the border issue diplomatically. Van Buren sent General Scott to the scene to lower the tensions. Scott successfully convinced all sides to submit the border issue to arbitration. The border dispute was put to rest a few years later, with the signing of the 1842 Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty.\n\"Amistad\" case: victory for the ex-slaves.\nThe Amistad case was a freedom suit that involved international issues and was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court. It resulted from the successful rebellion of African slaves on board the Spanish schooner \"La Amistad\" in 1839. The ship ended up in American waters and was seized by the predecessor agency of the Coast Guard. Van Buren viewed abolitionism as the greatest threat to the nation's unity, and he resisted the slightest interference with slavery in the states where it existed. His administration supported the Spanish government's demand that the ship and its cargo (including the Africans) be turned over to Spain. However, abolitionist lawyers intervened. A federal district court judge ruled that the Africans were legally free and should be transported home, but Van Buren's administration appealed the case to the Supreme Court.\nIn the Supreme Court in February 1840, John Quincy Adams argued passionately for the Africans' right to freedom. Van Buren's Attorney General Henry D. Gilpin presented the government's case. In March\u00a01841, the Supreme Court issued its final verdict: the \"Amistad\" Africans were free people and should be allowed to return home. The unique nature of the case heightened public interest in the saga, including the participation of former president Adams, Africans testifying in federal court, and their representation by prominent lawyers. Van Buren's administration lost its case and the ex-slaves won. The episode case drew attention to the personal tragedies of slavery and attracted new support for the growing abolition movement in the North. It also transformed the courts into the principal forum for a national debate on the legal foundations of slavery.\nJudicial appointments.\nVan Buren appointed two Associate Justices to the Supreme Court: John McKinley, confirmed September\u00a025, 1837, and Peter Vivian Daniel, confirmed March\u00a02, 1841. He also appointed eight other federal judges, all to United States district courts.\nWhite House hostess.\nFor the first half of his presidency, Van Buren, who had been a widower for many years, did not have a specific person to act as White House hostess at administration social events, but tried to assume such duties himself. When his eldest son Abraham Van Buren married Angelica Singleton in 1838, he quickly acted to install his daughter-in-law as his hostess. She solicited the advice of her distant relative, Dolley Madison, who had moved back to Washington after her husband's death, and soon the president's parties livened up. After the 1839 New Year's Eve reception, \"The Boston Post\" raved: \"[Angelica Van Buren is a] lady of rare accomplishments, very modest yet perfectly easy and graceful in her manners and free and vivacious in her conversation\u00a0... universally admired.\"\nAs the nation endured a deep economic depression, Angelica Van Buren's receiving style at receptions was influenced by her heavy reading about European court life (and her naive delight in being received as the \"Queen of the United States\" when she visited the royal courts of England and France after her marriage). Newspaper coverage of this, and the claim that she intended to re-landscape the White House grounds to resemble the royal gardens of Europe, was used in a political attack on her father-in-law by a Pennsylvania Whig Congressman Charles Ogle. He referred obliquely to her as part of the presidential \"household\" in his famous Gold Spoon Oration. The attack was delivered in Congress and the depiction of the president as living a royal lifestyle was a primary factor in his defeat for re-election.\nPresidential election of 1840.\nVan Buren easily won renomination for a second term at the 1840 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore, Maryland, but he and his party faced a difficult election in 1840. Van Buren's presidency had been a difficult affair, with the U.S. economy mired in a severe downturn, and other divisive issues, such as slavery, western expansion, and tensions with the United Kingdom, providing opportunities for Van Buren's political opponents\u2014including some of his fellow Democrats\u2014to criticize his actions. Although Van Buren's renomination was never in doubt, Democratic strategists began to question the wisdom of keeping Johnson on the ticket. Even former president Jackson conceded that Johnson was a liability and insisted on former House Speaker James K. Polk of Tennessee as Van Buren's new running mate. Van Buren was reluctant to drop Johnson, who was popular with workers and radicals in the North and added military experience to the ticket, which might prove important against likely Whig nominee William Henry Harrison. Rather than re-nominating Johnson, the Democratic convention decided to allow state Democratic Party leaders to select the vice-presidential candidates for their states.\nVan Buren hoped that the Whigs would nominate Clay for president, which would allow Van Buren to cast the 1840\u00a0campaign as a clash between Van Buren's Independent Treasury system and Clay's support for a national bank. However, rather than nominating longtime party spokesmen like Clay and Daniel Webster, the 1839 Whig National Convention nominated Harrison, who had served in various governmental positions during his career and had earned fame for his military leadership in the Battle of Tippecanoe and the War of 1812. Whig leaders like William Seward and Thaddeus Stevens believed that Harrison's war record would effectively counter the popular appeals of the Democratic Party. For vice president, the Whigs nominated former Senator John Tyler of Virginia. Clay was deeply disappointed by his defeat at the convention, but he nonetheless threw his support behind Harrison.\nWhigs presented Harrison as the antithesis of the president, whom they derided as ineffective, corrupt, and effete. Whigs also depicted Van Buren as an aristocrat living in high style in the White House, while they used images of Harrison in a log cabin sipping cider to convince voters that he was a man of the people. They threw such jabs as \"Van, Van, is a used-up man\" and \"Martin Van Ruin\" and ridiculed him in newspapers and cartoons. Issues of policy were not absent from the campaign; the Whigs derided the alleged executive overreaches of Jackson and Van Buren, while also calling for a national bank and higher tariffs. Democrats attempted to campaign on the Independent Treasury system, but the onset of deflation undercut these arguments. The enthusiasm for \"Tippecanoe and Tyler Too\", coupled with the country's severe economic crisis, made it impossible for Van Buren to win a second term. Harrison won by a popular vote of 1,275,612 to 1,130,033, and an electoral vote margin of 234 to 60. An astonishing 80% of eligible voters went to the polls on election day. Van Buren actually won more votes than he had in 1836, but the Whig success in attracting new voters more than canceled out Democratic gains. Additionally, Whigs won majorities for the first time in both the House of Representatives and the Senate.\nPost-presidency (1841\u20131862).\nElection of 1844.\nOn the expiration of his term, Van Buren returned to his estate of Lindenwald in Kinderhook. He continued to closely watch political developments, including the battle between the Whig alliance of the Great Triumvirate and President John Tyler, who took office after Harrison's death in April\u00a01841. Though undecided on another presidential run, Van Buren made several moves calculated to maintain his support, including a trip to the Southern United States and the Western United States during which he met with Jackson, former Speaker of the House James K. Polk, and others. President Tyler, James Buchanan, Levi Woodbury, and others loomed as potential challengers for the 1844\u00a0Democratic nomination, but it was Calhoun who posed the most formidable obstacle.\nVan Buren remained silent on major public issues like the debate over the Tariff of 1842, hoping to arrange for the appearance of a draft movement for his presidential candidacy. Tyler made the annexation of Texas his chief foreign policy goal, and many Democrats, particularly in the South, were anxious to quickly complete it. After an explosion on the killed Secretary of State Abel P. Upshur in February\u00a01844, Tyler brought Calhoun into his cabinet to direct foreign affairs. Like Tyler, Calhoun pursued the annexation of Texas to upend the presidential race and to extend slavery into new territories.\nShortly after taking office, Calhoun negotiated an annexation treaty between the United States and Texas. Van Buren had hoped he would not have to take a public stand on annexation, but as the Texas question came to dominate U.S. politics, he decided to make his views on the issue public. Though he believed that his public acceptance of annexation would likely help him win the 1844 Democratic nomination, Van Buren thought that annexation would inevitably lead to an unjust war with Mexico. In a public letter published shortly after Henry Clay also announced his opposition to the annexation treaty, Van Buren articulated his views on the Texas question.\nVan Buren's opposition to immediate annexation cost him the support of many pro-slavery Democrats. In the weeks before the 1844 Democratic National Convention, Van Buren's supporters anticipated that he would win a majority of the delegates on the first presidential ballot, but would not be able to win the support of the required two-thirds of delegates. Van Buren's supporters attempted to prevent the adoption of the two-thirds rule, but several Northern delegates joined with Southern delegates in implementing the two-thirds rule for the 1844 convention. Van Buren won 146 of the 266\u00a0votes on the first presidential ballot, with only 12 of his votes coming from Southern states.\nSenator Lewis Cass won much of the remaining vote, and he gradually picked up support on subsequent ballots until the convention adjourned for the day. When the convention reconvened and held another ballot, James K. Polk, who shared many of Van Buren's views but favored immediate annexation, won 44\u00a0votes. On the ninth ballot, Van Buren's supporters withdrew his name from consideration, and Polk won the nomination. Although angered that his opponents had denied him the nomination, Van Buren endorsed Polk in the interest of party unity. He also convinced Silas Wright to run for Governor of New York so that the popular Wright could help boost Polk in the state. Wright narrowly defeated Whig nominee Millard Fillmore in the 1844 gubernatorial election, and Wright's victory in the state helped Polk narrowly defeat Henry Clay in the 1844 presidential election.\nAfter taking office, Polk used George Bancroft as an intermediary to offer Van Buren the ambassadorship to London. Van Buren declined, partly because he was upset with Polk over the treatment the Van Buren delegates had received at the 1844 convention, and partly because he was content in his retirement. Polk also consulted Van Buren in the formation of his cabinet, but offended Van Buren by offering to appoint a New Yorker only to the lesser post of Secretary of War, rather than as Secretary of State or Secretary of the Treasury. Other patronage decisions also angered Van Buren and Wright, and they became permanently alienated from the Polk administration.\nElection of 1848.\nThough he had previously helped maintain a balance between the Barnburners and Hunkers, the two factions of the New York Democratic Party, Van Buren moved closer to the Barnburners after the 1844 Democratic National Convention. The split in the state party worsened during Polk's presidency, as his administration lavished patronage on the Hunkers. In his retirement, Van Buren also grew increasingly opposed to slavery.\nAs the Mexican\u2013American War brought the debate over slavery in the territories to the forefront of American politics, Van Buren published an anti-slavery manifesto. In it, he refuted the notion that Congress did not have the power to regulate slavery in the territories, and argued the Founding Fathers had favored the eventual abolition of slavery. The document, which became known as the \"Barnburner Manifesto\", was edited at Van Buren's request by John Van Buren and Samuel Tilden, both of whom were leaders of the Barnburner faction. After the publication of the Barnburner Manifesto, many Barnburners urged the former president to seek his old office in the 1848 presidential election. The 1848 Democratic National Convention seated competing Barnburner and Hunker delegations from New York, but the Barnburners walked out of the convention when Lewis Cass, who opposed congressional regulation of slavery in the territories, was nominated on the fourth ballot.\nIn response to the nomination of Cass, the Barnburners began to organize as a third party. At a convention held in June\u00a01848, in Utica, New York, the Barnburners nominated 65-year-old Van Buren for president. Though reluctant to bolt from the Democratic Party, Van Buren accepted the nomination to show the power of the anti-slavery movement, help defeat Cass, and weaken the Hunkers. At a convention held in Buffalo, New York in August\u00a01848, a group of anti-slavery Democrats, Whigs, and members of the abolitionist Liberty Party met in the first national convention of what became known as the Free Soil Party.\nThe convention unanimously nominated Van Buren, and chose Charles Francis Adams, son of late former President John Quincy Adams and grandson of late former President John Adams, as Van Buren's running mate. In a public message accepting the nomination, Van Buren gave his full support for the Wilmot Proviso, a proposed law that would ban slavery in all territories acquired from Mexico in the Mexican\u2013American War. Anti-slavery Whig orator Daniel Webster, in his \"Marshfield Speech\", expressed skepticism, in terms that may have influenced Whig voters, about the sincerity of Van Buren's espousal of the anti-slavery cause:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Mr. Van Buren's anti-slavery professions, Mr. Webster had no confidence. He said pleasantly, but significantly, that \"if he and Mr. Van Buren should meet under the Free-soil flag, the latter with his accustomed good-nature would laugh.\" He added, with a touch of characteristic humor, \"that the leader of the Free-spoil party suddenly becoming the leader of the Free-soil party is a joke to shake his sides and mine.\"\nVan Buren won no electoral votes, but finished second to Whig nominee Zachary Taylor in New York, taking enough votes from Cass to give the state\u2014and perhaps the election\u2014to Taylor. Nationwide, Van Buren won 10.1% of the popular vote, the strongest showing by a third-party presidential nominee up to that point in U.S. history.\nRetirement.\nVan Buren never sought public office again after the 1848 election, but he continued to closely follow national politics. He was deeply troubled by the stirrings of secessionism in the South and welcomed the Compromise of 1850 as a necessary conciliatory measure despite his opposition to the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850. Van Buren also worked on a history of American political parties and embarked on a tour of Europe, becoming the first former U.S. president to visit Britain. Though still concerned about slavery, Van Buren and his followers returned to the Democratic fold, partly out of the fear that a continuing Democratic split would help the Whig Party. He also attempted to reconcile the Barnburners and the Hunkers, with mixed results.\nVan Buren supported Franklin Pierce for president in 1852, James Buchanan in 1856, and Stephen A. Douglas in 1860. Van Buren viewed the fledgling Know Nothing movement with contempt and felt that the anti-slavery Republican Party exacerbated sectional tensions. He considered Chief Justice Roger Taney's ruling in the 1857 case of \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" to be a \"grievous mistake\" since it overturned the Missouri Compromise. He assessed that the Buchanan administration handled the issue of Bleeding Kansas poorly, and saw the Lecompton Constitution as a sop to Southern extremists.\nAfter the election of Abraham Lincoln and the secession of several Southern states in 1860, Van Buren unsuccessfully sought to call a constitutional convention. In April\u00a01861, former president Pierce wrote to the other living former presidents and asked them to consider meeting to use their stature and influence to propose a negotiated end to the war. Pierce asked the 78-year-old Van Buren to use his role as the senior living ex-president to issue a formal call. Van Buren's reply suggested that Buchanan should be the one to call the meeting, since he was the former president who had served most recently, or that Pierce should issue the call himself if he strongly believed in the merit of his proposal. Neither Buchanan nor Pierce was willing to make Pierce's proposal public, and nothing more resulted from it. Once the American Civil War began, Van Buren made public his support for the Union cause.\nDeath.\nVan Buren's health began to fail later in 1861, and he was bedridden with pneumonia during the fall and winter of 1861\u20131862. He died of bronchial asthma and heart failure at his Lindenwald estate at 2:00\u00a0a.m. on Thursday, July\u00a024, 1862. He is buried in the Kinderhook Reformed Dutch Church Cemetery, as are his wife Hannah, his parents, and his son Martin Van Buren Jr.\nVan Buren outlived all four of his immediate successors: Harrison, Tyler, Polk, and Taylor. In addition, he saw more successors ascend to the presidency than anyone else (eight), living to see Abraham Lincoln elected as the 16th President before his death.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nVan Buren's most lasting achievement was as a political organizer who built the Democratic Party and guided it to dominance in the Second Party System, and historians have come to regard Van Buren as integral to the development of the American political system. According to Robert V. Remini, \"Van Buren's creative contribution to the political development of the nation was enormous, and as such he earned his way to the presidency\u2026 Heretofore parties were regarded as evils to be tolerated; Van Buren argued that the party system was the most sensible and intelligent way the affairs of the nation could be democratically conducted, a viewpoint that eventually won national approval\".\nHis presidency is considered to be average, at best, by historians. He was blamed for the Panic of 1837 and defeated for reelection. His tenure was dominated by the economic conditions caused by the panic, and historians have split on the adequacy of the Independent Treasury as a response. Some historians disagree with these negative assessments. For example, libertarian writer Ivan Eland, in his 2009 book \"Recarving Rushmore\", ranked Van Buren as the third greatest president. He argues that Van Buren handled the Panic of 1837 well, and praised Van Buren for reducing government spending, balancing the budget, and avoiding potential wars with Canada and Mexico. Historian Jeffrey Rogers Hummel states that Van Buren was America's greatest president, arguing that \"historians have grossly underrated his many remarkable accomplishments in the face of heavy odds\".\nSeveral writers have portrayed Van Buren as among the nation's most obscure presidents. As noted in a 2014 \"Time\" magazine article on the \"Top 10 Forgettable Presidents\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Making himself nearly disappear completely from the history books was probably not the trick the \"Little Magician\" Martin Van Buren had in mind, but his was the first truly forgettable American presidency.\nMemorials.\nVan Buren's home in Kinderhook, New York, which he called Lindenwald, is now the Martin Van Buren National Historic Site. Counties are named for Van Buren in Michigan, Iowa, Arkansas, and Tennessee. Mount Van Buren, , three state parks and numerous towns were named after him.\nPopular culture.\nAssociation with \"OK\".\nDuring Martin Van Buren's 1840 re-election campaign, the abbreviation \"OK\" gained prominence as a slogan supporting his candidacy. Van Buren, whose nickname \"Old Kinderhook\" referenced his birthplace in Kinderhook, New York, used the term as a symbol of approval and solidarity among his supporters. Although \"OK\" was initially popularized as a humorous abbreviation for \"oll korrect\" (a deliberate misspelling of \"all correct\") in newspapers during the late 1830s, its association with Van Buren's campaign helped solidify its place in American vernacular. Despite the widespread use of \"OK,\" Van Buren was defeated in the 1840 election by William Henry Harrison, but the term continued to gain global recognition over the following decades.\nBooks.\nIn Gore Vidal's 1973 novel \"Burr\", a major plot theme is an attempt to prevent Van Buren's election as president by proving he is the illegitimate son of Aaron Burr.\nComic strips.\nAfter the 1988 presidential campaign, George H. W. Bush, a Yale University graduate and member of the Skull and Bones secret society, became the first incumbent vice president to win election to the presidency since Van Buren. In the comic strip \"Doonesbury\", artist Garry Trudeau depicted members of Skull and Bones as stealing Van Buren's skull as a congratulatory gift to the new president.\nCurrency.\nMartin Van Buren appeared in the presidential dollar coins series in 2008. The U.S. Mint also issued commemorative silver medals for Van Buren, released for sale in 2021.\nFilm and TV.\nVan Buren is portrayed by Nigel Hawthorne in the 1997 film \"Amistad\". The film depicts the legal battle surrounding the status of slaves who in 1839 rebelled against their transporters on \"La Amistad\" slave ship.\nOn the television show \"Seinfeld\", the 1997 episode \"The Van Buren Boys\" is about a fictional street gang that admires Van Buren and bases its rituals and symbols on him, including the hand sign of eight fingers pointing up to signify Van Buren, the eighth president.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks by Van Buren.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "19765", "revid": "29005906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19765", "title": "Melbourne Cricket Ground", "text": "Stadium in Melbourne, Australia\n}} Richmond\n}} Jolimont\nMelbourne Football Club (1858\u2013present)Richmond Football Club (1965\u2013present)Collingwood Football Club (1993\u2013present)Essendon Football Club (1991\u2013present)Hawthorn Football Club (2000\u2013present)Carlton Football Club (2005\u2013present)North Melbourne Football Club (1985\u20132005)Melbourne University Football Club (1911-1914)\nAustralian cricket team (1877\u2013present)Victoria cricket team (1851\u2013present)Melbourne Stars (2011\u2013present)\nMelbourne Storm (2000)\nAustralia men's national soccer team (selected matches)Australia women's national soccer team (selected matches)Melbourne Victory (international friendly matches)\nLos Angeles Rams (2026-onwards)\n&lt;/tr&gt;\n&lt;tr&gt;&lt;td colspan=\"2\"&gt;"}
