{"id": "17652", "revid": "8719036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17652", "title": "Lee Harvey Oswald", "text": "Assassin of John F. Kennedy (1939\u20131963)\nLee Harvey Oswald (October 18, 1939 \u2013 November 24, 1963) was a U.S. Marine veteran who assassinated John F. Kennedy, the 35th president of the United States, on November 22, 1963.\nOswald was placed in juvenile detention at age twelve for truancy, during which he was assessed by a psychiatrist as \"emotionally disturbed\" due to a lack of normal family life. He attended twelve schools in his youth, quitting repeatedly, and at age seventeen he joined the Marines, where he was court-martialed twice and jailed. In 1959, he was discharged from active duty into the Marine Corps Reserve, then flew to Europe and defected to the Soviet Union. He lived in Minsk, married a Russian woman named Marina, and had a daughter. In June 1962, he returned to the United States with his wife, and eventually settled in Dallas, Texas, where their second daughter was born.\nOswald shot and killed Kennedy on November 22, 1963, from a sixth-floor window of the Texas School Book Depository as Kennedy traveled by motorcade through Dealey Plaza in Dallas. About 45 minutes after assassinating Kennedy, Oswald murdered Dallas police officer J.\u00a0D. Tippit on a local street. He then slipped into a movie theater, where he was arrested for Tippit's murder. Oswald was charged with the assassination of Kennedy, but he denied responsibility for the killing, claiming that he was a \"patsy\" (a fall guy). Two days later, Oswald himself was murdered by local nightclub owner Jack Ruby on live television in the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters.\nIn September 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that both Oswald and Ruby had acted alone. This conclusion, though controversial, was supported by investigations from the Dallas Police Department, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the United States Secret Service, and the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA). Despite forensic, ballistic, and eyewitness accounts supporting the official findings, public opinion polls have shown that most Americans still do not believe that the official version tells the whole truth of the events, and the assassination has spawned numerous conspiracy theories.\nEarly life.\nLee Harvey Oswald was born at the old French Hospital in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 18, 1939, to a MetLife worker Robert Edward Lee Oswald Sr. (1896\u20131939) and a legal clerk Marguerite Frances Claverie (1907\u20131981). Robert Oswald was a third cousin of President Theodore Roosevelt and a distant cousin of Confederate general Robert E. Lee and served as a sergeant in the U.S. Army during World War I. Robert died of a heart attack two months before Lee was born. Lee's elder brother Robert Jr. (1934\u20132017) was a U.S. Marine during the Korean War. Through Marguerite's first marriage to Edward John Pic Jr., Lee and Robert Jr. were the half-brothers of U.S. Air Force veteran John Edward Pic (1932\u20132000).\nIn 1944, Marguerite moved the family from New Orleans to Dallas, Texas. Oswald entered the first grade in 1945 and over the next six years attended several different schools in the Fort Worth areas through the sixth grade. Oswald took an IQ test in the fourth grade and scored 103, and \"on achievement tests in [grades 4 to 6], he twice did best in reading and twice did worst in spelling\".\nAs a child, Oswald was described as withdrawn and temperamental by several people who knew him. When Oswald was 12 in August 1952, his mother took him to New York City where they lived for a short time with Oswald's half-brother, John. Oswald and his mother were later asked to leave after an argument in which Oswald allegedly struck his mother and threatened John's wife with a pocket knife.\nOswald attended seventh grade in the Bronx, New York City, but was often truant, which led to a psychiatric assessment at a juvenile reformatory. The reformatory psychiatrist, Dr. Renatus Hartogs, described Oswald as immersed in a \"vivid fantasy life, turning around the topics of omnipotence and power, through which [Oswald] tries to compensate for his present shortcomings and frustrations\". Hartogs concluded:\nLee has to be diagnosed as \"personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies\". Lee has to be seen as an emotionally, quite disturbed youngster who suffers under the impact of really existing emotional isolation and deprivation, lack of affection, absence of family life and rejection by a self involved and conflicted mother.\nHartogs recommended that Lee be placed on probation on condition that he seek help and guidance through a child guidance clinic, and that Oswald seek \"psychotherapeutic guidance through contact with a family agency\". Evelyn D. Siegel, a social worker who interviewed both Lee and Marguerite Oswald at Youth House, while describing \"a rather pleasant, appealing quality about this emotionally starved, affectionless youngster which grows as one speaks to him\", found that he had detached himself from the world around him because \"no one in it ever met any of his needs for love\". Hartogs and Siegel indicated that Marguerite gave him very little affection, with Siegel concluding that Lee \"just felt that his mother never gave a damn for him. He always felt like a burden that she simply just had to tolerate.\" Furthermore, his mother did not apparently indicate an awareness of the relationship between her conduct and her son's psychological problems, with Siegel describing Marguerite as a \"defensive, rigid, self-involved person who had real difficulty in accepting and relating to people\" and who had \"little understanding\" of Lee's behavior and of the \"protective shell he has drawn around himself\". Hartogs reported that she did not understand that Lee's withdrawal was a form of \"violent but silent protest against his neglect by her and represents his reaction to a complete absence of any real family life\".\nWhen Oswald returned to school for the 1953 Fall semester, his disciplinary problems continued. When he failed to cooperate with school authorities, they sought a court order to remove him from his mother's care so he could be placed into a home for boys to complete his education. This was postponed, perhaps partially because his behavior abruptly improved. Before the New York family court system could address their case, the Oswalds left New York in January 1954, and returned to New Orleans.\nOswald completed the eighth and ninth grades in New Orleans. He entered the tenth grade in 1955 but quit school after one month. After leaving school, Oswald worked for several months as an office clerk and messenger in New Orleans. In July 1956, Oswald's mother moved the family to Fort Worth, Texas, and Oswald re-enrolled in the tenth grade for the September session at Arlington Heights High School in Fort Worth. A few weeks later in October, Oswald quit school at age 17 to join the Marines; he never earned a high school diploma. By this point, he had moved 21 times and attended 12 different schools.\nThough Oswald had trouble spelling in his youth and may have had a \"reading-spelling disability\", he read voraciously. By age 15, he considered himself a socialist. According to his diary, \"I was looking for a key to my environment, and then I discovered socialist literature. I had to dig for my books in the back dusty shelves of libraries.\" At 16, he wrote to the Socialist Party of America for information on their Young People's Socialist League, saying he had been studying socialist principles for \"well over fifteen months\". Edward Voebel, \"whom the Warren Commission had established was Oswald's closest friend during his teenage years in New Orleans\", said \"reports that Oswald was already 'studying Communism' were a 'lot of baloney.'\" Voebel said that \"Oswald commonly read 'paperback trash'\".\nAs a teenager in 1955, Oswald became a cadet member of Civil Air Patrol in New Orleans. Fellow cadets variously recalled him attending CAP meetings \"three or four\" times, or \"10 or 12 times\", over a one- to three-month period.\nMarine Corps.\nOswald enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on October 24, 1956, just a week after his seventeenth birthday; because of his age, his brother Robert Jr. was required to sign as his legal guardian. Oswald also named his mother and his half-brother John as beneficiaries. Oswald idolized his older brother Robert Jr., and wore his Marine Corps ring. John Pic (Oswald's half-brother) testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald's enlistment was motivated by wanting \"to get from out and under ... the yoke of oppression from my mother\".\nOswald's enlistment papers recite that he was tall and weighed , with hazel eyes and brown hair. His primary training was in radar operation, which required a security clearance. A May 1957 document stated that he was \"granted final clearance to handle classified matter up to and including confidential after careful check of local records had disclosed no derogatory data\".\nAt Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi, Oswald finished seventh in a class of thirty in the Aircraft Control and Warning Operator Course, which \"included instruction in aircraft surveillance and the use of radar\". He was given the military occupational specialty of Aviation Electronics Operator. On July 9, he reported to the Marine Corps Air Station El Toro in California. There he met fellow Marine Kerry Thornley, who co-created Discordianism. Thornley wrote the 1962 fictional book \"The Idle Warriors\" based on Oswald. This was the only book written about Oswald before the Kennedy assassination. Oswald departed for Japan the following month, where he was assigned to Marine Air Control Squadron 1 at Naval Air Facility Atsugi near Tokyo.\nLike all Marines, Oswald was trained and tested in shooting, being ranked according to three tiers of passing grades: marksman, sharpshooter, and expert. In December 1956, he scored 212, which was slightly above the requirements for the designation of \"sharpshooter\", although in May 1959, he scored 191, which reduced his rating to \"marksman\", the lowest passing grade. Oswald was court-martialed after he accidentally shot himself in the elbow with an unauthorized .22 caliber handgun. He was court-martialed a second time for fighting with the sergeant he thought was responsible for his punishment in the shooting matter. He was demoted from private first class to private and briefly imprisoned. Oswald was later punished for a third incident: while he was on a night-time sentry duty in the Philippines, he inexplicably fired his rifle into the jungle.\nSlightly built, Oswald was nicknamed \"Ozzie Rabbit\" after the cartoon character; In November 1958, Oswald transferred back to El Toro where his unit's function \"was to serveil [\"sic\"] for aircraft, but basically to train both enlisted men and officers for later assignment overseas\". An officer there said that Oswald was a \"very competent\" crew chief and was \"brighter than most people\".\nWhile Oswald was in the Marines, he taught himself rudimentary Russian. Although this was an unusual endeavor, on February 25, 1959, he was invited to take a Marine proficiency exam in written and spoken Russian. His level at the time was rated \"poor\" in understanding spoken Russian, though he fared rather reasonably for a Marine private at the time in reading and writing. On September 11, 1959, he received a hardship discharge from active service, claiming his mother needed care. He was placed on the United States Marine Corps Reserve.\nDefection to the Soviet Union.\nOswald traveled to the Soviet Union just before he turned 20 in October 1959. He had taught himself Russian and saved $1,500 of his Marine Corps salary (). Oswald spent two days with his mother in Fort Worth, then embarked by ship on September 20 from New Orleans to Le Havre, France, and immediately traveled to the United Kingdom. Arriving in Southampton on October 9, he told officials he had $700 and planned to stay for one week before proceeding to a school in Switzerland. On the same day, he flew to Helsinki, where he checked in at Hotel Torni, room 309, then moved to Hotel Klaus Kurki, room 429. He was issued a Soviet visa on October 14. Oswald left Helsinki by train on the following day, crossed the Soviet border at Vainikkala, and arrived in Moscow on October 16. His visa, valid only for a week, was due to expire on October 21. During his stay in the Soviet Union his mail was intercepted and read by the CIA, with Reuben Efron being charged with this assignment.\nAlmost immediately after arriving, Oswald informed his Intourist guide of his desire to become a Soviet citizen. When asked why by the various Soviet officials he encountered \u2014 all of whom, by Oswald's account, found his wish incomprehensible \u2014 he said that he was a communist, and gave what he described in his diary as \"vauge [\"sic\"] answers about 'Great Soviet Union'\". On October 21, the day his visa was due to expire, he was told that his citizenship application had been refused, and that he had to leave the Soviet Union that evening. Distraught, Oswald inflicted a minor but bloody wound to his left wrist in his hotel room bathtub soon before his Intourist guide was due to arrive to escort him from the country, according to his diary because he wished to kill himself in a way that would shock her. Delaying Oswald's departure because of his self-inflicted injury, the Soviets kept him in a Moscow hospital under psychiatric observation for a week, until October 28, 1959.\nAccording to Oswald, he met with four more Soviet officials that day, who asked if he wanted to return to the United States. Oswald replied by insisting that he wanted to live in the Soviet Union as a Soviet national. When pressed for identification papers, he provided his Marine Corps discharge papers.\nOn October 31, Oswald appeared at the United States embassy in Moscow and declared a desire to renounce his U.S. citizenship. He said: \"I have made up my mind. I'm through.\" He told the U.S. embassy interviewing officer, Richard Edward Snyder, that \"he had been a radar operator in the Marine Corps and that he had voluntarily stated to unnamed Soviet officials that as a Soviet citizen he would make known to them such information concerning the Marine Corps and his specialty as he possessed. He intimated that he might know something of special interest.\" Such statements led to Oswald's \"hardship/honorable\" military reserve discharge being changed to \"undesirable\". The story of the defection of a former U.S. Marine to the Soviet Union was reported by both the Associated Press and United Press International.\nThough Oswald had wanted to attend Moscow State University, in January 1960 he was sent to Minsk, Byelorussia, to work as a lathe operator at the Gorizont Electronics Factory, which produced radios, televisions, and military and space electronics. Stanislau Shushkevich, who later became independent Belarus's first head of state, also worked at Gorizont at the time, and was assigned to help Oswald improve his Russian. Oswald received a government-subsidized, fully furnished studio apartment in a prestigious building and an additional supplement to his factory pay, which allowed him to have a comfortable standard of living by working-class Soviet standards, though he was kept under constant surveillance.\nFrom mid-1960 to early 1961, Oswald was in a relationship with Ella German (), a Belarusian coworker born in 1937.\nThey ate together in the factory cafeteria every day and dated about twice each week. German later described Oswald as \"a pleasant-looking guy with a good sense of humor... not as rough and rude as the men here were back then\";\nshe did not love him, but thought he was lonely and continued to date him out of pity. Their relationship became more serious \u2014 in Oswald's eyes \u2014 during the summer and fall of 1960,\nbut began to deteriorate after German learned in October that Oswald had been seeing other women. On January 2, 1961, Oswald proposed, but German refused.\nReturn to the U.S..\nOswald wrote in his diary in January 1961: \"I am starting to reconsider my desire about staying. The work is drab, the money I get has nowhere to be spent. No nightclubs or bowling alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances. I have had enough.\" Shortly afterwards, Oswald (who had never formally renounced his U.S. citizenship) wrote to the Embassy of the United States, Moscow, requesting the return of his American passport, and proposing to return to the U.S. if any charges against him would be dropped.\nIn March 1961, Oswald met Marina Prusakova (born 1941), a 19-year-old pharmacology student; they married six weeks later. The Oswalds' first child, June, was born on February 15, 1962. On May 24, 1962, Oswald and Marina applied at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow for documents that enabled her to emigrate to the U.S. On June 1, the U.S. Embassy gave Oswald a repatriation loan of $435.71. Oswald, Marina, and their infant daughter left for the United States, where they received less attention from the press than Oswald expected. Oswald and his wife returned to America on June 13, they arrived onboard the Maasdam and landed at Hoboken in New Jersey. Here they were met by Spas T. Raikin of the Travelers Aid Society, who had been contacted by the US Department of State. He took Oswald and his family to the New York City Department of Welfare where they were processed. Raikin recalls that Oswald was tight-lipped and that \"It was like pulling teeth to get information out of him\". He misled Raikin about his defection to the Soviet Union, claiming that he had been a Marine on duty in the U.S. Embassy in Moscow when he met a Russian girl and defected. He added that he had been misled by Soviet propaganda and that things were not as he had thought they were in the USSR. In reality Oswald was never stationed in Russia and did not meet his wife Marina until after he had defected.\nDallas\u2013Fort Worth.\nThe Oswalds soon settled in the Dallas/Fort Worth area, where Lee's mother and brother lived. Oswald began a manuscript on Soviet life, though he eventually gave up the project. The Oswalds also became acquainted with a number of anti-Communist Russian and East European \u00e9migr\u00e9s in the area. In testimony to the Warren Commission, Alexander Kleinlerer said that the Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s sympathized with Marina, while merely tolerating Oswald, whom they regarded as rude and arrogant.\nAlthough the Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9s eventually abandoned Marina when she made no sign of leaving her husband, Oswald found an unlikely friend in 51-year-old Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9 George de Mohrenschildt, a well-educated petroleum geologist with international business connections. A native of Russia, Mohrenschildt later told the Warren Commission that Oswald had a \"remarkable fluency in Russian\". Marina, meanwhile, befriended Ruth Paine, a Quaker trying to learn Russian, and her husband Michael Paine, who worked for Bell Helicopter.\nIn July 1962, Oswald was hired by the Leslie Welding Company as a sheet metal worker in Dallas; he disliked the work and quit after three months. On October 12, he started working for the graphic-arts firm of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall as a photoprint trainee. A fellow employee at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall testified that Oswald's rudeness at his new job was such that fights threatened to break out, and that he once saw Oswald reading a Russian-language publication. Oswald was fired in the first week of April 1963.\nEdwin Walker assassination attempt.\nIn March 1963, Oswald used the alias \"A. Hidell\" to make a mail-order purchase of a secondhand 6.5\u00a0mm caliber Carcano rifle for $19.95, plus $1.50 for shipping. He also purchased a .38 Smith &amp; Wesson Model 10 revolver by mail for $29.95 plus $1.27 shipping. The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald attempted to kill retired U.S. Major General Edwin Walker on April 10, 1963, and that Oswald fired the Carcano rifle at Walker through a window from less than away as Walker sat at a desk in his Dallas home. The bullet struck the window frame and Walker's only injuries were bullet fragments to the forearm. The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations stated that the \"evidence strongly suggested\" that Oswald carried out the shooting.\nGeneral Walker was an outspoken anti-communist, segregationist, and member of the John Birch Society. In 1961, Walker had been relieved of his command of the 24th Division of the U.S. Army in West Germany for distributing right-wing literature to his troops. Walker's later actions in opposition to racial integration at the University of Mississippi led to his arrest on insurrection, seditious conspiracy, and other charges. He was temporarily held in a mental institution on orders from President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, but a grand jury declined to indict him.\nMarina Oswald testified that her husband told her that he traveled by bus to General Walker's house and shot at Walker with his rifle. She said that Oswald considered Walker to be the leader of a \"fascist organization\". A note Oswald left for Marina on the night of the attempt, telling her what to do if he did not return, was found ten days after the Kennedy assassination.\nBefore the Kennedy assassination, Dallas police had no suspects in the Walker shooting, but Oswald's involvement was suspected within hours of his arrest following the assassination. The Walker bullet was too damaged to run conclusive ballistics studies on it, but neutron activation analysis later showed that it was \"extremely likely\" that it was made by the same manufacturer and for the same rifle make as the two bullets which later struck Kennedy.\nGeorge de Mohrenschildt testified that he \"knew that Oswald disliked General Walker\". Regarding this, de Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne recalled an incident that occurred the weekend following the Walker assassination attempt. The de Mohrenschildts testified that on April 14, 1963, just before Easter Sunday, they were visiting the Oswalds at their new apartment and had brought them a toy Easter bunny to give to their child. As Oswald's wife Marina was showing Jeanne around the apartment, they discovered Oswald's rifle standing upright, leaning against the wall inside a closet. Jeanne told George that Oswald had a rifle, and George joked to Oswald, \"Were you the one who took a pot-shot at General Walker?\" When asked about Oswald's reaction to this question, George de Mohrenschildt told the Warren Commission that Oswald \"smiled at that\". When de Mohrenschildt's wife Jeanne was asked about Oswald's reaction, she said, \"I didn't notice anything\", and continued, \"we started laughing our heads off, big joke, big George's joke\". Jeanne de Mohrenschildt testified that this was the last time she or her husband ever saw the Oswalds.\nNew Orleans.\nOswald returned to New Orleans on April 24, 1963. Marina's friend Ruth Paine drove her by car from Dallas to join Oswald in New Orleans the following month. On May 10, Oswald was hired by the Reily Coffee Company as a machinery greaser. He was fired in July \"because his work was not satisfactory and because he spent too much time loitering in Adrian Alba's garage next door, where he read rifle and hunting magazines\".\nIn his 1988 book \"On the Trail of the Assassins\", New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison claimed that Oswald really spent that time across the street at 544 Camp Street. These were the law offices of Guy Banister, a former FBI agent, an avid segregationist, and a local politician. Garrison added that Guy Banister, during the summer of 1963 in New Orleans, was most interested in infiltrating the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, and used Oswald as his spy. In their 1978 investigation, the House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated a possible connection between Oswald and Banister at the Camp Street address. The HSCA wrote that it \"could find no documentary proof that Banister had a file on Lee Harvey Oswald nor could the committee find credible witnesses whoever saw Lee Harvey Oswald and Guy Banister together. There are, however, indications that Banister at least knew of Oswald's leafletting activities and probably maintained a file on him.\"\nOn May 26, Oswald wrote to the New York City headquarters of the pro-Fidel Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee, proposing to rent \"a small office at my own expense for the purpose of forming a FPCC branch here in New Orleans\". Three days later, the FPCC responded to Oswald's letter advising against opening a New Orleans office \"at least not ... at the very beginning\". In a follow-up letter, Oswald replied, \"Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very beginning.\" On May 29, Oswald ordered the following items from a local printer: 500 application forms, 300 membership cards, and 1,000 leaflets with the heading, \"Hands Off Cuba\". According to Marina, Lee told her to sign the name \"A. J. Hidell\" as chapter president on his membership card.\nAccording to anti-Castro militant Carlos Bringuier, Oswald visited him on August 5 and 6 at a store he owned in New Orleans. Bringuier was the New Orleans delegate for the anti-Castro organization Directorio Revolucionario Estudantil (DRE). Bringuier would later tell the Warren Commission that he believed Oswald's visits were an attempt by Oswald to infiltrate his group. On August 9, Oswald turned up in downtown New Orleans handing out pro-Castro leaflets. Bringuier confronted Oswald, claiming he was tipped off about Oswald's leafleting by a friend. A scuffle ensued and Oswald, Bringuier, and two of Bringuier's friends were arrested for disturbing the peace. Prior to leaving the police station, Oswald requested to speak with an FBI agent. Oswald told the agent that he was a member of the New Orleans branch of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee which he claimed had 35 members and was led by A. J. Hidell. In fact, Oswald was the branch's only member and it had never been chartered by the national organization.\nA week later, on August 16, Oswald again passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets with two hired helpers, this time in front of the International Trade Mart. The incident was filmed by WDSU-TV. The two others were an unidentified Cuban man and Charles Hall Steele Jr., who Oswald had found at an employment office and paid $2 for fifteen minutes of his time. The next day, Oswald was interviewed by WDSU radio commentator William Stuckey, who probed Oswald's background. A few days later, Oswald accepted Stuckey's invitation to take part in a WDSU radio debate with Carlos Bringuier and Bringuier's associate Edward Scannell Butler, head of the right-wing Information Council of the Americas (INCA). This debate was taped and later released by INCA as \"Oswald: Self-Portrait in Red\".\nMexico.\nMarina's friend Ruth Paine transported Marina and her child by car from New Orleans to the Paine home in Irving, Texas, near Dallas, on September 23, 1963. Oswald stayed in New Orleans at least two more days to collect a $33 unemployment check. It is uncertain when he left New Orleans; he is next known to have boarded a bus in Houston on September 26 \u2013 bound for the Mexican border, rather than Dallas \u2013 and to have told other bus passengers that he planned to travel to Cuba via Mexico. He arrived in Mexico City on September 27, where he applied for a transit visa at the Cuban consulate, claiming he wanted to visit Cuba on his way to the Soviet Union. The Cuban consular officials insisted Oswald would need Soviet approval, but he was unable to get prompt co-operation from the Soviet consulate. CIA documents note Oswald spoke \"terrible hardly recognizable Russian\" during his meetings with Cuban and Soviet officials.\nAfter five days of shuttling between consulates \u2013 and including a heated argument with an official at the Cuban consulate, impassioned pleas to KGB agents, and at least some CIA scrutiny \u2013 Oswald was told by a Cuban consular officer that he was disinclined to approve the visa, saying \"a person like [Oswald] in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm\". Later, on October 18, the Cuban embassy approved the visa, but by this time Oswald was back in the United States and had given up on his plans to visit Cuba and the Soviet Union. Still later, eleven days before the assassination of President Kennedy, Oswald wrote to the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., saying, \"Had I been able to reach the Soviet Embassy in Havana, as planned, the embassy there would have had time to complete our business.\"\nWhile the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had visited Mexico City and the Cuban and Soviet consulates, questions regarding whether someone posing as Oswald had appeared at the embassies were serious enough to be investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations. Later, the Committee agreed with the Warren Commission that Oswald had visited Mexico City and concluded that \"the majority of evidence tends to indicate\" that Oswald visited the consulates, but the Committee could not rule out the possibility that someone else had used his name in visiting the consulates.\nAccording to a CIA document released in 2017, it is possible Oswald was trying to get the necessary documents from the embassies to make a quick escape to the Soviet Union after the assassination.\nReturn to Dallas.\nOn October 2, 1963, Oswald left Mexico City by bus and arrived in Dallas the next day. Ruth Paine said that a neighbor told her on October 14 about a job opening at the Texas School Book Depository, where her neighbor's brother, Wesley Frazier, worked. Mrs. Paine informed Oswald, who was interviewed at the depository and was hired there on October 16 as a $1.25 an hour minimum wage order filler. Oswald's supervisor, Roy S. Truly (1907\u20131985), said that Oswald \"did a good day's work\" and was an above-average employee. During the week, Oswald stayed in a Dallas rooming house under the name \"O. H. Lee\", but he spent his weekends with Marina at the Paine home in Irving. Oswald did not drive a car, but he commuted to and from Dallas on Mondays and Fridays with his co-worker Wesley Frazier. On October 20 (a month before the assassination), the Oswalds' second daughter, Audrey, was born.\nThe Dallas branch of the FBI became interested in Oswald after its agent learned that the CIA had determined that Oswald had been in contact with the Soviet embassy in Mexico, making Oswald a possible espionage case. FBI agents twice visited the Paine home in early November, when Oswald was not present, and spoke to Mrs. Paine. Oswald visited the Dallas FBI office about two to three weeks before the assassination, asking to see Special Agent James P. Hosty. When he was told that Hosty was unavailable, Oswald left a note that, according to the receptionist, read: \"Let this be a warning. I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don't stop bothering my wife\" [signed] \"Lee Harvey Oswald\". The note allegedly contained a threat, but accounts vary as to whether Oswald threatened to \"blow up the FBI\" or merely \"report this to higher authorities\". According to Hosty, the note said, \"If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me directly. If you don't cease bothering my wife, I will take the appropriate action and report this to the proper authorities.\" Agent Hosty said that he destroyed Oswald's note on orders from his superior, Gordon Shanklin, after Oswald was named the suspect in the Kennedy assassination.\nJohn F. Kennedy and J. D. Tippit murders.\nIn the days before Kennedy's arrival, several local newspapers published the route of Kennedy's motorcade, which passed the Texas School Book Depository. On Thursday, November 21, 1963, Oswald asked Frazier for an unusual mid-week lift back to Irving, saying he had to pick up some curtain rods. The next morning (the day of the assassination), he returned to Dallas with Frazier. He left $170 and his wedding ring, but took a large paper bag with him. Frazier reported that Oswald told him the bag contained curtain rods. The Warren Commission concluded that the package of \"curtain rods\" actually contained the rifle that Oswald was going to use for the assassination.\nOne of Oswald's co-workers, Charles Givens, testified to the Commission that he last saw Oswald on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository (TSBD) at approximately 11:55\u00a0a.m., which was 35 minutes before the motorcade entered Dealey Plaza. The Commission report stated that Oswald was not seen again \"until after the shooting\". In an FBI report taken the day after the assassination, Givens said that the encounter took place at 11:30\u00a0a.m. and that he saw Oswald reading a newspaper in the first-floor domino room at 11:50\u00a0a.m, 20 minutes later. William Shelley, a foreman at the depository, also testified that he saw Oswald near the telephone on the first floor between 11:45 and 11:50\u00a0a.m. Janitor Eddie Piper also testified that he spoke to Oswald on the first floor at 12:00\u00a0p.m. Another co-worker, Bonnie Ray Williams, was eating his lunch on the sixth floor of the depository and was there until at least 12:10\u00a0p.m. He said that during that time, he did not see Oswald, or anyone else, on the sixth floor and thought that he was the only person up there. He also said that some boxes in the southeast corner may have prevented him from seeing deep into the \"sniper's nest\". Various workers \u2013 including Givens, Junior Jarman, Troy West, Danny Arce, Jack Dougherty, Joe Molina, Mrs. Robert Reid, and Bill Lovelady \u2013 who were either in the first or second floor lunchrooms at times between 12:00 and 12:30 pm reported that Oswald was not present in those rooms during their lunch breaks.\nAs Kennedy's motorcade passed through Dealey Plaza at approximately 12:30\u00a0p.m. on November 22, Oswald fired three rifle shots from the southeast-corner window on the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository, killing the President and seriously wounding Texas Governor John Connally. One shot apparently missed the presidential limousine entirely, another struck both Kennedy and Connally, and a third bullet struck Kennedy in the head, killing him. Bystander James Tague received a minor facial injury from a small piece of curbstone that had fragmented after it was struck by one of the bullets.\nWitness Howard Brennan was sitting across the street from the Texas School Book Depository and watching the motorcade go by. He notified police that he heard a shot come from above and looked up to see a man with a rifle fire another shot from the southeast corner window on the sixth floor. He said he had seen the same man minutes earlier looking through the window. Brennan gave a description of the shooter, and Dallas police subsequently broadcast descriptions at 12:45\u00a0p.m., 12:48\u00a0p.m., and 12:55\u00a0p.m. After the second shot was fired, Brennan recalled, \"This man I saw previous[ly] was aiming for his last shot\u00a0... and maybe paused for another second as though to assure himself that he had hit his mark.\"\nThe paper bag Frazier had described was found by police near the open sixth-floor window from which Oswald was determined to have fired; it was long and had marks on its inside consistent with having been used to carry a rifle. Three shell casings were found on the floor near the window, and a Mannlicher-Carcano rifle with telescopic sight was found on the northwest corner of the sixth-floor near the staircase.\nAccording to the investigations, after the shooting Oswald covered the rifle with boxes and descended via the rear stairwell. About 90 seconds after the shots sounded, he was encountered in the second-floor lunchroom by Dallas police officer Marrion L. Baker, who was with Oswald's supervisor, Roy Truly. Baker let Oswald pass after Truly identified him as an employee. Baker later said Oswald did not seem \"nervous\" or \"out of breath\". Truly said that Oswald looked \"startled\" when Baker pointed his gun directly at him. Mrs. Robert Reid, a clerical supervisor at the depository who returned to her office within two minutes of the shooting, said she saw Oswald, \"very calm\", on the second floor holding a Coca-Cola bottle. As they walked past each other, Mrs. Reid said to Oswald, \"The President has been shot\" to which he mumbled something in response, but Reid did not understand him. Oswald was believed to have left the depository through the front entrance just before police sealed it off. Truly later pointed out to officers that Oswald was the only employee that he was certain was missing.\nAt about 12:40\u00a0p.m., 10 minutes after the shooting, Oswald boarded a city bus. Probably due to heavy traffic, he requested a transfer from the driver and got off two blocks later. Oswald then took a taxicab to his rooming house at 1026 North Beckley Avenue and entered through the front door at about 1:00\u00a0p.m. According to his housekeeper Earlene Roberts, Oswald immediately went to his room, \"walking pretty fast\". Roberts said that Oswald left \"a very few minutes\" later, zipping up a jacket he was not wearing when he had entered earlier. As Oswald left, Roberts looked out of the window of her house and last saw him standing at the northbound Beckley Avenue bus stop in front of her house.\nThe Warren Commission concluded that at approximately 1:15\u00a0p.m., Dallas Patrolman J. D. Tippit drove up in his patrol car alongside Oswald, presumably because Oswald resembled the broadcast description of the man seen by witness Howard Brennan firing shots at Kennedy's motorcade. He encountered Oswald near the corner of East 10th Street and North Patton Avenue. This location is about southeast of Oswald's rooming house \u2013 a distance that the Warren Commission concluded \"Oswald could have easily walked\". Tippit pulled alongside Oswald and \"apparently exchanged words with [him] through the right front or vent window\". \"Shortly after 1:15 p.m.\", Tippit exited his car. Oswald immediately fired his pistol and killed the policeman with four shots. Numerous witnesses heard the shots and saw Oswald flee the scene holding a revolver; nine positively identified him as the man who shot Tippit and fled. Four cartridge cases found at the scene were identified by expert witnesses before the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee as having been fired from the revolver later found in Oswald's possession, excluding all other weapons. The bullets taken from Tippit's body could not be positively identified as having been fired from Oswald's revolver, as the bullets were too extensively damaged to make conclusive assessments.\nArrest at the Texas Theatre.\nShoe store manager Johnny Brewer testified that he saw Oswald \"ducking into\" the entrance alcove of his store. Suspicious of this activity, Brewer watched Oswald continue up the street and slip without paying into the nearby Texas Theatre, where the film \"War Is Hell\" was playing. He alerted the theater's ticket clerk, who telephoned police, at about 1:40\u00a0p.m. As police arrived, the house lights were brought up and Brewer pointed out Oswald sitting near the rear of the theater. Police Officer Nick McDonald testified that he was the first to reach Oswald and that Oswald seemed ready to surrender saying, \"Well, it is all over now.\" McDonald said that Oswald pulled out a pistol tucked into the front of his pants, then pointed the pistol at him, and pulled the trigger. McDonald stated that the pistol did not fire because the pistol's hammer came down on the webbing between the thumb and index finger of his hand as he grabbed for the pistol. McDonald also said that Oswald struck him, but that he struck back and Oswald was disarmed. As he was led from the theater, Oswald shouted he was a victim of police brutality.\nOswald was formally arraigned for the murder of Officer Tippit at 7:10\u00a0p.m. Soon after his arrest, Oswald encountered reporters in a hallway. Oswald declared, \"I didn't shoot anybody\" and, \"They've taken me in because of the fact that I lived in the Soviet Union. I'm just a patsy!\" Later, at an arranged press meeting, a reporter asked, \"Did you kill the President?\" and Oswald \u2013 who by that time had been advised of the charge of murdering Tippit, but had not yet been arraigned in Kennedy's death \u2013 answered, \"No, I have not been charged with that. In fact, nobody has said that to me yet. The first thing I heard about it was when the newspaper reporters in the hall asked me that question.\" As he was led from the room the question was called out, \"What did you do in Russia?\" and, \"How did you hurt your eye?\"; Oswald answered, \"A policeman hit me.\" By early the next morning (shortly after 1:30\u00a0a.m.) he had been arraigned for the assassination of President Kennedy.\nFuture World Class Championship Wrestling announcer Bill Mercer, who at the time was a local television journalist, would be the first to inform Oswald that he was charged with the murder of Kennedy.\nPolice interrogation.\nOswald was interrogated several times during his two days at Dallas Police Headquarters. He admitted that he went to his rooming house after leaving the book depository. He also admitted that he changed his clothes and armed himself with a .38 caliber revolver before leaving his house to go to the theater. Oswald denied killing Kennedy and Tippit, owning a rifle, and claimed two photographs of him holding a rifle and a pistol were fakes. He also denied telling his co-worker he wanted a ride to Irving to get curtain rods for his apartment (he said that the package contained his lunch). He also denied carrying a long, bulky package to work the morning of the assassination. Oswald denied knowing an \"A. J. Hidell\". Oswald was then shown a forged Selective Service System card bearing his photograph and the alias, \"Alek James Hidell\" that he had in his possession at the time of his arrest. Oswald refused to answer any questions concerning the card, stating \"you have the card yourself and you know as much about it as I do\".\nFBI Special Agent James P. Hosty and Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz (chief of homicide) conducted the first interrogation of Oswald on Friday, November 22. When Oswald was asked to account for himself at the time of the assassination, he replied that he was eating his lunch in the first-floor lounge (known as the \"domino room\"); he said that he then went to the second-floor lunchroom to buy a bottle of Coca-Cola from the vending machine there and was drinking it when he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman Marrion L. Baker, who had entered the building with his gun drawn. Oswald said that while he was in the domino room, he saw two \"Negro employees\" walking by, one he recognized as \"Junior\" and a shorter man whose name he could not recall. Junior Jarman and Harold Norman confirmed to the Warren Commission that they had \"walked through\" the domino room around noon during their lunch break. When asked if anyone else was in the domino room, Norman testified that somebody else was there, but he could not remember who it was. Jarman testified that Oswald was not in the domino room when he was there.\nWhen homicide detective Jim Leavelle testified before the Warren Commission, he said that the first time he had ever sat in on an interrogation with Oswald was on Sunday morning, November 24, 1963. When Counsel Joseph Ball asked Leavelle if he had ever spoken to Oswald before this interrogation, he stated, \"No, I had never talked to him before\". Leavelle then stated during his testimony that \"the only time I had connections with Oswald was this Sunday morning [November 24, 1963]. I never had [the] occasion... to talk with him at any time...\" During Oswald's last interrogation on November 24, according to postal inspector Harry Holmes, Oswald was again asked where he was at the time of the shooting. Holmes (who attended the interrogation at the invitation of Captain Will Fritz) said that Oswald replied that he was working on an upper floor when the shooting occurred, then went downstairs where he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman Marrion L. Baker.\nOswald asked for legal representation several times during the interrogation, and he also asked for assistance during encounters with reporters. When H. Louis Nichols, President of the Dallas Bar Association, met with him in his cell on Saturday, he declined their services, saying he wanted to be represented by John Abt, chief counsel to the Communist Party USA, or by lawyers associated with the American Civil Liberties Union. Both Oswald and Ruth Paine tried to reach Abt by telephone several times Saturday and Sunday, but Abt was away for the weekend. Oswald also declined his brother Robert's offer on Saturday to obtain a local attorney.\nDuring an interrogation with Captain Fritz, when asked, \"Are you a communist?\", he replied, \"No, I am not a communist. I am a Marxist.\"\nMurder.\nOn Sunday, November 24, detectives were escorting Oswald through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters toward an armored car that was to take him from the city jail (located on the fourth floor of police headquarters) to the nearby county jail. At 11:21\u00a0a.m. CST, Dallas nightclub operator Jack Ruby approached Oswald from the side of the crowd and shot him once in the abdomen at close range. As the shot rang out, a police detective recognized Ruby and exclaimed: \"Jack, you son of a bitch!\" The crowd outside the headquarters applauded when they heard that Oswald had been shot.\nAs Oswald descended in the elevator to the basement, his last recorded words were \"I want to see the American Civil Liberties Union\". When the shot rang out, Oswald screamed \"Oh!\" in pain and his hands clutched at his stomach as he moaned while slumping to the floor. While Ruby was subdued by police, Oswald was carried back into the basement level jail office. Detective Billy Combest asked Oswald, \"Do you have anything you want to tell us now?\" Oswald shook his head.\nDrifting in and out of consciousness, Oswald was placed in an ambulance and was driven to Parkland Memorial Hospital, the same hospital where Kennedy was pronounced dead two days earlier. Frederick Bieberdorf, a medical student on duty who rode in the ambulance, said that\u2014several blocks before reaching the hospital\u2014Oswald started thrashing about, resisting Beiberdorf's efforts of heart massage and attempting to free an oxygen mask over his mouth. Oswald died at 1:07\u00a0p.m; Dallas police chief Jesse Curry announced his death on a TV news broadcast.\nAt 2:45\u00a0p.m. the same day, an autopsy was performed on Oswald in the Office of the County Medical Examiner. Dallas County medical examiner Earl Rose announced the results of the gross autopsy: \"The two things that we could determine were, first, that he died from a hemorrhage from a gunshot wound, and that otherwise he was a physically healthy male.\" Rose's examination found that the bullet entered Oswald's left side in the front part of the abdomen and caused damage to his spleen, stomach, aorta, vena cava, kidney, liver, diaphragm, and eleventh rib before coming to rest on his right side.\nA network television pool camera was broadcasting live to cover the transfer; millions of people watching on NBC saw the shooting as it happened, and on other networks within minutes afterward. In 1964, Robert H. Jackson of the \"Dallas Times Herald\" was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Photography for his photograph taken immediately after the shot was fired, as Oswald began to double over in pain.\nJack Ruby's motive.\nRuby later said he had been distraught over Kennedy's death and that his motive for killing Oswald was \"saving Mrs. Kennedy the discomfiture of coming back to trial\". Others have hypothesized that Ruby was part of a conspiracy. G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel for the House Select Committee on Assassinations from 1977 to 1979, said: \"The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was that Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime, trying to reach him on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever.\"\nBurial.\nMiller Funeral Home had great difficulty finding a cemetery willing to accept Oswald's remains; Rose Hill Cemetery in Fort Worth eventually agreed. A Lutheran minister reluctantly agreed to officiate but then failed to appear. Reverend Louis Saunders of the Fort Worth Council of Churches volunteered, saying that \"someone had to help this family\". He performed a brief graveside service under heavy guard on November 25. Reporters covering the burial were asked to act as pallbearers.\nOswald's original marker, with his full name, birth date, and death date, was stolen four years after the assassination. His mother replaced it with a marker simply inscribed \"Oswald\". The stolen marker was later found. His mother's body was buried beside his in 1981. A claim by Michael Eddowes in \"The Oswald File\" (1975) that a look-alike Russian agent was buried in place of Oswald led to the body's exhumation on October4, 1981. Dental records confirmed it was Oswald. The remains were reburied in a new coffin because of extensive water damage to the original.\nIn 2010, Miller Funeral Home employed a Los Angeles auction house to sell the original mole-skin covered pine coffin to an anonymous bidder for $87,468. The sale was halted after Oswald's brother, Robert (1934\u20132017), sued to reclaim the coffin. In 2015, a district judge in Tarrant County, Texas, ruled that the funeral home intentionally concealed the existence of the coffin from Robert Oswald, who had originally purchased it and believed that it had been discarded after the exhumation, and ordered it returned to Robert Oswald along with damages equal to the sale price. Robert Oswald's attorney stated that the coffin would likely be destroyed \"as soon as possible\".\nOfficial investigations.\nWarren Commission.\nPresident Lyndon B. Johnson issued an executive order that created the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy, and the Warren Report could not ascribe any one motive or group of motives to Oswald's actions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is apparent, however, that Oswald was moved by an overriding hostility to his environment. He does not appear to have been able to establish meaningful relationships with other people. He was perpetually discontented with the world around him. Long before the assassination he expressed his hatred for American society and acted in protest against it. Oswald's search for what he conceived to be the perfect society was doomed from the start. He sought for himself a place in history \u2013 a role as the \"great man\" who would be recognized as having been in advance of his times. His commitment to Marxism and communism appears to have been another important factor in his motivation. He also had demonstrated a capacity to act decisively and without regard to the consequences when such action would further his aims of the moment. Out of these and the many other factors which may have molded the character of Lee Harvey Oswald there emerged a man capable of assassinating President Kennedy.\nThe proceedings of the commission were closed, though not secret. Approximately three percent of its files have yet to be released to the public, which has continued to provoke speculation among researchers.\nRamsey Clark Panel.\nIn 1968, the Ramsey Clark Panel examined various photographs, X-ray films, documents, and other evidence. It concluded that Kennedy was struck by two bullets fired from above and behind him: one of which traversed the base of the neck on the right side without striking bone, and the other of which entered the skull from behind and destroyed its right side.\nHouse Select Committee.\nIn 1979, after a review of the evidence and of prior investigations, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) largely concurred with the Warren Commission and was preparing to issue a finding that Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy. Late in the Committee's proceedings, a dictabelt recording was introduced, purportedly recording sounds heard in Dealey Plaza before, during, and after the shots. After an analysis by the firm Bolt, Beranek and Newman appeared to indicate more than three gunshots, the HSCA revised its findings to assert a \"high probability that two gunmen fired\" at Kennedy and that Kennedy \"was probably assassinated as the result of a conspiracy\". Although the Committee was \"unable to identify the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy\", it made a number of further findings regarding the likelihood that particular groups, named in the findings, were involved. Four of the twelve members of the HSCA dissented from this conclusion.\nThe acoustic evidence has since been discredited. Officer H. B. McLain, from whose motorcycle radio the HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came, has repeatedly stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination. McLain asked the Committee, \"'If it was my radio on my motorcycle, why did it not record the revving up at high speed plus my siren when we immediately took off for Parkland Hospital?'\" \nIn 1982, a panel of twelve scientists appointed by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS), including Nobel laureates Norman Ramsey and Luis Alvarez, unanimously concluded that the acoustic evidence submitted to the HSCA was \"seriously flawed\", was recorded after the shots, and did not indicate additional gunshots. Their conclusions were published in the journal \"Science\". In a 2001 article in the journal \"Science &amp; Justice\", D. B. Thomas wrote that the NAS investigation was itself flawed. He concluded with a 96.3 percent certainty that at least two gunmen fired at President Kennedy and that at least one shot came from the grassy knoll. In 2005, Thomas's conclusions were rebutted in the same journal. Ralph Linsker and several members of the original NAS team reanalyzed the timings of the recordings and reaffirmed the earlier conclusion of the NAS report that the alleged shot sounds were recorded approximately one minute after the assassination. In 2010, D. B. Thomas challenged the 2005 \"Science &amp; Justice\" article and restated his conclusion that there were at least two gunmen.\nBackyard photos.\nPhotos of Oswald holding the rifle that was later determined to be the murder weapon are an important piece of evidence linking Oswald to the crime. The photos were uncovered with other possessions belonging to Oswald in the garage of Ruth Paine in Irving, Texas, on November 23, 1963. Marina Oswald told the Warren Commission that around March 31, 1963, she had taken pictures of Oswald as he posed with a Carcano rifle, a holstered pistol, and two Marxist newspapers \u2013 \"The Militant\" and \"The Worker\".\nOswald had sent one of the photos to \"The Militant\"'s New York office with an accompanying letter stating he was \"prepared for anything\": according to Sylvia Weinstein, who handled the newspaper's subscriptions at the time, Oswald was seen as \"kookie\" and politically \"dumb and totally naive\", as he apparently did not know that \"The Militant\", published by the Trotskyist Socialist Workers Party, and \"The Worker\", published by the pro-Soviet Communist Party USA, were rival publications and ideologically opposed to each other. The pictures were shown to Oswald after his arrest, but he insisted that they were forgeries.\nIn 1964, Marina testified before the Warren Commission that she had photographed Oswald, at his request and using his camera. These photos were labelled CE 133-A and CE 133-B. CE 133-A shows the rifle in Oswald's left hand and newspapers in front of his chest in the other, while the rifle is held with the right hand in CE 133-B. The Carcano in the images had markings matching those on the rifle found in the Book Depository after the assassination. Oswald's mother testified that on the day after the assassination she and Marina destroyed another photograph with Oswald holding the rifle with both hands over his head, with \"To my daughter June\" written on it.\nWhen shown one of the photos during his interrogation by Dallas police, Oswald stated that it was a fake. According to Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz:\nHe said that the picture was not his, that the face was his face, but that this picture had been made by someone superimposing his face, the other part of the picture was not him at all and that he had never seen the picture before. ... He told me that he understood photography real well, and that in time, he would be able to show that it was not his picture, and that it had been made by someone else.\nThe HSCA obtained another first-generation print (from CE 133-A) on April 1, 1977, from the widow of George de Mohrenschildt. The words \"Hunter of fascists \u2013 ha ha ha!\" written in block Russian were on the back. Also in English were added in script: \"To my friend George, Lee Oswald, 5/IV/63 [April 5, 1963].\" Handwriting experts for the HSCA concluded the English inscription and signature were by Oswald. After two original photos, one negative and one first-generation copy had been found, the Senate Intelligence Committee located (in 1976) a third backyard photo (CE 133-C) showing Oswald with newspapers held away from his body in his right hand.\nThese photos, widely recognized as some of the most significant evidence against Oswald, have been subjected to rigorous analysis. Photographic experts consulted by the HSCA concluded they were genuine, answering twenty-one points raised by critics. Marina Oswald has always maintained she took the photos herself, and the 1963 de Mohrenschildt print bearing Oswald's signature clearly indicate they existed before the assassination. Nonetheless, some continue to contest their authenticity. In 2009, after digitally analyzing the photograph of Oswald holding the rifle and paper, computer scientist Hany Farid concluded that the photo \"almost certainly was not altered\".\nOther investigations and dissenting theories.\nAuthor Mark Lane's 1966 work \"Rush to Judgment\" popularized the general dissenting theory that the Warren Commission's approach was flawed (\"covered itself with shame\"); that Oswald likely wasn't responsible, and that the witnesses who reported hearing shots fired from a nearby \"grassy knoll\" credibly cast doubt on Oswald acting alone. Lane was briefly retained as counsel for Oswald's mother.\nA Gallup poll taken in mid-November 2013, showed 61% believed that Kennedy was killed as a result of conspiracy, and only 30% thought Oswald acted alone. Oswald was never prosecuted because he was murdered two days after the assassination. In March 1967, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison arrested and charged New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw with conspiring to assassinate President Kennedy, with the help of Oswald, David Ferrie, and others. Garrison believed that the men were part of an arms smuggling ring supplying weapons to the anti-Castro Cubans in a conspiracy with elements of the CIA to kill Kennedy. The trial of Clay Shaw began in January 1969 in Orleans Parish Criminal Court. The jury acquitted Shaw.\nSeveral films have fictionalized a trial of Oswald, depicting what might have happened had Ruby not killed Oswald, including \"The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1964), \"The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1977), and \"On Trial: Lee Harvey Oswald\" (1986). The 1986 docu-trial was a 21-hour unscripted mock trial on television, argued by lawyers before a judge, with unscripted testimony from surviving witnesses to the events surrounding the assassination; it was aired again in 1988 including additional courtroom footage not included in the original 1986 Showtime/MPI version. The jury returned a verdict of guilty and inspired Vincent Bugliosi, who in 2005 described the 1986 mock trial as \"the closest thing to a trial that Lee Harvey Oswald ever had or will have to write\", to write his \"Oswald acted alone\" \"magnum opus\" \"Reclaiming History\" (2007). In 1992, the American Bar Association conducted two mock Oswald trials: the first trial ended in a hung jury, while the second trial saw the jury acquitting Oswald.\nJournalist Jefferson Morley has written extensively in his blog, \"JFK Facts\", on the nature of Oswald's relationship with James Angleton. In a March 2025 interview with the Washington Post, Morley shared the following: \u201cI\u2019m not saying that [Angleton] was the mastermind of the assassination. But he was the mastermind behind Oswald,\u201d Morley said Thursday night during his open Zoom call. \u201cThe failure of Angleton to intercept or do anything about Oswald at the same time that he\u2019s running operations around him \u2014 that combination, yes \u2014 that tells me Angleton played a complicit role in Kennedy\u2019s assassination.\u201d \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17653", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17653", "title": "Lincoln, Nebraska", "text": "Capital of Nebraska, United States\nLincoln is the capital city of the U.S. state of Nebraska. The city covers , and had a population of 291,082 as of the 2020 census (estimated at 300,619 in 2024). It is the second-most populous city in Nebraska and the 72nd-most populous in the United States. The county seat of Lancaster County, Lincoln is the economic and cultural anchor of the Lincoln, Nebraska metropolitan area, home to approximately 345,000 people.\nLincoln was founded in 1856 as the village of Lancaster on the wild salt marshes and arroyos of what became Lancaster County. Renamed after President Abraham Lincoln, it became Nebraska's state capital in 1869. The Bertram G. Goodhue\u2013designed state capitol building was completed in 1932, and is the nation's second-tallest capitol. As the city is the seat of government for the state of Nebraska, the state and the U.S. government are major employers. The University of Nebraska was founded in Lincoln in 1869. The university is Nebraska's largest, with 26,079 students enrolled, and the city's third-largest employer. Other primary employers fall into the service and manufacturing industries, including a growing high-tech sector. The region makes up a part of what is known as the Midwest Silicon Prairie.\nDesignated as a \"refugee-friendly\" city by the U.S. Department of State in the 1970s, the city was the 12th-largest resettlement site per capita in the country by 2000. Refugee Vietnamese, Karen (Burmese ethnic minority), Sudanese and Yazidi (Iraqi ethnic minority) people, as well as refugees from Iraq, the Middle East and Afghanistan, have resettled in the city. During the 2018\u201319 school year, Lincoln Public Schools provided support for about 3,000 students from 150 countries, who spoke 125 different languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nNatives.\nBefore the expansion westward of settlers, the prairie was covered with buffalo grass. Plains Indians, descendants of indigenous peoples who occupied the area for thousands of years, lived in and hunted along Salt Creek. The Pawnee, which included four tribes, lived in villages along the Platte River. The Great Sioux Nation, including the \"Ihanktonwan-Ihanktonwan\" and the Lakota, to the north and west, used Nebraska as a hunting and skirmish ground, but did not have any long-term settlements in the state. An occasional buffalo could still be seen in the plat of Lincoln in the 1860s.\nFounding.\nLincoln was founded in 1856 as the village of Lancaster and became the county seat of the newly created Lancaster County in 1859. The village was sited on the east bank of Salt Creek. The first settlers were attracted to the area due to the abundance of salt. Once J. Sterling Morton developed his salt mines in Kansas, salt in the village was no longer a viable commodity. Captain W. T. Donovan, a former steamer captain, and his family settled on Salt Creek in 1856. In 1859, the village settlers met to form a county. A caucus was formed and the committee, which included Donovan, selected Lancaster as the county seat. The county was named Lancaster. After the passage of the 1862 Homestead Act, homesteaders began to inhabit the area. The first plat was dated August 6, 1864.\nBy the end of 1868, Lancaster had a population of approximately 500. The township of Lancaster was renamed Lincoln, with the incorporation of the city of Lincoln on April 1, 1869. In 1869, the University of Nebraska was established in Lincoln by the state with a land grant of about 130,000 acres. Construction of University Hall, the first building, began the same year.\nState capital.\nNebraska was granted statehood on March 1, 1867. The capital of the Nebraska Territory had been Omaha since the creation of the territory in 1854. Most of its population lived south of the Platte River. After much of the territory south of the Platte was considered annexation to Kansas, the territorial legislature voted to place the capital south of the river and as far west as possible. Before the vote to remove the capital from Omaha, Omaha Senator J. N. H. Patrick made a last-ditch effort to derail the move by having the future capital named after recently assassinated President Abraham Lincoln. Many of the people south of the Platte had been sympathetic to the Confederate cause in the recently concluded Civil War. It was assumed that senators south of the river would not vote to pass the measure if the future capital was named after Lincoln. In the end, the motion to name the future capital Lincoln was ineffective in blocking the measure and the vote to move the capital south of the Platte was successful, with the passage of the Removal Act in 1867.\nThe Removal Act called for the formation of a Capital Commission to site the capital on state-owned land. On July 18, 1867, the Commission, composed of Governor David Butler, Secretary of State Thomas Kennard, and State Auditor John Gillespie, began to tour sites for the new capital. The village of Lancaster was chosen, in part due to its salt flats and marshes. Lancaster had approximately 30 residents. Disregarding the original plat of the village of Lancaster, Kennard platted Lincoln on a broader scale. The plat of the village of Lancaster was not dissolved nor abandoned; it became Lincoln when the Lincoln plat files were finished on September 6, 1867. To raise money for the construction of a capital, an auction of lots was held.\nNewcomers began to arrive and Lincoln's population grew. The Nebraska State Capitol was completed on December 1, 1868, a two-story building constructed with native limestone with a central cupola. The Kennard house, built in 1869, is the oldest remaining building in the original plat of Lincoln.\nIn 1888, a new capitol building was constructed on the site of the first to replace the structurally unsound former capitol. The second building was a classical design by architect William H. Willcox. It, too, had significant structural issues that, by the 1920s, made clear the need for the construction of a replacement. Construction began on a third capitol building in 1922. Bertram G. Goodhue was selected in a national competition as its architect. By 1924, the first phase of construction was completed and state offices moved into the new building. In 1925, the Willcox-designed capitol building was razed. The Goodhue-designed capitol was constructed in four phases, with the completion of the fourth phase in 1932. It is the second-tallest capitol building in the United States.\nGrowth and expansion.\nThe worldwide economic depression of 1890 saw Lincoln's population fall from 55,000 to 40,169 by 1900 (per the 1900 census). Volga-German immigrants from Russia settled in the North Bottoms neighborhood and as Lincoln expanded with the growth in population, the city began to annex nearby towns. Normal was the first town annexed in 1919. Bethany Heights, incorporated in 1890, was annexed in 1922. In 1926, the town of University Place was annexed. College View, incorporated in 1892, was annexed in 1929. Union College, a Seventh Day Adventist institution, was founded in College View in 1891. In 1930, Lincoln annexed the town of Havelock. Havelock actively opposed annexation to Lincoln and only relented due to a strike by the Burlington railroad shop workers which halted progress and growth for the city.\nThe Burlington and Missouri River Railroad's first train arrived in Lincoln on June 26, 1870, and the Midland Pacific (1871) and the Atchison and Nebraska (1872) soon followed. The Union Pacific began service in 1877. The Chicago and North Western and Missouri Pacific began service in 1886. The Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific extended service to Lincoln in 1892. Lincoln became a rail hub.\nAs automobile travel became more common, so did the need for better roads in Nebraska and throughout the U.S. In 1911, the Omaha-Denver Trans-Continental Route Association, with support from the Good Roads Movement, established the Omaha-Lincoln-Denver Highway (O-L-D) through Lincoln. The goal was to have the most efficient highway for travel throughout Nebraska, from Omaha to Denver.\nIn 1920, the Omaha-Denver Association merged with the Detroit-Lincoln-Denver Highway Association. As a result, the O-L-D was renamed the Detroit-Lincoln-Denver Highway (D-L-D) with the goal of having a continuous highway from Detroit to Denver. The goal was eventually realized by the mid-1920s; of constantly improved highway through six states. The auto route's success in attracting tourists led entrepreneurs to build businesses and facilities in towns along the route to keep up with the demand. In 1924, the D-L-D was designated as Nebraska State Highway 6. In 1926, the highway became part of the Federal Highway System and was renumbered U.S. Route 38. In 1931, U.S. 38 was renumbered as a U.S. 6/U.S. 38 overlap and in 1933, the U.S. 38 route designation was dropped.\nIn the early years of air travel, Lincoln had three airports and one airfield. Union Airport, was established northeast of Lincoln in 1920. The Lincoln Flying School was founded by E.J. Sias in a building he built at 2145 O Street. Charles Lindbergh was a student at the flying school in 1922. The flying school closed in 1947. Some remnants of the Union Airport are still visible between N. 56th and N. 70th Streets, north of Fletcher Avenue; mangled within a slowly developing industrial zone. Arrow Airport was established around 1925 as a manufacturing and test facility for Arrow Aircraft and Motors Corporation, primarily the Arrow Sport. The airfield was near Havelock; or to the west of where the North 48th Street Small Vehicle Transfer Station is today. Arrow Aircraft and Motors declared bankruptcy in 1939 and Arrow Airport closed roughly several decades later. An Arrow Sport is on permanent display, hanging in the Lincoln Airport's main passenger terminal.\nAs train, automobile, and air travel increased, business flourished and the city prospered. Lincoln's population increased 38.2% from 1920 to a population of 75,933 in 1930. In 1930, the city's small municipal airfield was dedicated to Charles Lindbergh and named Lindbergh Field for a short period as another airfield was named Lindbergh in California. It was north of Salt Lake, in an area known over the years as Huskerville, Arnold Heights and Air Park; and was approximately within the western half of the West Lincoln Township. The air field was a stop for United Airlines in 1927 and a mail stop in 1928.\nIn 1942, the Lincoln Army Airfield was established at the site. During World War II, the U.S. Army used the facility to train over 25,000 aviation mechanics and process over 40,000 troopers for combat. The Army closed the base in 1945, but the Air Force reactivated it in 1952 during the Korean War. In 1966, after the Air Force closed the base, Lincoln annexed the airfield and the base's housing units. The base became the Lincoln Municipal Airport, and later the Lincoln Airport, under the Lincoln Airport Authority's ownership. The two main airlines that served the airport were United Airlines and Frontier Airlines. The Authority shared facilities with the Nebraska National Guard, who continued to own parts of the old Air Force base.\nIn 1966, Lincoln annexed the township of West Lincoln, incorporated in 1887. West Lincoln voters rejected Lincoln's annexation until the state legislature passed a bill in 1965 that allowed cities to annex surrounding areas without a vote.\nRevitalization and growth.\nThe downtown core retail district from 1959 to 1984 saw profound changes as retail shopping moved from downtown to the suburban Gateway Shopping Mall. In 1956, Bankers Life Insurance Company of Nebraska announced plans to build a $6 million shopping center next to their new campus on Lincoln's eastern outskirts. Gateway Shopping Center, now called Gateway Mall, opened at 60th and O streets in 1960. By 1984, 75% of Lincoln's revenue from retail sales tax came from within a one-mile radius of the Mall. The exodus of retail and service businesses led the downtown core to decline and deteriorate.\nIn 1969, the Nebraska legislature legislated laws for urban renewal. Soon afterward, Lincoln began a program of revitalization and beautification. Most of the urban renewal projects focused on downtown and the near South areas. Many ideas were considered and not implemented. Successes included Sheldon Memorial Art Gallery, designed by Philip Johnson; new branch libraries, new street lighting, the First National Bank Building and the National Bank of Commerce Building designed by I.M. Pei.\nIn 1971, an expansion of Gateway Mall was completed. 1974 marked a new assembly facility in Lincoln, a subsidiary of Kawasaki Heavy Industries in Japan to produce motorcycles for the North American market. Lincoln's first woman mayor, Helen Boosalis, was elected in 1975. Mayor Boosalis was a strong supporter of the revitalization of Lincoln with the downtown beautification project being completed in 1978. In 1979, the square-block downtown Centrum was opened and connected to buildings with a skywalk. The Centrum was a two-level shopping mall with a garage for 1,038 cars. With the beautification and urban renewal projects, many historic buildings were razed in the city. In 2007 and 2009, the city of Lincoln received beautification grants for improvements on O and West O Streets, west of the Harris Overpass, commemorating the history of the D-L-D.\nAfter the fall of Saigon in 1975, Vietnamese refugees created a large residential and business community along the 27th Street corridor alongside Mexican eateries and African markets. Lincoln was designated as a \"Refugee Friendly\" city by the U.S. Department of State in the 1970s. In 2000, Lincoln was the twelfth-largest resettlement site per capita in the country. As of 2011, Lincoln had the second largest Karen (Burmese ethnic minority) population in the United States (behind Omaha), with an estimated 1,500 in 2019. As of the same year, Nebraska was one of the largest resettlement sites for the people of Sudan, mostly in Lincoln and Omaha. In 2014, some social service organizations estimated that up to 10,000 Iraqi refugees had resettled in Lincoln. In recent years, Lincoln had the largest Yazidi (Iraqi ethnic minority) population in the U.S., with over 2,000\u20133,000 having settled within the city (as of late 2017). In a three-year period, the immigrant and refugee student population at Lincoln Public Schools increased 52% - from 1,606 students in 2014, to 2,445 in 2017.\nThe decade from 1990 to 2000 saw a significant rise in population from 191,972 to 225,581. North 27th Street and Cornhusker Highway were redeveloped with new housing and businesses built. The boom housing market in south Lincoln created new housing developments including high end housing in areas like Cripple Creek, Williamsburg and The Ridge. The shopping center Southpointe Pavilions was completed in competition of Gateway Mall.\nInto the 21st century.\nIn 2001, Westfield America Trust purchased the Gateway Mall and named it Westfield Shoppingtown Gateway. In 2005, the company renamed it the Westfield Gateway. Westfield made a $45 million makeover of the mall in 2005 including an expanded food court, a new west-side entrance and installation of an Italian carousel. In 2012, Westfield America Trust sold Westfield Gateway to Starwood Capital Group. Starwood reverted the mall's name from Westfield Gateway to Gateway Mall and has made incremental expansions and renovations. In 2021, Gateway Mall was sold to a subsidiary of Strategic Value Partners.\nIn 2015, ALLO Communications announced it would bring ultra-high speed fiber internet to the city. Speeds up to 1 Gigabit per second were available for business and households by building off of the city's existing fiber network. Construction on the citywide network began in March 2016 and was estimated to be complete by 2019, making it one of the largest infrastructure projects in the United States. Telephone and cable TV service were also included, making it the third company to compete for such services within the same Lincoln footprint. In April 2016, Windstream Communications announced that 2,300 customers in Lincoln had 1 Gigabit per second fiber internet with an expected expansion of services to 25,000 customers by 2017. On November 29, 2017, Lincoln was named a Smart Gigabit Community by U.S. Ignite Inc. and in early 2018, Spectrum joined the ranks of internet service providers providing 1 gigabit internet within the city.\nIn 2021, Lincoln's second-tallest skyscraper was completed downtown. Second in height to the State Capitol by law, the Lied Place Residences was 250 feet, or 20 floors. The Lied Place Residences surpassed the U.S. Bank Tower (formerly the First National Bank Building), completed in 1970, by 30 feet. A least one taller building had been proposed since 2021, but any construction had been delayed due to inflation.\nIn 2022, the City of Lincoln adopted a new flag, called \"All Roads Lead to Lincoln\". In late 2022, Nebraska Highway 2 was diverted onto a newly constructed 11-mile long freeway, dubbed the South Beltway, on the Lincoln's south edge. The realignment marked the first time the eastern segment of Nebraska 2 was largely outside of the city in its history. A planned upgrade of U.S. Highway 77 (a.k.a. the Homestead Expressway) to freeway standards was planned to begin in 2025.\nGeography.\nLincoln has an area of , of which is land and is water, according to the United States Census Bureau in 2020.\nLincoln is one of the few large cities of Nebraska not along either the Platte River or the Missouri River. The city was originally laid out near Salt Creek and among the nearly flat saline wetlands of northern Lancaster County. The city's growth has led to development of the surrounding land, much of which is composed of gently rolling hills. In recent years, Lincoln's northward growth has encroached on the habitat of the endangered Salt Creek tiger beetle.\nMetropolitan area.\nThe Lincoln Metropolitan Statistical Area consists of Lancaster County and Seward County. Seward County was added to the metropolitan area in 2003. Lincoln is also in the Lincoln-Beatrice Combined Statistical Area which consists of the Lincoln metropolitan area and the micropolitan area of Beatrice. The city of Beatrice is the county seat of Gage County. The Lincoln-Beatrice combined statistical area is home to 363,733 people (2021 estimate) making it the 104th-largest combined statistical area in the United States.\nNeighborhoods.\nLincoln's neighborhoods include both old and new development. Some neighborhoods in Lincoln were formerly small towns that Lincoln later annexed, including University Place in 1926, Belmont, Bethany (Bethany Heights) in 1922, College View in 1929, Havelock in 1930, and West Lincoln in 1966. A number of Historic Districts are near downtown Lincoln, while newer neighborhoods have appeared primarily in the south and east. As of December 2013, Lincoln had 45 registered neighborhood associations within the city limits.\nOne core neighborhood that has seen rapid residential growth in recent years is the downtown Lincoln area. In 2010, there were 1,200 downtown Lincoln residents; in 2016, there were 3,000 (an increase of 140%). Around the middle of the same decade, demand for housing and rent units began outpacing supply. With Lincoln's population expected to grow to more than 311,000 people by 2020, prices for homes and rent costs have risen. Home prices rose 10% from the first quarter of 2015 to the first quarter of 2016; rent prices rose 30% from 2007 to 2017 with a 5\u20138% increase in 2016 alone.\nClimate.\nLocated in the Great Plains far from the moderating influence of mountains or large bodies of water, Lincoln has a highly variable four season humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfa\", Trewartha \"Dcao\"): winters are cold and summers are hot. With little precipitation during winter, precipitation is concentrated in the warmer months, when thunderstorms frequently roll in, often producing tornadoes. Snow averages per season but seasonal accumulation has ranged from in 1967\u20131968 to in 2018\u20132019. Snow tends to fall in light amounts, though blizzards are possible. There is an average of 38 days with a snow depth of or more. The average window for freezing temperatures is October 7 thru April 25, allowing a growing season of 164 days.\nThe monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in July. However, the city is subject both to episodes of bitter cold in winter and heat waves during summer, with 10.1 nights of or lower lows, 41.8 days of + highs, and 3.5 days of + highs. The city straddles the boundary of USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 5b and 6a. Temperature extremes have ranged from on January 12, 1974, up to on July 25, 1936. Readings as high as or as low as occur somewhat rarely; the last occurrence of each was August 24, 2023 and February 16, 2021. The second lowest temperature ever recorded in Lincoln was on February 16, 2021, which broke the monthly record of last set a day earlier. It occurred during the wider February 13\u201317, 2021 North American winter storm, which impacted the Midwestern and Northeastern United States as a whole.\nBased on 30-year averages obtained from NOAA's National Climatic Data Center for December, January and February, the Weather Channel ranked Lincoln the seventh-coldest major U.S. city in a 2014 article. In 2014, the Lincoln-Beatrice area was among the \"Cleanest U.S. Cities for Ozone Air Pollution\" in the American Lung Association's \"State of the Air 2014\" report.\nOn May 5, 2019, an EF2 tornado hit parts of western Lincoln, although no major injuries occurred. However, on April 26, 2024, a stronger EF3 tornado destroyed the Garner Industries building in northeast Lincoln, causing three injuries.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLincoln is Nebraska's second-most-populous city. In the 1970s, The U.S. government designated Lincoln a refugee-friendly city due to its stable economy, educational institutions, and size. Initially, refugees from Vietnam settled in Lincoln. Later, more refugees came from other countries, including Mexico, Guatemala and India, as well as the Middle East, Eastern Europe, Africa, Iraq, Afghanistan and Myanmar. In 2013, Lincoln was named one of the \"Top Ten Most Welcoming Cities in America\" and in 2025, 4-star Certified Welcoming by Welcoming America.\n2020 census.\nThe 2020 United States census counted 291,082 people, 115,930 households, and 67,277 families in Lincoln. The population density was 2,937.6 per square mile (1,134.2/km2). There were 122,048 housing units at an average density of 1,231.7 per square mile (475.6/km2). The racial makeup was 78.66% (228,956) White, 4.67% (13,605) Black or African-American, 0.89% (2,589) Native American, 4.77% (13,871) Asian, 0.07% (196) Pacific Islander, 3.5% (10,175) from other races, and 7.45% (21,690) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race was 7.0% (22,321) of the population.\nOf the 115,930 households, 26.9% had children under the age of 18; 43.8% were married couples living together; 27.1% had a female householder with no husband present. 31.0% of households consisted of individuals and 9.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.4 and the average family size was 3.0.\n21.9% of the population was under the age of 18, 15.7% from 18 to 24, 26.8% from 25 to 44, 20.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32.9 years. For every 100 females, the population had 100.8 males. For every 100 females ages 18 and older, there were 99.4 males.\nThe 2016-2020 5-year American Community Survey estimates show that the median household income was $60,063 (with a margin of error of +/- $1,248) and the median family income $79,395 (+/- $1,992). Males had a median income of $37,646 (+/- $1,251) versus $27,411 (+/- $805) for females. The median income for those above 16 years old was $31,869 (+/- $455). Approximately, 7.5% of families and 12.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.4% of those under the age of 18 and 6.2% of those ages 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nLincoln's economy is fairly typical of a mid-sized American city; most economic activity is derived from the service and manufacturing industries. Government and the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln are both large contributors to the local economy. Other prominent industries in Lincoln include finance, insurance, publishing, manufacturing, pharmaceutical, telecommunications, railroads, high technology, information technology, medical, education and truck transport.\nFor October 2021, the Lincoln Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) preliminary unemployment rate was 1.3% (not seasonally adjusted). With a tight labor market, Lincoln has seen rapid wage growth. From the summer of 2014 to the summer of 2015, the average hourly pay for both public and private employees have increased by 11%. From October 2014 to October 2015, wages were also up by 8.4%.\nOne of the largest employers is Bryan Health, which consists of two major hospitals and several large outpatient facilities across the city. Healthcare and medical jobs account for a large portion of Lincoln's employment: as of 2009, full-time healthcare employees in the city included 9,010 healthcare practitioners in technical occupations, 4,610 workers in healthcare support positions, 780 licensed and vocational nurses, and 150 medical and clinical laboratory technicians.\nSeveral national business were originally established in Lincoln; these include student lender Nelnet, Ameritas, Assurity, Fort Western Stores, CliffsNotes and HobbyTown USA. Several regional restaurant chains began in Lincoln, including Amigos/Kings Classic, Runza Restaurants, and Valentino's.\nThe Lincoln area makes up a part of what is known as the greater Midwest Silicon Prairie. The city is also a part of a rapidly growing craft brewing industry.\nPrincipal employers.\nAccording to the city's 2024 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the principal employers of the city are:\nAutomotive and technology.\n1974 saw the establishment of a Kawasaki motorcycles assembly facility named the American Kawasaki Motors Corporation (KMC), to complete Japan-produced components into finished products for the North American market. Incorporated in 1981, Kawasaki Motors Manufacturing Corp. (KMM) and assumed control of KMC. As of 2022, their webpresence named tallies \"All-Terrain Vehicles, Utility Vehicles, Personal Watercraft, Recreation Utility Vehicles, and Passenger Rail Cars\" as their range.\nKawasaki is one of Lincoln's largest private employers with over 2,400 employees, and it has the largest square footage of manufacturing space. Newer product lines are rail cars and aircraft cargo doors.\nMilitary.\nThe Nebraska Air and Army National Guard's Joint Force Headquarters are in Lincoln along with other major units of the Nebraska National Guard. During the early years of the Cold War, the Lincoln Airport was the Lincoln Air Force Base; the Nebraska Air National Guard and the Nebraska Army National Guard now have joint-use facilities with the Lincoln Airport. Alongside the National Guard, the 55th Wing of Offutt Air Force Base was temporarily headquartered in Lincoln through September 2022.\nArts and culture.\nSince Pinnacle Bank Arena opened in 2013, Lincoln's music scene has grown to the point where it is sometimes called a \"Music City\". Primary venues for live music include Pinnacle Bank Arena, Bourbon Theatre, Duffy's Tavern, and the Zoo Bar. The Pla-Mor Ballroom is a classic Lincoln music and dance scene with its in-house Sandy Creek Band. Pinewood Bowl hosts a range of performances, from national music performances to local plays, during the summer.\nThe Lied Center is a venue for national tours of Broadway productions, concert music, and guest lectures, and regularly features its resident orchestra, the Lincoln Symphony Orchestra. Lincoln has several performing arts venues. Plays are staged by UNL students in the Temple Building; community theater productions are held at the Lincoln Community Playhouse, the Loft at The Mill, and the Haymarket Theater.\nLincoln has a growing number of arts galleries, including the Sheldon Museum of Art, Burkholder Project and Noyes Art Gallery.\nFor movie viewing, Marcus Theatres owns 32 screens at four locations, and the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln's Mary Riepma Ross Media Arts Center shows independent and foreign films. Standalone cinemas in Lincoln include the Joyo Theatre and Rococo Theater. The Rococo Theater also hosts benefits and other engagements. The downtown section of O Street is Lincoln's largest bar and nightclub district. There is also the Bourbon Theatre, which is primarily used for bands in the metal rock and other related genres.\nLincoln is the hometown of Zager and Evans, known for their international hit record \"In the Year 2525\" (1969). It is also the hometown of several notable musical groups, such as Remedy Drive, VOTA, For Against, Lullaby for the Working Class, Matthew Sweet, Dirtfedd, The Show is the Rainbow and Straight. Lincoln is home to Maroon\u00a05 guitarist James Valentine.\nAnnual cultural events.\nAnnual events in Lincoln have come and gone throughout time, such as Band Day at the University of Nebraska's Lincoln campus and the Star City Holiday Parade. However, some events have never changed while new traditions have been created. Current annual cultural events in Lincoln include the Lincoln National Guard Marathon and Half-Marathon in May, Celebrate Lincoln in early June, the Uncle Sam Jam around July 3, and Boo at the Zoo in October. A locally popular event is the Haymarket Farmers' Market, running from May to October in the Historic Haymarket, one of several farmers markets throughout the city.\nTourism.\nTourist attractions and activities include the Sunken Gardens, basketball games at Pinnacle Bank Arena, the Lincoln Children's Zoo, the Dairy Store at UNL's East Campus, and Mueller Planetarium on the city campus. The Nebraska State Capitol, which is also the tallest building in Lincoln, offers tours.\nThe Speedway Motors Museum of American Speed preserves, interprets, and displays physical items significant in racing and automotive history. The National Museum of Roller Skating extends public knowledge of roller skating history and seeks to preserve its legacy for future generations.\nThe Lester F. Larsen Tractor Museum, operated by the University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln, is a small museum featuring vintage American tractors and documenting the history of Nebraska's tractor test law. The museum is housed in the original Nebraska Tractor Test Lab building, located at the University's east campus.\nLibrary.\nThe city's public library system is Lincoln City Libraries, which has eight branches. Lincoln City Libraries circulates more than three million items per year to the residents of Lincoln and Lancaster County. Lincoln City Libraries is also home to Polley Music Library and the Jane Pope Geske Heritage Room of Nebraska authors.\nSports.\nLincoln is home to the University of Nebraska's sports teams, the Cornhuskers. In total, the university fields 22 men's and women's teams in 14 NCAA Division\u00a0I sports. Nebraska football began play in 1890. Of the 128 Division I-A football teams, Nebraska is one of nine to have won 900 or more games. Notable coaches include Tom Osborne and Bob Devaney. Devaney coached from 1962 to 1972; the university's indoor arena, the Bob Devaney Sports Center, is named for him. Osborne coached from 1972 to 1997.\nOther sports teams are the Nebraska Wesleyan Prairie Wolves, an NCAA Division III University; the Lincoln Saltdogs, an American Association independent minor league baseball team; the Lincoln Stars, a USHL junior ice hockey team; and the No Coast Derby Girls, a member of the Women's Flat Track Derby Association.\nLincoln Airpark hosts SCCA Solo Nationals each September.\nParks and recreation.\nLincoln has an extensive park system, with over 131 individual parks connected by a system of recreational trails, a system of bike lanes and a system of cycle tracks. The MoPac Trail is a bicycling, equestrian and walking trail built on an abandoned Missouri Pacific Railroad corridor which runs for from the University of Nebraska's Lincoln campus eastward to Wabash, Nebraska.\nRegional parks include Antelope Park from S. 23rd and \"N\" Streets to S. 33rd Street and Sheridan Boulevard, Bicentennial Cascade Fountain, Hamann Rose Garden, Lincoln Children's Zoo, Veterans Memorial Garden, and Holmes Park at S. 70th Street and Normal Boulevard. Pioneers Park includes the Pioneers Park Nature Center at S. Coddington Avenue and W. Calvert Streets.\nCommunity parks include Ballard Park, Bethany Park, Bowling Lake Park, Densmore Park, Erwin Peterson Park, Fleming Fields, Irvingdale Park, Mahoney Park, Max E. Roper Park, Oak Lake Park, Peter Pan Park, Pine Lake Park, Sawyer Snell Park, Seacrest Park, Tierra Briarhurst, University Place Park and Woods Park.\nOther notable parks include Iron Horse Park, Lincoln Community Foundation Tower Square, Nine Mile Prairie owned by the University of Nebraska Foundation, Sunken Gardens, Union Plaza, and Wilderness Park. Smaller neighborhood parks are scattered throughout the city. Additionally, there are five public recreation centers, nine outdoor public pools and five public golf courses not including private facilities in Lincoln.\nGovernment.\nLincoln has a mayor\u2013council government. The mayor and a seven-member city council are selected in nonpartisan elections. Four members are elected from city council districts; the remaining three members are elected at-large. Lincoln's health, personnel, and planning departments are joint city/county agencies; most city and Lancaster County offices are in the County/City Building. The most recent city general election was held on May 2, 2023.\nSince Lincoln is the state capital, many Nebraska state and United States Government offices are in Lincoln. The city lies within the Lincoln Public Schools school district. The Lincoln Fire and Rescue Department shoulders the city's fire fighting and emergency ambulatory services while private companies provide non-emergency medical transport and volunteer fire fighting units support the city's outlying areas.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nLincoln Public Schools (LPS) is the public school district which includes the majority of the city limits. It includes eight traditional high schools: Lincoln High, East, Northeast, Northwest, North Star, Southeast, Southwest, and Standing Bear. LPS is also home to special interest high school programs, including the Arts and Humanities Focus Program, the Bryan Community School, The Career Academy and the Science Focus Program (Zoo School). Other programs include the Pathfinder Education Program, the Yankee Hill Program and the Lincoln Air Force JROTC.\nSome outerlying sections of Lincoln are in other school districts: Norris School District 160 and Waverly School District 145.\nThere are several private parochial elementary and middle schools throughout the community. Like Lincoln Public Schools, these schools are broken into districts, but most will allow attendance outside of boundary lines. Lincoln's private high schools are College View Academy, Lincoln Christian, Lincoln Lutheran, Parkview Christian School and Pius X High School.\nColleges and universities.\nLincoln has twelve colleges and universities. The University of Nebraska\u2013Lincoln, the main campus of the University of Nebraska system, is the largest university in Nebraska, with 20,830 undergraduate, 4,426 postgraduate students and 564 professionals enrolled in 2018. Out of the 25,820 enrolled, 2,187 undergraduate and 1,040 postgraduate students/professionals were international. With 135 countries outside of the U.S. represented, the five countries with the highest international enrollment were China, India, Malaysia, Oman and Rwanda.\nNebraska Wesleyan University, as of 2020, has 1,924 undergraduate and 151 postgraduate students. The school teaches in the tradition of a liberal arts college education. It remains affiliated with the United Methodist Church. Union Adventist University is a private Seventh-day Adventist four-year coeducational university with 911 students enrolled 2013\u201314.\nBryan College of Health Sciences offers undergraduate degrees in nursing and other health professions; a Masters in Nursing; a Doctoral degree in nurse anesthesia practice, as well as certificate programs for ancillary health professions. Universities with satellite locations in Lincoln are Bellevue University, Concordia University (Nebraska) and Doane University. Lincoln also hosts the College of Hair Design and Joseph's College of Cosmetology.\nSoutheast Community College is a community college system in southeastern Nebraska, with three campuses in Lincoln and an enrollment of 9,505 students as of spring 2024. The two-year Academic Transfer program is popular among students who want to complete their general education requirements before they enroll in a four-year institution. The University of Nebraska-Lincoln is the most popular transfer location.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\nLincoln has four licensed broadcast full power television stations; and one serving the city, but licensed to an area outside its limits:\nThe headquarters of Nebraska Public Media, which is affiliated with the Public Broadcasting Service and National Public Radio, are in Lincoln. The city has two low power digital TV stations in Lincoln area: including the translator KFDY-LD (simulcast of (KOHA-LD)) owned by Flood Communications of Nebraska LLC, including for main Spanish-language network affiliate Telemundo on 27.1, NCN (Ind.) on 27.2, and religious network affiliate 3ABN on 27.3 in Lincoln area only, on virtual channel 27, digital channel 27; and another low power digital KCWH-LD on CW+ affiliate, owned by Gray on channel 18.1 included sub-channels like Ion on 18.2, and CBS (Simulcast of KOLN) on 18.3.\nRadio.\nThere are 18 radio stations licensed in Lincoln, not including radio stations licensed outside of the city that serve the Lincoln area. Most areas of Lincoln also receive radio signals from Omaha and other surrounding communities.\nFM stations include:\nAM stations include:\nPrint.\nThe \"Lincoln Journal Star\" is the city's major daily newspaper. The \"Daily Nebraskan \"is the official monthly magazine of the University of Nebraska's Lincoln campus and \"The DailyER\" is the university's biweekly satirical paper. Other university newspapers include the \"Reveille\", the official periodical campus paper of Nebraska Wesleyan University and the \"Clocktower\", the official weekly campus paper of Union College.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\nLincoln is served by Interstate 80 via seven interchanges, connecting the city to San Francisco in the west and Teaneck, New Jersey in the New York City metropolitan area in the east. Other Highways that serve the Lincoln area are Interstate 180, U.S. Route 6, U.S. Highway 34, U.S. Highway 77 and nearby Nebraska Highway 79. The eastern segment of Nebraska Highway 2 is a primary trucking route that connects the Kansas City metropolitan area (Interstate 29) to the I-80 corridor in Lincoln. A few additional minor State Highway segments are located within the city as well.\nMass transit.\nA public bus transit system, StarTran, operates in Lincoln. StarTran's fleet consists of 67 full-sized buses and 13 Handi-Vans. The transit system has 18 bus routes, with a circular bus route downtown. Annual ridership for the fiscal year 2017\u201318 was 2,463,799.\nStarTran also offers a door-to-door van service called VANLNK to customers with the mobile app. The service has vehicles that are smaller than StarTran's buses. Departures can only be in the Lincoln city limits, and the service is a shared-ride service, meaning it optimizes trips to carry people along routes on the same schedule. All VANLNK vehicles are accessible by disabled people using lifts and ramps. However, although service animals are allowed, non-service animals must be on a pet carrier.\nIntercity transit.\nThe Lincoln Airport provides passengers with daily non-stop service to Chicago O'Hare International Airport, and Denver International Airport. General aviation support is provided through several private aviation companies. The Lincoln Airport was among the emergency landing sites for the NASA Space Shuttle. The site was chosen chiefly because of a runway; the longest of three at the airport.\nLincoln is served by both Express Arrow and Burlington Trailways for regional bus service between Omaha, Denver and points beyond. Megabus, in partnership with Windstar Lines, provides bus service between Lincoln and Chicago with stops in Omaha, Des Moines, Iowa City and Moline.\nAmtrak provides service to Lincoln station, operating its California Zephyr daily in each direction between Chicago and Emeryville, California, using BNSF's Lincoln \u2013 Denver route through Nebraska. The city is an Amtrak crew-change point.\nRail freight.\nRail freight travels coast-to-coast, to and through Lincoln via BNSF Railway, the Union Pacific Railroad, Lincoln's own Omaha, Lincoln and Beatrice Railway Company and an Omaha Public Power District rail line. Lincoln was once served by the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad (Rock Island), the Missouri Pacific Railroad (MoPac) and the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company (C&amp;NW). The abandoned right-of-way of these former railroads have since been turned into bicycle trails.\nCycling modes.\nLincoln has a third-generation dock-based bike share program that began in mid-April 2018, called BikeLNK. The first phase of the program included 19 docks and 100 bicycles, scattered throughout downtown and around the UNL City, UNL East &amp; Nebraska Innovation campuses. A second phase in 2019 increased the number of docks to 21, total bicycles to 105 and expanded to a location outside of downtown. Lincoln also has a fleet of commercial pedicabs that operates in the downtown area.\nModal characteristics.\nIn 2016, 80.5 percent of working Lincoln residents commuted by driving alone, 9.6 percent carpooled, 1.1 percent used public transportation, and 3.1 percent walked. About 2.4 percent used all other forms of transportation, including taxis, bicycles, and motorcycles as well as ride-sharing services such as Lyft and Uber which entered the Lincoln market in the summer of 2014. About 3.3 percent worked at home.\nIn 2015, 6.3 percent of city of Lincoln households were without a car, which decreased slightly to 5.8 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Lincoln averaged 1.78 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.\nUtilities.\nPower in Lincoln is provided by the Lincoln Electric System (LES). The LES service area covers , serving Lincoln and several other communities outside of the city. A public utility, LES's electric rates are the 8th lowest in the nation, according to a nationwide survey conducted by LES in 2018. Current LES power supply resources are 35% oil and gas, 34% renewable and 31% coal. Renewable resources have increased with partial help from the addition of an LES-owned five megawatt solar energy farm put into service June, 2016. The solar farm produces enough energy to power 900 homes. LES also owns two wind turbines in the northeast part of the city.\nWater in Lincoln is provided through the Lincoln Water System. In the 1920s, the city of Lincoln undertook the task of building the Lincoln Municipal Lighting and Waterworks Plant (designed by Fiske &amp; Meginnis). The building worked as the main hub for water from nearby wells and power in Lincoln for decades until it was replaced and turned into an apartment building. Most of Lincoln's water originates from wells along the Platte River near Ashland, Nebraska. Wastewater is in turn collected by the Lincoln Wastewater System. The city of Lincoln owns both systems.\nNatural gas is provided by Black Hills Energy.\nLandline telephone service has had a storied history within the regional Lincoln area with the Lincoln Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, founded in 1880. In its history, LT&amp;T introduced the first rotary dial telephone exchange in the U.S. in 1904; the first Radiotelephone in 1946; and piloted the first 911 system in the nation in 1968. Many years later, LT&amp;T was renamed Aliant Communications and shortly thereafter merged in 1998 with Alltel. In 2006, Windstream Communications was formed with the spinoff of Alltel and a merge with VALOR Communications Group. Windstream Communications provides telephone service both over VoIP and conventional telephone circuits to the Lincoln area. Spectrum offers telephone service over VoIP on their cable network. In addition, ALLO Communications provides telephone, television and internet service over their underground fiber network to all parts of the city.\nHealth care.\nLincoln has three major hospitals within two health care systems serving the city: Bryan Health and CHI Health St. Elizabeth. Madonna Rehabilitation Hospital is a geriatric facility and a physical medicine &amp; rehabilitation center. Lincoln has two specialty hospitals: Lincoln Surgical Hospital and the Nebraska Heart Institute. A U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Community-Based Outpatient Clinic (CBOC) is in Lincoln (Lincoln VA Clinic, part of the Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System).\nPolice.\nThe Lincoln Police Department has just over 350 police officers. The police per capita rate is extremely low at 1.2 officers per 1,000 people (the average being 1.94), and the violent crime rate of 522 per 100,000 people. The department is nationally accredited by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies and was the first law enforcement agency in Nebraska to become so.\nThe LPD shares its headquarters with the Lancaster County Sheriff's Office.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17654", "revid": "152145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17654", "title": "Letterboxing (hobby)", "text": "Outdoor hobby\nLetterboxing is an outdoor hobby that combines elements of orienteering, art, and puzzle solving. Letterboxers hide small, weatherproof boxes in publicly accessible places (like parks) and distribute clues to finding the box in printed catalogs, on one of several websites, or by word of mouth. Individual letterboxes contain a notebook and a rubber stamp, preferably hand carved or custom made. Finders make an imprint of the letterbox's stamp in their personal notebook, and leave an impression of their personal signature stamp on the letterbox's \"visitors' book\" or \"logbook\" \u2014 as proof of having found the box and letting other letterboxers know who has visited. Many letterboxers keep careful track of their \"find count\".\nHistory.\nThe origin of letterboxing can be traced to Dartmoor, Devon, England in 1854. William Crossing in his \"Guide to Dartmoor\" states that a well known Dartmoor guide (James Perrott) placed a bottle for visiting cards at Cranmere Pool on the northern moor in 1854. From this hikers on the moors began to leave a letter or postcard inside a box along the trail (sometimes addressed to themselves, sometimes a friend or relative)\u2014hence the name \"letterboxing\". The next person to discover the site would collect the postcards and post them. In 1938 a plaque and letterbox in Crossing's memory were placed at Duck's Pool on southern Dartmoor.\nThe first Dartmoor letterboxes were so remote and well-hidden that only the most determined walkers found them, allowing weeks to pass before the letter made its way home. Until the 1970s there were no more than a dozen sites around the moor, usually in the most inaccessible locations. Increasingly, however, letterboxes have been located in relatively accessible sites and today there are thousands of letterboxes, many within easy walking distance of the road. As a result, the tradition of leaving a letter or postcard in the box has been forgotten.\nMembership of the \"100 Club\" is open to anyone who has found at least 100 letterboxes on Dartmoor. Clues to the locations of letterboxes are published by the \"100 Club\" in an annual catalogue. Some letterboxes however remain \"word of mouth\" and the clues to their location can only be obtained from the person who placed the box. Some clues may also be found in other letterboxes or on the Internet. However, this is more common for letterboxes in places other than Dartmoor, where no \"100 Club\" or catalogue exist.\nLetterboxing has become a popular sport, with thousands of walkers gathering for 'box-hunts', and while in some areas of Dartmoor it is particularly popular amongst children, some of the more difficult to find boxes and tougher terrain are better suited to more experienced adults.\nLetterboxes can be found in other areas of the United Kingdom, including the North York Moors, and have spread all over the world. The Scottish artist Alec Finlay has placed letterboxes with rubber stamp circle poems at locations around the world, including Yorkshire Sculpture Park.\nInterest in letterboxing in the US is generally considered to have started with a feature article in the \"Smithsonian\" magazine in April 1998. Much of the terminology below is associated with letterboxing in the US and would be unfamiliar to UK letterboxers. The growing popularity of the somewhat similar activity of geocaching during the 2000s has increased interest in letterboxing as well.\nGatherings.\nLetterboxers organise events, usually called \"meets\" or \"gatherings\". The first letterbox meet was held on Dartmoor, and they are now held twice-yearly on \"clock change days\" (in March and October). Gatherings in the US are usually at parks or places with enough space for a large group of letterboxers to meet up and do exchanges (exchanging of personal stamps and/or personal travelers), as well as talk and discuss box ideas. Gatherings in the US usually have a special, one-day \"Event stamp.\" At some gatherings, boxes are created or donated to be planted nearby specifically for the gathering attendees to find.\nThe first gathering in North America was held in November, 1999, at The Inn at Long Trail in Killington, Vermont.\nTypes.\nThere are now many different kinds of letterboxes, each with some specific distinction. While purists recognise only those letterboxes planted in the wild, many new variations exist. The kinds include:\n A normal letterbox, hidden and uses clue to find it.\n These are usually traditional boxes, but these \"mystery\" boxes have either vague starting areas, no starting areas, no descriptions, no clue \u2013 any number of things to make the box extremely hard to find.\n The clues for these are usually found in a traditional box as an extra one to find. Usually planted in the same area as the traditional that hosts its clue. Clues can be distributed in any way.\n The clue is given by word of mouth, or typed up, but a letterboxer can only receive the clue from the planter.\n A clue without a home. The clue is hidden in another letterbox (similar to clues for a bonus boxes), but the letterboxer that finds the clue is expected to move the clue to another nearby letterbox. The cuckoo clue typically contains directions to limit how far the clue should travel to find a new home.\n A traveling letterbox, it is placed in a traditional letterbox for another letterboxer to find. When found, it is stamped like a traditional letterbox, but is then carried by the letterboxer to the next letterbox they find and then left in that letterbox for the next finder. The hitchhiker's stamp should also be recorded in the host letterbox's logbook, and vice versa.\n Much like a traditional box, but instead of being planted, the box is kept with the creator at all times. If another letterboxer is met on the trail or at a meet it is attainable if requested. In the US this box is usually only attainable if the other letterboxer knows the password or passphrase which is sometimes cryptic, straightforward, almost non-existent, or silly.\nIn the US, letterboxes have developed new forms:\n Much like a hitchhiker, except instead of being carried from letterbox to letterbox, a letterboxer passes it to another letterboxer. It can be passed in a personal traveller, or planted on another letterboxer or their unattended bags on the trails or at gatherings. Most people are subtle about planting them\u2014but not all.\n Like a combination of a hitchhiker and a cootie. Either put in a traditional letterbox, like a hitchhiker, or put it on a person, like a cootie.\n This is a traditional letterbox with special qualities. Namely, it is a \"hostel\" for hitchhikers, sized and specially designated to hold multiple hitchhikers at one time. Normally, there are at least one or two hitchhikers in the box at all times, and any letterboxer who takes a hitchhiker out is required to leave a new one in its place. A hitchhiker hostel has its own stamp and logbook, just like a traditional letterbox, and any hitchhiker that is placed within it should be stamped and recorded within the logbook, preferably with both the date of its being added to the hostel (in order to make it easier to move the older hitchhikers out), and the date it is removed.\n A parasite is very much like a hitchhiker except, instead of being carried by a letterboxer between letterboxes on its own, it is carried along with a hitchhiker. When a letterboxer joins a parasite to a hitchhiker (\"infecting\" it), it is stamped into the hitchhiker. The parasite's stamp is also recorded in the logbook of the letterbox that a hitchhiker is placed in, \"infecting\" the letterbox, as well. In the event of being placed in a letterbox that has multiple hitchhikers in it (such as a hitchhiker hostel), the parasite \"infects\" all of the hitchhikers inside. The letterboxer that has done the moving also has the choice of sending the parasite along with a different hitchhiker. (This is a relatively new variation of letterbox, and has only just recently begun to take off.)\n Online letterboxes; A scavenger hunt of sorts for an image of a letterbox through different websites, collecting answers to questions posted as the clues to the box. Answers sometimes are unscrambled or emailed to the creator; the final answer is put in a blank in a web address, which takes the finder to an image of the letterbox online.\n A letterbox that has only been planted for a short amount of time. (A few days or a week, any time length the planter wants.)\n Boxes that are made like traditional letterboxes, but instead of being planted in the wild, they are sent via postal mail to the people on sign-up lists for the box, or around a \"ring\" of people in a postal ring, which is usually focused on a theme of some sort. Postals are also very often very well-designed and organised, as well as ornate.\n A circle poem is a kind of 'art' letterbox developed in Britain. There are one hundred planned boxes, each of which contains a rubber stamp circle poem by the Scottish poet and artist, Alec Finlay. These are sited at locations around the world, and each has its own nominated keeper.\nFind counts.\nA letterboxer's \"find count\" or \"PFX count\" is organised as follows:\nSome boxers list individual types of boxes in their PFX counts (e.g.: codice_1 would mean 12 plants, 76 finds, 45 exchanges, four events or event stamps, 21 hitchhikers, and four virtuals). Some include virtuals, hitchhikers, and other non-traditional boxes in a single find count, while some exclude them. Many letterboxers do not bother to keep count at all.\nThe \"PFX count\" is not a term associated with Dartmoor Letterboxing.\nQuesting.\nQuesting is a game played across a community or geographic place. Originally coined in the US, it is similar to the concept of letterboxing where clues lead to sealed boxes to be found in a type of treasure hunt.\nVital Communities, a non-profit organization in White River Junction, Vermont established the Valley Quest program as a sense-of-place education program in 1995. Valley quests map and share the Upper Valley region's special places. Created by school groups, scout groups, historical societies and others, there are now over 200 quests across Vermont and New Hampshire. Questing has spread to other communities, too. There is a South Shore Quests program in Hingham, Massachusetts along with programs in Keene, New Hampshire and on Martha's Vineyard.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17656", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17656", "title": "Language translation", "text": ""}
{"id": "17658", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17658", "title": "Legal technicality", "text": "Colloquial phrase referring to a technical aspect of law\nThe term legal technicality is a casual or colloquial phrase referring to a technical aspect of law. The phrase is not a term of art in the law; it has no exact meaning, nor does it have a legal definition. In public perception, it typically refers to \"procedural rules that can dictate the outcome of a case without having anything to do with the merits of that case.\" However, as a vague term, the definition of a technicality varies from person to person, and it is often simply used to denote any portion of the law that interferes with the outcome desired by the user of the term.\nSome legal technicalities govern legal procedure, enable or restrict access to courts, and/or enable or limit the discretion of a court in handing down judgment. These are aspects of procedural law. Other legal technicalities deal with aspects of substantive law, that is, aspects of the law that articulate specific criteria that a court uses to assess a party's compliance with or violation of, for example, one or more criminal laws or civil laws. In some cases, people may regard legal protections such as the exclusionary rule as legal technicalities.\nIn the introduction to \"A Dictionary of Human Rights\", David Robertson states (emphasis in original): &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"One cannot dismiss legal technicalities and cut through legal language entirely, because rights basically \"are\" legal technicalities. What cannot be expressed with some clarity in a legal document will not be preserved and protected.\"\nIn 1928, William W. Brewton wrote that the law is inevitably technical because a relatively small number of laws have to account for a much larger number of possible situations. Since the rules and principles of law are expected to apply to many different cases, they cannot always account for the exact circumstances, which can result in failures of justice in individual cases even when the greatest possible overall justice is being achieved. He said that people mistakenly criticize the technicalities, which are both \"necessary and inevitable\", when they should focus instead on preventing the original causes of litigation and crime.\nBrewton wrote that the rules of procedure are complex because there is no simplified approach that would be sufficient. Furthermore, allowing the rules to be broken (such as abrogating a constitutional right) to better fit a single case would mean that the same rules could be broken in other cases:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17659", "revid": "47468357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17659", "title": "Lionhead Studios", "text": "British video game developer, 1997\u20132016\nLionhead Studios Limited was a British video game developer founded in July 1997 by Peter Molyneux, Mark Webley, Tim Rance, and Steve Jackson. The company is best known for the \"Black &amp; White\" and \"Fable\" series. Lionhead started as a breakaway from developer Bullfrog Productions, which was also founded by Molyneux. Lionhead's first game was \"Black &amp; White\", a god game with elements of artificial life and strategy games. \"Black &amp; White\" was published by Electronic Arts in 2001. Lionhead Studios is named after Webley's hamster, which died not long after the naming of the studio, as a result of which the studio was very briefly renamed to Redeye Studios.\n\"Black &amp; White\" was followed up with the release of an expansion pack named \"\". Lionhead released \"Fable\", from satellite developer Big Blue Box. In 2005, Lionhead released \"The Movies\" and \"Black &amp; White 2\". Lionhead was acquired by Microsoft Studios in April 2006 due to encountering financial difficulties. Many Lionhead developers left around this time, including co-founder Jackson and several developers who left to found Media Molecule. Molyneux left Lionhead in early 2012 (shortly after the resignation of another group of developers who were dissatisfied with the company) to found 22cans because he wanted to be more creative. After Molyneux's departure, Microsoft had Lionhead switch to developing games as a service games. As a result, there were many changes within the studio.\nIn early March 2016, Microsoft announced that it had proposed closing Lionhead Studios and that the planned game \"Fable Legends\" would be cancelled; Lionhead was closed down almost two months later, on 29 April. A few months after Lionhead's closure, two key people (Webley and Gary Carr, who was Lionhead's creative director) founded Two Point Studios.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nPeter Molyneux founded Bullfrog Productions in 1987, which was later acquired by Electronic Arts (EA) in 1995. Around 1996, Molyneux had contemplated leaving Bullfrog, as he felt limited in his creative freedom under Electronic Arts. He along with Lionhead's eventual co-founders, Mark Webley, Tim Rance and Steve Jackson, started developing plans for a new studio. In 1997, due to a series of events and from issues arising between Molyneux and Electronic Arts, he ultimately left the company in July 1997, co-founding Lionhead shortly after that, along with Mark Webley, Tim Rance, and Steve Jackson (who co-founded Games Workshop and co-authored the \"Fighting Fantasy\" series). On his recruitment, Jackson said \"It was an offer I couldn't refuse\", as he wanted to get back to making games instead of writing about them (Jackson had interviewed Molyneux about Bullfrog and \"Dungeon Keeper\", but for much of it, they discussed German board games instead. This led to them meeting frequently for an event called \"Games Night\"). Molyneux assured him that his lack of programming knowledge was an asset rather than a problem. Lionhead is the second Bullfrog break-off group, after Mucky Foot Productions (founded in February 1997). According to Glenn Corpes (who co-founded another: Lost Toys), Lionhead was Molyneux's \"take on what Bullfrog used was\".\nThe idea of the company was to develop quality games without growing too large. On the differences between Lionhead and Bullfrog, Molyneux said: \"This time round we're a professionally run company. Gone are the days of shooting work experience people with guns\". He also said that Lionhead would develop only one game at a time. Early Lionhead employees included Demis Hassabis, Mark Healey (Lionhead's first artist), and Alex Evans.\nThe name Lionhead came from Webley's pet hamster, who had died the week prior to the foundation. The hamster's death was taken as a bad sign, so other names, including Black Box, Red Rocket, Midnight, and Hurricane were considered but none had unanimous support. The name Red Eye was then suggested, and everyone liked it (the decision needed to be quick as Molyneux was to be interviewed by \"Edge\"). However, for reasons including the name being in use by many other companies, the domains redeye.com and redeye.co.uk being taken and lionhead.co.uk had already been registered by Rance, the company already having Lionhead business cards, and the possibility of the name Red Eye having drinking connotations, the name was reverted to Lionhead. By the time the name was reverted, it was too late for \"Edge\" to amend their interview, so it was published with the company being referred to as Redeye Studios. In the interview, Molyneux stated that his ambition for the company was to \"make it a world-renowned software development house \u2013 known in Europe, Japan and America for top-quality games\".\nEarly years.\nWord about Lionhead began spreading quickly. Within the first month, companies including Sega, Nintendo, Eidos, GTI, and Lego had arranged meetings. One day, \"a major Japanese console manufacturer\" had come to present plans for a \"next generation console\", but by then, Lionhead's first game had already been committed.\nBy the end of July, Lionhead had signed a one-game contract with Electronic Arts. The studio was initially run out of Molyneux's mansion in Elstead, before relocating to the University of Surrey Research Park in 1998. According to Jackson, it was \"a mere stone's throw from Bullfrog's old lily pad on the very same estate\". For the staff who had come from Bullfrog, it was \"a little like coming home\". Six companies were competing for a space, and Lionhead won due to Molyneux and Bullfrog's reputation.\nLionhead had originally intended to make their first public appearance at the E3 trade show in May 1997. This was cancelled at the last minute because there was not yet any deal with Electronic Arts, and there was the possibility of not being able to discuss Lionhead. The debut was made in September at the European Computer Trade Show instead. According to Jackson, \"Everyone\" was interested in Lionhead: journalists from many major European magazines frequently turned up at Lionhead's suite.\nBy August 1998, after the studio placed a job advertisement in \"Edge\" which received over 100 applications, Russell Shaw had been hired as Head of Music. Lionhead's first title was \"Black &amp; White\", which was published by Electronic Arts under terms of Molyneux's severance package from departing Bullfrog. It was released in 2001 to widespread critical acclaim. It won BAFTA Awards for Interactivity and Moving Images in 2001, and Academy of Interactive Arts &amp; Sciences awards for Computer Innovation and Computer Game of the Year the following year. An expansion pack ', was released the following year. In Lionhead's early years, Jackson wrote columns about the company and the development of \"Black &amp; White\" for magazines such as \"PC Zone\" and '. The articles were also published on Lionhead's website.\nAccording to Eurogamer, Lionhead \"was a continuation of the culture and development ethic of Bullfrog\", which included the playing of pranks. One such prank was one \"that would go down in Lionhead history\". It involved a visit from the Mayor of Guildford during the development of \"Black &amp; White\": Healey had inserted a couple of wires into a woollen glove with the other ends put into a floppy drive. Molyneux was forced to explain to the Mayor how the game's on-screen hand was controlled by the glove (which Healey was wearing), when it was actually being controlled by a mouse with Healey's other hand, which were hidden. The Mayor fell for the trick.\nBy June 2002, Lionhead had established satellite companies, including Big Blue Box Studios, Intrepid Computer Entertainment (also called Intrepid Developments), and Black &amp; White Studios. Lionhead and its satellite studios had 107 employees and were developing six games: \"Fable\", \"The Movies\", a project called \"Creation\" (also called \"Dimitri\"), \"Black &amp; White NG\" (\"Black &amp; White Next Generation\"), \"Black &amp; White 2\", and \"BC\", despite Molyneux's earlier statement that Lionhead would only work on one at a time. The idea to form these satellite studios came from Jackson during the development of \"Black &amp; White\". Big Blue Box Studios was founded in July 1998 by Ian Lovett and Simon and Dene Carter, because of a desire to leave Electronic Arts and \"the sadly ravaged corpse of Bullfrog it had left behind\". Intrepid Computer Entertainment was founded by Joe Rider and Matt Chilton, and Black &amp; White Studios was headed by Jonty Barnes, who was a programmer on \"Dungeon Keeper\" and \"Black &amp; White\". According to Molyneux, \"The Movies\" came about because Lionhead listened to some financial advisers after the release of \"Black &amp; White\", who said that the company would die if it did not float on the stock market. The company then went for initial public offering, which Molyneux said was \"The most stupid thing that ever happened\" because it meant having to expand quickly and develop more games. In the early 2000s, Lionhead was \"growing very fast\". The company was nominated for the 2002 Golden Joystick Awards British Developer of the Year award.\nBefore \"Fable\" shipped, Lionhead purchased Big Blue Box and Intrepid. The decision to merge Big Blue Box with Lionhead was made to accelerate the completion of the game. \"Fable\" was released in 2004 for the Xbox, and won AIAS awards for Outstanding Achievement in Character or Story Development and Outstanding Achievement in Original Musical Composition in 2005. \"Dimitri\" was cancelled. In 2003, Gary Carr joined Lionhead. Due to the stock market crash in the aftermath of 9/11, Lionhead sought investments from venture capitalists. Deals with various firms were signed in July 2004. This came at a time when the company needed money for the development of five games to be released by different publishers.\nAcquisition by Microsoft.\nIn 2005, Lionhead released two titles: \"Black &amp; White 2\" and \"The Movies\". Around this time, Lionhead had roughly 220 employees. These titles did not achieve a massive impact in sales (Molyneux described \"The Movies\" as \"a disaster\" due to lack of playtesting. However, it won a BAFTA Award for Simulation in 2006.), and Lionhead soon afterwards encountered financial difficulty. Due to this, on 6 April 2006, Lionhead Studios was acquired by Microsoft. Ubisoft was another contender for the acquisition of Lionhead, but Molyneux believed Microsoft to be \"perfect\", and said people wanted \"the safety and security of being part of something bigger\". Microsoft wanted the \"Fable\" series to be an Xbox exclusive, and knew that if Ubisoft had acquired Lionhead, it would have gone to the PlayStation 3 instead, a conclusion that Webley concurred with. Lionhead were concerned with securing the company's future and protecting jobs and spent \"months\" preparing for the acquisition. Some, such as Andy Robson (Head of Testing), were dissatisfied with the deal. He claimed Lionhead were trying to cheat him out of money he was owed. Molyneux believed that Microsoft were pleased with the deal, and said that they made their money back due to the release of the \"fantastically successful\" \"Fable II\" (it won a BAFTA Award for Action and Adventure in 2009) for the Xbox 360 in 2008. In late 2005, Healey left Lionhead with Evans and a couple of other developers to found Media Molecule. Jackson also left in 2006 when Microsoft took over.\nThe general consensus amongst Lionhead was that the buyout \"benefited Lionhead greatly\". Microsoft purchased a lease that enabled Lionhead to expand to multiple floors, a canteen, and an office revamp. According to \"Fable\" franchise director Ted Timmins, the improvements felt like Lionhead was \"a real developer\". The pranks were also reduced. During the development of \"Fable II\", Lionhead received death threats because the game featured a gay character and some of the leading characters were black. Microsoft, for the most part, left Lionhead alone during the development of \"Fable II\", but did ask them to change the icon of a condom (the game featured a dog who was able to dig them up) to a modern one, despite the game being set in an earlier era. Lionhead and Microsoft conflicted over the game's marketing: Microsoft believed that role-playing games were about dragons and wanted to market the game as such, despite Lionhead's insistence that the game was \"a Monty Python-esque comedy\". According to \"Fable\" art director John McCormack, the marketing was \"shit\" and that dragons were \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" fare and had nothing to do with \"Fable\". Despite the row, most of the \"Fable II\" team thought highly of the relationship between Lionhead and Microsoft, and after the game's release, Lionhead won a BAFTA Award for the best action adventure game. There was also a dispute over \"Fable III\"'s box art. The game was developed and released in 18 months, but fell short of the expectations set by the previous installment. Six months before its release, Lionhead attempted to integrate Kinect into the game, but failed. In June 2009, Molyneux became creative director of Microsoft Studios' European division, a position he held concurrently with the head of Lionhead.\nAnother Kinect-based project, \"Milo &amp; Kate\" was in development but was cancelled. Molyneux blamed the cancellation on Kinect's technology and Microsoft's attitude towards their target market. Its development team moved to \"\", another Kinect game that was released in 2012 and was \"disastrous\".\nMolyneux's departure.\nBy early 2012, Lionhead were suffering what had been described as \"Black Monday\". Several Lionhead veterans, dissatisfied with the way the company was heading, resigned on the same day. According to McCormack, Molyneux \"lost it\" and ordered them to leave the premises immediately. Molyneux apologised for this outburst, and soon afterwards, in March, he too left Lionhead and founded 22cans, along with Rance, who had ceased being Lionhead's chief technology officer sometime prior. He was also joined by Paul McLaughlin, who was Lionhead's head of art. Webley then temporarily took over as head of the studio, before being replaced by Scott Henson early the following year. Molyneux said he left Lionhead because he wanted to increase his creativity. He also said that after 12 years (the series began in 2000 by Big Blue Box Studios), everyone was \"tired\" of the \"Fable\" series. Craig Oman, producer of \"Fable Anniversary\", said that Molyneux's departure gave Lionhead an opportunity to reidentify itself.\nMolyneux's departure had a much greater impact than those of other veterans who had already left the company. Lionhead became more professional and organised according to some staff. One said that Molyneux had the power to keep Microsoft at bay, and his departure left the remaining staff vulnerable. Around this time, Microsoft insisted that Lionhead make a games as a service \"Fable\" game to reinvigorate interest in the series or face closure. Due to the switch to service based model, the idea of \"Fable IV\" was rejected, and experts in monetisation and competitive game design were hired to assist the transition. At some point, John Needham became head of Lionhead. Creative director Carr (who had played major roles in \"Milo &amp; Kate\", \"The Movies\", and \"Fable: The Journey\") left in September 2015, and a new one, David Eckelberry, was brought in. Lionhead encountered difficulty in this project, \"Fable Legends\", because they had not done anything like it before.\nClosure.\nOn 7 March 2016, Microsoft announced the cancellation of \"Fable Legends\" and a proposed closure of Lionhead Studios. The closure came as a shock to some staff, who had suspected Microsoft were concerned but did not think Lionhead would be shut down: it was thought that the worst-case scenario would be that \"Fable Legends\"'s assets would be used for \"Fable IV\". Some staff put the closure down to \"a string of bad decisions and mismanagement\". The game was supposed to be released in summer 2015, after the release of Windows 10, and some said Lionhead had failed to meet their own targets. To comply with UK employment law, there was a consultation period and the \"Fable Legends\" servers were not shut down until mid-April so that customers could get refunds. There was a small \"live operations\" team that conducted this process, but for others, work was optional. An attempt to save the project was made, under the name of \"Project Phoenix\". This would have involved developing it with a new studio under licence from Microsoft, who supported the idea, but it failed due to lack of time and the fact that many Lionhead employees had found new jobs. On 29 April 2016, Lionhead closed down. One Lionhead developer, Charlton Edwards (the only one remaining who had worked on \"Black &amp; White\"), said there was a giveaway and he received some of the \"trophies\". Both current and former Lionhead developers gave the studio a send-off at a pub. On 26 July, Webley and Carr founded Two Point Studios, a studio that some former Lionhead developers later joined.\nIn the 2021 documentary \"Power On: The Story of Xbox\", Microsoft admitted that their handling of Lionhead Studios was a mistake. Phil Spencer, the current head of Xbox at Microsoft, admitted that forcing Lionhead to work on Kinect and the impact of that on the quality of their games was at fault. Spencer said \"You acquire a studio for what they're great at now, and your job is to help them accelerate how they do what they do, not them accelerate what you do.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17660", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17660", "title": "Linear Algebra/Subspace", "text": ""}
{"id": "17661", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17661", "title": "Linear Algebra/Linear Combination", "text": ""}
{"id": "17662", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17662", "title": "Linear Algebra/Generating a Vector Space", "text": ""}
{"id": "17663", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17663", "title": "Linear Algebra/Linearly Independent Vectors", "text": ""}
{"id": "17664", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17664", "title": "Linear Algebra/Basis for a Vector Space", "text": ""}
{"id": "17668", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17668", "title": "Linear Algebra/Inner Product Space", "text": ""}
{"id": "17669", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17669", "title": "Linear Algebra/Banach Spaces", "text": ""}
{"id": "17670", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17670", "title": "Linear Algebra/Hilbert Spaces", "text": ""}
{"id": "17671", "revid": "147617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17671", "title": "Litigant", "text": ""}
{"id": "17672", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17672", "title": "Law/Tax", "text": ""}
{"id": "17674", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17674", "title": "Leading question", "text": "Question that suggests a particular answer\nA leading question is a question that suggests a particular answer and contains information the examiner is looking to have confirmed. The use of leading questions in court to elicit testimony is restricted in order to reduce the ability of the examiner to direct or influence the evidence presented. Depending on the circumstances, leading questions can be objectionable or proper.\nThe propriety of leading questions generally depends on the relationship of the witness to the party conducting the examination. An examiner may generally ask leading questions of a hostile witness or on cross-examination (\"Will help to elicit the testimony of a witness who, due to age, incapacity, or limited intelligence, is having difficulty communicating their evidence\"), but not on direct examination (to \"coach\" the witness to provide a particular answer).\nCairns-Lee, Lawley &amp; Tosey have reviewed the role of leading questions in research interviews and proposed a typology and a 'cleanness rating' to facilitate researchers to review and assess the influence of their interview questions.\nExample.\nLeading questions may often be answerable with a yes or no (though not all yes\u2013no questions are leading). Leading questions are distinct from loaded questions, which are objectionable because they contain implicit assumptions (such as \"Have you stopped beating your wife?\" indirectly asserting that the subject both \"has\" a wife, and \"has\" beaten her at some point).\nLeading question:\n\"Mr. Smith's car was traveling 20 miles over the speed limit when he lost control of his vehicle and slammed into the victim's car, right?\" (Leads the witness to the conclusion that Mr. Smith was speeding, and as a result lost control of his vehicle, leading to the accident, which was clearly his fault.)\nNeutral question:\n\"How fast would you estimate Mr. Smith's car was traveling before the collision?\" \nEven neutral questions can lead witnesses to answers based on word choice, response framing, assumptions made, and form. The words \"fast\", \"collision\" and \"How\", for example, can alter speed estimates provided by respondents.\nWhen someone asks a leading question, they expect the other person to agree with the leading question.\n\"Our company has the best sandwiches, right?\"\nThey expect the answer to agree that the sandwiches are the best.\nUnited States.\nWhile each state has its own rules of evidence, many states model their rules on the Federal Rules of Evidence, which themselves relate closely to the common-law mode of examination. Rule 611(c) of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Leading questions should not be used on the direct examination of a witness except as may be necessary to develop the witness' testimony. Ordinarily leading questions should be permitted on cross-examination. When a party calls a hostile witness, an adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party, interrogation may be by leading questions.\nLeading questions are the primary mode of examination of witnesses who are hostile to the examining party, and are not objectionable in that context. Examination of hostile witnesses usually takes place on cross-examination. As the rule recognizes, the examination of a \"hostile witness, an adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party\" will sometimes take place on direct examination, and leading questions are permitted.\nIn practice, judges will sometimes permit leading questions on direct examination of friendly witnesses with respect to preliminary matters that are necessary to provide background or context, and which are not in dispute; for example, a witness's employment or education. Leading questions may also be permitted on direct examination when a witness requires special handling, for example a child. However, the court must take care to be sure that the examining attorney is not \"coaching\" the witness through leading questions. Courts may also cite the various editions of McCormick's and Wigmore's treatises on evidence to answer whether a closed-ended question is inherently leading.\nAlthough Rule 611(c) of the Federal Rules of Evidence (and comparable rules of many states) do not prohibit leading questions on re-direct, some states have expressly limited the use of leading questions on re-direct. As a practical matter, it rests within the trial court's discretion as to what leading questions may be asked on re-direct. Generally speaking, leading questions will be more liberally permitted on re-direct in order to establish a foundation and call the attention of the witness to specific testimony elicited on cross examination. Additionally, on re-direct, an interrogator will often ask questions which specifically seek to elicit whether an inference resulting from questioning on cross examinations is accurate. Although these types of questions will likely result in a \"yes\" or \"no\" response, they are properly understood to be direct questions, not leading questions, and are permissible.\nExceptions to general restrictions against leading questions may arise,\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17675", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17675", "title": "Lithuania", "text": "Country in the Baltic region of Europe\nLithuania, officially the Republic of Lithuania, is a country in the Baltic region of Europe. It is one of three Baltic states and lies on the eastern shore of the Baltic Sea, bordered by Latvia to the north, Belarus to the east and south, Poland to the south, and the Russian semi-exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast to the southwest, with a maritime border with Sweden to the west. Lithuania covers an area of , and has a population of 2.9 million. Its capital and largest city is Vilnius; other major cities include Kaunas, Klaip\u0117da, \u0160iauliai and Panev\u0117\u017eys. Lithuanians are the titular nation, belong to the ethnolinguistic group of Balts, and speak Lithuanian.\nFor millennia, the southeastern shores of the Baltic Sea were inhabited by various Baltic tribes. In the 1230s, Lithuanian lands were united for the first time by Mindaugas, who formed the Kingdom of Lithuania on 6 July 1253. Subsequent expansion and consolidation resulted in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, which by the 14th century was the largest country in Europe. In 1386, the grand duchy entered into a \"de facto\" personal union with the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland. The two realms were united into the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569, forming one of the largest and most prosperous states in Europe. The commonwealth lasted more than two centuries, until neighbouring countries gradually dismantled it between 1772 and 1795, with the Russian Empire annexing most of Lithuania's territory.\nTowards the end of World War I, Lithuania declared independence in 1918, founding the modern Republic of Lithuania. In World War II, Lithuania was occupied by the Soviet Union, then by Nazi Germany, before being reoccupied by the Soviets in 1944. Lithuanian armed resistance to the Soviet occupation lasted until the early 1950s. On 11 March 1990, a year before the formal dissolution of the Soviet Union, Lithuania became the first Soviet republic to break away when it proclaimed the restoration of its independence.\nLithuania is a developed country with a high-income and an advanced economy ranking very high in Human Development Index. Lithuania ranks highly in digital infrastructure, press freedom and happiness. It is a member of the United Nations, the European Union, the Council of Europe, the Council of the Baltic Sea States, the Eurozone, the Nordic Investment Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Schengen Agreement, NATO, OECD and the World Trade Organization. It also participates in the Nordic-Baltic Eight (NB8) regional co-operation format.\nEtymology.\nThe spelling of \"Lithuania\" was a later addition to the original Latinate \"Lituania\" since 1800 as a form of hyperforeignism influenced by Greek loanwords with the theta; it is ultimately from . The first known record of \"Lietuva\" is in a 1009 story of Saint Bruno in the \"Annals of Quedlinburg\". The chronicle records Latinized form of the name Lietuva: \"Litua\". The true meaning of the name is unknown, and scholars still debate it. There are a few plausible versions.\nLietava, a small stream near Kernav\u0117\u2014the core area of the early Lithuanian state and a possible first capital of the eventual Grand Duchy of Lithuania\u2014is usually credited as the source of the name. However, the stream is very small, and some find it improbable that such a small and localized body of water could have lent its name to an entire nation. On the other hand, such naming is not unprecedented in world history.\nArt\u016bras Dubonis proposed another hypothesis, that Lietuva relates to the word \"lei\u010diai\" (plural of \"leitis\"). From the middle of the 13th century, \"lei\u010diai\" were a distinct warrior social group of the Lithuanian society subordinate to the Lithuanian ruler or the state itself. The word \"lei\u010diai\" is used in 14\u201316th century historical sources as an ethnonym for Lithuanians (but not Samogitians) and is still used, usually poetically or in historical contexts, in the Latvian language, which is closely related to Lithuanian.\nHistory.\nEarly history and Baltic tribes.\nThe history of Lithuania dates back to settlements founded about 10,000 years ago. The first people settled in the territory of Lithuania after the Last Glacial Period in the 10th millennium BC: Kunda, Neman and Narva cultures. They were traveling hunters. In the 8th millennium BC the climate became warmer and forests developed. The inhabitants of what is now Lithuania travelled less and engaged in local hunting, gathering and fresh-water fishing. The Indo-Europeans, who arrived in the 3rd \u2013 2nd millennium BC, mixed with the local population and formed various Baltic tribes. The Balts did not maintain close cultural or political contacts with the Roman Empire, while maintaining trade contacts via the Amber Road.\nFrom the 9th to the 11th centuries, coastal Balts were subjected to raids by the Vikings. Lithuania comprised mainly the culturally different regions of Samogitia (known for its early medieval skeletal burials), and further east Auk\u0161taitija, or Lithuania proper (known for its early medieval cremation burials). The area was remote and unattractive to outsiders, including traders, which accounts for its separate linguistic, cultural and religious identity and delayed integration into general European patterns and trends. Traditional Lithuanian pagan customs and mythology, with many archaic elements, were long preserved. Rulers' bodies were cremated up until the conversion to Christianity.\nKingdom of Lithuania, Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nThe first written record of the name for the country dates back to 1009 AD. Facing the German threat, Mindaugas in the middle of the 13th century united a large part of the Baltic tribes and founded the State of Lithuania, while in 1253 he was crowned as the Catholic King of Lithuania. Moreover by taking advantage of the weakened territory of the former Kievan Rus' due to the Mongol invasion, Mindaugas incorporated Black Ruthenia into Lithuania. After Mindaugas' assassination in 1263, pagan Lithuania was again a target of the Christian crusades of the Teutonic Order and Livonian Order. Traidenis during his reign (1269\u20131282) reunified all Lithuanian lands and achieved military successes against the crusaders, fighting alongside other Baltic tribes, but was unable to militarily assist the Old Prussians in their Great Uprising. Traidenis' main residence was in Kernav\u0117.\nFrom the late 13th century members of the Gediminids dynasty began ruling Lithuania. Grand Duke Gediminas consolidated a hereditary monarchy and established Vilnius as the capital city in his letters. Lithuania was christianized and incorporated East Slavs' territories (e.g. principalities of Minsk, Kyiv, Polotsk, Vitebsk, Smolensk, etc.) significantly expanding the Grand Duchy of Lithuania's territory, expanding to ~650,000 km2 in the first half of the 14th century. At the end of the 14th century Lithuania was the largest country in Europe. In 1385, Lithuania formed a dynastic union with Poland through the Union of Krewo. By the 15th century patrilineal members of the Lithuanian ruling Gediminids dynasty ruled Lithuania and Poland, as well as Hungary, Croatia, Bohemia, and Moldavia. Wars with the Teutonic State in 1409-1411 and in 1422 concluded with the Treaty of Melno.\nIn the 15th century the strengthened Grand Duchy of Moscow renewed the Muscovite\u2013Lithuanian Wars for the Lithuanian-controlled Eastern Orthodox territories. Due to the unsuccessful beginning of the Livonian War, loss of land to the Tsardom of Russia, and pressure by monarch Sigismund II Augustus (a supporter of a close Polish\u2013Lithuanian union), the Lithuanian nobility agreed to conclude the Union of Lublin in 1569 with the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland, which created the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth with a joint monarch, but Lithuania remained a separate state. After concluding the real union, Lithuania and Poland jointly managed to reach military successes during the Livonian War, occupation of Moscow (1610), war with Sweden (1600\u20131611), Smolensk war with Russia (1632\u20131634), etc. In 1588, Sigismund III Vasa personally confirmed the Third Statute of Lithuania where it was stated that Lithuania and Poland have equal rights within the Commonwealth and ensured the separation of powers. The real union strongly intensified the Polonization of Lithuania and Lithuanian nobility.\nThe mid-17th century was marked with disastrous military losses for Lithuania as during the Deluge most of the territory of Lithuania was annexed by the Tsardom of Russia, and Vilnius was captured for the first time by a foreign army and ravaged. In 1655, Lithuania unilaterally seceded from Poland, declared Swedish King Charles X Gustav as the Grand Duke of Lithuania and fell under the protection of the Swedish Empire. However, by 1657 Lithuania was once again a part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth following the Lithuanian revolt against the Swedes. Vilnius was recaptured from the Russians in 1661.\nIn the second half of the 18th century the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth was three times partitioned by three neighboring countries which completely dissoluted both independent Lithuania and Poland from the political map in 1795 after a failed Ko\u015bciuszko Uprising and short-lived recapture of Vilnius in 1794. Most of Lithuania's territory was annexed by the Russian Empire, while U\u017enemun\u0117 was annexed by Prussia.\nEfforts to restore statehood.\nFollowing the annexation the Russian Tsarist authorities implemented Russification policies in Lithuania, which then made a part of a new administrative region Northwestern Krai. In 1812 Napoleon during the French invasion of Russia established the puppet Lithuanian Provisional Governing Commission to support his war efforts. After Napoleon's defeat the Russian rule was reinstated in Lithuania.\nDuring the November Uprising (1830\u20131831) the Lithuanians and Poles jointly attempted to restore their statehoods, however the Russian victory resulted in stricter Russification measures: the Russian language was introduced in all government institutions, Vilnius University was closed in 1832, and theories that Lithuania had been a \"Western Russian\" state since its establishment were propagated. Subsequently, the Lithuanians once again tried to restore statehood by participating in the January Uprising (1863\u20131864), but yet another Russian victory resulted in even stronger Russification policies with the introduction of the Lithuanian press ban, pressure on the Catholic Church in Lithuania and Mikhail Muravyov-Vilensky's repressions. Lithuanians resisted Russification through an extensive network of Lithuanian book smugglers, secret Lithuanian publishing and homeschooling. Moreover, the Lithuanian National Revival, inspired by Lithuanian history, language and culture, laid the foundations for the reestablishment of an independent Lithuania. The Great Seimas of Vilnius was held in 1905 and its participants adopted resolutions which demanded a wide autonomy for Lithuania.\nRestored statehood and occupations.\nDuring World War I the German Empire annexed Lithuanian territories from the Russian Empire and they became a part of \"Ober Ost\". In 1917, the Lithuanians organized the Vilnius Conference which adopted a resolution, featuring the aspiration for the restoration of Lithuania's sovereignty and military alliance with Germany and elected the Council of Lithuania. In 1918, the short-lived Kingdom of Lithuania was proclaimed; however on 16 February 1918 the Council of Lithuania adopted the Act of Independence of Lithuania which restored Lithuania as a democratic republic with its capital in Vilnius and without any political ties that existed with other nations in the past. \nIn 1918\u20131920 Lithuanians defended the statehood of Lithuania against Bolsheviks, Bermontians and Poles during the Lithuanian Wars of Independence. The aims of the newly restored Lithuania clashed with J\u00f3zef Pi\u0142sudski's plans to create a federation (Intermarium) in territories previously ruled by the Jagiellonians. The Lithuanian authorities prevented the 1919 Polish coup attempt in Lithuania, and in 1920 during the \u017beligowski's Mutiny the Polish forces captured Vilnius Region and established a puppet state of the Republic of Central Lithuania, which in 1922 was incorporated into Poland. Consequently, Kaunas became the temporary capital of Lithuania where the Constituent Assembly of Lithuania was held and other primary Lithuanian institutions operated until 1940. In 1923, the Klaip\u0117da Revolt was organized which unified the Klaip\u0117da Region with Lithuania. The 1926 Lithuanian coup d'\u00e9tat replaced the democratically elected government and president with an authoritarian regime led by Antanas Smetona.\nIn the late 1930s Lithuania accepted the 1938 Polish ultimatum, 1939 German ultimatum and transferred the Klaip\u0117da Region to Nazi Germany. The 1939 Soviet\u2013Lithuanian Mutual Assistance Treaty allowed the presence of Soviet troops in Lithuania. In 1940 Lithuania accepted the Soviet ultimatum and recovered the control of its historical capital Vilnius, however, the acceptance resulted in the Soviet occupation of Lithuania and its transformation into the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic. In 1941 during the June Uprising in Lithuania it was attempted to restore independent Lithuania and the Red Army was expelled from its territory, however in a few days Lithuania was occupied by Nazi Germany. In 1944 Lithuania was re-occupied by the Soviet Union, and Soviet political repressions along with Soviet deportations from Lithuania resumed. Thousands of Lithuanian partisans and their supporters attempted to militarily restore independent Lithuania, but their resistance was eventually suppressed in 1953 by the Soviet authorities and their collaborators. Jonas \u017demaitis, the chairman of the Union of Lithuanian Freedom Fighters, was captured and executed in 1954, his successor as chairman Adolfas Ramanauskas was brutally tortured and executed in 1957. Since the late 1980s S\u0105j\u016bdis movement sought for the restoration of independent Lithuania, and in 1989 the Baltic Way was held.\n1990\u2013present.\nOn 11 March 1990, the Supreme Council announced the restoration of Lithuania's independence. Lithuania became the first Soviet-occupied state to announce the restitution of independence. On 20 April 1990, the Soviets imposed an economic blockade by ceasing to deliver raw materials to Lithuania. Domestic industry and the population started feeling the lack of fuel, essential goods, and even hot water. Although the blockade lasted for 74 days, Lithuania did not renounce its declaration of independence.\nGradually, economic relations were restored. However, tensions peaked again in January 1991. Attempts were made to carry out a coup d'\u00e9tat using the Soviet Armed Forces, the Internal Army of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the USSR Committee for State Security (KGB). Because of the poor economic conditions in Lithuania, the authorities in Moscow believed the coup would receive strong public support. However, people flocked to Vilnius to defend the Supreme Council of the Republic of Lithuania and independence. The coup ended with limited material losses, though the Soviet Army killed 14 people and injured hundreds. A large part of the Lithuanian population participated in the January Events. On 31 July 1991, Soviet paramilitaries killed 7 Lithuanian border guards on the Belarusian border in what became known as the Medininkai Massacre. On 17 September, Lithuania was admitted to the United Nations.\nOn 25 October 1992, citizens voted in a referendum to adopt the current constitution. On 14 February 1993, during the direct general elections, Algirdas Brazauskas became the first president after the restoration of independence. On 31 August 1993 the last units of the former Soviet Army left Lithuania.\nOn 31 May 2001, Lithuania joined the World Trade Organization. Since March 2004, Lithuania has been part of NATO. On 1 May 2004, it became a full member of the European Union, and a member of the Schengen Agreement in December 2007. On 1 January 2015, Lithuania joined the eurozone and adopted the European Union's single currency. On 4 July 2018, Lithuania officially joined the OECD. On 24 February 2022, Lithuania declared a state of emergency in response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Together with seven other NATO member states, it invoked NATO Article 4 to hold consultations on security. \nGeography.\nLithuania is located in the Baltic region of Europe and covers an area of . It lies between latitudes 53\u00b0 and 57\u00b0 N, and mostly between longitudes 21\u00b0 and 27\u00b0 E (part of the Curonian Spit lies west of 21\u00b0). It has around of sandy coastline, with around facing the open Baltic Sea. The rest of the coast is sheltered by the Curonian sand peninsula. The warm-water port at Klaip\u0117da lies at the narrow mouth of the Curonian Lagoon (Lithuanian: \"Kur\u0161i\u0173 marios\"), a shallow lagoon extending south to Kaliningrad. The country's main and largest river, the Nemunas River, and some of its tributaries carry international shipping.\nLithuania lies at the edge of the North European Plain. Its landscape was smoothed by the glaciers of the last ice age, and is a combination of moderate lowlands and highlands. Its highest point is Auk\u0161tojas Hill at in the eastern part of the country. The terrain features numerous lakes and wetlands, and a mixed forest zone covers over 33% of the country. Dr\u016bk\u0161iai is the largest lake, Tauragnas is the deepest lake, and Asveja is the longest lake in Lithuania.\nAfter a re-estimation of the boundaries of the European continent in 1989, Jean-George Affholder, a scientist at the Institut G\u00e9ographique National (French National Geographic Institute), determined that the geographic centre of Europe was in Lithuania, at , north of Vilnius. Affholder accomplished this by calculating the centre of gravity of the geometrical figure of Europe.\nClimate.\nLithuania has a temperate climate with both maritime and continental influences. It is defined as humid continental (Dfb) under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification (but is close to oceanic in a narrow coastal zone).\nAverage temperatures on the coast are in January and in July. In Vilnius, the average temperatures are in January and in July. During the summer, is common during the day, while is common at night; in the past, temperatures have reached as high as . Some winters can be very cold. occurs almost every winter. Winter extremes are in coastal areas and in the east.\nThe average annual precipitation is on the coast, in the Samogitia highlands, and in the east. Snow occurs every year, and it can snow from October to April. In some years, sleet can fall in September or May. The growing season lasts 202 days in the western part of the country and 169 days in the eastern part. Severe storms are rare in the east but common in the coastal areas. Lithuania experienced a drought in 2002, causing forest and peat bog fires.\nBiodiversity and conservation.\nThe \"Aplinkos apsaugos \u012fstatymas\" (Environmental Protection Act) was adopted in 1992. The law provides the foundations for regulating social relations in the field of environmental protection, establishes the basic rights and obligations of legal and natural persons in preserving the biodiversity, ecological systems, and the landscape. Lithuania agreed to cut carbon emissions by at least 20% of 1990 levels by 2020 and by at least 40% by 2030, together with all European Union members. Also, by 2020 at least 20% (27% by 2030) of the country's total energy consumption should be from the renewable energy sources. In 2016, Lithuania introduced especially effective container deposit legislation, which resulted in collecting 92% of all packagings in 2017.\nLithuania does not have high mountains, and its landscape is dominated by blooming meadows, dense forests and fertile fields of cereals. However, it stands out by the abundance of hillforts, which previously had castles where the ancient Lithuanians burned altars for pagan gods. Lithuania is a particularly watered region with more than 3,000 lakes, mostly in the northeast. The country is also drained by numerous rivers, most notably the longest Nemunas. Lithuania is home to two terrestrial ecoregions: Central European mixed forests and Sarmatic mixed forests.\nForest has long been one of the most important natural resources. Forests occupy one-third of the territory, and timber-related industrial production accounts for almost 11% of industrial production. There are five national parks, 30 regional parks, 402 nature reserves, 6 strict nature reserves, and 668 state-protected natural heritage objects.\nEcosystems include natural and semi-natural (forests, bogs, wetlands and meadows) and anthropogenic (agrarian and urban) ecosystems. Among natural ecosystems, forests are particularly important, covering 33% of the country's territory. Wetlands (raised bogs, fens, transitional mires, etc.) cover 7.9% of the country, with 70% of wetlands having been lost due to drainage and peat extraction between 1960 and 1980. Changes in wetland plant communities resulted in the replacement of moss and grass communities by trees and shrubs, and fens not directly affected by land reclamation have become drier as a result of a drop in the water table. There are 29,000 rivers with a total length of 64,000\u00a0km; the Nemunas River basin occupies 74% of the territory of the country. Due to the construction of dams, approximately 70% of spawning sites of potential catadromous fish species have disappeared. In some cases, river and lake ecosystems continue to be impacted by anthropogenic eutrophication.\nAgricultural land comprises 54% of Lithuania's territory (roughly 70% of that is arable land and 30% meadows and pastures), approximately 400,000 ha of agricultural land is not farmed and acts as an ecological niche for weeds and invasive plant species. Habitat deterioration is occurring in regions with very productive and expensive lands as crop areas are expanded. Currently, 18.9% of all plant species, including 1.87% of all known fungi species and 31% of all known species of lichens, are listed in the Lithuanian Red Data Book. The list also contains 8% of all fish species.\nThe wildlife populations have rebounded as hunting became more restricted and urbanization allowed replanting forests (forests already tripled in size since their lows). Currently, Lithuania has approximately 250,000 larger wild animals or 5 per square kilometre. The most prolific large wild animal is the roe deer, with 120,000 of them. They are followed by boars (55,000). Other ungulates are the deer (~22,000), fallow-deer (~21,000) and the largest one: moose (~7,000). Among the predators, foxes are the most common (~27,000). Wolves are, however, more ingrained into the mythology as there are just 800 in Lithuania. Even rarer are the lynxes (~200). There are about 200,000 rabbits in the forests.\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nSince Lithuania declared the restoration of its independence on 11 March 1990, it has maintained strong democratic traditions. It held its first independent general elections on 25 October 1992, in which 56.75% of voters supported the new constitution. There were intense debates concerning the constitution, particularly the role of the president. A separate referendum was held on 23 May 1992 to gauge public opinion on the matter, and 41% of voters supported the restoration of the President of Lithuania. Through compromise, a semi-presidential system was agreed on.\nThe Lithuanian head of state is the president, directly elected for a five-year term and serving a maximum of two terms. The president oversees foreign affairs and national security and is the commander-in-chief of the military. The president appoints the prime minister and the cabinet, as well as other top civil servants and the judges for all courts except the Constitutional Court. President Gitanas Naus\u0117da was elected on 26 May 2019 by winning in all the municipalities of Lithuania in the second election round. He was re-elected in 2024, winning more than 74% of the run-off votes.\nThe judges of the Constitutional Court (\"Konstitucinis Teismas\") serve nine-year terms. One-third of the court members is renewed every three years. The judges are appointed by the Seimas on the nomination by the president, chairman of the Seimas, and the chairman of the Supreme Court. The unicameral Lithuanian parliament, the Seimas, has 141 members elected to four-year terms: 71 in single-member constituencies, and the others in a nationwide vote by proportional representation. A party must receive at least 5% of the national vote to be eligible for any of the 70 national seats in the Seimas.\nAccording to International IDEA's Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Lithuania performs in the mid to high range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in civic engagement and electoral participation.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nLithuania exhibits a fragmented multi-party system, with many small parties in which coalition governments are common. Elections for president take place on the last Sunday no more than two months before the end of current presidential term. Ordinary elections to the Seimas take place on the second Sunday of October every four years. The Social Democratic Party of Lithuania won the 2024 Lithuanian parliamentary elections and gained 52 of 141 seats in the parliament. In November 2024, Gintautas Paluckas was confirmed as the prime minister after the Social Democrats reached a coalition agreement with Union of Democrats \"For Lithuania\" and Dawn of Nemunas. Lithuania was one of the first countries in the world to grant women a right to vote in the elections. Women were allowed to vote by the 1918 Constitution of Lithuania and used their newly granted right for the first time in 1919. \nEach municipality is governed by a municipal council and a mayor, who is a member of the municipal council. The number of members, elected on a four-year term, in each municipal council depends on the size of the municipality and varies from 15 (in municipalities with fewer than 5,000 residents) to 51 (in municipalities with more than 500,000 residents). Members of the council, with the exception of the mayor, are elected using proportional representation. Starting with 2015, the mayor is elected directly by the majority of residents of the municipality. The Social Democratic Party of Lithuania won the most positions in the 2023 elections (358 municipal council seats and 17 mayors).\nAs of 2024, the number of seats in the European Parliament allocated to Lithuania was 11. Ordinary elections take place on a Sunday on the same day as in other EU countries. Eight political parties gained seats in the 2024 elections.\nLaw and law enforcement.\nThe first attempt to codify the Lithuanian laws was in 1468 when the Casimir's Code was compiled and adopted by Grand Duke Casimir IV Jagiellon. In the 16th century three editions of the Statutes of Lithuania were created with the First Statute being adopted in 1529, the Second Statute in 1566, and the Third Statute in 1588. On 3 May 1791, the Europe's first and the world's second constitution was adopted by the Great Sejm. The Third Statute was partly in force in the territory of Lithuania even until 1840, despite the Third Partition of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795.\nIn 1934\u20131935, Lithuania held the first mass trial of the Nazis in Europe; the convicted were sentenced to imprisonment in a heavy labor prison and capital punishments.\nAfter regaining of independence in 1990, the largely modified Soviet legal codes were in force for about a decade. The current Constitution of Lithuania was adopted on 25 October 1992. In 2001, the Civil Code of Lithuania was passed in Seimas. It was succeeded by the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code in 2003. The approach to the criminal law is inquisitorial, as opposed to adversarial; it is generally characterised by an insistence on formality and rationalisation, as opposed to practicality and informality. Normative legal act enters into force on the next day after its publication in the \"Teis\u0117s akt\u0173 registras\", unless it has a later entry into force date. The European Union law is an integral part of the Lithuanian legal system since 1 May 2004.\nAfter breaking away from the Soviet Union, Lithuiana had a difficult crime situation, however, the law enforcement agencies fought crime over the years, making Lithuania a reasonably safe country. Crime in Lithuania has been declining rapidly. Law enforcement is primarily the responsibility of local \"Lietuvos policija\" (Lithuanian Police) commissariats. They are supplemented by the \"Lietuvos policijos antiteroristini\u0173 operacij\u0173 rinktin\u0117 Aras\" (Anti-Terrorist Operations Team of the Lithuanian Police \"Aras\"), \"Lietuvos kriminalin\u0117s policijos biuras\" (Lithuanian Criminal Police Bureau), \"Lietuvos policijos kriminalistini\u0173 tyrim\u0173 centras\" (Lithuanian Police Forensic Research Center) and \"Lietuvos keli\u0173 policijos tarnyba\" (Lithuanian Road Police Service).\nIn 2017, there were 63,846 crimes registered in Lithuania. Of these, thefts comprised a large part with 19,630 cases (13.2% less than in 2016). While 2,835 crimes were serious and very serious (crimes that may lead to more than six years imprisonment), which is 14.5% less than in 2016. In total, 129 homicides or attempted homicide occurred (19.9% less than in 2016), while serious bodily harm was registered 178 times (17.6% less than in 2016). Another problematic crime contraband cases also decreased by 27.2% from 2016. Meanwhile, crimes in electronic data and information technology security fields increased by 26.6%. In the 2024 Special Eurobarometer, 24% of Lithuanians said that corruption affects their daily lives (EU average 27%). Moreover, 83% of Lithuanians regarded corruption as widespread in their country (EU average 68%), and 78% agreed that bribery and the use of connections is often the easiest way of obtaining certain public services (EU average 63%). \nCapital punishment in Lithuania was suspended in 1996 and eliminated in 1998. Imprisonment rate in Lithuania is among the highest in the EU, although it has decreased by nearly half between 2013 and 2023. According to scientist Gintautas Sakalauskas, the high imprisonment rate is not because of a high criminality rate in the country, but due to Lithuania's high repression level and mistrust in the society.\nAdministrative divisions.\n&lt;br&gt;Alytus County \n&lt;br&gt;Kaunas County \n&lt;br&gt;Klaip\u0117da&lt;br&gt;County \n&lt;br&gt;Marijampol\u0117&lt;br&gt;County \n&lt;br&gt;Panev\u0117\u017eys County \n&lt;br&gt;\u0160iauliai County \n&lt;br&gt;Taurag\u0117 County \n&lt;br&gt;Tel\u0161iai County \n&lt;br&gt;Utena County \n&lt;br&gt;Vilnius County \n\"Baltic Sea\" \n\"Latvia\" \n\"Belarus\" \n\"Poland\" \n\"Russia\" \nThe current system of administrative division was established in 1994 and modified in 2000 to meet the requirements of the European Union. The country's 10 counties (Lithuanian: singular \u2013 \"apskritis\", plural \u2013 \"apskritys\") are subdivided into 60 municipalities (Lithuanian: singular \u2013 \"savivaldyb\u0117\", plural \u2013 \"savivaldyb\u0117s\"), and further divided into 546 elderships (Lithuanian: singular \u2013 \"seni\u016bnija\", plural \u2013 \"seni\u016bnijos\"). There are also 5 distinct cultural regions \u2013 Dz\u016bkija, Auk\u0161taitija, Suvalkija, Samogitia and Lithuania Minor.\nMunicipalities have been the most important unit of administration since the system of county governorship (\"apskrities vir\u0161ininkas\") was dissolved in 2010. Some municipalities are historically called \"district municipalities\" (often shortened to \"district\"), while others are called \"city municipalities\" (sometimes shortened to \"city\"). Each has its own elected government. The election of municipality councils originally occurred every three years, but now takes place every four years. The council appoints elders to govern the elderships. Mayors have been directly elected since 2015; prior to that, they were appointed by the council.\nElderships are the smallest administrative units and do not play a role in national politics. They provide necessary local public services\u2014for example, registering births and deaths in rural areas. They are most active in the social sector, identifying needy individuals or families and organizing and distributing welfare and other forms of relief. Some citizens feel that elderships have no real power and receive too little attention, and that they could otherwise become a source of local initiative for addressing rural problems.\nForeign relations.\nLithuania became a member of the United Nations on 18 September 1991, and is a signatory to a number of its organizations and other international agreements. It is also a member of the European Union, the Council of Europe, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as well as NATO and its adjunct North Atlantic Coordinating Council. Lithuania gained membership in the World Trade Organization on 31 May 2001, and joined the OECD on 5 July 2018, while also seeking membership in other Western organizations. Lithuania has established diplomatic relations with 149 countries. During the second half of 2013, Lithuania assumed the role of the presidency of the European Union. Lithuania is active in developing cooperation among northern European countries. It is a member of the interparliamentary Baltic Assembly, the intergovernmental Baltic Council of Ministers and the Council of the Baltic Sea States.\nLithuania cooperates with Nordic and the two other Baltic countries through the Nordic-Baltic Eight format. A similar format, NB6, unites Nordic and Baltic members of EU. NB6's focus is to discuss and agree on positions before presenting them to the Council of the European Union and at the meetings of EU foreign affairs ministers. The Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) was established in Copenhagen in 1992 as an informal regional political forum. Its main aim is to promote integration and to close contacts between the region's countries. The members of CBSS are Iceland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Germany, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Poland, Russia, and the European Commission. Its observer states are Belarus, France, Italy, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, the United States, the United Kingdom, and Ukraine.\nThe Nordic Council of Ministers and Lithuania engage in political cooperation to attain mutual goals and to determine new trends and possibilities for joint cooperation. The council's information office aims to disseminate Nordic concepts and to demonstrate and promote Nordic cooperation. Together with the five Nordic countries and the two other Baltic countries, it is a member of the Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) and cooperates in its NORDPLUS programme, which is committed to education.\nPoland was highly supportive of Lithuanian independence, despite the discriminatory treatment of its Polish minority. The former Solidarity leader and Polish President Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa criticised the government of Lithuania over discrimination against the Polish minority and rejected the Order of Vytautas the Great. Lithuania maintains warm relations with Georgia and strongly supports its European Union and NATO aspirations. During the Russo-Georgian War in 2008, when the Russian troops were occupying the territory of Georgia and approaching towards the Georgian capital Tbilisi, President Valdas Adamkus, together with the Polish and Ukrainian presidents, went to Tbilisi by answering to the Georgians request of the international assistance. Shortly, Lithuanians and the Lithuanian Catholic Church also began collecting financial support for the war victims.\nIn 2004\u20132009, Dalia Grybauskait\u0117 served as European Commissioner for Financial Programming and the Budget within the Jos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso-led Commission.\nIn 2013, Lithuania was elected to the United Nations Security Council for a two-year term, becoming the first Baltic country elected to this post. During its membership, Lithuania actively supported Ukraine and often condemned Russia for the war in Ukraine, immediately earning Ukrainian esteem. As the war in Donbas progressed, President Dalia Grybauskait\u0117 compared the Russian President Vladimir Putin to Josef Stalin and to Adolf Hitler; she also called Russia a \"terrorist state\".\nIn 2018 Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia were awarded the Peace of Westphalia Prize for their exceptional model of democratic development and contribution to peace in the continent. In 2019 Lithuania condemned the Turkish offensive into north-eastern Syria. In December 2021, Lithuania reported that in an escalation of the diplomatic spat with China over its relations with Taiwan, China had stopped all imports from Lithuania. According to Lithuanian intelligence agencies, in 2023 there was an increase in Chinese intelligence activity against Lithuania, including cyberespionage and increased focus on Lithuania's internal affairs and foreign policy.\nThe 2023 NATO summit was held in Vilnius.\nMilitary.\nThe Lithuanian Armed Forces comprises the Lithuanian Land Force, Lithuanian Air Force, Lithuanian Naval Force, Lithuanian Special Operations Force and other units: Logistics Command, Training and Doctrine Command, Headquarters Battalion, Military Police. Directly subordinated to the Chief of Defence are the Special Operations Forces and Military Police. The Reserve Forces are under command of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces.\nThe Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of some 20,000 active personnel, which may be supported by reserve forces. Compulsory conscription ended in 2008 but was reintroduced in 2015. As of 2024, the Lithuanian Armed Forces have 30 soldiers and officers participating in nine international operations and European Union training missions deployed in Kosovo, Iraq, Central African Republic, Djibouti, Mozambique, Spain, Italy, and in the United Kingdom, providing training for Ukrainian soldiers on Operation Interflex.\nLithuania became a full member of NATO in March 2004. Fighter jets of NATO members are deployed in \u0160iauliai Air Base and provide security for the Baltic airspace. Since 2014, Lithuania participates in the British-led Joint Expeditionary Force.\nBeginning in summer of 2005, Lithuania was part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team in Chaghcharan in Ghor Province.Since joining international operations in 1994, Lithuania has lost two soldiers: Lieutenant Normundas Valteris fell in Bosnia, as his patrol vehicle drove over a mine. Sergeant Ar\u016bnas Jarmalavi\u010dius was fatally wounded during an attack on the camp of his Provincial Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan.\nThe Lithuanian National Defence Policy aims to guarantee the preservation of the independence and sovereignty of the state, the integrity of its land, territorial waters and airspace, and its constitutional order. Its main strategic goals are to defend the country's interests, and to maintain and expand the capabilities of its armed forces so they may contribute to and participate in the missions of NATO and European Union member states.\nThe defense ministry is responsible for combat forces, search and rescue, and intelligence operations. The 5,000 border guards fall under the Interior Ministry's supervision and are responsible for border protection, passport and customs duties, and share responsibility with the navy for smuggling and drug trafficking interdiction. A special security department handles VIP protection and communications security. In 2015 National Cyber Security Centre of Lithuania was created. Paramilitary organisation Lithuanian Riflemen's Union acts as a civilian self-defence institution.\nAccording to NATO, in 2020, Lithuania allocated 2.13% of its GDP to the national defense. For a long time, especially after the 2008 financial crisis, Lithuania lagged behind NATO allies in terms of defence spending. However, it increased funding, exceeding the NATO guideline of 2% in 2019. President Naus\u0117da called for more NATO troops on 22 April 2022, saying NATO should increase its deployment of troops in Lithuania and elsewhere on Europe's eastern flank following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, during a meeting in Vilnius.\nEconomy.\nLithuania has an open and mixed economy that is classified as a high-income economy by the World Bank. As of 2017[ [update]] the three largest sectors were services (63% of GDP), industry (24%) and agriculture (3%). On 1 January 2015, the euro became the national currency, replacing litas, which had been in circulation since 1993.\nMineral products comprised the largest share of exports (14%) in 2024; other major sectors include machinery and appliances, electrical equipment (14%), chemical products (11%), food, beverages and tobacco products (9%). The largest markets for exports were Latvia (12%), Poland (10%), and Germany (9%). Exports equaled 88% of GDP in 2022.\nGDP experienced very high real growth rates for the decade up to 2009, peaking at 11% in 2007. As a result, the country was often termed a Baltic Tiger. However, in 2009 due to the 2008 financial crisis, GDP contracted 15% and unemployment rate reached 17.8% in 2010. Growth has since been much slower. According to the IMF, financial conditions are conducive to growth and financial soundness indicators remain strong. The public debt ratio in 2016 was 40% of GDP; it had been 15% in 2008.\nOn average, more than 95% of all foreign direct investment (FDI) comes from EU countries. Sweden is historically the largest investor with 20% \u2013 30% of FDI. FDI into Lithuania spiked in 2017, reaching its highest ever recorded number of greenfield investment projects. In 2017, Lithuania was third, after Ireland and Singapore by the average job value of investment projects.\nThe US was the leading source country in 2017, 25% of total FDI. Based on the Eurostat's data, in 2017 the value of exports recorded the most rapid growth of Baltic states and across Europe at 17%.\nBetween 2004 and 2016, one of five Lithuanians emigrated, seeking better opportunities and higher salaries abroad. Long term emigration and economic growth has resulted in a shortage in the labor market and growth in salaries being larger than growth in labor efficiency. Unemployment in 2017 was 8%. As of 2022, median wealth per adult was $32,000 (mean was $70,000), while total national wealth was $147 billion. As of 2023 Q2, the average monthly gross salary was \u20ac2,000.&lt;ref name=\"https://osp.stat.gov.lt\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Implicit tax rates on labor, capital and corporate income in Lithuania have been among of the lowest in the EU. The nominal personal income tax rate is 20%, with 32% applied on high incomes. The corporate tax rate is 16% for most companies and 6% for small businesses; 7 free economic zones operate.\nInformation technology production is growing, reaching \u20ac2 billion in 2016. In 2017, 35 financial technology companies came to Lithuania as a result of the government and Bank of Lithuania simplifying procedures. Lithuania has granted a total of 39 e-money licenses, second in the EU to the UK. In 2018, Google set up a payment company in Lithuania. Europe's first international blockchain centre launched in Vilnius in 2018. Since 2021, Lithuania has issued hundreds of licenses for cryptocurrency exchange and storage operations, making it one of the leading countries in the EU in this sector.\nAgriculture.\nAgriculture has been one of Lithuania's most important occupations for many centuries. Accession to the European Union in 2004 ushered in a new agricultural era. The EU pursues a very high standard of food safety and purity. In 1999, the Seimas adopted a law on product safety, and in 2000 it adopted a law on food. The reform of the agricultural market has been carried out on the basis of these two laws.\nIn 2016, agricultural production was \u20ac2.3 billion. Cereal crops occupied the largest part (5710 tons); other significant types include: sugar beet (934 tons), rapeseed (393 tons) and potatoes (340 tons). Products totaling \u20ac4,385 million were exported to foreign markets, of which products for \u20ac3,165 million were of Lithuanian origin. Export of agricultural and food products accounted for 19% of all exports of goods.\nOrganic farming is becoming more popular. The status of organic growers and producers is granted by the public body \"Ekoagros\". In 2016, there were 2539 such farms that occupied 225,542 hectares. Of these, 43% were cereals, 31% perennial grasses, 14% leguminous crops and 12% others.\nScience and technology.\nLithuania ranks moderately in the International Innovation Index, and is placed 15th among EU countries by the European Innovation Scoreboard. Lithuania was ranked 33th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. Lasers and biotechnology are flagship fields of the science and high-tech industry. \"\u0160viesos konversija\" (\"Light Conversion\") has developed a femtosecond laser system that has 80% market share worldwide, with applications in DNA research, ophthalmological surgeries, and nanotechnology. The Vilnius University Laser Research Center has developed one of the most powerful femtosecond lasers in the world dedicated primarily to oncological diseases. In 1963, Vytautas Strai\u017eys and his colleagues created Vilnius photometric system that is used in astronomy. Noninvasive intracranial pressure and blood flow measuring devices were developed by Kaunas University of Technology scientist A. Ragauskas. K\u0119stutis Pyragas contributed to the study of chaos theory with his method of delayed feedback control, the Pyragas method. Kavli Prize laureate Virginijus \u0160ik\u0161nys is known for his discoveries in CRISPR, namely with respect to CRISPR-Cas9.\nLithuania has launched three satellites to space: LitSat-1, Lituanica SAT-1 and LituanicaSAT-2. Lithuanian Museum of Ethnocosmology and Mol\u0117tai Astronomical Observatory is located in Kulionys. Fifteen R&amp;D institutions are members of Lithuanian Space Association; Lithuania is a cooperating state with European Space Agency. Rimantas Stankevi\u010dius is the only ethnically Lithuanian astronaut.\nLithuania in 2018 became an Associated Member State of CERN. Two CERN incubators in Vilnius and Kaunas will be hosted. The most advanced scientific research is being conducted at the Life Sciences Center, Center For Physical Sciences and Technology. From 2011 to 2016, yearly growth of the biotech and life science sector reached 22%. 16 academic institutions, 15 R&amp;D centres (science parks and innovation valleys) and more than 370 manufacturers operate in the life science and biotech industry.\nIn 2008 the Valley development programme was started aiming to upgrade scientific research infrastructure and encourage business and science cooperation. Five R&amp;D Valleys were launched \u2013 J\u016brinis (maritime technologies), Nemunas (agro, bioenergy, forestry), Saul\u0117tekis (laser and light, semiconductor), Santara (biotechnology, medicine), Santaka (sustainable chemistry and pharmacy). Lithuanian Innovation Center was created to provide support for innovations and research institutions.\nTourism.\nAccording to the World Travel and Tourism Council, the tourism sector contributed approximately \u20ac1.7 billion to the national economy in 2023, accounting for 2.3% of the country's GDP. This represents a notable recovery from the downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, although it remains below pre-pandemic levels. In 2023, Lithuania welcomed over 1.1 million international visitors, marking a substantial recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Foreign tourists accounted for nearly a third of the total population. The majority of international tourists originated from neighboring countries, notably Belarus and Poland. Domestic tourism has also seen significant growth, with residents making around 12.8 million trips within the country in 2023. Most of these were same-day trips, totaling nearly 10 million.\nKey urban centres such as Vilnius, Kaunas, and Klaip\u0117da attract numerous visitors because of their rich history and cultural offerings. Vilnius is renowned for its baroque architecture and has been recognized as the European Green Capital for 2025. Seaside resorts like Palanga and Neringa are popular for their sandy beaches and unique landscapes. Neringa, part of the Curonian Spit, is UNESCO's World Heritage Site known for its colossal sand dunes and pine forests. Spa towns such as Druskininkai offer wellness retreats, with Druskininkai featuring the largest water park in Eastern Europe and the Snow Arena, one of the largest indoor skiing slopes in Europe.\nLithuania offers diverse outdoor activities. Hot air ballooning is particularly popular in Vilnius and Trakai, providing aerial views of the historic landscapes. Cycling tourism is on the rise, with the country boasting over 3,769\u00a0km of bicycle tracks, including 1,988\u00a0km of asphalt pavement. The EuroVelo 10 (Baltic Sea Cycle Route) traverses the Curonian Spit, offering views of sand dunes and coastal towns like Palanga and Nida. The EuroVelo 11 (East Europe Route) passes through eastern Lithuania, including Vilnius and Trakai, and natural areas like Labanoras Regional Park. The Nemunas Delta Regional Park is a haven for birdwatchers, hosting over 300 bird species, including rare and endangered ones like the greater spotted eagle and aquatic warbler. The park's wetlands serve as crucial resting sites for migratory birds.\nCommunication.\nLithuania has a well developed communications infrastructure. The country has 2.8 million citizens and 5 million SIM cards. The largest LTE (4G) mobile network covers 97% of Lithuania's territory. Usage of fixed phone lines has been rapidly decreasing due to rapid expansion of mobile-cellular services. In 2017, Lithuania was top 30 in the world by average mobile broadband speeds and top 20 by average fixed broadband speeds.\nLithuania was also top 7 in 2017 in the List of countries by 4G LTE penetration. In 2016, Lithuania was ranked 17th in United Nations' e-participation index. There are four TIER III datacenters in Lithuania.\nLithuania is 44th globally ranked country on data center density according to Cloudscene.\nDevelopment of Rural Areas Broadband Network (RAIN) was started with the objective to provide residents, state and municipal authorities and businesses with fibre-optic broadband access in rural areas. RAIN infrastructure allows 51 communications operators to provide network services to their clients. The project was funded by the European Union and the Lithuanian government. 72% of households have access to internet, a number which in 2017 was among EU's lowest and in 2016 ranked 97th by CIA World Factbook. The number of households with internet access is expected to increase and reach 77% by 2021. Almost 50% of Lithuanians had smartphones in 2016, a number that is expected to increase to 65% by 2022.\nLithuania has the highest FTTH (Fiber to the home) penetration rate in Europe (36.8% in September 2016) according to FTTH Council Europe.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nRail transport consists of of Russian gauge railway, of which are electrified, and of European standard gauge lines starting at the Lithuania\u2013Poland border. Lithuania received its first railway connection in the middle of the 19th century, when the Saint Petersburg\u2013Warsaw railway was constructed. It included a stretch from Daugavpils via Vilnius and Kaunas to Virbalis. The first and only still operating Kaunas tunnel was completed in 1860. The Rail Baltica railway will link Kaunas to Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Poland, and Germany. \nAmong EU countries, Lithuania has the highest share of freight transported by rail, at 31.7% in 2023. This has dropped over 50% since 2018, caused mainly by sanctions imposed on Belarusian exports and Russia. In 2017, Lithuanian Railways (\"Lietuvos Gele\u017einkeliai\"), the company that operates most of the railway lines, received an EU penalty for breaching the EU's antitrust laws and restricting competition in rail freight.\nLithuania has an extensive network of motorways. WEF grades Lithuanian roads at 4.7 / 7.0 and the Lithuanian road authority (LAKD) at 6.5 / 10.0. Lithuanian trucking companies drew attention in 2016 and 2017 with huge and record-breaking orders of trucks. Almost 90% of commercial truck traffic is international transport, the highest of any EU country. Transportation is the third largest sector of the Lithuanian economy. The sector accounts for 40% of national energy consumption and 75% of oil usage. The car fleet is among the oldest within the European Union and constitutes the most significant single source of domestic greenhouse gas emissions.\nThe Port of Klaip\u0117da is the only commercial cargo port in Lithuania. In 2011 45.5 million tons of cargo were handled (including B\u016bting\u0117 oil terminal figures). The port is not among the EU's 20 largest ports, but it is the eighth largest port in the Baltic Sea region with ongoing expansion plans. As of 2022, the LIWA (Lithuanian Inland Waterways Authority, \"Vidaus vandens keliu direkcija\" in Lithuanian) is developing a strategy to resurrect cargo shipping on the Nemunas. Its fleet of electric ships will travel 260\u00a0km between the Port of Klaipda and the industrial and transportation centre of Kaunas. The project is anticipated to need a \u20ac75.7 million initial investment, and estimated to eliminate 48,000 truck trips annually. The inland river cargo port in Marvel\u0117, linking Kaunas and Klaip\u0117da, received its first cargo in 2019.\nVilnius Airport is the largest airport in Lithuania and 91st busiest airport in Europe. It served 3.8 million passengers in 2016. Other airports include Kaunas Airport, Palanga International Airport and \u0160iauliai Airport. Kaunas Airport is a small commercial cargo airport that started regular commercial cargo traffic in 2011.\nEnergy.\n \nSystematic diversification of energy imports and resources is the key energy strategy. Long-term aims were defined in National Energy Independence strategy in 2012. It was estimated that strategic energy independence initiatives will cost \u20ac6.3\u20137.8 billion and provide annual savings of \u20ac0.9\u20131.1 billion.\nAfter the decommissioning of the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant, Lithuania turned from electricity exporter to electricity importer. As of 2015[ [update]], 66% of electrical power was imported. Unit No. 1 was closed in 2004, as a condition of entry into the European Union; Unit No. 2 was closed down in 2009. Proposals have been made to construct a new Visaginas Nuclear Power Plant. However, a non-binding referendum held in 2012 clouded the prospects for the Visaginas project, as 63% of voters said no to a new nuclear power plant.\nThe main source of electrical power is the Elektr\u0117nai Power Plant. Other primary sources are the Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant and Kaunas Hydroelectric Power Plant. Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant is the only power plant in the Baltic states to be used for regulation of the power system's operation with generating capacity of 900 MW for at least 12 hours. First geothermal heating plant (Klaip\u0117da Geothermal Demonstration Plant) in the Baltic Sea region was built in 2004.\nLithuania\u2013Sweden submarine electricity interconnection NordBalt and Lithuania\u2013Poland electricity interconnection LitPol Link were launched at the end of 2015. In 2018, synchronising the Baltic states' electricity grid with the Synchronous grid of Continental Europe has started. In 2016, 20.8% of electricity consumed in Lithuania came from renewable sources.\nIn order to break down Gazprom's natural gas monopoly the first large scale LNG import terminal (Klaip\u0117da LNG FSRU) in the Baltic region was built in the port of Klaip\u0117da in 2014. The Klaip\u0117da LNG terminal was called Independence, thus emphasising the aim to diversify the energy market of Lithuania. Norwegian company Equinor supplies of natural gas annually from 2015 until 2020. The terminal is able to meet 100 percent of demand, and is projected to meet 90 percent of the demand in Latvia and Estonia. Gas Interconnection Poland\u2013Lithuania, also known as Lithuania\u2013Poland pipeline, became operational in 2022.\nDemographics.\nSince the Neolithic period, the demographics of Lithuania have stayed fairly homogenous. There is a high probability that the inhabitants of present-day Lithuania have similar genetic compositions to their ancestors, although without being actually isolated from them. The population has little apparent genetic differences among ethnic subgroups. A 2004 analysis of MtDNA revealed that Lithuanians are genetically close to the Slavic and Finno-Ugric speaking populations of northern and eastern Europe. Y-chromosome SNP haplogroup analysis showed Lithuanians to be genetically closest to Latvians and Estonians.\nThe median age in 2022 was 44 years (male: 41, female: 47). In 2021, the age structure of the population was as follows:\nLithuania has a sub-replacement fertility rate: the total fertility rate was 1.34 children born per woman in 2021, and the mean age of women at childbirth was 30.3 years. The average age of first childbirth for women was 28.2 years. The human sex ratio is male leaning for the age categories 15\u201344, with 1.0352 males for every female. As of 2021[ [update]], 25.6% of births were to unmarried women. The mean age at first marriage in 2021 was 28.3 years for women and 30.5 years for men.\nEthnic groups and languages.\nEthnic Lithuanians make up about 80% of the country's population. In 2024, 82.6% of residents were ethnic Lithuanians. Several sizeable minorities exist, such as Poles (6.3%), Russians (5.0%), Belarusians (2.1%) and Ukrainians (1.7%). Poles in Lithuania are the largest minority, concentrated in southeast Lithuania (the Vilnius Region), constituting majority in \u0160al\u010dininkai (76.3%) and Vilnius District Municipality (46.8%). Russians in Lithuania are the second largest minority, concentrated in Visaginas (47.4%), Zarasai District Municipality (17.2%) and Klaip\u0117da (16%). About 2,250 Roma live in Lithuania, mostly in Vilnius, Kaunas and Panev\u0117\u017eys; their organizations are supported by the National Minority and Emigration Department. For centuries, Tatar and Karaite communities have lived in Lithuania. In 2021, there were around 2,150 registered Tatars and 196 Karaites in the country.\nThe official language is Lithuanian, but in some areas there is a significant presence of minority languages such as Polish, Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian. The greatest presence of minorities and the use of these languages are in \u0160al\u010dininkai, Visaginas, and Vilnius District. In 1941, the Jewish population reached its peak at approximately 250,000 people, making up about 10% of the population. Today, however, it has dwindled to a very small number. Yiddish is spoken by members of the tiny remaining Jewish community. The state laws guarantee education in minority languages, and there are numerous publicly funded schools in the areas populated by minorities, with Polish as the language of instruction being the most widely available.\nAccording to the survey carried out within the framework of the Lithuanian census of 2021, 85.33% of the population speaks Lithuanian as their native language, 6.8% are native speakers of Russian and 5.1% of Polish. As of 2021[ [update]], 60.6% of residents speak Russian as a foreign language, 31.1% \u2013 English, 10.5% \u2013 Lithuanian, 8% \u2013 German, 7.9% \u2013 Polish, 1.9% \u2013 French, 2.6% \u2013 various others. Most schools teach English as the first foreign language, but students may also study German, French and Spanish; Russian is available as a second foreign language. Around 85% of upper secondary school students were studying English in 2022, and around 80% of people in the 15-19 age group reported knowing English in 2011.\nUrbanization.\nThere has been a steady movement of population to the cities since the 1990s, encouraged by the planning of regional centres, such as Alytus, Marijampol\u0117, Utena, Plung\u0117, and Ma\u017eeikiai. By the early 21st century, about two-thirds of the population lived in urban areas. As of 2021[ [update]], 68.19% of the population lives in urban areas. Functional urban areas include Vilnius (population 708,203), Kaunas (population 391,153), and Panev\u0117\u017eys (population 124,526). The fDI of the Financial Times in their research \"Cities and Regions of the Future\" ranked Vilnius fourth in the mid-sized European cities category in the 2018\u201319 ranking, second in the 2022\u201323 ranking, second in 2023 ranking while the city claimed 24th spot in the worldwide overall ranking in 2021\u201322 and Vilnius county was ranked 10th in the small European regions category in 2018\u201319, fifth in 2022\u201323, fifth in 2023 rankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHealth.\nLithuania provides free state-funded healthcare to all citizens and registered long-term residents. It co-exists with a significant private healthcare sector. In 2003\u20132012, the network of hospitals was restructured, as part of wider healthcare service reforms. It started in 2003\u20132005 with the expansion of ambulatory services and primary care. In 2016, Lithuania ranked 27th in Europe in the Euro health consumer index, a ranking of European healthcare systems based on waiting time, results and other indicators. Lithuania ranked 19th in the 2024 edition of the World Happiness Report.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], life expectancy at birth was 76.0 (70.6 years for males and 81.6 for females) and the infant mortality rate was 2.99 per 1,000 births. The annual population growth rate increased by 0.3% in 2007. Lithuania has seen a dramatic rise in suicides in the 1990s. The suicide rate has been constantly decreasing since, but it still remains the highest in the EU and one of the highest in the OECD. The suicide rate as of 2019 is 20.2 per 100,000 people. Suicide in Lithuania has been a subject of research, but the main reasons behind the high rate are psychological and economic, including social transformations and economic recessions, alcoholism, lack of tolerance in the society, and bullying.\nBy 2000, the vast majority of health care institutions were non-profit-making enterprises and a private sector developed, providing mostly outpatient services which are paid for out-of-pocket. The Ministry of Health also runs a few health care facilities and is involved in the running of the two major Lithuanian teaching hospitals. It is responsible for the State Public Health Centre which manages the public health network including ten county public health centres with their local branches. The ten counties run county hospitals and specialised health care facilities.\nThere is Compulsory Health Insurance for the Lithuanian residents. There are 5 territorial health insurance funds, covering Vilnius, Kaunas, Klaip\u0117da, \u0160iauliai and Panev\u0117\u017eys. Contributions for people who are economically active are 9% of income. Emergency medical services are provided free of charge to all residents. Access to the secondary and tertiary care, such as hospital treatment, is normally via referral by a general practitioner. Lithuania has one of the lowest health care prices in Europe.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, 74.2% of residents were Catholics. Catholicism has been the main religion since the official Christianisation of Lithuania in 1387. The Catholic Church was persecuted by the Russian Empire as part of the Russification policies and by the Soviet Union as part of the overall anti-religious campaigns. During the Soviet era, some priests actively led the resistance against the communist regime, as symbolised by the Hill of Crosses and exemplified by \"The Chronicle of the Catholic Church in Lithuania\".\n3.7% of the population are Eastern Orthodox, mainly among the Russian minority. The community of Old Believers (0.6% of population) dates back to the 1660s. Protestants are 0.8%, of which 0.6% are Lutheran and 0.2% are Reformed. Before World War II, according to Losch (1932), the Lutherans were 3.3% of the total population. They were mainly Germans and Prussian Lithuanians in the Klaip\u0117da Region (Memel territory). This population fled or was expelled after the war, and Protestantism is now mainly represented by ethnic Lithuanians throughout the northern and western parts of the country, as well as in large urban areas. Newly arriving evangelical churches have established missions since 1990.\nHinduism is a minority religion and a fairly recent development. Hinduism is spread by Hindu organizations: ISKCON, Sathya Sai Baba, Brahma Kumaris and Osho Rajneesh. ISKCON (Lithuanian: \"Kri\u0161nos s\u0105mon\u0117s jud\u0117jimas\") is the largest and the oldest movement as the first Krishna followers date to 1979. Brahma Kumaris maintains the Centre Brahma Kumaris in Antakalnis, Vilnius.\nThe historical communities of Lipka Tatars maintain Islam as their religion. Lithuania was historically home to a significant Jewish community and was an important centre of Jewish scholarship and culture from the 18th century until the eve of World War II. Of the approximately 220,000 Jews who lived in Lithuania in June 1941, almost all were killed during the Holocaust. The Lithuanian Jewish community numbered about 4,000 at the end of 2009.\nRomuva, the neopagan revival of the ancient religious practices, has gained popularity over the years. Romuva claims to continue living pagan traditions, which survived in folklore and customs. Romuva is a polytheistic pagan faith, which asserts the sanctity of nature and has elements of ancestor worship. According to the 2001 census, there were 1,270 people of Baltic faith in Lithuania. That number jumped to 5,118 in the 2011 census and decreased to 3,917 in 2021 census.\nEducation.\nThe constitution mandates ten-year education ending at age 16 and guarantees a free public higher education for students deemed 'good'. The Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Lithuania proposes national educational policies and goals that are then voted for in the Seimas. Laws govern long-term educational strategy along with general laws on standards for higher education, vocational training, law and science, adult education, and special education. 5.4% of GDP or 15.4% of total public expenditure was spent for education in 2016.\nAccording to the World Bank, the literacy rate among Lithuanians aged 15 years and older is 100%. School attendance rates are above the EU average, and school leave is less common than in the EU. According to Eurostat Lithuania leads among other countries of the European Union in people with secondary education (93.3%). Based on OECD data, Lithuania is among the top 5 countries in the world in postsecondary (tertiary) education attainment. As of 2022[ [update]], 58.15% of the population aged 25 to 34, and 33.28% of the population aged 55 to 64 had completed tertiary education. The share of tertiary-educated 25\u201364-year-olds in STEM (Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields in Lithuania were above the OECD average (29% and 26% respectively), similarly to business, administration and law (25% and 23% respectively).\nThe modern education system has multiple structural problems. Insufficient funding, quality issues, and decreasing student population are the most prevalent. Teacher salaries are below the EU average, despite significant increases since 2011. Low teacher salaries was the primary reason behind national teacher strikes in 2014, 2015, and 2016. Salaries in the higher education sector are also low. Many professors have a second job to supplement their income. PISA report from 2022 found that results in math, science and reading were around OECD average, after trailing the OECD average in earlier reports in 2010 and 2015, although the relative improvement was primarily driven by the decrease in performance in the other OECD countries as a result of COVID 19 pandemic. The population ages 6 to 19 has decreased by 36% between 2005 and 2015. As a result, the student-teacher ratio is decreasing and expenditure per student is increasing, but schools, particularly in rural areas, are forced into reorganizations and consolidations. As with other Baltic nations, in particular Latvia, the large volume of higher education graduates within the country, coupled with the high rate of spoken second languages is contributing to an education brain drain.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], there were 15 public and 6 private universities as well as 16 public and 11 private colleges. Vilnius University is one of the oldest universities in Northern Europe and the largest university in Lithuania. Kaunas University of Technology is the largest technical university in the Baltic States and the second largest university in Lithuania. In an attempt to reduce costs and adapt to sharply decreasing number of high-school students, parliament decided to reduce the number of universities. In early 2018, Lithuanian University of Educational Sciences and Aleksandras Stulginskis University were merged into Vytautas Magnus University.\nCulture.\nLithuanian language.\nThe Lithuanian language (\"lietuvi\u0173 kalba\") is recognized as one of the official languages of the European Union. There are about 2.96 million native Lithuanian speakers in Lithuania and about 200,000 abroad. Lithuanian is a Baltic language, closely related to Latvian, although they are not mutually intelligible. It is written in an adapted version of the Roman script. Lithuanian is believed to be the linguistically most conservative living Indo-European tongue, retaining many features of Proto Indo-European. Lithuanian language studies are important for comparative linguistics and for reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European language.\nThere are two main dialects: Auk\u0161taitian dialect and Samogitian dialect. Auk\u0161taitian dialect is mainly used in the central, southern and eastern parts of Lithuania while Samogitian dialect is used in the western part of the country. The Samogitian dialect has many completely different words and is even considered a separate language by some linguists. Nowadays, the distinguishing feature between the two dialects is the unequal pronunciation of accented and unaccented two-vowels uo and ie.\nThe groundwork for written Lithuanian was laid in 16th and 17th centuries by Lithuanian noblemen and scholars, who promoted Lithuanian language, created dictionaries and published books \u2013 Mikalojus Dauk\u0161a, Stanislovas Rapolionis, Abraomas Kulvietis, Jonas Bretk\u016bnas, Martynas Ma\u017evydas, Konstantinas Sirvydas, Simonas Vai\u0161noras-Varni\u0161kis.\nThe first grammar book of the Lithuanian language \"Grammatica Litvanica\" was published in Latin in 1653 by Danielius Kleinas.\nJonas Jablonskis' works and activities are especially important for the Lithuanian literature moving from the use of dialects to a standard Lithuanian language. The linguistic material which he collected was published in the 20 volumes of Academic Dictionary of Lithuanian and is still being used in research and in editing of texts and books. He also introduced the letter \"\u016b\" into Lithuanian writing.\nLiterature.\nThere is a great deal of Lithuanian literature written in Latin, the main scholarly language of the Middle Ages. The edicts of the King Mindaugas are the prime example of the literature of this kind. The Letters of Gediminas are another crucial heritage of the Lithuanian Latin writings.\nOne of the first Lithuanian authors who wrote in Latin was early Renaissance poet Nicolaus Hussovianus. His poem \"Carmen de statura, feritate ac venatione bisontis\" (\"A Song about the Appearance, Savagery and Hunting of the Bison\"), published in 1523, describes the Lithuanian landscape, way of life and customs, touches on some actual political problems, and reflects the clash of paganism and Christianity. A person under the pseudonym Michalo Lituanus wrote a treatise \"De moribus tartarorum, lituanorum et moscorum\" (\"On the Customs of Tatars, Lithuanians and Muscovites\") in the middle of the 16th century. An extraordinary figure in the cultural life of Lithuania in the 16th century was the lawyer and poet of Spanish origin Petrus Roysius Maurus Alcagnicensis. The publicist, lawyer, and mayor of Vilnius, Augustinus Rotundus wrote a no longer existent history of Lithuania in Latin around 1560. loannes Radvanus, a humanist poet of the second half of the 16th century, wrote an epic poem imitating the Aeneid of Vergil. His \"Radivilias\", intended to become the Lithuanian national epic, was published in Vilnius in 1588.\n17th century Lithuanian scholars also wrote in Latin \u2013 Kazimieras Kojelavi\u010dius-Vij\u016bkas, \u017dygimantas Liauksminas are known for their Latin writings in theology, rhetorics and music. Albertas Kojalavi\u010dius-Vij\u016bkas wrote first printed Lithuanian history \"Historia Lithuania\". Lithuanian literary works in the Lithuanian language started being published in the 16th century. In 1547 Martynas Ma\u017evydas compiled and published the first printed Lithuanian book \"Katekizmo prasti \u017eod\u017eiai\" (\"The Simple Words of Catechism\"). He was followed by Mikalojus Dauk\u0161a with \"Katechizmas\". In the 16th and 17th centuries, as in the whole Christian Europe, Lithuanian literature was primarily religious.\nThe evolution of the old (14th\u201318th century) Lithuanian literature ends with Kristijonas Donelaitis, one of the most prominent authors of the Age of Enlightenment. Donelaitis' poem \"Metai\" (\"The Seasons\") is a landmark of the Lithuanian fiction literature, written in hexameter. With a mix of Classicism, Sentimentalism and Romanticism, the Lithuanian literature of the first half of the 19th century is represented by Maironis, Antanas Baranauskas, Simonas Daukantas, Oscar Milosz, and Simonas Stanevi\u010dius. During the tsarist annexation of Lithuania in the 19th century, the Lithuanian press ban was implemented, which led to the formation of the \"Knygne\u0161iai\" (Lithuanian book smugglers) movement. 20th-century Lithuanian literature is represented by Juozas Tumas-Vai\u017egantas, Antanas Vienuolis, Bernardas Brazd\u017eionis, Antanas \u0160k\u0117ma, Balys Sruoga, Vytautas Ma\u010dernis and Justinas Marcinkevi\u010dius. In 21st century debuted Kristina Sabaliauskait\u0117, Laura Sintija \u010cerniauskait\u0117, R\u016bta \u0160epetys.\nArchitecture.\nSeveral famous Lithuania-related architects are notable for their achievements in the field of architecture. Johann Christoph Glaubitz, Marcin Knackfus, Laurynas Gucevi\u010dius and Karol Podczaszy\u0144ski were instrumental in introducing Baroque and neoclassical architectural movements to the Lithuanian architecture during the 17th to 19th centuries. Vilnius is considered a capital of the Eastern Europe Baroque. Vilnius Old Town has many Baroque churches and other buildings and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Vilnian Baroque style is named after Lithuania's capital city.\nLithuania is known for numerous castles. Some castles have been rebuilt or survive partially. Many Lithuanian nobles' historic palaces and manor houses have remained till the nowadays and were reconstructed. Lithuanian village life has existed since the days of Vytautas the Great. Zervynos and Kapini\u0161kiai are two of many ethnographic villages in Lithuania. Rum\u0161i\u0161k\u0117s is an open space museum where old ethnographic architecture is preserved.\nDuring the interwar period, Art Deco, Lithuanian National Romanticism architectural style buildings were constructed in the temporary capital Kaunas. Its architecture is regarded as one of the finest examples of the European Art Deco and has received the European Heritage Label.\nArts and museums.\nThe Lithuanian Art Museum was founded in 1933 and is the largest museum of art conservation and display in Lithuania. Among other important museums are the Palanga Amber Museum, where amber pieces comprise a major part of the collection, National Gallery of Art, presenting collection of Lithuanian art of the 20th and 21st century, National Museum of Lithuania presenting Lithuanian archaeology, history and ethnic culture. In 2018 two private museums were opened \u2013 MO Museum devoted to modern and contemporary Lithuanian art and \"Tartle\", exhibiting a collection of Lithuanian art heritage and artefacts.\nPerhaps the most renowned figure in Lithuania's art community was 19th century composer Mikalojus Konstantinas \u010ciurlionis. The 2420 \u010ciurlionis asteroid, identified in 1975, honors his achievements. The M. K. \u010ciurlionis National Art Museum, as well as the only military museum in Lithuania, Vytautas the Great War Museum, are located in Kaunas.\nFranciszek Smuglewicz, Jan Rustem, J\u00f3zef Oleszkiewicz and Kanuty Rusiecki are the most prominent Lithuanian painters of the 18th and 19th centuries.\nTheatre.\nLithuania has theatres in Vilnius, Kaunas, Klaip\u0117da and Panev\u0117\u017eys. These include Lithuanian National Drama Theatre, \"Keistuoli\u0173 teatras\" (Theatre of Freaks) in Vilnius, Kaunas State Drama Theatre, Theatre of Oskaras Kor\u0161unovas, Klaip\u0117da Drama Theatre, Theatre of Gytis Ivanauskas, Miltinis Drama Theatre in Panev\u0117\u017eys, The Doll's Theatre, Old Theatre of Vilnius. Theatre festivals include \"Sirenos\" (Sirens), \"TheATRIUM\", \"Nerk \u012f teatr\u0105\" (Dive into the Theatre).\nLithuanian theatre directors include Eimuntas Nekro\u0161ius, Jonas Vaitkus, Cezaris Grau\u017einis, Gintaras Varnas, Dalia Ibelhauptait\u0117 and Art\u016bras Areima. Actors include Dainius Gavenonis, Rolandas Kazlas, Saulius Balandis and Gabija Jaraminait\u0117. Theatre director Oskaras Kor\u0161unovas was awarded the Swedish Commander Grand Cross \u2013 the Order of the Polar Star.\nCinema.\nOn 28 July 1896, Thomas Edison performed a live photography session held in the Concerts Hall of the Botanical Garden of Vilnius University. Similar American movies were available with the addition of special phonograph records that also provided sound. In 1909, Lithuanian cinema pioneers Antanas Ra\u010di\u016bnas and Ladislas Starevich released their first movies. Soon the Ra\u010di\u016bnas' recordings of Lithuania's views became very popular among the Lithuanian Americans abroad. In 1925, Pranas Valuskis filmed movie \"Naktis Lietuvoje\" (Night in Lithuania) about Lithuanian book smugglers that left the first bright Lithuanian footprint in Hollywood. The most significant and mature Lithuanian American movie of the time \"Aukso \u017e\u0105sis\" (Golden goose) was created in 1965 by Birut\u0117 P\u016bkelevi\u010di\u016bt\u0117 that featured motifs from the Brothers Grimm fairy tales. In 1940, Romuva Cinema was opened in Kaunas and currently is the oldest still operational cinema in Lithuania. After the occupation of the state, movies mostly were used for the Soviet propaganda purposes, nevertheless Almantas Grikevi\u010dius, Gytis Luk\u0161as, Henrikas \u0160ablevi\u010dius, Ar\u016bnas \u017debri\u016bnas, Raimondas Vabalas were able to overcome the obstacles and create valuable films. After the restoration of the independence, \u0160ar\u016bnas Bartas, Audrius Stonys, Ar\u016bnas Matelis, Audrius Juz\u0117nas, Algimantas Puipa, Janina Lapinskait\u0117, Dijana and her husband Kornelijus Matuzevi\u010dius received success in international movie festivals.\nMusic.\nLithuanians are sometimes described as a \"singing folk\". The choral music traditions are prominent in the country. The long-standing \"Dain\u0173 \u0161vent\u0117\" (Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival) is organized starting from 1924. Since 1990, the festival has been organised every four years and summons roughly 30,000 singers and folk dancers of various professional levels and age groups from across the country. In 2008, Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival together with its Latvian and Estonian versions was inscribed as UNESCO Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.\nLithuanian folk music belongs to Baltic music branch which is connected with Neolithic corded ware culture. Two instrument cultures meet in the areas inhabited by Lithuanians: stringed (kankli\u0173) and wind instrument cultures. Lithuanian folk music is archaic, mostly used for ritual purposes, containing elements of paganism faith. There are three ancient styles of singing in Lithuania connected with ethnographical regions: monophony, heterophony and polyphony. Folk song genres: Sutartin\u0117s (Multipart Songs), Wedding Songs, War-Historical Time Songs, Calendar Cycle and Ritual Songs and Work Songs.\nThe musical education and talent screening, especially for high-caliber individuals, is strong and holds an esteemed reputation. Vilnius is the only city with three choirs laureates (Brevis, Jauna Muzika and Chamber Choir of the Conservatoire) at the European Grand Prix for Choral Singing. The biennial childrens music festival Dain\u0173 dainel\u0117 has been organized since 1974, promoting singing traditions among the youth alongside other events such as Laum\u0117s juosta. \"Gatv\u0117s muzikos diena\" (Street Music Day) gathers musicians of various genres annually. Music Information Centre Lithuania collects, promotes and shares information on Lithuanian musical culture.\nItalian artists organized the first opera in Lithuania in 1636 at the Palace of the Grand Dukes by the order of W\u0142adys\u0142aw IV Vasa. Currently, operas are staged at the Lithuanian National Opera and Ballet Theatre and also by independent troupe Vilnius City Opera. State also supports two full-time musical theatres of Kaunas and Klaip\u0117da. After the restoration of independence, a lot of Lithuanian opera artists, such as Virgilijus Noreika, Violeta Urmana, Vytautas Juozapaitis, Asmik Grigorian, Sigut\u0117 Stonyt\u0117, etc. achieved international recognition and leading roles in the world's top theatres, while concurrently Dalia Ibelhauptait\u0117 earned acclaim as a director. According to \"Financial Times\", roughly 20 Lithuanian top tier professionals are performing internationally per season.\nMikalojus Konstantinas \u010ciurlionis was a Lithuanian painter and composer. During his short life he created about 200 pieces of music. His works have influenced modern Lithuanian culture. His symphonic poems \"In the Forest\" (\"Mi\u0161ke\") and \"The Sea\" (\"J\u016bra\") were performed only posthumously. \u010ciurlionis contributed to symbolism and art nouveau and was representative of the fin de si\u00e8cle epoch. He has been considered one of the pioneers of abstract art in Europe. The nations arts academy is named after him.\nModern classical composers emerged in 1970s \u2013 Bronius Kutavi\u010dius, Feliksas Bajoras, Osvaldas Balakauskas, Onut\u0117 Narbutait\u0117, Vidmantas Bartulis and others. Most of those composers explored archaic Lithuanian music and its harmonic combination with modern minimalism and neoromanticism. Jazz scene was active even during the years of Soviet occupation. In 1970\u201371 the Ganelin/Tarasov/Chekasin trio established the Vilnius Jazz School. Most known annual events are Vilnius Jazz Festival, Kaunas Jazz, Bir\u0161tonas Jazz.\nRock and protest music.\nAfter the Soviet reoccupation of Lithuania in 1944, the Soviet's censorship continued firmly controlling all artistic expressions in Lithuania, and any violations by criticizing the regime would immediately result in punishments. The first local rock bands started to emerge around 1965 and included \"Kertukai\", \"Aitvarai\" and \"Nuogi ant slenks\u010dio\" in Kaunas, and K\u0119stutis Antan\u0117lis, \"Vienuoliai\", and \"G\u0117li\u0173 Vaikai\" in Vilnius, among others. Unable to express their opinions directly, the Lithuanian artists began organizing patriotic Roko Mar\u0161ai and were using metaphors in their songs' lyrics, which were easily identified for their true meanings by the locals. Postmodernist rock band Antis and its vocalist Algirdas Kau\u0161p\u0117das were one of the most active performers who mocked the Soviet regime by using metaphors. For example, in the song \"Zombiai\" (Zombies), the band indirectly sang about the Red Army soldiers who occupied the state and its military base in Ukmerg\u0117. Vytautas Kernagis' song \"Kolorado vabalai\" (Colorado beetles) was also a favourite due to its lyrics in which true meaning of the Colorado beetles was intended to be the Soviets decorated with the Ribbons of Saint George.\nIn the early independence years, rock band Foje was particularly popular and gathered tens of thousands of spectators to the concerts. After disbanding in 1997, Foje vocalist Andrius Mamontovas remained one of the most prominent Lithuanian performers and an active participant in various charity events. Marijonas Mikutavi\u010dius is famous for creating unofficial Lithuania sport anthem \"Trys milijonai\" (Three millions) and official anthem of the EuroBasket 2011 \"Nebetyli sirgaliai\" (English version was named \"Celebrate Basketball\").\nCuisine.\nLithuanian cuisine features the products suited to the cool and moist northern climate of Lithuania: barley, potatoes, rye, beets, greens, berries, and mushrooms are locally grown, and dairy products are one of its specialties. Fish dishes are very popular in the coastal region. Since it shares its climate and agricultural practices with Northern Europe, Lithuanian cuisine has some similarities to Scandinavian cuisine. Nevertheless, it has its own distinguishing features, which were formed by a variety of influences during the country's long and difficult history.\nDairy products include white cottage cheese (\"var\u0161k\u0117s s\u016bris\"), curd (\"var\u0161k\u0117\"), soured milk (\"r\u016bgpienis\"), sour cream (\"grietin\u0117\"), butter (\"sviestas\"), and sour cream butter \"kastinis\". Traditional meat products are usually seasoned, matured and smoked \u2013 smoked sausages (\"de\u0161ros\"), lard (\"la\u0161iniai\"), \"skilandis\", smoked ham (\"kumpis\"). Soups (\"sriubos\")\u2014boletus soup (\"baravyk\u0173 sriuba\"), cabbage soup (\"kop\u016bst\u0173 sriuba\"), beer soup (\"alaus sriuba\"), milk soup (\"pieni\u0161ka sriuba\"), cold-beet soup (\"\u0161altibar\u0161\u010diai\")\u2014and various kinds of porridges (\"ko\u0161\u0117s\") are part of tradition and daily diet. Freshwater fish, herring, wild berries and mushrooms, honey are highly popular diet to this day.\nOne of the oldest and most fundamental food products is rye bread. Rye bread is eaten every day for breakfast, lunch and dinner. Bread played an important role in family rituals and agrarian ceremonies.\nLithuanians and other nations that once formed part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania share many dishes and beverages. German traditions also influenced Lithuanian cuisine, introducing pork and potato dishes, such as potato pudding (\"kugelis\" or kugel) and potato sausages (\"v\u0117darai\"), as well as the baroque tree cake known as \"\u0160akotis\". The most exotic of all the influences is Eastern (Karaite) cuisine \u2013 the \"kibinai\" are popular in Lithuania. Noblemen usually hired French chefs, so French cuisine influence came to Lithuania in this way.\nBalts were using mead (\"midus\") for thousands of years. Beer (\"alus\") is the most common alcoholic beverage. Lithuania has a long farmhouse beer tradition, first mentioned in 11th century chronicles. Beer was brewed for ancient Baltic festivities and rituals. Farmhouse brewing survived to a greater extent in Lithuania than anywhere else, and through accidents of history the Lithuanians then developed a commercial brewing culture from their unique farmhouse traditions. Lithuania is top 5 by consumption of beer per capita in Europe in 2015, counting 75 active breweries, 32 of them are microbreweries.\nEight Lithuanian restaurants are listed in the White Guide Baltic Top 30. The local \u201e\"30 geriausi\u0173 restoran\u0173\"\u201d guide lists top domestic places, and Lithuanian restaurants appear in the 2024 Michelin Guide.\nMedia.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to promote these freedoms. However, the constitutional definition of freedom of expression does not protect certain acts, such as incitement to national, racial, religious, or social hatred, violence and discrimination, or slander, and disinformation. It is a crime to deny or \"grossly trivialize\" Soviet or Nazi German crimes against Lithuania or its citizens, or to deny genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes.\nIn 2021, the best-selling daily national newspapers were \"Lietuvos rytas\" (5.4% of all weekly readers), \"Vakaro \u017einios\" (3.2%), \"Kauno diena\" (2.9%). Best-selling weekly newspapers were \"Savait\u0117\" (16.5%), \"\u017dmon\u0117s\" (8.4%), \"Prie kavos\" (4.1%), \"Savaitgalis\" (3.9%) and \"Verslo \u017einios\" (3.2%). In 2021, the most popular national television channels were TV3 (34.6% of the daily audience), LNK (32.3%), Lithuanian National Radio and Television (31.6%), BTV (17.3%), Lietuvos rytas TV (16.2%), TV6 (15.3%). The most popular radio stations were M-1 (14.5% of daily listeners), \"Lietus\" (12.7%), \"Radiocentras\" (9.1%) and \"LRT Radijas\" (8.5%).\nPublic holidays and festivals.\nAs a result of a thousand-years history, Lithuania has two national days. The first one is the Statehood Day on 6 July, marking the establishment of the medieval Kingdom of Lithuania in 1253. The creation of modern Lithuanian state is commemorated on 16 February as a Lithuanian State Reestablishment Day on which independence from Russia and Germany was declared in 1918. Jonin\u0117s (previously known as \"Rasos\") is a public holiday with pagan roots that celebrates a solstice. There are 13 public holidays (which come with a day off).\nKaziuko mug\u0117 is an annual fair held since the beginning of the 17th century that commemorates the anniversary of Saint Casimir's death and gathers thousands of visitors and many craftsmen. Other notable festivals are Vilnius International Film Festival, Kauno Miesto Diena, Klaip\u0117da Sea Festival, Mados infekcija, Vilnius Book Fair, Vilnius Marathon, Devilstone Open Air, Apuol\u0117 854, Great \u017demai\u010di\u0173 Kalvarija Festival.\nSports.\nBasketball is the most popular and national sport of Lithuania. The national basketball team has won the EuroBasket on three occasions (1937, 1939 and 2003), as well as 8 other medals in the Eurobasket, the World Championships and the Olympic Games. 76% of the population watched the men's national team games live in 2014. Lithuania hosted the Eurobasket in 1939 and 2011. The historic basketball team BC \u017dalgiris, from Kaunas, won the European basketball league Euroleague in 1999. Lithuania has produced a number of NBA players, including Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees Arvydas Sabonis and \u0160ar\u016bnas Mar\u010diulionis, and current NBA players Jonas Valan\u010di\u016bnas, Domantas Sabonis.\nLithuania has won a total of 26 medals at the Olympic Games, including 6 gold medals in athletics, modern pentathlon, shooting, and swimming. Other Lithuanians won Olympic medals representing Soviet Union. Discus thrower Virgilijus Alekna is the most successful Olympic athlete of independent Lithuania, having won gold medals in the 2000 Sydney and 2004 Athens games, as well as a bronze in 2008 in Beijing and numerous World Championship medals. A gold medal was won by 15-year-old swimmer R\u016bta Meilutyt\u0117 at the 2012 London Olympics.\nLithuania hosted the 2021 FIFA Futsal World Cup, the first time Lithuania had hosted a FIFA tournament.\nFew Lithuanian athletes have found success in winter sports, although facilities are provided by several ice rinks and skiing slopes, including Snow Arena, the first indoor ski slope in the Baltics. In 2018 Lithuania men's national ice hockey team won gold medals at the 2018 IIHF World Championship Division I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17676", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17676", "title": "Relativist fallacy", "text": "Fallacy\nThe relativist fallacy, also known as the subjectivist fallacy, is claiming that something is true for one person but not true for someone else, when in fact that thing is an objective fact. The fallacy rests on the law of noncontradiction. The fallacy applies only to objective facts, or what are alleged to be objective facts, rather than to facts about personal tastes or subjective experiences, and only to facts regarded in the same sense and at the same time. \nInterpretations.\nThere are at least two ways to interpret the relativist fallacy: either as identical to relativism (generally), or as the ad hoc adoption of a relativist stance purely to defend a controversial position.\nOn the one hand, discussions of the relativist fallacy that portray it as \"identical to\" relativism (e.g., linguistic relativism or cultural relativism) are themselves committing a commonly identified fallacy of informal logic\u2014namely, begging the question against an earnest, intelligent, logically competent relativist. It is itself a fallacy to describe a controversial view as a \"fallacy\"\u2014not, at least, without arguing that it is a fallacy. In any event, it does not do to argue as follows:\nThis is an example of circular reasoning. The second step includes an argument from fallacy.\nOn the other hand, if someone adopts a simple relativist stance as an ad hoc defense of a controversial or otherwise compromised position\u2014saying, in effect, that \"what is true for you is not necessarily true for me,\" and thereby attempting to avoid having to mount any further defense of the position\u2014one might be said to have committed a fallacy. The accusation of having committed a fallacy might rest on either of two grounds: (1) the relativism on which the bogus defense rests is so simple and meritless that it straightforwardly contradicts the law of noncontradiction; or (2) the defense (and thus the fallacy itself) is an example of ad hoc reasoning. It puts one in the position of asserting or implying that truth or standards of logical consistency are relative to a particular thinker or group and that under some other standard, the position is correct despite its failure to stand up to logic.\nDetermining whether someone has committed a relativist fallacy\u2014by any interpretation\u2014requires distinguishing between things that are true \"for\" a particular person, and things that are true \"about\" that person. Take, for example, the statement proffered by Alice: \"More Americans than ever are overweight.\" One may introduce arguments for and against this proposition, based upon such things as standards of statistical analysis, the definition of \"overweight,\" etc. The position answers to objective logical debate. If Bob answers Alice, saying \"That may be true for you, but it is not true for me,\" he has given an answer that is fallacious as well as somewhat meaningless in the context of Alice's original statement.\nConversely, take the new statement by Alice, who is tall, \" is grossly overweight.\" Bob, who is , and weighs an exact, well-conditioned , replies, \"That may be true for you, but it is not true for me.\" In this context, Bob's reply is both meaningful and arguably accurate. As he is discussing something that is true \"about\" himself, he is not barred from making an argument that considers subjective facts, and so he does not commit the fallacy."}
{"id": "17678", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17678", "title": "Logical fallacy/Ad Hominem", "text": ""}
{"id": "17679", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17679", "title": "Logical fallacy/Straw Man", "text": ""}
{"id": "17680", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17680", "title": "Logical fallacy/Appeal to Authority", "text": ""}
{"id": "17681", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17681", "title": "Bandwagon fallacy", "text": ""}
{"id": "17683", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17683", "title": "Logical fallacy/Ad hominem", "text": ""}
{"id": "17686", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17686", "title": "Appeal to popularity", "text": ""}
{"id": "17687", "revid": "40347300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17687", "title": "False dilemma", "text": "Informal fallacy involving falsely limited alternatives\nA false dilemma, also referred to as false dichotomy or false binary, is an informal fallacy based on a premise that erroneously limits what options are available. The source of the fallacy lies not in an invalid form of inference but in a false premise. This premise has the form of a disjunctive claim: it asserts that one among a number of alternatives must be true. This disjunction is problematic because it oversimplifies the choice by excluding viable alternatives, presenting the viewer with only two absolute choices when, in fact, there could be many.\nFalse dilemmas often have the form of treating two contraries, which may both be false, as contradictories, of which one is necessarily true. Various inferential schemes are associated with false dilemmas, for example, the constructive dilemma, the destructive dilemma or the disjunctive syllogism. False dilemmas are usually discussed in terms of deductive arguments, but they can also occur as defeasible arguments.\nThe human liability to commit false dilemmas may be due to the tendency to simplify reality by ordering it through either-or-statements, which is to some extent already built into human language. This may also be connected to the tendency to insist on clear distinction while denying the vagueness of many common expressions.\nDefinition.\nA \"false dilemma\" is an informal fallacy based on a premise that erroneously limits what options are available. In its most simple form, called the \"fallacy of bifurcation\", all but two alternatives are excluded. A fallacy is an argument, i.e. a series of premises together with a conclusion, that is unsound, i.e. not both valid and true. Fallacies are usually divided into \"formal\" and \"informal\" fallacies. Formal fallacies are unsound because of their structure, while informal fallacies are unsound because of their content. The problematic content in the case of the \"false dilemma\" has the form of a disjunctive claim: it asserts that one among a number of alternatives must be true. This disjunction is problematic because it oversimplifies the choice by excluding viable alternatives. Sometimes a distinction is made between a \"false dilemma\" and a \"false dichotomy\". On this view, the term \"false dichotomy\" refers to the false disjunctive claim while the term \"false dilemma\" refers not just to this claim but to the argument based on this claim.\nTypes.\nDisjunction with contraries.\nIn its most common form, a \"false dilemma\" presents the alternatives as contradictories, while in truth they are merely contraries. Two propositions are contradictories if it has to be the case that one is true and the other is false. Two propositions are contraries if at most one of them can be true, but leaves open the option that both of them might be false, which is not possible in the case of contradictories. Contradictories follow the law of the excluded middle but contraries do not. For example, the sentence \"the exact number of marbles in the urn is either 10 or not 10\" presents two contradictory alternatives. The sentence \"the exact number of marbles in the urn is either 10 or 11\" presents two contrary alternatives: the urn could also contain 2 marbles or 17 marbles. A common form of using contraries in \"false dilemmas\" is to force a choice between extremes on the agent: someone is either good or bad, rich or poor, normal or abnormal. Such cases ignore that there is a continuous spectrum between the extremes that is excluded from the choice. While \"false dilemmas\" involving contraries, i.e. exclusive options, are a very common form, this is just a special case: there are also arguments with non-exclusive disjunctions that are false dilemmas. For example, a choice between security and freedom does not involve contraries since these two terms are compatible with each other.\nLogical forms.\nIn logic, there are two main types of inferences known as dilemmas: the constructive dilemma and the destructive dilemma. In their most simple form, they can be expressed in the following way:\nThe source of the fallacy is found in the disjunctive claim in the third premise, i.e. formula_3 and formula_4 respectively. The following is an example of a \"false dilemma\" with the \"simple constructive form\": (1) \"If you tell the truth, you force your friend into a social tragedy; and therefore, are an immoral person\". (2) \"If you lie, you are an immoral person (since it is immoral to lie)\". (3) \"Either you tell the truth, or you lie\". Therefore \"[y]ou are an immoral person (whatever choice you make in the given situation)\". This example constitutes a false dilemma because there are other choices besides telling the truth and lying, like keeping silent.\nA false dilemma can also occur in the form of a disjunctive syllogism:\nIn this form, the first premise (formula_6) is responsible for the fallacious inference. Lewis's trilemma is a famous example of this type of argument involving three disjuncts: \"Jesus was either a liar, a lunatic, or Lord\". By denying that Jesus was a liar or a lunatic, one is forced to draw the conclusion that he was God. But this leaves out various other alternatives, for example, that Jesus was a prophet.\nDeductive and defeasible arguments.\nFalse dilemmas are usually discussed in terms of deductive arguments. But they can also occur as defeasible arguments. A valid argument is deductive if the truth of its premises ensures the truth of its conclusion. For a valid defeasible argument, on the other hand, it is possible for all its premises to be true and the conclusion to be false. The premises merely offer a certain degree of support for the conclusion but do not ensure it. In the case of a defeasible false dilemma, the support provided for the conclusion is overestimated since various alternatives are not considered in the disjunctive premise.\nExplanation and avoidance.\nPart of understanding \"fallacies\" involves going beyond logic to empirical psychology in order to \"explain\" why there is a tendency to commit or fall for the fallacy in question. In the case of the \"false dilemma\", the tendency to simplify reality by ordering it through either-or-statements may play an important role. This tendency is to some extent built into human language, which is full of pairs of opposites. This type of simplification is sometimes necessary to make decisions when there is not enough time to get a more detailed perspective.\nIn order to \"avoid\" false dilemmas, the agent should become aware of additional options besides the prearranged alternatives. Critical thinking and creativity may be necessary to see through the \"false dichotomy\" and to discover new alternatives.\nRelation to distinctions and vagueness.\nSome philosophers and scholars believe that \"unless a distinction can be made rigorous and precise it isn't really a distinction\". An exception is analytic philosopher John Searle, who called it an incorrect assumption that produces false dichotomies. Searle insists that \"it is a condition of the adequacy of a precise theory of an indeterminate phenomenon that it should precisely characterize that phenomenon as indeterminate; and a distinction is no less a distinction for allowing for a family of related, marginal, diverging cases.\" Similarly, when two options are presented, they often are, although not always, two extreme points on some spectrum of possibilities; this may lend credence to the larger argument by giving the impression that the options are mutually exclusive, even though they need not be. Furthermore, the options in false dichotomies typically are presented as being collectively exhaustive, in which case the fallacy may be overcome, or at least weakened, by considering other possibilities, or perhaps by considering a whole spectrum of possibilities, as in fuzzy logic.\nThis issue arises from real dichotomies in nature, the most prevalent example is the occurrence of an event. It either happened or it did not happen. This ontology sets a logical construct that cannot be reasonably applied to epistemology.\nExamples.\nFalse choice.\nThe presentation of a \"false choice\" often reflects a deliberate attempt to eliminate several options that may occupy the middle ground on an issue. A common argument against noise pollution laws involves a false choice. It might be argued that in New York City noise should not be regulated, because if it were, a number of businesses would be required to close. This argument assumes that, for example, a bar must be shut down to prevent disturbing levels of noise emanating from it after midnight. This ignores the fact that law could require the bar to lower its noise levels, or install soundproofing structural elements to keep the noise from excessively transmitting onto others' properties.\nBlack-and-white thinking.\nIn psychology, a phenomenon related to the false dilemma is \"black-and-white thinking\" or \"thinking in black and white\". There are people who routinely engage in black-and-white thinking, an example of which is someone who categorizes other people as all good or all bad.\nSimilar concepts.\nVarious different terms are used to refer to false dilemmas. Some of the following terms are equivalent to the term \"false dilemma\", some refer to special forms of false dilemmas and others refer to closely related concepts.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17688", "revid": "40781349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17688", "title": "Loaded question", "text": "Question containing an unjustified assumption\nA loaded question is a form of complex question that contains a controversial assumption (e.g., a presumption of guilt).\nSuch questions may be used as a rhetorical tool: the question attempts to limit direct replies to be those that serve the questioner's agenda. The traditional example is the question \"Have you stopped beating your wife?\" Without further clarification, an answer of either yes or no suggests the respondent has beaten their wife at some time in the past. Thus, these facts are \"presupposed\" by the question, and in this case an entrapment, because it narrows the respondent to a single answer, and the fallacy of many questions has been committed. The fallacy relies upon context for its effect: the fact that a question presupposes something does not in itself make the question fallacious. Only when some of these presuppositions are not necessarily agreed to by the person who is asked the question does the argument containing them become fallacious. Hence, the same question may be loaded in one context, but not in the other. For example, the previous question would not be loaded if it were asked during a trial in which the defendant had already admitted to beating his wife.\nThis informal fallacy should be distinguished from that of begging the question, which offers a premise whose plausibility depends on the truth of the proposition asked about, and which is often an implicit restatement of the proposition.\nDefense.\nA common way out of this argument is not to answer the question (e.g. with a simple 'yes' or 'no'), but to challenge the assumption behind the question. To use an earlier example, a good response to the question \"Have you stopped beating your wife?\" would be \"I have \"never\" beaten my wife\". This removes the ambiguity of the expected response, therefore nullifying the tactic. However, the asker may respond to a challenge by accusing the one who answers of dodging the question.\nHistorical examples.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius wrote a brief biography of the philosopher Menedemus in which he relates that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[O]nce when Alexinus asked him whether he had left off beating his father, he said, \"I have not beaten him, and I have not left off;\" and when he said further that he ought to put an end to the doubt by answering explicitly yes or no, \"It would be absurd,\" he rejoined, \"to comply with your conditions, when I can stop you at the entrance.\"\nFor another example, the 2009 New Zealand child discipline referendum asked: \"Should a smack as part of good parental correction be a criminal offence in New Zealand?\" Murray Edridge, of Barnardos New Zealand, criticized the question as \"loaded and ambiguous\" and claimed \"the question presupposes that smacking is a part of good parental correction\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17689", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17689", "title": "Irrelevant conclusion", "text": "Type of informal fallacy\nAn irrelevant conclusion, also known as or missing the point, is the informal fallacy of presenting an argument whose conclusion fails to address the issue in question. It falls into the broad class of relevance fallacies.\nThe irrelevant conclusion should not be confused with formal fallacy, an argument whose conclusion does not follow from its premises; instead, it is that despite its formal consistency it is not relevant to the subject being talked about.\nOverview.\n\"Ignoratio elenchi\" is one of the fallacies identified by Aristotle in his \"Organon\". In a broader sense he asserted that all fallacies are a form of \"ignoratio elenchi\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ignoratio Elenchi\", according to Aristotle, is a fallacy that arises from \"ignorance of the nature of refutation\". To refute an assertion, Aristotle says we must prove its contradictory; the proof, consequently, of a proposition which stood in any other relation than that to the original, would be an \"ignoratio elenchi\". Since Aristotle, the scope of the fallacy has been extended to include all cases of proving the wrong point\u00a0... \"I am required to prove a certain conclusion; I prove, not that, but one which is likely to be mistaken for it; in that lies the fallacy\u00a0... For instance, instead of proving that 'this person has committed an atrocious fraud', you prove that 'this fraud he is accused of is atrocious'\";\u00a0... The nature of the fallacy, then, consists in substituting for a certain issue another which is more or less closely related to it and arguing the substituted issue. The fallacy does not take into account whether the arguments do or do not really support the substituted issue, it only calls attention to the fact that they do not constitute proof of the original one\u2026 It is a particularly prevalent and subtle fallacy and it assumes a great variety of forms. But whenever it occurs and whatever form it takes, it is brought about by an assumption that leads the person guilty of it to substitute for a definite subject of inquiry another which is in close relation with it.\u2014\u200a\nSamuel Johnson's unique \"refutation\" of Bishop Berkeley's immaterialism, his claim that matter did not actually exist but only seemed to exist, has been described as \"ignoratio elenchi\": during a conversation with Boswell, Johnson powerfully kicked a nearby stone and proclaimed of Berkeley's theory, \"I refute it \"thus\"!\" (See also \"argumentum ad lapidem\".)\nA related concept is that of the red herring, which is a deliberate attempt to divert a process of enquiry by changing the subject. \"Ignoratio elenchi\" is sometimes confused with straw man argument.\nEtymology.\nThe phrase \"ignoratio elenchi\" is from la\u00a0'an ignoring of a refutation'. Here \"elenchi\" is the genitive singular of the Latin noun \"elenchus\", which is from grc \" \"\u1f14\u03bb\u03b5\u03b3\u03c7\u03bf\u03c2\" (elenchos)\"\u00a0'an argument of disproof or refutation'. The translation in English of the Latin expression has varied somewhat. Hamblin proposed \"misconception of refutation\" or \"ignorance of refutation\" as a literal translation, John Arthur Oesterle preferred \"ignoring the issue\", and Irving Copi, Christopher Tindale and others used \"irrelevant conclusion\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17690", "revid": "49353319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17690", "title": "Equivocation", "text": "Misleading use of a term with multiple meanings\nIn logic, equivocation (\"calling two different things by the same name\") is an informal fallacy resulting in the failure to define one's terms, or knowingly and deliberately using words in a different sense than the one the audience will understand.\nIt is a type of ambiguity that stems from a phrase having two or more distinct meanings, not from the grammar or structure of the sentence.\nFallacy of four terms.\nEquivocation in a syllogism (a chain of reasoning) produces a fallacy of four terms (). Below is an example:\n Since only man [human] is rational.\n And no woman is a man [male].\n Therefore, no woman is rational.\nThe first instance of \"man\" implies the entire human species, while the second implies just those who are male.\nMotte-and-bailey fallacy.\nEquivocation can also be used to conflate two positions which share similarities, one modest and easy to defend and one much more controversial. The arguer advances the controversial position, but when challenged, they insist that they are only advancing the more modest position.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17692", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17692", "title": "Sampling bias", "text": "Bias in the sampling of a population\nIn statistics, sampling bias is a bias in which a sample is collected in such a way that some members of the intended population have a lower or higher sampling probability than others. It results in a biased sample of a population (or non-human factors) in which all individuals, or instances, were not equally likely to have been selected. If this is not accounted for, results can be erroneously attributed to the phenomenon under study rather than to the method of sampling.\nMedical sources sometimes refer to sampling bias as ascertainment bias. Ascertainment bias has basically the same definition, but is still sometimes classified as a separate type of bias.\nDistinction from selection bias.\nSampling bias is usually classified as a subtype of selection bias, sometimes specifically termed sample selection bias, but some classify it as a separate type of bias.\nA distinction, albeit not universally accepted, of sampling bias is that it undermines the external validity of a test (the ability of its results to be generalized to the entire population), while selection bias mainly addresses internal validity for differences or similarities found in the sample at hand. In this sense, errors occurring in the process of gathering the sample or cohort cause sampling bias, while errors in any process thereafter cause selection bias.\nHowever, selection bias and sampling bias are often used synonymously.\nTypes.\nSymptom-based sampling.\nThe study of medical conditions begins with anecdotal reports. By their nature, such reports only include those referred for diagnosis and treatment. A child who can't function in school is more likely to be diagnosed with dyslexia than a child who struggles but passes. A child examined for one condition is more likely to be tested for and diagnosed with other conditions, skewing comorbidity statistics. As certain diagnoses become associated with behavior problems or intellectual disability, parents try to prevent their children from being stigmatized with those diagnoses, introducing further bias. Studies carefully selected from whole populations are showing that many conditions are much more common and usually much milder than formerly believed.\nTruncate selection in pedigree studies.\nGeneticists are limited in how they can obtain data from human populations. As an example, consider a human characteristic. We are interested in deciding if the characteristic is inherited as a simple Mendelian trait. Following the laws of Mendelian inheritance, if the parents in a family do not have the characteristic, but carry the allele for it, they are carriers (e.g. a non-expressive heterozygote). In this case their children will each have a 25% chance of showing the characteristic. The problem arises because we can't tell which families have both parents as carriers (heterozygous) unless they have a child who exhibits the characteristic. The description follows the textbook by Sutton.\nThe figure shows the pedigrees of all the possible families with two children when the parents are carriers (Aa).\nThe probabilities of each of the families being selected is given in the figure, with the sample frequency of affected children also given. In this simple case, the researcher will look for a frequency of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20447 or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5\u20448 for the characteristic, depending on the type of truncate selection used.\nThe caveman effect.\nAn example of selection bias is called the \"caveman effect\". Much of our understanding of prehistoric peoples comes from caves, such as cave paintings made nearly 40,000 years ago. If there had been contemporary paintings on trees, animal skins or hillsides, they would have been washed away long ago. Similarly, evidence of fire pits, middens, burial sites, etc. are most likely to remain intact to the modern era in caves. Prehistoric people are associated with caves because that is where the data still exists, not necessarily because most of them lived in caves for most of their lives.\nProblems due to sampling bias.\nSampling bias is problematic because it is possible that a statistic computed of the sample is systematically erroneous. Sampling bias can lead to a systematic over- or under-estimation of the corresponding parameter in the population. Sampling bias occurs in practice as it is practically impossible to ensure perfect randomness in sampling. If the degree of misrepresentation is small, then the sample can be treated as a reasonable approximation to a random sample. Also, if the sample does not differ markedly in the quantity being measured, then a biased sample can still be a reasonable estimate.\nThe word bias has a strong negative connotation. Indeed, biases sometimes come from deliberate intent to mislead or other scientific fraud. In statistical usage, bias merely represents a mathematical property, no matter if it is deliberate or unconscious or due to imperfections in the instruments used for observation. While some individuals might deliberately use a biased sample to produce misleading results, more often, a biased sample is just a reflection of the difficulty in obtaining a truly representative sample, or ignorance of the bias in their process of measurement or analysis. An example of how ignorance of a bias can exist is in the widespread use of a ratio (a.k.a. fold change) as a measure of difference in biology. Because it is easier to achieve a large ratio with two small numbers with a given difference, and relatively more difficult to achieve a large ratio with two large numbers with a larger difference, large significant differences may be missed when comparing relatively large numeric measurements. Some have called this a 'demarcation bias' because the use of a ratio (division) instead of a difference (subtraction) removes the results of the analysis from science into pseudoscience (See Demarcation Problem).\nSome samples use a biased statistical design which nevertheless allows the estimation of parameters. The U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, for example, deliberately oversamples from minority populations in many of its nationwide surveys in order to gain sufficient precision for estimates within these groups. These surveys require the use of sample weights (see later on) to produce proper estimates across all ethnic groups. Provided that certain conditions are met (chiefly that the weights are calculated and used correctly) these samples permit accurate estimation of population parameters.\nHistorical examples.\nA classic example of a biased sample and the misleading results it produced occurred in 1936. In the early days of opinion polling, the American \"Literary Digest\" magazine collected over two million postal surveys and predicted that the Republican candidate in the U.S. presidential election, Alf Landon, would beat the incumbent president, Franklin Roosevelt, by a large margin. The result was the exact opposite. The Literary Digest survey represented a sample collected from readers of the magazine, supplemented by records of registered automobile owners and telephone users. This sample included an over-representation of wealthy individuals, who, as a group, were more likely to vote for the Republican candidate. In contrast, a poll of only 50 thousand citizens selected by George Gallup's organization successfully predicted the result, leading to the popularity of the Gallup poll.\nAnother classic example occurred in the 1948 presidential election. On election night, the Chicago Tribune printed the headline \"DEWEY DEFEATS TRUMAN\", which turned out to be mistaken. In the morning the grinning president-elect, Harry S. Truman, was photographed holding a newspaper bearing this headline. The reason the Tribune was mistaken is that their editor trusted the results of a phone survey. Survey research was then in its infancy, and few academics realized that a sample of telephone users was not representative of the general population. Telephones were not yet widespread, and those who had them tended to be prosperous and have stable addresses. (In many cities, the Bell System telephone directory contained the same names as the Social Register). In addition, the Gallup poll that the Tribune based its headline on was over two weeks old at the time of the printing.\nIn air quality data, pollutants (such as carbon monoxide, nitrogen monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, or ozone) frequently show high correlations, as they stem from the same chemical process(es). These correlations depend on space (i.e., location) and time (i.e., period). Therefore, a pollutant distribution is not necessarily representative for every location and every period. If a low-cost measurement instrument is calibrated with field data in a multivariate manner, more precisely by collocation next to a reference instrument, the relationships between the different compounds are incorporated into the calibration model. By relocation of the measurement instrument, erroneous results can be produced.\nA twenty-first century example is the COVID-19 pandemic, where variations in sampling bias in COVID-19 testing have been shown to account for wide variations in both case fatality rates and the age distribution of cases across countries.\nStatistical corrections for a biased sample.\nIf entire segments of the population are excluded from a sample, then there are no adjustments that can produce estimates that are representative of the entire population. But if some groups are underrepresented and the degree of underrepresentation can be quantified, then sample weights can correct the bias. However, the success of the correction is limited to the selection model chosen. If certain variables are missing the methods used to correct the bias could be inaccurate.\nFor example, a hypothetical population might include 10 million men and 10 million women. Suppose that a biased sample of 100 patients included 20 men and 80 women. A researcher could correct for this imbalance by attaching a weight of 2.5 for each male and 0.625 for each female. This would adjust any estimates to achieve the same expected value as a sample that included exactly 50 men and 50 women, unless men and women differed in their likelihood of taking part in the survey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17693", "revid": "1654255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17693", "title": "Post hoc", "text": "Post hoc (sometimes written as post-hoc) is a Latin phrase, meaning \"after this\" or \"after the event\".\nPost hoc may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17694", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17694", "title": "No true Scotsman", "text": "Informal logical fallacy\nNo true Scotsman or appeal to purity is an informal fallacy in which one modifies a prior claim in response to a counterexample by asserting the counterexample is excluded by definition. Rather than admitting error or providing evidence to disprove the counterexample, the original claim is changed by using a non-substantive modifier such as \"true\", \"pure\", \"genuine\", \"authentic\", \"real\", or other similar terms.\nPhilosopher Bradley Dowden explains the fallacy as an \"ad hoc rescue\" of a refuted generalization attempt. The following is a simplified rendition of the fallacy:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em;\"&gt;\nPerson A: \"No Scotsman puts sugar on his porridge.\"\nPerson B: \"But my uncle Angus is a Scotsman and he puts sugar on his porridge.\"\nPerson A: \"But no true Scotsman puts sugar on his porridge.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nOccurrence.\nThe \"no true Scotsman\" fallacy is committed when the arguer satisfies the following conditions: \nAn appeal to purity is commonly associated with protecting a preferred group. Scottish national pride may be at stake if someone regularly considered to be Scottish commits a heinous crime. To protect people of Scottish heritage from a possible accusation of guilt by association, one may use this fallacy to deny that the group is associated with this undesirable member or action. \"No true Scotsman would do something so undesirable\"; i.e., the people who would do such a thing are tautologically (definitionally) excluded from being part of our group such that they cannot serve as a counterexample to the group's good nature.\nOrigin and philosophy.\nThe description of the fallacy in this form is attributed to the English philosopher Antony Flew, who wrote, in his 1966 book \"God &amp; Philosophy\", \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this ungracious move a brash generalization, such as \"No Scotsmen put sugar on their porridge\", when faced with falsifying facts, is transformed while you wait into an impotent tautology: if ostensible Scotsmen put sugar on their porridge, then this is by itself sufficient to prove them not \"true\" Scotsmen.\nIn his 1975 book \"Thinking About Thinking\", Flew wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Imagine some Scottish chauvinist settled down one Sunday morning with his customary copy of \"The News of the World\". He reads the story under the headline, \"Sidcup Sex Maniac Strikes Again\". Our reader is, as he confidently expected, agreeably shocked: \"No Scot would do such a thing!\" Yet the very next Sunday he finds in that same favourite source a report of the even more scandalous on-goings of Mr Angus McSporran in Aberdeen. This clearly constitutes a counter example, which definitively falsifies the universal proposition originally put forward. ('Falsifies' here is, of course, simply the opposite of 'verifies'; and it therefore means 'shows to be false'.) Allowing that this is indeed such a counter example, he ought to withdraw; retreating perhaps to a rather weaker claim about most or some. But even an imaginary Scot is, like the rest of us, human; and none of us always does what we ought to do. So what he is in fact saying is: \"No true Scotsman would do such a thing!\" David P. Goldman, writing under his pseudonym \"Spengler\", compared distinguishing between \"mature\" democracies, which never start wars, and \"emerging democracies\", which may start them, with the \"no true Scotsman\" fallacy. Spengler alleges that political scientists have attempted to save the \"US academic dogma\" that democracies never start wars against other democracies from counterexamples by declaring any democracy which does indeed start a war against another democracy to be flawed, thus maintaining that no true and mature democracy starts a war against a fellow democracy.\nCognitive psychologist Steven Pinker has suggested that phrases like \"no true Christian ever kills, no true communist state is repressive and no true Trump supporter endorses violence\" exemplify the fallacy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17696", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17696", "title": "Slippery slope", "text": "Rhetorical argument\nIn a slippery slope argument, a course of action is rejected because the slippery slope advocate believes it will lead to a chain reaction resulting in an undesirable end or ends. The core of the slippery slope argument is that a specific decision under debate is likely to result in unintended consequences. The strength of such an argument depends on whether the small step really is likely to lead to the effect. This is quantified in terms of what is known as the warrant (in this case, a demonstration of the process that leads to the significant effect).\nThis type of argument is sometimes used as a form of fearmongering in which the probable consequences of a given action are exaggerated in an attempt to scare the audience. When the initial step is not demonstrably likely to result in the claimed effects, this is called the slippery slope fallacy. This is a type of informal fallacy, and is a subset of continuum fallacy, in that it ignores the possibility of middle ground and assumes a discrete transition from category A to category B. Other idioms for the slippery slope fallacy are the thin edge of the wedge, domino fallacy (as a form of domino effect argument) or \"dam burst\", and various other terms that are sometimes considered distinct argument types or reasoning flaws, such as the \"camel's nose in the tent\", \"parade of horribles\", \"boiling frog\", and \"snowball effect\".\nSlopes, arguments, and fallacies.\nSome writers distinguish between a slippery slope event and a slippery slope argument. A slippery slope event can be represented by a series of conditional statements, namely:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe idea being that through a series of intermediate steps, p will imply z. Some writers point out that strict necessity isn't required and it can still be characterized as a slippery slope if at each stage the next step is plausible. With strict implication, p will imply z, but if at each step the probability is 90%, for example, then the more steps there are, the less likely it becomes that p will cause z.\nA slippery slope argument is typically a negative argument where there is an attempt to discourage someone from taking a course of action because if they do it will lead to some unacceptable conclusion. Some writers point out that an argument with the same structure might be used in a positive way in which someone is encouraged to take the first step because it leads to a desirable conclusion.\nIf someone is accused of using a slippery slope argument then it is being suggested they are guilty of fallacious reasoning, and while they are claiming that p implies z, for whatever reason, this is not the case. In logic and critical thinking textbooks, slippery slopes and slippery slope arguments are normally discussed as a form of fallacy, although there may be an acknowledgement that non-fallacious forms of the argument can also exist.\nTypes of argument.\nDifferent writers have classified slippery slope arguments in different and often contradictory ways, but there are two basic types of argument that have been described as slippery slope arguments. One type has been called \"the causal slippery slope\", and the distinguishing feature of this type is that the various steps leading from p to z are events with each event being the cause of the next in the sequence. The second type might be called \"the judgmental slippery slope\" with the idea being that the 'slope' does not consist of a series of events but is such that, for whatever reason, if a person makes one particular judgment they will rationally have to make another and so on. The judgmental type may be further sub-divided into conceptual slippery slopes and decisional slippery slopes.\nConceptual slippery slopes, which Trudy Govier calls \"the fallacy of slippery assimilation\", are closely related to the sorites paradox. So, in the context of talking about slippery slopes, Merilee Salmon writes: \"The slippery slope is an ancient form of reasoning. According to van Fraassen (\"The Scientific Image\"), the argument is found in Sextus Empiricus that incest is not immoral, on the grounds that 'touching your mother's big toe with your little finger is not immoral, and all the rest differs only by degree.'\"\nDecisional slippery slopes are similar to conceptual slippery slopes in that they rely on there being a continuum with no clear dividing lines such that if you decide to accept one position or course of action then there will, either now or in the future, be no rational grounds for not accepting the next position or course of action in the sequence.\nThe difficulty in classifying slippery slope arguments is that there is no clear consensus in the literature as to how terminology should be used. It has been said that whilst these two fallacies \"have a relationship which may justify treating them together\", they are also distinct, and \"the fact that they share a name is unfortunate\". Some writers treat them side by side but emphasize how they differ. Some writers use the term \"slippery slope\" to refer to one kind of argument but not the other, but don't agree on which one, whilst others use the term to refer to both. So, for example: \nMetaphor and its alternatives.\nThe metaphor of the \"slippery slope\" dates back at least to Cicero's essay \"Laelius de Amicitia\" (XII.41). The title character Gaius Laelius Sapiens uses the metaphor to describe the decline of the Republic upon the impending election of Gaius Gracchus: \"Affairs soon move on, for they glide readily down the path of ruin when once they have taken a start.\"\nThin end of a wedge.\nWalton suggests Alfred Sidgwick should be credited as the first writer on informal logic to describe what would today be called a slippery slope argument. Sidgwick wrote in 1910: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We must not do this or that, it is often said, because if we did we should be logically bound to do something else which is plainly absurd or wrong. If we once begin to take a certain course there is no knowing where we shall be able to stop within any show of consistency; there would be no reason for stopping anywhere in particular, and we should be led on, step by step into action or opinions that we all agree to call undesirable or untrue.\nSidgwick says this is \"popularly known as the objection to a thin end of a wedge\" but might be classified now as a decisional slippery slope. However, the wedge metaphor also captures the idea that unpleasant end result is a wider application of a principle associated with the initial decision which is often a feature of decisional slippery slopes due to their incremental nature but may be absent from causal slippery slopes.\nDomino fallacy.\nT. Edward Damer, in his book \"Attacking Faulty Reasoning\", describes what others might call a causal slippery slope but says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While this image may be insightful for understanding the character of the fallacy, it represents a misunderstanding of the nature of the causal relations between events. Every causal claim requires a separate argument. Hence, any \"slipping\" to be found is only in the clumsy thinking of the arguer, who has failed to provide sufficient evidence that one causally explained event can serve as an explanation for another event or for a series of events.\nInstead Damer prefers to call it the \"domino fallacy\". Howard Kahane suggests that the domino variation of the fallacy has gone out of fashion because it was tied to the domino theory for the United States becoming involved in the war in Vietnam and although the U.S. lost that war, \"it is primarily communist dominoes that have fallen\".\nDam burst.\nFrank Saliger notes that \"in the German-speaking world the dramatic image of \"the dam burst\" seems to predominate, in English speaking circles talk is more of the slippery slope argument\", and that \"in German writing dam burst and slippery slope arguments are treated as broadly synonymous. In particular the structural analyses of slippery slope arguments derived from English writing are largely transferred directly to the dam burst argument.\" \nIn exploring the differences between the two metaphors, he comments that in the dam burst the initial action is clearly in the foreground and there is a rapid movement towards the resulting events whereas in the slippery slope metaphor the downward slide has at least equal prominence to the initial action and it \"conveys the impression of a slower 'step-by-step' process where the decision maker as participant slides inexorably downwards under the weight of its own successive (erroneous) decisions\". Despite these differences Saliger continues to treat the two metaphors as being synonymous. Walton argues that although the two are comparable \"the metaphor of the dam bursting carries with it no essential element of a sequence of steps from an initial action through a gray zone with its accompanying loss of control eventuated in the ultimate outcome of the ruinous disaster. For these reasons, it seems best to propose drawing a distinction between dam burst arguments and slippery slope arguments.\"\nOther metaphors.\nEric Lode notes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Commentators have used numerous different metaphors to refer to arguments that have this rough form. For example, people have called such arguments \"wedge\" or \"thin edge of the wedge\", \"camel's nose\" or \"camel's nose in the tent\", \"parade of horrors\" or \"parade of horribles\", \"domino\", \"boiling frog\" and \"this could snowball\" arguments. All of these metaphors suggest that allowing one practice or policy could lead us to allow a series of other practices or policies.\"\nBruce Waller says it is lawyers who often call it the \"parade of horribles\" argument while politicians seem to favor \"the camel's nose is in the tent\".\nThe 1985 best-selling children's book \"If You Give a Mouse a Cookie\" by Laura Joffe Numeroff and Felicia Bond popularized the general idea of the slippery slope for recent generations. \nDefining features of slippery slope arguments.\nGiven the disagreement over what constitutes a genuine slippery slope argument, it is to be expected that there are differences in the way they are defined. Lode says that \"although all SSAs share certain features, they are a family of related arguments rather than a class of arguments whose members all share the same form.\"\nVarious writers have attempted to produce a general taxonomy of these different kinds of slippery slope. Other writers have given a general definition that will encompass the diversity of slippery slope arguments. Eugene Volokh says, \"I think the most useful definition of a slippery slope is one that covers all situations where decision A, which you might find appealing, ends up materially increasing the probability that others will bring about decision B, which you oppose.\"\nThose who hold that slippery slopes are causal generally give a simple definition, provide some appropriate examples and perhaps add some discussion as to the difficulty of determining whether the argument is reasonable or fallacious. Most of the more detailed analysis of slippery slopes has been done by those who hold that genuine slippery slopes are of the decisional kind.\nLode, having claimed that SSAs are not a single class of arguments whose members all share the same form, nevertheless goes on to suggest the following common features.\nRizzo and Whitman identify slightly different features. They say, \"Although there is no paradigm case of the slippery slope argument, there are characteristic features of all such arguments. The key components of slippery slope arguments are three:\nWalton notes that these three features will be common to all slippery slopes but objects that there needs to be more clarity on the nature of the 'mechanism' and a way of distinguishing between slippery slope arguments and arguments from negative consequences.\nCorner et al. say that a slippery slope has \"four distinct components:\nThe alleged danger lurking on the slippery slope is the fear that a presently unacceptable proposal (C) will (by any number of psychological processes\u2014see, e.g., ) in the future be re-evaluated as acceptable.\"\nWalton adds the requirement that there must be a loss of control. He says, there are four basic components:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One is a first step, an action or policy being considered. A second is a sequence in which this action leads to other actions. A third is a so-called gray zone or area of indeterminacy along the sequence where the agent loses control. The fourth is the catastrophic outcome at the very end of the sequence. The idea is that as soon as the agent in question takes the first step he will be impelled forward through the sequence, losing control so that in the end he will reach the catastrophic outcome. Not all of these components are typically made explicit\u00a0...\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17699", "revid": "45228249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17699", "title": "Argument from ignorance", "text": "Informal fallacy\nArgument from ignorance (), or appeal to ignorance, is an informal fallacy where something is claimed to be true or false because of a lack of evidence to the contrary.\nThe fallacy is committed when one asserts that a proposition is true because it has not yet been proven false or a proposition is false because it has not yet been proven true. If a proposition has not yet been proven true, one is not entitled to conclude, solely on that basis, that it is false, and if a proposition has not yet been proven false, one is not entitled to conclude, solely on that basis, that it is true. Another way of expressing this is that a proposition is true only if proven true, and a proposition is false only if proven false. If no proof is offered (in either direction), then the proposition can be called unproven, undecided, inconclusive, an open problem or a conjecture. \nUse.\nThe term was likely coined by philosopher John Locke in the late 17th century. \nIn debates, appealing to ignorance is sometimes an attempt to shift the burden of proof.\nThere is a debate over whether the argument from ignorance is always fallacious. It is generally accepted that there are only special circumstances in which this argument may not be fallacious. For example, with the presumption of innocence in legal cases, it would make sense to argue:\nIt has not been proven that the defendant is guilty.&lt;br&gt;Therefore, the defendant is not guilty.\nLogic.\nThe argument has the form:\nformula_1 has not been proven false.&lt;br&gt;Therefore, formula_1 is true.\nIts reverse:\nformula_1 has not been proven true.&lt;br&gt;Therefore, formula_1 is false.\nwhere formula_1 is a proposition, i.e. a statement declaring that something is true, or that it is false.\nExamples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Simply because you do not have evidence that something exists does not mean that you have evidence that it doesn't exist.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Appeal to ignorance: the claim that whatever has not been proved false must be true, and vice versa. (e.g., \"There is no compelling evidence that UFOs are not visiting the Earth; therefore, UFOs exist, and there is intelligent life elsewhere in the Universe.\" Or: \"There may be seventy kazillion other worlds, but not one is known to have the moral advancement of the Earth, so we're still central to the Universe.\") This impatience with ambiguity can be criticized in the phrase: absence of evidence is not evidence of absence.\nJob call example.\nThey never called me back. I guess I didn't get the job.\nThis would follow the second form of the argument:\nformula_1 (I got the job) has not been proven true (via lack of callback).&lt;br&gt;Therefore, formula_7 (I didn't get the job) is true.\nWhile both parts may be true (in this case, you actually didn't get the job), the reasoning is fallacious because there are cases, even if unlikely, where you could get the job, but don't receive a callback. For example, administrative delays, technical issues, or some kind of oversight from the hiring team.\nRelated terms.\nContraposition and transposition.\nContraposition, also known as transposition, is a logically valid rule of inference that allows the creation of a new proposition from the negation and reordering of an existing one. The method applies to any proposition of the type \"If A then B\" and says that negating all the variables and switching them back to front leads to a new proposition i.e. \"If Not-B then Not-A\" that is just as true as the original one and that the first implies the second and the second implies the first.\nNull result.\n\"Null result\" is a term often used in science to indicate \"evidence of absence\". A search for water on the ground may yield a null result (the ground is dry); therefore, it probably did not rain.\nRelated arguments.\nArgument from self-knowing.\nArguments from self-knowing take the form:\nIn practice these arguments are often unsound and rely on the truth of the supporting premise. For example, the claim that \"If I had just sat on a wild porcupine then I would know it\" is probably not fallacious and depends entirely on the truth of the first premise (the ability to know it).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17703", "revid": "1609017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17703", "title": "Leo (constellation)", "text": "Zodiac constellation straddling the celestial equator\nLeo is one of the constellations of the zodiac, between Cancer, the Crab, to the west and Virgo, the Maiden, to the east. It is located in the Northern celestial hemisphere. Its name is Latin for lion, and to the ancient Greeks represented the Nemean Lion killed by the mythical Greek hero Heracles as one of his twelve labors. Its old astronomical symbol is (\u264c\ufe0e). One of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd-century astronomer Ptolemy, Leo remains one of the 88 modern constellations today, and one of the most easily recognizable due to its many bright stars and a distinctive shape that is reminiscent of the crouching lion it depicts. \nFeatures.\nStars.\nLeo contains many bright stars, many of which were individually identified by the ancients. There are nine bright stars that can be easily seen with the naked eye, four of the nine stars are either first or second magnitude which render this constellation especially prominent. Six of the nine stars also form an asterism known as \"The Sickle,\" which to modern observers may resemble a backwards \"question mark\", The sickle is marked by six stars: Epsilon Leonis, Mu Leonis, Zeta Leonis, Gamma Leonis, Eta Leonis, and Alpha Leonis. The rest of the three stars form an isosceles triangle, Beta Leonis (Denebola) marks the lion's tail and the rest of his body is delineated by Delta Leonis and Theta Leonis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Flowlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLeo is also home to a bright variable star, the red giant R Leonis. It is a Mira variable with a minimum magnitude of 10 and normal maximum magnitude of 6; it periodically brightens to magnitude 4.4. R Leonis, 330 light-years from Earth, has a period of 310 days and a diameter of 450 solar diameters.\nThe star Wolf 359 (CN Leonis), one of the nearest stars to Earth at 7.8 light-years away, is in Leo. Wolf 359 is a red dwarf of magnitude 13.5; it periodically brightens by one magnitude or less because it is a flare star. Gliese 436, a faint star in Leo about 33 light-years away from the Sun, is orbited by a transiting Neptune-mass extrasolar planet.\nThe carbon star CW Leo (IRC +10216) is the brightest star in the night sky at the infrared N-band (10 \u03bcm wavelength).\nThe star SDSS J102915+172927 (Caffau's star) is a population II star in the galactic halo seen in Leo. It is about 13 billion years old, making it one of the oldest stars in the Galaxy. It has the lowest metallicity of any known star.\nModern astronomers, including Tycho Brahe in 1602, excised a group of stars that once made up the \"tuft\" of the lion's tail and used them to form the new constellation Coma Berenices (Berenice's hair), although there was precedent for that designation among the ancient Greeks and Romans.\nDeep-sky objects.\nLeo contains many bright galaxies; Messier 65, Messier 66, Messier 95, Messier 96, Messier 105, and NGC 3628 are the most famous, the first two being part of the Leo Triplet.\nThe Leo Ring, a cloud of hydrogen, helium gas, is found in the orbit of two galaxies found within this constellation. M66 is a spiral galaxy that is part of the Leo Triplet, whose other two members are M65 and NGC 3628. It is at a distance of 37 million light-years and has a somewhat distorted shape due to gravitational interactions with the other members of the Triplet, which are pulling stars away from M66. Eventually, the outermost stars may form a dwarf galaxy orbiting M66. Both M65 and M66 are visible in large binoculars or small telescopes, but their concentrated nuclei and elongation are only visible in large amateur instruments.\nM95 and M96 are both spiral galaxies 20 million light-years from Earth. Though they are visible as fuzzy objects in small telescopes, their structure is only visible in larger instruments. M95 is a barred spiral galaxy. M105 is about a degree away from the M95/M96 pair; it is an elliptical galaxy of the 9th magnitude, also about 20 million light-years from Earth.\nNGC 2903 is a barred spiral galaxy discovered by William Herschel in 1784. It is very similar in size and shape to the Milky Way and is located 25 million light-years from Earth. In its core, NGC 2903 has many \"hotspots\", which have been found to be near regions of star formation. The star formation in this region is thought to be due to the presence of the dusty bar, which sends shock waves through its rotation to an area with a diameter of 2,000 light-years. The outskirts of the galaxy have many young open clusters.\nLeo is also home to some of the largest structures in the observable universe. Some of the structures found in the constellation are the Clowes\u2013Campusano LQG, U1.11, U1.54, and the Huge-LQG, which are all large quasar groups; the latter being the second largest structure known (see also NQ2-NQ4 GRB overdensity).\nMeteor showers.\nThe Leonids occur in November, peaking on November 14\u201315, and have a radiant close to Gamma Leonis. Its parent body is Comet Tempel-Tuttle, which causes significant outbursts every 35 years. The normal peak rate is approximately 10 meteors per hour.\nThe January Leonids are a minor shower that peaks between January 1 and 7.\nHistory and mythology.\nLeo was one of the earliest recognized constellations, with archaeological evidence that the Mesopotamians had a similar constellation as early as 4000 BCE. The Persians called Leo \"Ser\" or \"Shir\"; the Turks, \"Artan\"; the Syrians, \"Aryo\"; the Jews, \"Arye\"; the Indians, \"Simha\", all meaning \"lion\".\nSome mythologists believe that in Sumeria, Leo represented the monster Humbaba, who was killed by Gilgamesh.\nIn Babylonian astronomy, the constellation was called UR.GU.LA, the \"Great Lion\"; the bright star Regulus was known as \"the star that stands at the Lion's breast.\" Regulus also had distinctly regal associations, as it was known as the King Star.\nIn Greek mythology, Leo was identified as the Nemean Lion which was killed by Heracles (Hercules to the Romans) during the first of his twelve labours. The Nemean Lion would take women as hostages to its lair in a cave, luring warriors from nearby towns to save the damsel in distress, to their misfortune. The Lion was impervious to any weaponry; thus, the warriors' clubs, swords, and spears were rendered useless against it. Realizing that he must defeat the Lion with his bare hands, Hercules slipped into the Lion's cave and engaged it at close quarters. When the Lion pounced, Hercules caught it in midair, one hand grasping the Lion's forelegs and the other its hind legs, and bent it backwards, breaking its back and freeing the trapped maidens. Zeus commemorated this labor by placing the Lion in the sky.\nThe Roman poet Ovid called it \"Herculeus Leo\" and \"Violentus Leo\". \"Bacchi Sidus\" (star of Bacchus) was another of its titles, the god Bacchus always being identified with this animal. However, Manilius called it \"Jovis et Junonis Sidus\" (Star of Jupiter and Juno).\nAstrology.\nAs of 2002[ [update]], the Sun appears in the constellation Leo from August 10 to September 16. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Leo from July 23 to August 22, and in sidereal astrology, from August 16 to September 17.\nNamesakes.\nUSS Leonis (AK-128) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "17704", "revid": "44573545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17704", "title": "Libra (constellation)", "text": "Zodiac constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nLibra is a constellation of the zodiac and is located in the Southern celestial hemisphere. Its name is Latin for weighing scales. Its old astronomical symbol is (\u264e\ufe0e). It is fairly faint, with no first magnitude stars, and lies between Virgo to the west and Scorpius to the east. Beta Librae, also known as Zubeneschamali, is the brightest star in the constellation. Three star systems are known to have planets.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nOverall, there are 83 stars within the constellation's borders brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5.\nThe brightest stars in Libra form a quadrangle that distinguishes it for the unaided observer. Traditionally, Alpha and Beta Librae are considered to represent the scales' balance beam, while Gamma and Sigma are the weighing pans.\nAlpha Librae, called Zubenelgenubi, is a multiple star system divisible into two stars when seen through binoculars, The primary (Alpha2 Librae) is a blue-white star of magnitude 2.7 and the secondary (Alpha1 Librae) is a white star of magnitude 5.2 and spectral type F3V that is 74.9 \u00b1 0.7 light-years from Earth. Its traditional name means \"the southern claw\". Zubeneschamali (Beta Librae) is the corresponding \"northern claw\" to Zubenelgenubi. The brightest star in Libra, Zubeneschamali is a green-tinged star of magnitude 2.6, 160 (or 185 \u00b1 2) light-years from Earth. Gamma Librae is called Zubenelakrab, which means \"the scorpion's claw\", completing the suite of names referring to Libra's archaic status. It is an orange giant of magnitude 3.9, 152 light-years from Earth.\nIota Librae is a complex multiple star, 377 light-years from Earth, with both optical and true binary components in it. The primary appears as a blue-white star of magnitude 4.5; it is a binary star indivisible in even the largest amateur instruments with a period of 23 years. The secondary, visible in small telescopes as a star of magnitude 9.4, is a binary with two components, magnitudes 10 and 11. There is an optical companion to Iota Librae; 25 Librae is a star of magnitude 6.1, 219 light-years from Earth and visible in binoculars. Mu Librae is a binary star divisible in medium-aperture amateur telescopes, 235 light-years from Earth. The primary is of magnitude 5.7 and the secondary is of magnitude 6.8.\nDelta Librae is an Algol-type eclipsing variable star, 304 lightyears from Earth. It has a period of 2 days, 8 hours; its minimum magnitude of 5.9 and its maximum magnitude is 4.9. FX Librae, designated 48 Librae, is a shell star of magnitude 4.9. Shell stars, like Pleione and Gamma Cassiopeiae, are stars with irregular variations caused by their abnormally high speed of rotation. This ejects gas from the star's equator.\nSigma Librae (the proper name is Brachium) was formerly known as Gamma Scorpii despite being well inside the boundaries of Libra. It was not redesignated as Sigma Librae until 1851 by Benjamin A. Gould.\nHistory and mythology.\nLibra was known in Babylonian astronomy as \"MUL Zibanu\" (the \"scales\" or \"balance\"), or alternatively as the Claws of the Scorpion. The scales were held sacred to the sun god Shamash, who was also the patron of truth and justice. Since these times, Libra has been associated with law, fairness and civility.\nIt was also seen as the Scorpion's Claws in ancient Greece. This is the name used repeatedly by Aratus, which made it widespread in Hellenistic times: \"few conspicuous stars the Claws can boast,\nand their dim light mid brighter gems is lost\" In Arabic \"zub\u0101n\u0101\" means \"scorpion's claws\", and likely similarly in other Semitic languages: this resemblance of words may be why the Scorpion's claws became the Scales. Indeed, Zubenelgenubi and Zubeneschamali, the names of the constellation's two main stars, in Arabic mean \"southern claw\" and \"northern claw\" respectively. It has also been suggested that the scales are an allusion to the fact that when the sun entered this part of the ecliptic at the autumnal equinox, the days and nights are equal. Libra's status as the location of the equinox earned the equinox the name \"First Point of Libra\", though this location ceased to coincide with the constellation in 730 BC because of the precession of the equinoxes.\nIn ancient Egypt the three brightest stars of Libra (\u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03c3 Librae) formed a constellation that was viewed as a boat. Libra is not mentioned by Eudoxus or Aratus as a constellation. Libra is mentioned by Manetho (3rd century B.C.) and Geminus (1st century B.C.), and included by Ptolemy in his 48 asterisms. Ptolemy catalogued 17 stars, Tycho Brahe 10, and Johannes Hevelius 20. It only became a constellation in ancient Rome, when it began to represent the scales held by Astraea, the goddess of justice, associated with Virgo in the Greek mythology.\nThe constellation.\nLibra is bordered by the head of Serpens to the north, Virgo to the northwest, Hydra to the southwest, the corner of Centaurus to the southwest, Lupus to the south, Scorpius to the east and Ophiuchus to the northeast. Covering 538.1\u00a0square degrees and 1.304% of the night sky, it ranks 29th of the 88 constellations in size. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Lib\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of 12 segments (\"illustrated in infobox\"). In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 14h 22m 08.08s and 16h 02m 17.23s, while the declination coordinates are between \u22120.47\u00b0 and \u221230.00\u00b0. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 60\u00b0N.\nPlanetary systems.\nLibra is home to the Gliese 581 planetary system, which consists of the star Gliese 581 and three confirmed planets. This system gained attention in the late 2000s and early 2010s as the subject of some of the earliest claims of potentially habitable exoplanets, but it is now known that Gliese 581c is too hot to be potentially habitable, and the planet candidates Gliese 581d and g likely do not exist. At the time of its discovery in 2009, Gliese 581e was the smallest mass exoplanet known orbiting a normal star.\nDeep-sky objects.\nLibra is home to one bright globular cluster, NGC 5897. It is a loose cluster, 50,000 light-years from Earth; it is fairly large and has an integrated magnitude of 9. IC 1059 is a galaxy in the constellation Libra.\nAstrology.\nAs of 2002[ [update]], the Sun appears in the constellation Libra from October 31 to November 22. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Libra from the northern autumnal equinox (c. September 23) to on or about October 23, and in sidereal astrology, from October 16 to November 15.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17705", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17705", "title": "Little Dipper", "text": ""}
{"id": "17706", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17706", "title": "LowGerman", "text": ""}
{"id": "17707", "revid": "3747202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17707", "title": "Laws of physics", "text": ""}
{"id": "17708", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17708", "title": "Law of physics", "text": ""}
{"id": "17712", "revid": "17521759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17712", "title": "Law of nature", "text": "Law of nature or laws of nature may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "17713", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17713", "title": "Linkoeping", "text": ""}
{"id": "17714", "revid": "45523345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17714", "title": "Roxen (lake)", "text": "Lake in Norrk\u00f6ping Municipality, \u00d6sterg\u00f6tland County, Sweden\nRoxen () is a medium-sized lake in south-central Sweden, east of Lake V\u00e4ttern, part of the waterpath Motala str\u00f6m and the G\u00f6ta Canal. South of Lake Roxen is the city Link\u00f6ping.\nRoxen, especially the western parts, is very good for birdwatching. There are natural reserves at Kungsbro and Svart\u00e5mynningen.\nThe lake develops in a graben depression.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17717", "revid": "4052843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17717", "title": "Locomotive", "text": "Self-propelled railway vehicle\nA locomotive is a rail vehicle that provides the motive power for a train. Traditionally, locomotives pulled trains from the front. However, push\u2013pull operation has become common, and in the pursuit for longer and heavier freight trains, companies are increasingly using distributed power: single or multiple locomotives placed at the front and rear and at intermediate points throughout the train under the control of the leading locomotive.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"locomotive\" originates from the Latin 'from a place', ablative of 'place', and the Medieval Latin 'causing motion', and is a shortened form of the term \"locomotive engine\", which was first used in 1814 to distinguish between self-propelled and stationary steam engines.\nClassifications.\nPrior to locomotives, the motive force for railways had been generated by various lower-technology methods such as human power, horse power, gravity or stationary engines that drove cable systems. Few such systems are still in existence today. Locomotives may generate their power from fuel (wood, coal, petroleum or natural gas), or they may take power from an outside source of electricity. It is common to classify locomotives by their source of energy. The common ones include:\nSteam.\nA steam locomotive is a locomotive whose primary power source is a steam engine. The most common form of steam locomotive also contains a boiler to generate the steam used by the engine. The water in the boiler is heated by burning combustible material \u2013 usually coal, wood, or oil \u2013 to produce steam. The steam moves reciprocating pistons which are connected to the locomotive's main wheels, known as the \"driving wheels\". Both fuel and water supplies are carried with the locomotive, either on the locomotive itself, in bunkers and tanks, (this arrangement is known as a \"tank locomotive\") or pulled behind the locomotive, in tenders, (this arrangement is known as a \"tender locomotive\").\nThe first full-scale working railway steam locomotive was built by Richard Trevithick in 1802. It was constructed for the Coalbrookdale ironworks in Shropshire in England though no record of it working there has survived. On 21 February 1804, the first recorded steam-hauled railway journey took place as another of Trevithick's locomotives hauled a train from the Penydarren ironworks, in Merthyr Tydfil, to Abercynon in South Wales. Accompanied by Andrew Vivian, it ran with mixed success. The design incorporated a number of important innovations including the use of high-pressure steam which reduced the weight of the engine and increased its efficiency.\nIn 1812, Matthew Murray's twin-cylinder rack locomotive \"Salamanca\" first ran on the edge-railed rack-and-pinion Middleton Railway; this is generally regarded as the first commercially successful locomotive. Another well-known early locomotive was \"Puffing Billy\", built 1813\u201314 by engineer William Hedley for the Wylam Colliery near Newcastle upon Tyne. This locomotive is the oldest preserved, and is on static display in the Science Museum, London. George Stephenson built \"Locomotion No. 1\" for the Stockton &amp; Darlington Railway in the north-east of England, which was the first public steam railway in the world. In 1829, his son Robert built \"The Rocket\" in Newcastle upon Tyne. Rocket was entered into, and won, the Rainhill Trials. This success led to the company emerging as the pre-eminent early builder of steam locomotives used on railways in the UK, US and much of Europe. The Liverpool &amp; Manchester Railway, built by Stephenson, opened a year later making exclusive use of steam power for passenger and goods trains.\nThe steam locomotive remained by far the most common type of locomotive until after World War II. Steam locomotives are less efficient than modern diesel and electric locomotives, and a significantly larger workforce is required to operate and service them. British Rail figures showed that the cost of crewing and fuelling a steam locomotive was about two and a half times larger than the cost of supporting an equivalent diesel locomotive, and the daily mileage they could run was lower. Between about 1950 and 1970, the majority of steam locomotives were retired from commercial service and replaced with electric and diesel\u2013electric locomotives. While North America transitioned from steam during the 1950s, and continental Europe by the 1970s, in other parts of the world, the transition happened later. Steam was a familiar technology that used widely-available fuels and in low-wage economies did not suffer as wide a cost disparity. It continued to be used in many countries until the end of the 20th century. By the end of the 20th century, almost the only steam power remaining in regular use around the world was on heritage railways.\nInternal combustion.\nInternal combustion locomotives use an internal combustion engine, connected to the driving wheels by a transmission. They typically keep the engine running at a near-constant speed whether the locomotive is stationary or moving. Internal combustion locomotives are categorised by their fuel type and sub-categorised by their transmission type.\nThe first internal combustion rail vehicle was a kerosene-powered draisine built by Gottlieb Daimler in 1887, but this was not technically a locomotive as it carried a payload.\nThe earliest gasoline locomotive in the western United States was built by the Best Manufacturing Company in 1891 for San Jose and Alum Rock Railroad. It was only a limited success and was returned to Best in 1892.\nThe first commercially successful petrol locomotive in the United Kingdom was a petrol\u2013mechanical locomotive built by the Maudslay Motor Company in 1902, for the Deptford Cattle Market in London. It was an 80\u00a0hp locomotive using a three-cylinder vertical petrol engine, with a two speed mechanical gearbox.\nIn 1903, the Hungarian Weitzer railmotor was the world's first petrol electric locomotive.\nDiesel.\nDiesel locomotives are powered by diesel engines. In the early days of diesel propulsion development, various transmission systems were employed with varying degrees of success, with electric transmission proving to be the most popular. In 1914, Hermann Lemp, a General Electric electrical engineer, developed and patented a reliable direct current electrical control system (subsequent improvements were also patented by Lemp). Lemp's design used a single lever to control both engine and generator in a coordinated fashion, and was the prototype for all diesel\u2013electric locomotive control. In 1917\u201318, GE produced three experimental diesel\u2013electric locomotives using Lemp's control design. In 1924, a diesel\u2013electric locomotive (Eel2 original number \u042e\u044d 001/Yu-e 001) started operations. It had been designed by a team led by Yury Lomonosov and built 1923\u20131924 by Maschinenfabrik Esslingen in Germany. It had five driving axles (1'E1'). After several test rides, it hauled trains for almost three decades from 1925 to 1954.\nElectric.\nAn electric locomotive is a locomotive powered only by electricity. Electricity is supplied to moving trains with a (nearly) continuous conductor running along the track that usually takes one of three forms: an overhead line, suspended from poles or towers along the track or from structure or tunnel ceilings; a third rail mounted at track level; or an onboard battery. Both overhead wire and third-rail systems usually use the running rails as the return conductor but some systems use a separate fourth rail for this purpose. The type of electrical power used is either direct current (DC) or alternating current (AC).\nVarious collection methods exist: a trolley pole, which is a long flexible pole that engages the line with a wheel or shoe; a bow collector, which is a frame that holds a long collecting rod against the wire; a pantograph, which is a hinged frame that holds the collecting shoes against the wire in a fixed geometry; or a contact shoe, which is a shoe in contact with the third rail. Of the three, the pantograph method is best suited for high-speed operation.\nElectric locomotives almost universally use axle-hung traction motors, with one motor for each powered axle. In this arrangement, one side of the motor housing is supported by plain bearings riding on a ground and polished journal that is integral to the axle. The other side of the housing has a tongue-shaped protuberance that engages a matching slot in the truck (bogie) bolster, its purpose being to act as a torque reaction device, as well as a support. Power transfer from motor to axle is effected by spur gearing, in which a pinion on the motor shaft engages a bull gear on the axle. Both gears are enclosed in a liquid-tight housing containing lubricating oil. The type of service in which the locomotive is used dictates the gear ratio employed. Numerically high ratios are commonly found on freight units, whereas numerically low ratios are typical of passenger engines.\nElectricity is typically generated in large and relatively efficient generating stations, transmitted to the railway network and distributed to the trains. Some electric railways have their own dedicated generating stations and transmission lines but most purchase power from an electric utility. The railway usually provides its own distribution lines, switches and transformers.\nElectric locomotives usually cost 20% less than diesel locomotives, their maintenance costs are 25\u201335% lower, and cost up to 50% less to run.\nDirect current.\nThe earliest systems were DC systems. The first electric passenger train was presented by Werner von Siemens at Berlin in 1879. The locomotive was driven by a 2.2\u00a0kW, series-wound motor, and the train, consisting of the locomotive and three cars, reached a speed of 13\u00a0km/h. During four months, the train carried 90,000 passengers on a circular track. The electricity (150 V DC) was supplied through a third insulated rail between the tracks. A contact roller was used to collect the electricity. The world's first electric tram line opened in Lichterfelde near Berlin, Germany, in 1881. It was built by Werner von Siemens (see Gross-Lichterfelde Tramway and Berlin Stra\u00dfenbahn). The Volk's Electric Railway opened in 1883 in Brighton, and is the oldest surviving electric railway. Also in 1883, M\u00f6dling and Hinterbr\u00fchl Tram opened near Vienna in Austria. It was the first in the world in regular service powered from an overhead line. Five years later, in the U.S. electric trolleys were pioneered in 1888 on the Richmond Union Passenger Railway, using equipment designed by Frank J. Sprague.\nThe first electrically worked underground line was the City &amp; South London Railway, prompted by a clause in its enabling act prohibiting use of steam power. It opened in 1890, using electric locomotives built by Mather &amp; Platt. Electricity quickly became the power supply of choice for subways, abetted by the Sprague's invention of multiple-unit train control in 1897.\nThe first use of electrification on a main line was on a four-mile stretch of the Baltimore Belt Line of the Baltimore &amp; Ohio (B&amp;O) in 1895 connecting the main portion of the B&amp;O to the new line to New York through a series of tunnels around the edges of Baltimore's downtown. Three Bo+Bo units were initially used, at the south end of the electrified section; they coupled onto the locomotive and train and pulled it through the tunnels.\nDC was used on earlier systems. These systems were gradually replaced by AC. Today, almost all main-line railways use AC systems. DC systems are confined mostly to urban transit such as metro systems, light rail and trams, where power requirement is less.\nAlternating current.\nThe first practical AC electric locomotive was designed by Charles Brown, then working for Oerlikon, Z\u00fcrich. In 1891, Brown had demonstrated long-distance power transmission, using three-phase AC, between a hydro-electric plant at Lauffen am Neckar and Frankfurt am Main West, a distance of 280\u00a0km. Using experience he had gained while working for Jean Heilmann on steam\u2013electric locomotive designs, Brown observed that three-phase motors had a higher power-to-weight ratio than DC motors and, because of the absence of a commutator, were simpler to manufacture and maintain. However, they were much larger than the DC motors of the time and could not be mounted in underfloor bogies: they could only be carried within locomotive bodies.\nIn 1894, Hungarian engineer K\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kand\u00f3 developed a new type 3-phase asynchronous electric drive motors and generators for electric locomotives. The new 3-phase asynchronous electric drive motors were more effective than the synchronous electric motors of earlier locomotive designs. \nKand\u00f3's early 1894 designs were first applied in a short three-phase AC tramway in Evian-les-Bains (France), which was constructed between 1896 and 1898. In 1918, Kand\u00f3 invented and developed the rotary phase converter, enabling electric locomotives to use three-phase motors whilst supplied via a single overhead wire, carrying the simple industrial frequency (50\u00a0Hz) single phase AC of the high voltage national networks.\nIn 1896, Oerlikon installed the first commercial example of the system on the Lugano Tramway. Each 30-tonne locomotive had two motors run by three-phase 750\u00a0V 40\u00a0Hz fed from double overhead lines. Three-phase motors run at constant speed and provide regenerative braking, and are well suited to steeply graded routes, and the first main-line three-phase locomotives were supplied by Brown (by then in partnership with Walter Boveri) in 1899 on the 40\u00a0km Burgdorf\u2014Thun line, Switzerland. The first implementation of industrial frequency single-phase AC supply for locomotives came from Oerlikon in 1901, using the designs of Hans Behn-Eschenburg and Emil Huber-Stockar; installation on the Seebach-Wettingen line of the Swiss Federal Railways was completed in 1904. The 15\u00a0kV, 50\u00a0Hz , 48\u00a0tonne locomotives used transformers and rotary converters to power DC traction motors.\nItalian railways were the first in the world to introduce electric traction for the entire length of a main line rather than just a short stretch. The 106\u00a0km Valtellina line was opened on 4 September 1902, designed by Kand\u00f3 and a team from the Ganz works. The electrical system was three-phase at 3\u00a0kV 15\u00a0Hz. The voltage was significantly higher than used earlier and it required new designs for electric motors and switching devices. The three-phase two-wire system was used on several railways in Northern Italy and became known as \"the Italian system\". Kand\u00f3 was invited in 1905 to undertake the management of Societ\u00e0 Italiana Westinghouse and led the development of several Italian electric locomotives.\nBattery\u2013electric.\nA battery\u2013electric locomotive (or battery locomotive) is an electric locomotive powered by onboard batteries; a kind of battery electric vehicle.\nSuch locomotives are used where a conventional diesel or electric locomotive would be unsuitable. An example is maintenance trains on electrified lines when the electricity supply is turned off. Another use is in industrial facilities where a combustion-powered locomotive (i.e., steam- or diesel-powered) could cause a safety issue due to the risks of fire, explosion or fumes in a confined space. Battery locomotives are preferred for mines where gas could be ignited by trolley-powered units arcing at the collection shoes, or where electrical resistance could develop in the supply or return circuits, especially at rail joints, and allow dangerous current leakage into the ground. Battery locomotives in over-the-road service can recharge while absorbing dynamic-braking energy.\nThe first known electric locomotive was built in 1837 by chemist Robert Davidson of Aberdeen, and it was powered by galvanic cells (batteries). Davidson later built a larger locomotive named \"Galvani\", exhibited at the Royal Scottish Society of Arts Exhibition in 1841. The seven-ton vehicle had two direct-drive reluctance motors, with fixed electromagnets acting on iron bars attached to a wooden cylinder on each axle, and simple commutators. It hauled a load of six tons at four miles per hour (6 kilometers per hour) for a distance of . It was tested on the Edinburgh and Glasgow Railway in September of the following year, but the limited power from batteries prevented its general use.\nAnother example was at the Kennecott Copper Mine, Latouche, Alaska, where in 1917 the underground haulage ways were widened to enable working by two battery locomotives of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+1\u20442 tons. In 1928, Kennecott Copper ordered four 700-series electric locomotives with on-board batteries. These locomotives weighed 85 tons and operated on 750-volt overhead trolley wire with considerable further range whilst running on batteries. The locomotives provided several decades of service using Nickel\u2013iron battery (Edison) technology. The batteries were replaced with lead-acid batteries, and the locomotives were retired shortly afterward. All four locomotives were donated to museums, but one was scrapped. The others can be seen at the Boone and Scenic Valley Railroad, Iowa, and at the Western Railway Museum in Rio Vista, California. The Toronto Transit Commission previously operated a battery electric locomotive built by Nippon Sharyo in 1968 and retired in 2009.\nLondon Underground regularly operates battery\u2013electric locomotives for general maintenance work.\nOther types.\nAtomic\u2013electric.\nIn the early 1950s, Lyle Borst of the University of Utah was given funding by various US railroad line and manufacturers to study the feasibility of an electric-drive locomotive, in which an onboard atomic reactor produced the steam to generate the electricity. At that time, atomic power was not fully understood; Borst believed the major stumbling block was the price of uranium. With the Borst atomic locomotive, the center section would have a 200-ton reactor chamber and steel walls 5 feet thick to prevent releases of radioactivity in case of accidents. He estimated a cost to manufacture atomic locomotives with 7000 h.p. engines at approximately $1,200,000 each. Consequently, trains with onboard nuclear generators were generally deemed unfeasible due to prohibitive costs.\nFuel cell\u2013electric.\nIn 2002, the first 3.6 tonne, 17\u00a0kW hydrogen-(fuel-cell)\u2013powered mining locomotive was demonstrated in Val-d'Or, Quebec. In 2007 the educational mini-hydrail in Kaohsiung, Taiwan went into service. The Railpower GG20B finally is another example of a fuel cell\u2013electric locomotive.\nHybrid locomotives.\nThere are many different types of hybrid or dual-mode locomotives using two or more types of motive power. The most common hybrids are electro-diesel locomotives powered either from an electricity supply or else by an onboard diesel engine. These are used to provide continuous journeys along routes that are only partly electrified. Examples include the EMD FL9 and Bombardier ALP-45DP\nUse.\nThere are three main uses of locomotives in rail transport operations: hauling passenger trains, freight trains, and switching (UK English: shunting).\nFreight locomotives are normally designed to deliver high starting tractive effort and high sustained power. This allows them to start and move long, heavy trains, but usually comes at the cost of relatively low maximum speeds. Passenger locomotives usually develop lower starting tractive effort but are able to operate at the high speeds required to maintain passenger schedules. Mixed-traffic locomotives (US English: general purpose or road switcher locomotives) meant for both passenger and freight trains do not develop as much starting tractive effort as a freight locomotive but are able to haul heavier trains than a passenger locomotive.\nMost steam locomotives have reciprocating engines, with pistons coupled to the driving wheels by means of connecting rods, with no intervening gearbox. This means the combination of starting tractive effort and maximum speed is greatly influenced by the diameter of the driving wheels. Steam locomotives intended for freight service generally have smaller diameter driving wheels than passenger locomotives.\nIn diesel-electric and electric locomotives the control system between the traction motors and axles adapts the power output to the rails for freight or passenger service. Passenger locomotives may include other features, such as head-end power (also referred to as hotel power or electric train supply) or a steam generator.\nSome locomotives are designed specifically to work steep grade railways, and feature extensive additional braking mechanisms and sometimes rack and pinion. Steam locomotives built for steep rack and pinion railways frequently have the boiler tilted relative to the locomotive frame, so that the boiler remains roughly level on steep grades.\nLocomotives are also used on some high-speed trains. Some of them are operated in push-pull formation with trailer control cars at another end of a train, which often have a cabin with the same design as a cabin of locomotive; examples of such trains with conventional locomotives are Railjet and Intercity 225.\nAlso many high-speed trains, including all TGV, many Talgo (250 / 350 / Avril / XXI), some Korea Train Express, ICE 1/ICE 2 and Intercity 125, use dedicated power cars, which do not have places for passengers and technically are special single-ended locomotives. The difference from conventional locomotives is that these power cars are integral part of a train and are not adapted for operation with any other types of passenger coaches. On the other hand, many high-speed trains such as the Shinkansen network never use locomotives. Instead of locomotive-like power-cars, they use electric multiple units (EMUs) or diesel multiple units (DMUs) \u2013 passenger cars that also have traction motors and power equipment. Using dedicated locomotive-like power cars allows for a high ride quality and less electrical equipment;\nbut EMUs have less axle weight, which reduces maintenance costs, and EMUs also have higher acceleration and higher seating capacity.\nAlso some trains, including TGV PSE, TGV TMST and TGV V150, use both non-passenger power cars and additional passenger motor cars.\nOperational role.\nLocomotives occasionally work in a specific role, such as:\nWheel arrangement.\nThe wheel arrangement of a locomotive describes how many wheels it has; common methods include the AAR wheel arrangement, UIC classification, and Whyte notation systems.\nRemote control locomotives.\nIn the second half of the twentieth century remote control locomotives started to enter service in switching operations, being remotely controlled by an operator outside of the locomotive cab.\nThe main benefit is one operator can control the loading of grain, coal, gravel, etc. into the cars. In addition, the same operator can move the train as needed. Thus, the locomotive is loaded or unloaded in about a third of the time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "17719", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17719", "title": "Lars Magnus Ericsson", "text": "Swedish inventor\nLars Magnus Ericsson (; 5 May 1846 \u2013 17 December 1926) was a Swedish inventor, entrepreneur and founder of telephone equipment manufacturer Ericsson (incorporated as \"Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson\").\nEarly life.\nLars Magnus was born in V\u00e4rmskog, V\u00e4rmland, and grew up in the small village of Vegerbol located between Karlstad and Arvika. At the age of 12, Ericsson's father died forcing him to seek work as a miner. He worked until he had enough money to leave the village and move to Stockholm in 1867. He then worked for six years for an instrument maker named \"\u00d6llers &amp; Co.\" who mainly created telegraph equipment. Because of his skills, he was given two state scholarships to study instrument making abroad between 1872 and 1875. One of the companies he worked at was Siemens &amp; Halske.\nCareer.\nUpon his return to Sweden in 1876, he founded a small mechanical workshop together with his friend Carl Johan Andersson who had also worked at \"\u00d6llers &amp; Co.\". This workshop was actually a former kitchen of some 13\u00a0m2 situated at Drottninggatan 15 in the most central part of Stockholm. Here, he started a telephone company by analyzing Bell company and Siemens telephones and creating his own copies in their image. It was not until they started cooperating with Henrik Tore Cedergren in 1883 that the company would start to grow into the Ericsson corporation.\nIn the year 1900 Lars Magnus retired from Ericsson at the age of 54. He kept his shares in the company until 1905 and then sold them all.\nHe is said to have been a demanding person, and disliked any direct publicity about his personality and did not wish to be idolized. He was, however, deeply respected by his employees. He was always a skeptic and cautious in business. He was also somewhat opposed to patents, as many of the products he made would not have been possible to do if the patent legislation had been overly effective. When his phones were copied by Norwegian companies he did not care, as his phones had in turn been largely copied from Siemens. He initially did not believe in a mass market for telephones, and saw it as a toy for the leisure class.\nPersonal life.\nEricsson married Hilda Simonsson in 1878. They had four children together: Johan (1879\u20131881), Gustaf (1880\u20131965), Anna (1881\u20131967) and Lars Magnus Jr. \"Lalle\" (1892\u20131921). When their daughter Anna was only six weeks old, their eldest son Johan died from pulmonary oedema. The couple also lost their son Lalle at a young age to tuberculosis.\nDeath.\nAfter his death in 1926, he was buried at H\u00e5gelby g\u00e5rd in Botkyrka. At his explicit request, there is no headstone marking his grave."}
{"id": "17721", "revid": "33159230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17721", "title": "Lysator", "text": "Computer club, Link\u00f6ping University, Sweden\nLysator is an academic computer club at Link\u00f6ping University, Sweden with almost 600 members. It is an independent non-profit society, separate from the students' union and the faculties of the university.\nHistory.\nLysator was founded on 29 March 1973. The first computer used at Lysator was a Datasaab D21, delivered to Lysator on 25 May 1973. Later in the decade, members of Lysator developed and initially built a microcomputer, the LYS-16, which was advanced for its time due to its 16-bit word size.\nIn February 1993, Lysator put up the first web server in Sweden, among the first 10\u201315 in the world.\nOn 30 July 2010, Lysator began migrating to a new 3U home rack, increasing their available storage space from 700GB to 13TB.\nProjects hosted by Lysator.\nLysator has been a starting ground for many notable projects, some of which have since become independent from the club:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17722", "revid": "1319243510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17722", "title": "Latin hip-hop", "text": "Hip-hop music by Latin American artists\nLatin hip-hop (also known as Latin rap) is a subgenre of hip hop music that is recorded by Spanish-speaking artists in North America, South America, and Spain.\nLatin hip-hop in the United States.\nWest Coast.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, most Latin rap came from New York and the West Coast of the United States. Due to the heaviest Puerto Rican migration to New York City in the '50s, during the '70s, the birth of Latin Hip-Hop involved Hispanic from the Caribbean island. Early hip-hop from the United States had a significant influence on early Puerto Rican hip-hop pioneers such as Ruben DJ, , and Vico-C.\nMellow Man Ace, from Cuba, was the first Hispanic artist to have a major bilingual single, the 1989 track \"Mentirosa\". This song went platinum, leading Mellow Man Ace to be described as the \"Godfather of Latin rap\" and inducted into the Hip-Hop Hall of Fame inductee. In 1990, fellow West Coast artist Kid Frost further brought Hispanics to the rap forefront with his hit song \"La Raza.\" In 1991, Kid Frost, Mellow Man, A.L.T. and several other Latin rappers formed the rap super group Latin Alliance and released a self-titled album which featured the hit \"Lowrider (On the Boulevard)\". The remake of the song Tequila was an A.L.T. hit later that year. Cypress Hill, of which Mellow Man Ace was a member before going solo, would become the first Hispanic rap group to reach platinum status in 1991. The group was also the first major hip-hop music group to include Spanish and Latin slang in their lyrics. Cypress Hill gained hit \"Insane in the Brain\"(1993) and Platinum record. Ecuadorian-born American rapper Gerardo received heavy rotation on video and radio for his single Rico Suave. While commercially watered-down, his album enjoyed a status of being one of the first mainstream Spanglish CDs on the market. Johnny J was a multi-platinum songwriter, music producer, and rapper who was perhaps best known for his production on Tupac Shakur's albums All Eyez on Me and Me Against the World. He also produced the 1990 single Knockin' Boots for his classmate Candyman's album \"Ain't No Shame in My Game\", which eventually went platinum thanks to the single. N2Deep, A Lighter Shade of Brown, Proper Dos, and Slow Pain were popular in latin rap scene.\nIn the mid-1990s, the success of LA's Cypress Hill led to additional Latin hip-hop artists finding label support. Delinquent Habits were a horn-sampling trio that found MTV support for their breakout bilingual single \"Tres Delinquentes\" in 1996. By the early 2000s, two Mexico-born, United States-raised Latin hip-hop acts found success on major labels. LA's Akwid fused banda with hip-hop on hits like \"No Hay Manera\" while Milwaukee's Kinto Sol told tales of Mexican immigrant life over more minimalist beats. Mr.Criminal, Mr.Capone-E, Mr.Knightowl, Ms.Krazie, Charlie Row Campo and Mr.Sancho released Latin and Chicano rap CDs.\nEast Coast.\nDJ Charlie Chase fused hip-hop with salsa and other music genres. Chase was the DJ for the New York hip-hop group the Cold Crush Brothers, from 1978 and through the '80s. East Coast Latin artists such as the Beatnuts emerged in the early 1990s, with New Jersey native Chino XL earning recognition for his lyricism and equal controversy for his subject matter. In 1992, Mesanjarz of Funk, led by the Spanish/English flow of Mr. Pearl, became the first Spanish rap group signed to a major label (Atlantic Records). In 1994, Platinum Producer and DJ Frankie Cutlass used his own label, Hoody Records, to produce his single \u201cPuerto Rico\u201d which became a classic. In the late 1990s, Puerto Rican rapper Big Punisher became the first Hispanic solo artist to reach platinum sales for an LP with his debut album \"Capital Punishment\", which included hit song \"Still Not a Player\". The genre even spawned a bicultural novelty, the Brooklyn-based crew Hip Hop Hood\u00edos, who fused their dual Jewish and Hispanic cultures on songs like \"Havana Nagila\" and \"Raza Hood\u00eda.\"\nSouth and Midwest.\nLatin rap (as well as its subgenre of Chicano rap) has thrived along the Western, Southern and Midwestern states with little promotion due to the large Latino populations of those regions. Jonny Z is considered to be a pioneer of Latin hip-hop, due to him being one of the first Hispanic combining Spanglish lyrics with freestyle, salsa, mambo, and regional Mexican banda. He scored four Billboard Hot Dance singles between 1993 and 1997, including one of the greatest Miami bass songs of all time, \"Shake Shake (Shake That Culo)\". Besides bass music, he also recorded the Chicano anthem \"Orale\". \"The Oxford Encyclopedia of Latinos and Latinas in the United States\" Volume 2, Page 301 states: \"A new style of Latina and Latino hip-hop was created in Miami and Texas by the bass rappers DJ Laz and Jonny Z, who mixed Latin styles with bass music\".\nPuerto Rico.\nUrbano Music from Puerto Rico has had a substantial impact on Latin rap and relate a certain message to their respective audiences. Puerto Rican \u00fanderground rap (more commonly referred to as \u00dander in Puerto Rico, eventually known as Reggaeton) emerged as a form of cultural and social protest within the Puerto Rican context. This is similar to the way American and Jamaican youth used rap and reggae/dancehall as a means to communicate their feelings on social, cultural, and political issues. In essence, Puerto Rican rap became the voice of the Puerto Rican youth in which they use dancehall and rap music as methods of expression for the Jamaican and working-class American youth counterparts.\nLatin trap.\nIn the mid-2010s, A new movement of Urbano music referred to as Latin Trap (or \"Trap Latino\" in Spanish) began to emerge, led by the Puerto Rican rapper Anuel AA. \nThis musical movement was different from American trap, being influenced not only by Southern hip-hop, but also by Urbano music, R&amp;B, pop, and reggaeton. The trap music movement brought artists like Bad Bunny to the mainstream who became the first non-English speaking rapper to become the most streamed artist of the year on Spotify, three consecutive times between 2020 and 2022, and also has the title of having the most streamed album on Spotify with his album Un Verano Sin Ti (2022).\nAlso known as \"Trap Latino\", Latin trap similar to mainstream trap which details \"'la calle,' or the streets \u2014 hustling, sex, and drugs\". Prominent artists of Latin trap include Arc\u00e1ngel, Bryant Myers, Anuel AA and Bad Bunny. In July 2017, \"The Fader\" wrote \"Rappers and reggaetoneros from Puerto Rico to Colombia have taken elements of trap \u2014 the lurching bass lines, jittering 808s and the eyes-half-closed vibe \u2014 and infused them into banger after banger.\" In an August 2017 article for \"Billboards series, \"A Brief History Of,\" they enlisted some of the key artists of Latin trap\u2014including Ozuna, De La Ghetto, Bad Bunny, Farruko and Bryant Myers\u2014to narrate a brief history on the genre. Elias Leight of \"Rolling Stone\" noted \"[Jorge] Fonseca featured Puerto Rican artists like Anuel AA, Bryant Myers and Noriel on the compilation \"Trap Capos: Season 1\", which became the first \"Latin trap\" LP to reach Number One on \"Billboards Latin Rhythm Albums chart.\"\nIn addition, Venezuelan hip-hop has emerged in an explosive way with very talented artists such as Neutro Shorty and Big Soto\nPuerto Rican hip-hop.\nIn the early 1980s as hip-hop was becoming popular in the United States with groups like Run-DMC and the Sugarhill Gang, a young rapper in Puerto Rico would be inspired by rap from the United States under the pseudonym \"Vico C\". Vico C would go on and produce underground hip-hop mixtapes which would become very popular in the San Juan metropolitan area, inspiring artists at the time like Ruben DJ, Brewley MC, Lisa M, and Def J. Le Fresh. As Reggaeton started becoming a much more popular as a more \"danceable\" rhythm compatible to the Caribbean, Puerto Rican hip-hop became a niche underground movement in Puerto Rico. In the late 90s there was an attempt to reinvigorate the hip-hop movement in Puerto Rico by a group called \"No Mel Syndicate\". While the hip-hop movement continues to be locally underground, modern artists such as Siete Nueve, MC Ceja, and PJ Sin Suela continue to produce hip-hop in Puerto Rico.\nLatin hip-hop in other countries.\nMexico.\nIn the late 1990s, hip-hop took hold in Mexico, especially with the platinum success of Mexican rap pioneers Control Machete. The genre also found prominence with Latin alternative artists who fused hip-hop rhymes with live instrumentation, including rap-rockers Molotov and cumbia-rockers El Gran Silencio.\nNarco Rap.\nA music scene, similar to the early underground gangsta rap scene, has emerged in northeastern Mexico (Nuevo Le\u00f3n, Tamaulipas and Coahuila), where the musical phenomenon of hip-hop is being co-opted by the influence of organized crime and the drug war in the region.\nSome of the main exponents of the genre are Cano y Blunt, DemenT and Big Los.\nArgentina &amp; Uruguay.\nThere are many hip-hop scenes in Latin America, including a growing rap movement in Buenos Aires and Montevideo.\nHip-hop in Uruguay has had a significant presence since the late 1990s, with groups such as Sudacas en Guerra, Oeste Pro Funk, Pl\u00e1tano Macho and El Peyote Asesino. Starting in 2003, the genre began to develop progressively in the country, especially after latejapride* joined Bizarro Records. Since then, numerous groups and artists have emerged on the Uruguayan hip-hop scene, including Beat Urbano, Arrajatabla Flow Club &amp; The Warriors, Magia Negra Squad, Primate and Cubaguayo, among others.\nIntroduction: Since the late 1990s, Uruguay has witnessed the development of a thriving hip-hop scene, marked by the contributions of early pioneers and a variety of influential groups.\n2003 Onwards: A significant turning point was latejapride*'s signing with Bizarro Records, which led to a progressive development of the genre.\nNew Artists and Challenges: The emergence of acts like Beat Urbano, Arrajatabla Flow Club &amp; The Warriors, and Magia Negra Squad, as well as the challenges faced, including the tragic murder of rapper Plef, illustrate the scene's evolution and resilience.\nConclusion\nEach of these countries' hip-hop scenes reflects their unique cultural contexts and social issues. While facing distinct challenges, these communities continue to use hip-hop as a powerful tool for expression and social commentary.\n Uruguayan Hip-Hop Development: New Rappers such as 44 Kid, Zanto, Davus, Mesita, and Rodridi recorded rap singles or albums.\nFreestyle.\nIn the mid-1980s, freestyle music was initially called \"Latin hip-hop\". This dance music genre, not to be confused with improvised freestyle rapping, was dominated, at the time, by electro funk beats and electronic Latin melodic and percussion elements, over which Latino vocalists sang melodramatic pop vocals, usually in English even though it was started by Nuyorican natives and African-Americans primarily. Freestyle has been primarily popular among Hispanics in the New York City, Miami, Chicago and California club scenes, but achieved national mainstream pop success with hits by Lisa Lisa, the Cover Girls, George Lamond, Stevie B, TKA and Expos\u00e9, among others.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17724", "revid": "4583648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17724", "title": "Lighthouse of Alexandria", "text": "Ancient lighthouse in Egypt\nThe Lighthouse of Alexandria, sometimes called the Pharos of Alexandria, was a lighthouse built by the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, during the reign of Ptolemy II Philadelphus (280\u2013247 BC). It has been estimated to have been at least in overall height. One of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, for many centuries it was one of the tallest man-made structures in the world.\nThe lighthouse was severely damaged by three earthquakes between 956 and 1303 AD and became an abandoned ruin. It was the third-longest surviving ancient wonder, after the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the extant Great Pyramid of Giza, surviving in part until 1480, when the last of its remnant stones were used to build the Citadel of Qaitbay on the site.\nIn 1994, a team of French archaeologists dived in the water of Alexandria's Eastern Harbour and discovered some remains of the lighthouse on the sea floor. In 2016, the Ministry of State of Antiquities in Egypt had plans to turn submerged ruins of ancient Alexandria, including those of the Pharos, into an underwater museum.\nIn 2025, portions of the lighthouse's entrance, threshold stones, and foundation paving stones were resurfaced to aid in a digital reconstruction effort.\nOrigin.\nPharos was a small island located on the western edge of the Nile Delta. In 332 BC, Alexander the Great founded the city of Alexandria on an isthmus opposite Pharos. Alexandria and Pharos were later connected by a mole spanning more than , which was called the \"Heptastadion\" (\"seven stadia\"\u2014a \"stadion\" was a Greek unit of length measuring approximately 180\u00a0m).\nThe east side of the mole became the Great Harbour, now an open bay; on the west side lay the port of Eunostos, with its inner basin Kibotos now vastly enlarged to form the modern harbour. Today's city development between the present Grand Square and the modern Ras el-Tin quarter is built on the silt which gradually widened and obliterated this mole. The Ras el-Tin promontory, where Ras el-Tin Palace was built in the 19th century, represents all that is left of the island of Pharos, the site of the lighthouse at its eastern point having been weathered away by the sea.\nConstruction.\nThe lighthouse was constructed in the third century BC. After Alexander the Great died, Ptolemy the First (Ptolemy I Soter) declared himself king in 305 BC and commissioned its construction shortly thereafter. The building was finished during the reign of his son, Ptolemy II Philadelphus, and took twelve years to complete at a total cost of 800\u00a0talents of silver. The light was produced by a furnace at the top, and the tower was said to have been built mostly with solid blocks of limestone and granite.\nIn his encyclopedic manuscript \"Geographica\", Strabo, who visited Alexandria in the late first century BC, reported that Sostratus of Cnidus had a dedication to the \"Saviour Gods\" inscribed in metal letters on the lighthouse. Writing in the first century AD, Pliny the Elder stated in his \"Natural History\" that Sostratus was the architect, although this conclusion is disputed. In his second century AD educational treatise \"How to Write History\", Lucian claimed that Sostratus hid his name under plaster which bore the name of Ptolemy, so that when the plaster eventually fell off, Sostratus's name would be visible in the stone.\nThe blocks of sandstone and limestone used in the construction of the lighthouse have been scientifically analysed to discover where they originated, with mineralogical and chemical analysis pointing to the Wadi Hammamat quarries, in the desert to the east of Alexandria.\nHeight and description.\nArab descriptions of the lighthouse are consistent despite it undergoing several repairs after earthquake damage. Given heights vary only fifteen percent from , on a square base.\nThe Arab authors indicate that the lighthouse was constructed from large blocks of light-coloured stone. The tower was made up of three tapering tiers: a lower square section with a central core; a middle octagonal section; and, at the top, a circular section. Al-Masudi wrote in the 10th century that the seaward side featured an inscription dedicated to Zeus. Geographer Al-Idrisi visited the lighthouse in 1154 and noted openings in the walls throughout the rectangular shaft with lead used as a filling agent in between the masonry blocks at the base. He reckoned the total height of the lighthouse to be 300 dhira rashashl (162 m).\nAt its apex was a mirror which reflected sunlight during the day; a fire was lit at night. Extant Roman coins struck by the Alexandrian mint show that a statue of Triton was positioned on each of the building's four corners, and a statue of Poseidon or Zeus stood on top.\nThe fullest description of the lighthouse comes from Arab traveller Abou Haggag Youssef Ibn Mohammed el-Balawi el-Andaloussi, who visited Alexandria in 1166. Balawi provided a description and measurement of the interior of the lighthouse's rectangular shaft. The inner ramp was described as roofed with masonry at 7 shibr (189\u00a0cm, 6.2\u00a0ft), noted as to allow two horsemen to pass at once. In clockwise rotation, the ramp held four storeys with eighteen, fourteen, and seventeen rooms on the second, third, and fourth floors, respectively.\nBalawi reported the base of the lighthouse to be 45 ba (30 m, 100\u00a0ft) long on each side with connecting ramp 600 dhira (300 m, 984\u00a0ft) long by 20 dhira (10 m, 32\u00a0ft) wide. The octagonal section was 24 ba (16.4 m, 54\u00a0ft) in width, and the diameter of the cylindrical section 12.73 ba (8.7 m, 28.5\u00a0ft). The apex of the lighthouse's oratory was measured with diameter 6.4 ba (4.3 m 20.9\u00a0ft).\nLater accounts of the lighthouse after the destruction by the 1303 Crete earthquake include Ibn Battuta, a Moroccan scholar and explorer, who passed through Alexandria in 1326 and 1349. Battuta noted that the wrecked condition of the lighthouse was then only noticeable by the rectangle tower and entrance ramp. He stated the tower to be 140 shibr (30.8 m, 101\u00a0ft) on each side. Battuta detailed Sultan An-Nasir Muhammad's plan to build a new lighthouse near the site of the collapsed one, but these went unfulfilled after the Sultan's death in 1341.\nDestruction.\nThe lighthouse was partially cracked and damaged by earthquakes in 796 and 951, followed by structural collapse in the earthquake of 956, and then again in 1303. Earthquakes propagate from two well known tectonic boundaries, the African\u2013Arabian and Red Sea Rift zones, respectively 350 and 520\u00a0km from the lighthouse's location. Documentation shows the 956 earthquake to be the first to cause structural collapse of the top 20 metres of the construction.\nDocumented repairs after the 956 earthquake include the installation of an Islamic-style dome after the collapse of the statue that previously topped the structure. The most destructive earthquake in 1303 had an estimated intensity of VIII+ originating from Crete (280\u2013350\u00a0km from Alexandria). The stubby remnant disappeared in 1480, when the sultan of Egypt, Qaitbay, built a medieval fort on the larger platform of the lighthouse site using the fallen stone.\nThe 10th-century Arab writer al-Mas'udi reports a legendary tale of the lighthouse's destruction, according to which, in the time of Caliph Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan (r.\u2009705\u00a0\u2013\u00a0715), the Byzantines sent a eunuch agent, who adopted Islam, gained the caliph's confidence and secured permission to search for hidden treasure at the base of the lighthouse. The search was cunningly made in such a manner that the foundations were undermined, and the Pharos collapsed. The agent managed to escape in a ship waiting for him.\nArchaeological research and rediscovery.\nGaston Jondet made the first detailed description of the submerged ruins of the old port of Alexandria in 1916. He was followed by Raymond Weill in the same year, and by Sir Leopold Halliday Savile in 1940.\nIn 1968, the lighthouse was rediscovered. UNESCO sponsored an expedition to send a team of marine archaeologists, led by Honor Frost, to the site. She confirmed the existence of ruins representing part of the lighthouse. Due to the lack of specialised archaeologists and the area becoming a military zone, exploration was put on hold.\nA team of French archaeologists led by Jean-Yves Empereur re-discovered the physical remains of the lighthouse in late 1994 on the floor of Alexandria's Eastern Harbour. He worked with cinematographer Asma el-Bakri who used a 35\u00a0mm camera to take the first underwater pictures of the scattered remains of collapsed columns and statues. Empereur's most significant findings consisted of blocks of granite 49\u201360 tonnes in mass often broken into multiple pieces, 30 sphinxes, 5 obelisks and columns with carvings dating back to Ramses II (1279\u20131213 BC).\nThe cataloguing of over 3,300 pieces was completed by Empereur and his team at the end of 1995 using a combination of photography and mapping. Thirty-six pieces of Empereur's granite blocks and other discoveries have been restored and are on display in Alexandria museums. Satellite imaging has revealed further remains. In the early 1990s, the underwater archaeologist Franck Goddio began exploration at the opposite side of the harbour from where Empereur's team had worked.\nSatellite and sonar imaging has revealed the additional remains of wharves, houses and temples which had all fallen into the Mediterranean as a result of earthquakes and other natural disasters. It is possible to go diving and see the ruins. In 2012 the secretariat of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage was working with the Government of Egypt on an initiative to add the Bay of Alexandria (including the remains of the lighthouse) to a World Heritage List of submerged cultural sites.\nSignificance.\nLegend has it that the people of the island of Pharos were wreckers; hence, Ptolemy I Soter had the lighthouse built to help guide ships into port at night.\nThe etymology of \"Pharos\" is uncertain. The word became generalised in modern Greek to mean \"lighthouse\" (\u03c6\u03ac\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 'f\u00e1ros'), and was borrowed by many Romance languages such as Catalan or Romanian (\"far\"), French (\"phare\"), Italian and Spanish (\"faro\") \u2013 and thence into Esperanto (\"faro\"), and Portuguese (\"farol\"), and even some Slavic languages like Bulgarian (\"far\"). In French, Portuguese, Turkish, Serbian and Russian, a derived word means \"headlight\" (\"phare\", \"farol\", \"far\", \"\u0444\u0430\u0440\", \"\u0444\u0430\u0440\u0430\").\nProposed reconstruction.\nSince 1978 proposals have been made to replace the lighthouse with a modern reconstruction. In 2015, the Egyptian government and the Alexandria governorate suggested building a skyscraper on the site of the lighthouse as part of the regeneration of the eastern harbour of Alexandria Port.\nPharos in culture.\nThe lighthouse remains a civic symbol of the city of Alexandria and of the Alexandria Governorate with which the city is more or less coterminous. A stylised representation of the lighthouse appears on the flag and seal of the Governorate and on many public services of the city, including the seal of Alexandria University.\nIn literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now because of the narrowness of the strait there can be no access by ship to the harbour without the consent of those who hold the Pharos. In view of this, Caesar took the precaution of landing his troops while the enemy was preoccupied with fighting, seized the Pharos and posted a garrison there. The result was that safe access was secured for his corn supplies and reinforcements.\u2014\u200a\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17725", "revid": "50076165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17725", "title": "Lighthouse", "text": "Structure designed to emit light to aid navigation\nA lighthouse is a tower, building, or other type of physical structure designed to emit light from a system of lamps and lenses and to serve as a beacon for navigational aid for maritime pilots at sea or on inland waterways.\nLighthouses mark dangerous coastlines, hazardous shoals, reefs, rocks, and safe entries to harbors; they also assist in aerial navigation. Once widely used, the number of operational lighthouses has declined due to the expense of maintenance and the advent of much cheaper, more sophisticated, and more effective electronic navigational systems.\nHistory.\nAncient lighthouses.\nBefore the development of clearly defined ports, mariners were guided by fires built on hilltops. Since elevating the fire would improve visibility, placing the fire on a platform became a practice that led to the development of the lighthouse. In antiquity, the lighthouse functioned more as an entrance marker to ports than as a warning signal for reefs and promontories, unlike many modern lighthouses. The most famous lighthouse structure from antiquity was the Pharos of Alexandria, Egypt, which collapsed following a series of earthquakes between 956 and 1323.\nThe intact Tower of Hercules at A Coru\u00f1a, Spain gives insight into ancient lighthouse construction; other evidence about lighthouses exists in depictions on coins and mosaics, of which many represent the lighthouse at Ostia. Coins from Alexandria, Ostia, and Laodicea in Syria also exist.\nModern construction.\nThe modern era of lighthouses began at the turn of the 18th century, as the number of lighthouses being constructed increased significantly due to much higher levels of transatlantic commerce. Advances in structural engineering and new and efficient lighting equipment allowed for the creation of larger and more powerful lighthouses, including ones exposed to the sea. The function of lighthouses was gradually changed from indicating ports to the providing of a visible warning against shipping hazards, such as rocks or reefs.\nThe Eddystone Rocks were a major shipwreck hazard for mariners sailing through the English Channel. The first lighthouse built there was an octagonal wooden structure, anchored by 12 iron stanchions secured in the rock, and was built by Henry Winstanley from 1696 to 1698. His lighthouse was the first tower in the world to have been fully exposed to the open sea.\nThe civil engineer John Smeaton rebuilt the lighthouse from 1756 to 1759; his tower marked a major step forward in the design of lighthouses and remained in use until 1877. He modeled the shape of his lighthouse on that of an oak tree, using granite blocks. He rediscovered and used \"hydraulic lime\", a form of concrete that will set under water used by the Romans, and developed a technique of securing the granite blocks together using dovetail joints and marble dowels. The dovetailing feature served to improve the structural stability, although Smeaton also had to taper the thickness of the tower towards the top, for which he curved the tower inwards on a gentle gradient. This profile had the added advantage of allowing some of the energy of the waves to dissipate on impact with the walls. His lighthouse was the prototype for the modern lighthouse and influenced all subsequent engineers.\nOne such influence was Robert Stevenson, himself a seminal figure in the development of lighthouse design and construction. His greatest achievement was the construction of the Bell Rock Lighthouse in 1810, one of the most impressive feats of engineering of the age. This structure was based upon Smeaton's design, but with several improved features, such as the incorporation of rotating lights, alternating between red and white. Stevenson worked for the Northern Lighthouse Board for nearly fifty years during which time he designed and oversaw the construction and later improvement of numerous lighthouses. He innovated in the choice of light sources, mountings, reflector design, the use of Fresnel lenses, and in rotation and shuttering systems providing lighthouses with individual signatures allowing them to be identified by seafarers. He also invented the movable jib and the balance-crane as a necessary part for lighthouse construction.\nAlexander Mitchell designed the first screw-pile lighthouse \u2013 his lighthouse was built on piles that were screwed into the sandy or muddy seabed. Construction of his design began in 1838 at the mouth of the Thames and was known as the Maplin Sands lighthouse, and first lit in 1841. Although its construction began later, the Wyre Light in Fleetwood, Lancashire, was the first to be lit (in 1840).\nLighting improvements.\nUntil 1782 the source of illumination had generally been wood pyres or burning coal. The Argand lamp, invented in 1782 by the Swiss scientist Aim\u00e9 Argand revolutionized lighthouse illumination with its steady smokeless flame. Early models used ground glass which was sometimes tinted around the wick. Later models used a mantle of thorium dioxide suspended over the flame, creating a bright, steady light. The Argand lamp used whale oil, colza, olive oil or other vegetable oil as fuel, supplied by a gravity feed from a reservoir mounted above the burner. The lamp was first produced by Matthew Boulton, in partnership with Argand, in 1784, and became the standard for lighthouses for over a century.\nSouter Lighthouse was the first lighthouse to be built for the purpose of electric illumination in 1871.\nSouth Foreland Lighthouse was the first tower to successfully use an electric light in 1875. The lighthouse's carbon arc lamps were powered by a steam-driven magneto. John Richardson Wigham was the first to develop a system for gas illumination of lighthouses. His improved gas 'crocus' burner at the Baily Lighthouse in county Dublin, Ireland, near Dublin city was 13 times more powerful than the most brilliant light then known.\nThe vaporized oil burner was invented in 1901 by Arthur Kitson, and improved by David Hood at Trinity House. The fuel was vaporized at high pressure and burned to heat the mantle, giving an output of over six times the luminosity of traditional oil lights. The use of gas as illuminant became widely available with the invention of the Dal\u00e9n light by Swedish engineer Gustaf Dal\u00e9n. He used Agamassan (Aga), a substrate, to absorb the gas, allowing the gas to be stored, and hence used, safely. Dal\u00e9n also invented the 'sun valve', which automatically regulated the light and turned it off during the daytime. The technology was the predominant light source in lighthouses from the 1900s to the 1960s, when electric lighting had become dominant.\nOptical systems.\nWith the development of the steady illumination of the Argand lamp, the application of optical lenses to increase and focus the light intensity became a practical possibility. William Hutchinson developed the first practical optical system in 1777, known as a catoptric system. This rudimentary system effectively collimated the emitted light into a concentrated beam, thereby greatly increasing the light's visibility. The ability to focus the light led to the first revolving lighthouse beams, where the light would appear to the mariners as a series of intermittent flashes. It also became possible to transmit complex signals using the light flashes.\nFrench physicist and engineer Augustin-Jean Fresnel developed the multi-part Fresnel lens for use in lighthouses. His design allowed for the construction of lenses of large aperture and short focal length, without the mass and volume of material that would be required by a lens of conventional design. A Fresnel lens can be made much thinner than a comparable conventional lens, in some cases taking the form of a flat sheet. A Fresnel lens can also capture more oblique light from a light source, thus allowing the light from a lighthouse equipped with one to be visible over greater distances.\nThe first Fresnel lens was used in 1823 in the Cordouan lighthouse at the mouth of the Gironde estuary; its light could be seen from more than out. Fresnel's invention increased the luminosity of the lighthouse lamp by a factor of four and his system is still in common use.\nModern lighthouses.\nThe introduction of electrification and automatic lamp changers began to make lighthouse keepers obsolete. For many years, lighthouses still had keepers, partly because lighthouse keepers could serve as a rescue service, if necessary. Improvements in maritime navigation and safety, such Global Positioning System (GPS), led to the phasing out of non-automated lighthouses across the world. Although several closed due to safety concerns, Canada still maintains 51 staffed lighthouses, split roughly evenly across east and west coasts, including Machias Seal Island which is staffed to assert Canadian sovereignty.\nThe remaining modern lighthouses are usually illuminated by a single stationary flashing light powered by solar-charged batteries and mounted on a steel skeleton tower. Where the power requirement is too great for solar power alone, \"cycle charging\" of the battery by a Diesel generator is provided. The generator only comes into use when the battery needs charging, saving fuel and increasing periods between maintenance.\nFamous lighthouse builders.\nJohn Smeaton is noteworthy for having designed the third and most famous Eddystone Lighthouse, but some builders are well known for their work in building multiple lighthouses. The Stevenson family (Robert, Alan, David, Thomas, David Alan, and Charles) made lighthouse building a three-generation profession in Scotland. \nRichard Henry Brunton designed and built 26 in Meiji era Japan, which became known as Brunton's \"children\". Blind Irishman Alexander Mitchell invented and built a number of screw-pile lighthouses. Englishman James Douglass was knighted for his work on the fourth Eddystone Lighthouse.\nUnited States Army Corps of Engineers Lieutenant George Meade built numerous lighthouses along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts before gaining wider fame as the winning general at the Battle of Gettysburg. Colonel Orlando M. Poe, engineer to General William Tecumseh Sherman in the siege of Atlanta, designed and built some of the most exotic lighthouses in the most difficult locations on the U.S. Great Lakes.\nFrench merchant navy officer Marius Michel Pasha built almost a hundred lighthouses along the coasts of the Ottoman Empire in a period of twenty years after the Crimean War (1853\u20131856).\nTechnology.\nIn a lighthouse, the source of light is called the \"lamp\" (whether electric or fuelled by oil) and the light is concentrated, if needed, by the \"lens\" or \"optic\". Power sources for lighthouses in the 20th\u201321st centuries vary.\nPower.\nOriginally lit by open fires and later candles, the Argand hollow wick lamp and parabolic reflector were introduced in the late 18th century.\nWhale oil was also used with wicks as the source of light. Kerosene became popular in the 1870s and electricity and acetylene gas derived on-site from calcium carbide began replacing kerosene around the turn of the 20th century. Carbide was promoted by the Dal\u00e9n light, which automatically lit the lamp at nightfall and extinguished it at dawn.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, many remote lighthouses in Russia (then Soviet Union) were powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs). These had the advantage of providing power day or night and did not need refuelling or maintenance. However, after the collapse of the Soviet government in 1990s, most of the official records on the locations, and condition, of these lighthouses were reportedly lost. Over time, the condition of RTGs in Russia degraded; many of them fell victim to vandalism and scrap metal thieves, who may not have been aware of the dangerous radioactive contents.\nEnergy-efficient LED lights can be powered by solar panels, with batteries instead of a Diesel generator for backup.\nLight source.\nMany Fresnel lens installations have been replaced by rotating aerobeacons, which require less maintenance.\nIn modern automated lighthouses, the system of rotating lenses is often replaced by a high intensity light that emits brief omnidirectional flashes, concentrating the light in time rather than direction. These lights are similar to obstruction lights used to warn aircraft of tall structures. Later innovations were \"Vega Lights\", and experiments with light-emitting diode (LED) panels.\nLED lights, which use less energy and are easier to maintain, had come into widespread use by 2020. In the United Kingdom and Ireland about a third of lighthouses had been converted from filament light sources to use LEDs, and conversion continued with about three per year. The light sources are designed to replicate the colour and character of the traditional light as closely as possible. The change is often not noticed by people in the region, but sometimes a proposed change leads to calls to preserve the traditional light, including in some cases a rotating beam. A typical LED system designed to fit into the traditional 19th century Fresnel lens enclosure was developed by Trinity House and two other lighthouse authorities and costs about \u20ac20,000, depending on configuration, according to a supplier; it has large fins to dissipate heat. Lifetime of the LED light source is 50,000 to 100,000 hours, compared to about 1,000 hours for a filament source.\nLaser light.\nExperimental installations of laser lights, either at high power to provide a \"line of light\" in the sky or, utilising low power, aimed towards mariners have identified problems of increased complexity in installation and maintenance, and high power requirements. The first practical installation, in 1971 at Point Danger lighthouse, Queensland, was replaced by a conventional light after four years, because the beam was too narrow to be seen easily.\nLight characteristics.\nIn any of these designs an observer, rather than seeing a continuous weak light, sees a brighter light during short time intervals. These instants of bright light are arranged to create a light characteristic or pattern specific to a lighthouse. For example, the Scheveningen Lighthouse flashes are alternately 2.5 and 7.5\u00a0seconds. Some lights have sectors of a particular color (usually formed by colored panes in the lantern) to distinguish safe water areas from dangerous shoals. Modern lighthouses often have unique reflectors or racon transponders so the radar signature of the light is also unique.\nLens.\nBefore modern strobe lights, lenses were used to concentrate the light from a continuous source. Vertical light rays of the lamp are redirected into a horizontal plane, and horizontally the light is focused into one or a few directions at a time, with the light beam swept around. As a result, in addition to seeing the side of the light beam, the light is directly visible from greater distances, and with an identifying light characteristic.\nThis concentration of light is accomplished with a rotating lens assembly. In early lighthouses, the light source was a kerosene lamp or, earlier, an animal or vegetable oil Argand lamp, and the lenses rotated by a weight driven clockwork assembly wound by lighthouse keepers, sometimes as often as every two hours. The lens assembly sometimes floated in liquid mercury to reduce friction. In more modern lighthouses, electric lights and motor drives were used, generally powered by diesel electric generators. These also supplied electricity for the lighthouse keepers.\nEfficiently concentrating the light from a large omnidirectional light source requires a very large diameter lens. This would require a very thick and heavy lens if a conventional lens were used. The Fresnel lens (pronounced ) focused 85% of a lamp's light versus the 20% focused with the parabolic reflectors of the time. Its design enabled construction of lenses of large size and short focal length without the weight and volume of material in conventional lens designs.\nFresnel lighthouse lenses are ranked by \"order\", a measure of refracting power, with a first order lens being the largest, most powerful and expensive; and a sixth order lens being the smallest. The order is based on the focal length of the lens. A first order lens has the longest focal length, with the sixth being the shortest. Coastal lighthouses generally use first, second, or third order lenses, while harbor lights and beacons use fourth, fifth, or sixth order lenses.\nSome lighthouses, such as those at Cape Race, Newfoundland, and Makapuu Point, Hawaii, used a more powerful hyperradiant Fresnel lens manufactured by the firm of Chance Brothers.\nBuilding.\nComponents.\nWhile lighthouse buildings differ depending on the location and purpose, they tend to have common components.\nA light station comprises the lighthouse tower and all outbuildings, such as the keeper's living quarters, fuel house, boathouse, and fog-signaling building. The Lighthouse itself consists of a tower structure supporting the lantern room where the light operates.\nThe lantern room is the glassed-in housing at the top of a lighthouse tower containing the lamp and lens. Its glass storm panes are supported by metal muntins (glazing bars) running vertically or diagonally. At the top of the lantern room is a stormproof ventilator designed to remove the smoke of the lamps and the heat that builds in the glass enclosure. A lightning rod and grounding system connected to the metal cupola roof provides a safe conduit for any lightning strikes.\nImmediately beneath the lantern room is usually a Watch Room or Service Room where fuel and other supplies were kept and where the keeper prepared the lanterns for the night and often stood watch. The clockworks (for rotating the lenses) were also located there. On a lighthouse tower, an open platform called the gallery is often located outside the watch room (called the Main Gallery) or Lantern Room (Lantern Gallery). This was mainly used for cleaning the outside of the windows of the Lantern Room.\nLighthouses near to each other that are similar in shape are often painted in a unique pattern so they can easily be recognized during daylight, a marking known as a daymark. The black and white barber pole spiral pattern of Cape Hatteras Lighthouse is one example. Race Rocks Light in western Canada is painted in horizontal black and white bands to stand out against the horizon.\nDesign.\nFor effectiveness, the lamp must be high enough to be seen before the danger is reached by a mariner. The minimum height is calculated by trigonometry (see Distance to the horizon) as formula_1, where \"H\" is the height above water in feet, and \"D\" is the distance from the lighthouse to the horizon in nautical miles, the lighthouse range.\nWhere dangerous shoals are located far off a flat sandy beach, the prototypical tall masonry coastal lighthouse is constructed to assist the navigator making a landfall after an ocean crossing. Often these are cylindrical to reduce the effect of wind on a tall structure, such as Cape May Light. Smaller versions of this design are often used as harbor lights to mark the entrance into a harbor, such as New London Harbor Light.\nWhere a tall cliff exists, a smaller structure may be placed on top such as at Horton Point Light. Sometimes, such a location can be too high, for example along the west coast of the United States, where frequent low clouds can obscure the light. In these cases, lighthouses are placed below the clifftop to ensure that they can still be seen at the surface during periods of fog or low clouds, as at Point Reyes Lighthouse. Another example is in San Diego, California: the Old Point Loma lighthouse was too high up and often obscured by fog, so it was replaced in 1891 with a lower lighthouse, New Point Loma lighthouse.\nAs technology advanced, prefabricated skeletal iron or steel structures tended to be used for lighthouses constructed in the 20th century. These often have a narrow cylindrical core surrounded by an open lattice work bracing, such as Finns Point Range Light.\nSometimes a lighthouse needs to be constructed in the water itself. Wave-washed lighthouses are masonry structures constructed to withstand water impact, such as Eddystone Lighthouse in Britain and the St. George Reef Light of California. In shallower bays, Screw-pile lighthouse ironwork structures are screwed into the seabed and a low wooden structure is placed above the open framework, such as Thomas Point Shoal Lighthouse. As screw piles can be disrupted by ice, steel caisson lighthouses such as Orient Point Light are used in cold climates. Orient Long Beach Bar Light (Bug Light) is a blend of a screw pile light that was converted to a caisson light because of the threat of ice damage. Skeletal iron towers with screw-pile foundations were built on the Florida Reef along the Florida Keys, beginning with the Carysfort Reef Light in 1852.\nIn waters too deep for a conventional structure, a lightship might be used instead of a lighthouse, such as the former lightship \"Columbia\". Most of these have now been replaced by fixed light platforms (such as Ambrose Light) similar to those used for offshore oil exploration.\nRange lights.\nAligning two fixed points on land provides a navigator with a line of position called a range in North America and a transit in Britain. Ranges can be used to precisely align a vessel within a narrow channel such as a river. With landmarks of a range illuminated with a set of fixed lighthouses, nighttime navigation is possible.\nSuch paired lighthouses are called range lights in North America and leading lights in the United Kingdom. The closer light is referred to as the beacon or front range; the further light is called the rear range. The rear range light is almost always taller than the front.\nWhen a vessel is on the correct course, the two lights align vertically, but when the observer is out of position, the difference in alignment indicates the direction of travel to correct the course.\nLocation.\nThere are two types of lighthouses: ones that are located on land, and ones that are offshore. \n\"Offshore Lighthouses\" are lighthouses that are not close to land. There can be a number of reasons for these lighthouses to be built. Offshore lighthouses are commonly used to project sovereignty or territorial assertions over maritime claims, often having manifested as early public services and state building. Examples of such lighthouses include the Raffles Lighthouse which asserts Singapore's southern maritime claims, the Subi Reef lighthouse which asserts the disputed Chinese claim over the South China Seas, and Machias Seal Island lighthouse which affirms Canada's disputed claim in its boundary dispute with the United States of America in the Gulf of Maine and the Bay of Fundy. There can be a shoal, reef or submerged island several miles from land.\nThe current Cordouan Lighthouse was completed in 1611, from the shore on a small islet, but was built on a previous lighthouse that can be traced back to the 880s and is the oldest surviving lighthouse in France. It is connected to the mainland by a causeway. The oldest surviving oceanic offshore lighthouse is Bell Rock Lighthouse in the North Sea, off the coast of Scotland.\nMaintenance.\nAsia and Oceania.\nIn Australia, lighthouses are conducted by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority.\nIn India, lighthouses are maintained by the Directorate General of Lighthouses and Lightships, an office of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways.\nEurope.\nThe former Soviet government built a number of automated lighthouses powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators in remote locations in northern Russia. They operated for long periods without external support with great reliability. However, numerous installations deteriorated, were stolen, or vandalized. Some cannot be found due to poor record-keeping.\nThe United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland together have three bodies: lighthouses around the coasts of England and Wales are looked after by Trinity House, those around Scotland and the Isle of Man by the Northern Lighthouse Board and those around Ireland by the Commissioners of Irish Lights.\nNorth America.\nIn Canada, lighthouses are managed by the Canadian Coast Guard.\nIn the United States, lighthouses are maintained by the United States Coast Guard, into which the United States Lighthouse Service was merged in 1939.\nPreservation.\nAs lighthouses became less essential to navigation, many of their historic structures faced demolition or neglect. In the United States, the National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act of 2000 provides for the transfer of lighthouse structures to local governments and private non-profit groups, while the USCG continues to maintain the lamps and lenses. In Canada, the Nova Scotia Lighthouse Preservation Society won heritage status for Sambro Island Lighthouse, and sponsored the Heritage Lighthouse Protection Act to change Canadian federal laws to protect lighthouses.\nMany groups formed to restore and save lighthouses around the world, including the World Lighthouse Society and the United States Lighthouse Society, as well as the Amateur Radio Lighthouse Society, which sends amateur radio operators to publicize the preservation of remote lighthouses throughout the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17726", "revid": "41263835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17726", "title": "Library of Alexandria", "text": "Library in ancient Alexandria, Egypt\nThe Library of Alexandria in Alexandria, Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. The library was part of a larger research institution called the Mouseion, which was dedicated to the Muses, the nine goddesses of the arts. The idea of a universal library in Alexandria may have been proposed by Demetrius of Phalerum, an exiled Athenian statesman living in Alexandria, to Ptolemy I Soter, who may have established plans for the library, but the library itself was probably not built until the reign of his son Ptolemy II Philadelphus. The library quickly acquired many papyrus scrolls, owing largely to the Ptolemaic kings' aggressive and well-funded policies for procuring texts. It is unknown precisely how many scrolls were housed at any given time, but estimates range from 40,000 to 400,000 at its height.\nAlexandria came to be regarded as the capital of knowledge and learning, in part because of the Great Library. Many important and influential scholars worked at the Library during the third and second centuries BC, including: Zenodotus of Ephesus, who worked towards standardizing the works of Homer; Callimachus, who wrote the \"Pinakes\", sometimes considered the world's first library catalog; Apollonius of Rhodes, who composed the epic poem the \"Argonautica\"; Eratosthenes of Cyrene, who calculated the circumference of the earth within a few hundred kilometers of accuracy; Hero of Alexandria, who invented the first recorded steam engine; Aristophanes of Byzantium, who invented the system of Greek diacritics and was the first to divide poetic texts into lines; and Aristarchus of Samothrace, who produced the definitive texts of the Homeric poems as well as extensive commentaries on them. During the reign of Ptolemy III Euergetes, a daughter library was established in the Serapeum, a temple to the Greco-Egyptian god Serapis.\nThe influence of the Library declined gradually over the course of several centuries. This decline began with the purging of intellectuals from Alexandria in 145 BC during the reign of Ptolemy VIII Physcon, which resulted in Aristarchus of Samothrace, the head librarian, resigning and exiling himself to Cyprus. Many other scholars, including Dionysius Thrax and Apollodorus of Athens, fled to other cities, where they continued teaching and conducting scholarship. The Library, or part of its collection, was accidentally burned by Julius Caesar during his civil war in 48 BC, but it is unclear how much was actually destroyed and it seems to have either survived or been rebuilt shortly thereafter. The geographer Strabo mentions having visited the Mouseion in around 20 BC, and the prodigious scholarly output of Didymus Chalcenterus in Alexandria from this period indicates that he had access to at least some of the Library's resources.\nThe Library dwindled during the Roman period, from a lack of funding and support. Its membership appears to have ceased by the 260s AD. Between 270 and 275 AD, Alexandria saw a Palmyrene invasion and an imperial counterattack that probably destroyed whatever remained of the Library, if it still existed. The daughter library in the Serapeum may have survived after the main Library's destruction. The Serapeum, mainly used as a gathering place for Neoplatonist philosophers following the teachings of Iamblichus, was vandalized and demolished in 391 AD under a decree issued by bishop Theophilus of Alexandria.\nHistorical background.\nThe Library of Alexandria was not the first library of its kind. A long tradition of libraries existed in both Greece and in the ancient Near East. The earliest recorded archive of written materials comes from the ancient Sumerian city-state of Uruk in around 3400 BC, when writing had only just begun to develop. Scholarly curation of literary texts began in around 2500 BC. The later kingdoms and empires of the ancient Near East had long traditions of book collecting. The ancient Hittites and Assyrians had massive archives containing records written in many different languages. The most famous library of the ancient Near East was the Library of Ashurbanipal in Nineveh, founded in the seventh century BC by the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal (ruled 668\u2013c. 627 BC). A large library also existed in Babylon during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II (c. 605\u2013c. 562 BC). In Greece, the Athenian tyrant Pisistratus was said to have founded the first major public library in the sixth century BC. It was out of this mixed heritage of both Greek and Near Eastern book collections that the idea for the Library of Alexandria may have been born through Alexander.\nFollowing the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC, there was a power grab for his empire among his top-ranking officers. The empire was divided into three: the Antigonid dynasty controlled Greece; the Seleucid dynasty, who had their capitals at Antioch and Seleucia, controlled large areas of Asia Minor, Syria, and Mesopotamia; and the Ptolemaic dynasty controlled Egypt with Alexandria as its capital. The Macedonian kings who succeeded Alexander the Great as rulers of the Near East wanted to promote Hellenistic culture and learning throughout the known world. These rulers, therefore, had a vested interest in collecting and compiling information from both the Greeks and the far more ancient kingdoms of the Near East. Libraries enhanced a city's prestige, attracted scholars, and provided practical assistance in ruling and governing the kingdom. Eventually, for these reasons, every major Hellenistic urban center would have a royal library. The Library of Alexandria, however, was unprecedented because of the scope and scale of the Ptolemies' ambitions; unlike their predecessors and contemporaries, the Ptolemies wanted to produce a repository of all knowledge. To support this endeavor, they were well positioned as Egypt was the ideal habitat for the papyrus plant, which provided an abundant supply of materials needed to amass their knowledge repository.\nUnder Ptolemaic patronage.\nFounding.\nThe Library was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world, but details about it are a mixture of history and legend. The earliest known surviving source of information on the founding of the Library of Alexandria is the pseudepigraphic \"Letter of Aristeas\", which was composed between c. 180 and c. 145 BC. It claims the Library was founded during the reign of Ptolemy I Soter (c. 323\u2013c. 283 BC) and that it was initially organized by Demetrius of Phalerum, a student of Aristotle who had been exiled from Athens and taken refuge in Alexandria within the Ptolemaic court. Nonetheless, the \"Letter of Aristeas\" is very late and contains information that is now known to be inaccurate. According to Diogenes Laertius, Demetrius was a student of Theophrastus, a student of Aristotle. Other sources claim that the Library was instead created under the reign of Ptolemy I's son Ptolemy II Philadelphus (283\u2013246 BC).\nModern scholars agree that, while it is possible that Ptolemy I, who was a historian and author of an account of Alexander's campaign, may have laid the groundwork for the Library, it probably did not come into being as a physical institution until the reign of Ptolemy II. By that time, Demetrius of Phalerum had fallen out of favor with the Ptolemaic court. He probably would not, therefore, have had any role in establishing the Library as an institution. Stephen V. Tracy, however, argues that it is highly probable that Demetrius played an important role in collecting at least some of the earliest texts that would later become part of the Library's collection. In around 295 BC, Demetrius may have acquired early texts of the writings of Aristotle and Theophrastus, which he would have been uniquely positioned to do since he was a distinguished member of the Peripatetic school.\nThe Library was built in the Brucheion (Royal Quarter) as part of the Mouseion. Its main purpose was to show off the wealth of Egypt, with research as a lesser goal, but its contents were used to aid the ruler of Egypt. The exact layout of the library is not known, but ancient sources describe the Library of Alexandria as comprising a collection of scrolls, Greek columns, a walk, a room for shared dining, a reading room, meeting rooms, gardens, and lecture halls, creating a model for the modern university campus. A hall contained shelves for the collections of papyrus scrolls known as \"bibliothekai\" (\"\u03b2\u03b9\u03b2\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03b8\u1fc6\u03ba\u03b1\u03b9\"). According to popular description, an inscription above the shelves read: \"The place of the cure of the soul.\"\nEarly expansion and organization.\nThe Ptolemaic rulers intended the Library to be a collection of all knowledge and they worked to expand the Library's collections through an aggressive and well-funded policy of book purchasing. They dispatched royal agents with large amounts of money and ordered them to purchase and collect as many texts as they possibly could, about any subject and by any author. Older copies of texts were favored over newer ones, since it was assumed that older copies had undergone less copying and that they were therefore more likely to more closely resemble what the original author had written. This program involved trips to the book fairs of Rhodes and Athens. According to the Greek medical writer Galen, under the decree of Ptolemy II, any books found on ships that came into port were taken to the library, where they were copied by official scribes. The original texts were kept in the library, and the copies delivered to the owners. The Library particularly focused on acquiring manuscripts of the Homeric poems, which were the foundation of Greek education and revered above all other poems. The Library therefore acquired many different manuscripts of these poems, tagging each copy with a label to indicate where it had come from.\nIn addition to collecting works from the past, the Mouseion which housed the Library also served as home to a host of international scholars, poets, philosophers, and researchers, who, according to the first-century BC Greek geographer Strabo, were provided with a large salary, free food and lodging, and exemption from taxes. They had a large, circular dining hall with a high domed ceiling in which they ate meals communally. There were also numerous classrooms, where the scholars were expected to at least occasionally teach students. Ptolemy II Philadelphus is said to have had a keen interest in zoology, so it has been speculated that the Mouseion may have even had a zoo for exotic animals. According to classical scholar Lionel Casson, the idea was that if the scholars were completely freed from all the burdens of everyday life they would be able to devote more time to research and intellectual pursuits. Strabo called the group of scholars who lived at the Mouseion a \u03c3\u03cd\u03bd\u03bf\u03b4\u03bf\u03c2 (, \"community\"). As early as 283 BC, they may have numbered between thirty and fifty learned men.\nEarly scholarship.\nThe Library of Alexandria was not affiliated with any particular philosophical school; consequently, scholars who studied there had considerable academic freedom. They were, however, subject to the authority of the king. One likely apocryphal story is told of a poet named Sotades who wrote an obscene epigram making fun of Ptolemy II for marrying his sister Arsinoe II. Ptolemy II is said to have jailed him and, after he escaped and was caught again, sealed him in a lead jar and dropped him into the sea. As a religious center, the Mouseion was directed by a priest of the Muses known as an \"epistates\", who was appointed by the king in the same manner as the priests who managed the various Egyptian temples. The Library itself was directed by a scholar who served as , as well as tutor to the king's son.\nThe first recorded head librarian was Zenodotus of Ephesus (lived c.\u2009325\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009270 BC). Zenodotus' main work was devoted to the establishment of canonical texts for the Homeric poems and the early Greek lyric poets. Most of what is known about him comes from later commentaries that mention his preferred readings of particular passages. Zenodotus is known to have written a glossary of rare and unusual words, which was organized in alphabetical order, making him the first person known to have employed alphabetical order as a method of organization. Since the collection at the Library of Alexandria seems to have been organized in alphabetical order by the first letter of the author's name from very early, Casson concludes that it is highly probable that Zenodotus was the one who organized it in this way. Zenodotus' system of alphabetization, however, only used the first letter of the word and it was not until the second century AD that anyone is known to have applied the same method of alphabetization to the remaining letters of the word.\nMeanwhile, the scholar and poet Callimachus compiled the \"Pinakes\", a 120-book catalogue of various authors and all their known works. The \"Pinakes\" has not survived, but enough references to it and fragments of it have survived to allow scholars to reconstruct its basic structure. The \"Pinakes\" was divided into multiple sections, each containing entries for writers of a particular genre of literature. The most basic division was between writers of poetry and prose, with each section divided into smaller subsections. Each section listed authors in alphabetical order. Each entry included the author's name, father's name, place of birth, and other brief biographical information, sometimes including nicknames by which that author was known, followed by a complete list of all that author's known works. The entries for prolific authors such as Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophocles, and Theophrastus must have been extremely long, spanning multiple columns of text. Although Callimachus did his most famous work at the Library of Alexandria, he never held the position of head librarian there. Callimachus' pupil Hermippus of Smyrna wrote biographies, Philostephanus of Cyrene studied geography, and Istros (who may have also been from Cyrene) studied Attic antiquities. In addition to the Great Library, many other smaller libraries also began to spring up all around the city of Alexandria.\nAfter Zenodotus either died or retired, Ptolemy II Philadelphus appointed Apollonius of Rhodes (lived c.\u2009295\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009215 BC), a native of Alexandria and a student of Callimachus, as the second head librarian of the Library of Alexandria. Philadelphus also appointed Apollonius of Rhodes as the tutor to his son, the future Ptolemy III Euergetes. Apollonius of Rhodes is best known as the author of the \"Argonautica\", an epic poem about the voyages of Jason and the Argonauts, which has survived to the present in its complete form. The \"Argonautica\" displays Apollonius' vast knowledge of history and literature and makes allusions to a vast array of events and texts while simultaneously imitating the style of the Homeric poems. Some fragments of his scholarly writings have also survived, but he is generally more famous today as a poet than as a scholar.\nAccording to legend, during the librarianship of Apollonius, the mathematician and inventor Archimedes (lived c.\u2009287 \u2013c.\u2009212 BC) came to visit the Library of Alexandria. During his time in Egypt, Archimedes is said to have observed the rise and fall of the Nile, leading him to invent the Archimedes' screw, which can be used to transport water from low-lying bodies into irrigation ditches. Archimedes later returned to Syracuse, where he continued making new inventions.\nAccording to two late and largely unreliable biographies, Apollonius was forced to resign from his position as head librarian and moved to the island of Rhodes (after which he takes his name) on account of the hostile reception he received in Alexandria to the first draft of his \"Argonautica\". It is more likely that Apollonius' resignation was on account of Ptolemy III Euergetes' ascension to the throne in 246 BC.\nLater scholarship and expansion.\nThe third head librarian, Eratosthenes of Cyrene (lived c. 280\u2013c. 194 BC), is best known today for his scientific works, but he was also a literary scholar. Eratosthenes' most important work was his treatise \"Geographika\", which was originally in three volumes. The work itself has not survived, but many fragments of it are preserved through quotation in the writings of the later geographer Strabo. Eratosthenes was the first scholar to apply mathematics to geography and map-making and, in his treatise \"Concerning the Measurement of the Earth\", he calculated the circumference of the earth and was only off by less than a few hundred kilometers. Eratosthenes also produced a map of the entire known world, which incorporated information taken from sources held in the Library, including accounts of Alexander the Great's campaigns in India and reports written by members of Ptolemaic elephant-hunting expeditions along the coast of East Africa.\nEratosthenes was the first person to advance geography towards becoming a scientific discipline. Eratosthenes believed that the setting of the Homeric poems was purely imaginary and argued that the purpose of poetry was \"to capture the soul\", rather than to give a historically accurate account of actual events. Strabo quotes him as having sarcastically commented, \"a man might find the places of Odysseus' wanderings if the day were to come when he would find the leatherworker who stitched the goatskin of the winds.\" Meanwhile, scholars at the Library of Alexandria displayed interest in other scientific subjects. Bacchius of Tanagra, a contemporary of Eratosthenes, edited and commented on the medical writings of the Hippocratic Corpus. The doctors Herophilus (lived c. 335\u2013c. 280 BC) and Erasistratus (c. 304\u2013c. 250 BC) studied human anatomy, but their studies were hindered by protests against the dissection of human corpses, which was seen as immoral.\nAccording to Galen, around this time, Ptolemy III requested permission from the Athenians to borrow the original manuscripts of Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, for which the Athenians demanded the enormous amount of fifteen talents () of a precious metal as guarantee that he would return them. Ptolemy III had expensive copies of the plays made on the highest quality papyrus and sent the Athenians the copies, keeping the original manuscripts for the library and telling the Athenians they could keep the talents. This story may also be construed to show the power of Alexandria over Athens during the Ptolemaic dynasty. This detail arises from the fact that Alexandria was a man-made bidirectional port between the mainland and the Pharos island, welcoming trade from the East and West, and soon found itself to be an international hub for trade, the leading producer of papyrus and, soon enough, books. As the Library expanded, it ran out of space to house the scrolls in its collection, so, during the reign of Ptolemy III Euergetes, it opened a satellite collection in the Serapeum of Alexandria, a temple to the Greco-Egyptian god Serapis located near the royal palace.\nPeak of literary criticism.\nAristophanes of Byzantium (lived c. 257\u2013c. 180 BC) became the fourth head librarian sometime around 200 BC. According to a legend recorded by the Roman writer Vitruvius, Aristophanes was one of seven judges appointed for a poetry competition hosted by Ptolemy III Euergetes. All six of the other judges favored one competitor, but Aristophanes favored the one whom the audience had liked the least. Aristophanes declared that all of the poets except for the one he had chosen had committed plagiarism and were therefore disqualified. The king demanded that he prove this, so he retrieved the texts that the authors had plagiarized from the Library, locating them by memory. On account of his impressive memory and diligence, Ptolemy III appointed him as head librarian.\nThe librarianship of Aristophanes of Byzantium is widely considered to have opened a more mature phase of scholarship in the Library of Alexandria's history. During this phase, literary criticism reached its peak and came to dominate the Library's scholarly output. Aristophanes of Byzantium edited poetic texts and introduced the division of poems into separate lines on the page, since they had previously been written out just like prose. He also invented the system of Greek diacritics, wrote important works on lexicography, and introduced a series of signs for textual criticism. He wrote introductions to many plays, some of which have survived in partially rewritten forms.\nThe fifth head librarian was an obscure individual named Apollonius Eidographus, who is known by the epithet \"the classifier of forms\" (). One late lexicographical source explains this epithet as referring to the classification of poetry on the basis of musical forms.\nDuring the early second century BC, several scholars at the Library of Alexandria studied works on medicine. Zeuxis the Empiricist is credited with having written commentaries on the Hippocratic Corpus, and he actively worked to procure medical writings for the Library's collection. A scholar named Ptolemy Epithetes wrote a treatise on wounds in the Homeric poems, a subject straddling the line between traditional philology and medicine. However, it was also during the early second century BC that the political power of Ptolemaic Egypt began to decline. After the Battle of Raphia in 217 BC, Ptolemaic power became increasingly unstable. There were uprisings among segments of the Egyptian population and, in the first half of the second century BC, connection with Upper Egypt became largely disrupted. Ptolemaic rulers also began to emphasize the Egyptian aspect of their nation over the Greek aspect. Consequently, many Greek scholars began to leave Alexandria for safer countries with more generous patronages.\nAristarchus of Samothrace (lived c. 216\u2013c. 145 BC) was the sixth head librarian. He earned a reputation as the greatest of all ancient scholars of Homeric poetry and produced not only texts of classic poems and works of prose, but full \"hypomnemata\", or long, free-standing commentaries, on them. These commentaries would typically cite a passage of a classical text, explain its meaning, define any unusual words used in it, and comment on whether the words in the passage were really those used by the original author or if they were later interpolations added by scribes. He made many contributions to a variety of studies, but particularly the study of the Homeric poems, and his editorial opinions are widely quoted by ancient authors as authoritative. A portion of one of Aristarchus' commentaries on the \"Histories\" of Herodotus has survived in a papyrus fragment. In 145 BC, however, Aristarchus became caught up in a dynastic struggle in which he supported Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator as the ruler of Egypt. Ptolemy VII was murdered and succeeded by Ptolemy VIII Physcon, who immediately set about punishing all those who had supported his predecessor, forcing Aristarchus to flee Egypt and take refuge on the island of Cyprus, where he died shortly after. Ptolemy VIII expelled all foreign scholars from Alexandria, forcing them to disperse across the Eastern Mediterranean.\nDecline.\nAfter Ptolemy VIII's expulsions.\nPtolemy VIII Physcon's expulsion of the scholars from Alexandria brought about a shift in the history of Hellenistic scholarship. The scholars who had studied at the Library of Alexandria and their students continued to conduct research and write treatises, but most of them no longer did so in association with the Library. Due to this, the Library of Alexandria began to decline in respect and prestige. A diaspora of Alexandrian scholarship occurred, in which scholars of the Library dispersed first into the eastern Mediterranean and then into the world of the western Mediterranean as well. Former scholars and their disciples took their scholarly energies elsewhere. For example, Aristarchus' student Dionysius Thrax (c.\u2009170\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200990 BC) established a school on the Greek island of Rhodes. He also wrote the first book on Greek grammar, a succinct guide to speaking and writing clearly and effectively \u2013 a book that remained the primary grammar textbook for Greek schoolboys until as late as the twelfth century AD. Another one of Aristarchus' pupils, Apollodorus of Athens (c.\u2009180\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009110 BC), went to Alexandria's greatest rival, Pergamum, where he taught and conducted research. This scholarly diaspora prompted the historian Menecles of Barca to sarcastically comment that Alexandria had become the teacher of all Greeks and barbarians alike.\nMeanwhile, in Alexandria, from the middle of the second century BC onwards, Ptolemaic rule in Egypt grew less stable than it had been previously. Confronted with growing social unrest and other major political and economic problems, the later Ptolemies did not devote as much attention towards the Library and the Mouseion as their predecessors had, continuing the decline that had begun under Ptolemy VIII Physcon. The status of both the Library and the head librarian diminished. Several of the later Ptolemies used the position of head librarian as a mere political plum to reward their most devoted supporters. Ptolemy VIII appointed a man named Cydas, one of his palace guards, as head librarian and Ptolemy IX Soter II (ruled 88\u201381 BC) is said to have given the position to a political supporter. Eventually, the position of head librarian lost so much of its former prestige that even contemporary authors ceased to take interest in recording the terms of office for individual head librarians.\nA shift in Greek scholarship at large occurred around the beginning of the first century BC. By this time, all major classical poetic texts had finally been standardized and extensive commentaries had already been produced on the writings of all the major literary authors of the Greek Classical Era. Consequently, there was little original work left for scholars to do with these texts. Many scholars began producing syntheses and reworkings of the commentaries of the Alexandrian scholars of previous centuries, at the expense of their own originalities. Other scholars branched out and began writing commentaries on the poetic works of postclassical authors, including Alexandrian poets such as Callimachus and Apollonius of Rhodes. Meanwhile, Alexandrian scholarship was probably introduced to Rome in the first century BC by Tyrannion of Amisus (c.\u2009100\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200925 BC), a student of Dionysius Thrax.\nBurning by Julius Caesar.\nIn 48 BC, during Caesar's Civil War, Julius Caesar was besieged at Alexandria. His soldiers set fire to some of the Egyptian ships docked in the Alexandrian port while trying to clear the wharves to block the fleet belonging to Cleopatra's brother Ptolemy XIV. This fire purportedly spread to the parts of the city nearest to the docks, causing considerable devastation in that area. The first-century AD Roman playwright and Stoic philosopher Seneca the Younger quotes Livy's , which was written between 63 and 14 BC, as saying that the fire started by Caesar destroyed 40,000 scrolls from the Library of Alexandria. The Greek Middle Platonist Plutarch (c. 46\u2013120 AD) writes in his \"Life of Caesar\" that, \"[W]hen the enemy endeavored to cut off his communication by sea, he was forced to divert that danger by setting fire to his ships, which, after burning the docks, thence spread on and destroyed the great library.\" The Roman historian Cassius Dio (c.\u2009155\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009235 AD), however, writes: \"Many places were set on fire, with the result that, along with other buildings, the dockyards and storehouses of grain and books, said to be great in number and of the finest, were burned.\" However, Florus and Lucan only mention that the flames burned the fleet itself and some \"houses near the sea\".\nScholars have interpreted Cassius Dio's wording to indicate that the fire did not actually destroy the entire Library itself, but rather one or more Library warehouses near the docks. Whatever damage Caesar's fire may have caused, evidently the Library was not completely destroyed. The geographer Strabo (c.\u200963 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200924 AD) mentions visiting the Mouseion, the larger research institution to which the Library was attached, in around 20 BC, several decades after Caesar's fire, indicating that it either survived the fire or was rebuilt soon afterwards. Nonetheless, Strabo's manner of talking about the Mouseion shows that it was nowhere near as prestigious as it had been a few centuries prior. It is unknown whether this was due to historical decline or catastrophic destruction. Despite mentioning the Mouseion, Strabo does not mention the Library separately, perhaps indicating that it had been so drastically reduced in stature and significance that Strabo felt it did not warrant separate mention. It is unclear what happened to the Mouseion after Strabo's mention of it.\nFurthermore, Plutarch records in his \"Life of Mark Antony\" that in the years leading up to the Battle of Actium in 33 BC, Mark Antony was rumored to have given Cleopatra all 200,000 scrolls in the Library of Pergamum. Plutarch himself notes that his source for this anecdote was sometimes unreliable and it is possible that the story may be nothing more than propaganda intended to show that Mark Antony was loyal to Cleopatra and Egypt rather than to Rome. Casson, however, argues that even if the story was made up, it would not have been believable unless the Library still existed. Edward J. Watts argues that Mark Antony's gift may have been intended to replenish the Library's collection after the damage to it caused by Caesar's fire roughly a decade and a half prior.\nFurther evidence for the Library's survival after 48 BC comes from the fact that the most notable producer of composite commentaries during the late first century BC and early first century AD was a scholar who worked in Alexandria named Didymus Chalcenterus, whose epithet () means \"bronze guts\". Didymus is said to have produced somewhere between 3,500 and 4,000 books, making him the most prolific known writer in all of antiquity. He was also given the nickname (), meaning \"book-forgetter\" because it was said that even he could not remember all the books he had written. Parts of some of Didymus' commentaries have been preserved in the forms of later extracts and these remains are modern scholars' most important sources of information about the critical works of the earlier scholars at the Library of Alexandria. Lionel Casson states that Didymus' prodigious output \"would have been impossible without at least a good part of the resources of the library at his disposal\".\nRoman period and destruction.\nVery little is known about the Library of Alexandria during the time of the Roman Principate (27 BC \u2013 284 AD). The emperor Claudius (ruled 41\u201354 AD) is recorded to have built an extension to the Library, but it seems that the Library of Alexandria's general fortunes followed those of the city of Alexandria itself. After Alexandria came under Roman rule, the city's status and, consequently that of its famous Library, gradually diminished. While the Mouseion still existed, membership was granted not on the basis of scholarly achievement, but rather on the basis of distinction in government, the military, or even in athletics.\nThe same was evidently the case even for the position of head librarian; the only known head librarian from the Roman Period was a man named Tiberius Claudius Balbilus, who lived in the middle of the first century AD and was a politician, administrator, and military officer with no record of substantial scholarly achievements. Members of the Mouseion were no longer required to teach, conduct research, or even live in Alexandria. The Greek writer Philostratus records that the emperor Hadrian (ruled 117\u2013138 AD) appointed the ethnographer Dionysius of Miletus and the sophist Polemon of Laodicea as members of the Mouseion, even though neither of these men is known to have ever spent any significant amount of time in Alexandria.\nAs the reputation of Alexandrian scholarship declined, the reputations of other libraries across the Mediterranean world improved, diminishing the Library of Alexandria's former status as the most prominent. Other libraries also sprang up within the city of Alexandria itself and the scrolls from the Great Library may have been used to stock some of these smaller libraries. The Caesareum and the Claudianum in Alexandria are both known to have had major libraries by the end of the first century AD. The Serapeum, originally the \"daughter library\" of the Great Library, probably expanded during this period as well, according to classical historian Edward J. Watts.\nBy the second century AD, the Roman Empire grew less dependent on grain from Alexandria and the city's prominence declined further. The Romans during this period also had less interest in Alexandrian scholarship, causing the Library's reputation to continue to decline as well. The scholars who worked and studied at the Library of Alexandria during the time of the Roman Empire were less well known than the ones who had studied there during the Ptolemaic Period. Eventually, the word \"Alexandrian\" itself came to be synonymous with the editing of texts, correction of textual errors, and writing of commentaries synthesized from those of earlier scholars\u2014in other words, taking on connotations of pedantry, monotony, and lack of originality. Mention of both the Great Library of Alexandria and the Mouseion that housed it disappear after the middle of the third century AD. The last known references to scholars being members of the Mouseion date to the 260s.\nIn 272 AD, the emperor Aurelian fought to recapture the city of Alexandria from the forces of the Palmyrene queen Zenobia. During the course of the fighting, Aurelian's forces destroyed the Broucheion quarter of the city in which the main library was located. If the Mouseion and Library still existed at this time, they were almost certainly destroyed or damaged during the attack. If they did survive the attack, whatever was left of them would have been further damaged or destroyed during the emperor Diocletian's siege of Alexandria in 297, when the Brouchion quarter was again destroyed.\nArabic sources on the Arab conquest.\nIn 642 AD, Alexandria was captured by an Arab army under the command of Amr ibn al-As. Several later Arabic sources describe the library's destruction by the order of Caliph Umar. The earliest was al-Qifti who described the story in a biographical dictionary \"History of Learned Men\", written before 1248. Bar-Hebraeus, writing in the thirteenth century, quotes Umar as saying to Ya\u1e25y\u0101 al-Na\u1e25w\u012b (John Philoponus): \"If those books are in agreement with the Quran, we have no need of them; and if these are opposed to the Quran, destroy them.\" So, Ibn al Qifti recounts, the general ordered that the books be burned to fuel the fires that heated Alexandria's city baths. It is said that they were enough to provide heating for six months.\nLater scholars, beginning with Father Eus\u00e8be Renaudot in his 1713 translation of the \"History of the Patriarchs of Alexandria\", are skeptical of these stories, given the amount of time that had passed before they were recorded and the political motivations of the various authors. Roy MacLeod, for example, points out that the story first appeared 500 years after the event, that John Philoponus was almost certainly dead by the time of the conquest of Egypt and that both the Great Library of Alexandria and the Mouseion were likely long gone by then. According to Diana Delia, \"Omar's rejection of pagan and Christian wisdom may have been devised and exploited by conservative authorities as a moral exemplum for Muslims to follow in later, uncertain times, when the devotion of the faithful was once again tested by proximity to nonbelievers\". The historian Bernard Lewis suggests the myth came into existence during the reign of Saladin in order to justify the Sunni Ayyubids' breaking up of the Shia Fatimid collections and library at public auction.\nSuccessors to the Mouseion.\nSerapeum.\nThe Serapeum is often called the \"Daughter Library\" of Alexandria. For much of the late fourth century AD it was probably the largest collection of books in the city of Alexandria. In the 370s and 380s, the Serapeum was still a major pilgrimage site for pagans. It remained a fully functioning temple, and had classrooms for philosophers to teach in. It naturally tended to attract followers of Iamblichean Neoplatonism. Most of these philosophers were primarily interested in theurgy, the study of cultic rituals and esoteric religious practices. The Neoplatonist philosopher Damascius (lived c. 458 \u2013after 538) records that a man named Olympus came from Cilicia to teach at the Serapeum, where he enthusiastically taught his students the rules of traditional divine worship and ancient religious practices. He enjoined his students to worship the old gods in traditional ways, and he may have even taught them theurgy.\nScattered references indicate that, sometime in the fourth century, an institution known as the \"Mouseion\" may have been reestablished at a different location somewhere in Alexandria. Nothing, however, is known about the characteristics of this organization. It may have possessed some bibliographic resources, but whatever they may have been, they were clearly not comparable to those of its predecessor.\nUnder the Christian rule of Roman emperor Theodosius I, pagan rituals were outlawed, and pagan temples were destroyed. In 391 AD, the bishop of Alexandria, Theophilus, supervised the destruction of an old Mithraeum. They gave some of the cult objects to Theophilus, who had them paraded through the streets so that they could be mocked and ridiculed. The pagans of Alexandria were incensed by this act of desecration, especially the teachers of Neoplatonic philosophy and theurgy at the Serapeum. The teachers at the Serapeum took up arms and led their students and other followers in a guerrilla attack on the Christian population of Alexandria, killing many of them before being forced to retreat. In retaliation, the Christians vandalized and demolished the Serapeum, although some parts of the colonnade were still standing as late as the twelfth century. Whether an actual library still existed at this point, and if so how extensive it was, is not recorded. Jonathan Theodore has stated that by 391/392 AD there was \"no remaining \"Great Library\" in the sense of the iconic vast, priceless collection\". Only Orosius explicitly mentions the destruction of books or scrolls; sources probably written after the Serapeum's destruction speak of its collection of literature in the past tense. On the other hand, a recent article identifies the literary evidence suggesting that the original Ptolemaic library collection was moved to the Serapeum by the end of the second century AD and that a library is attested there until the Serapeum was destroyed along with the books it contained.\nSchool of Theon and Hypatia.\nThe \"Suda\", a tenth-century Byzantine encyclopedia, calls the mathematician Theon of Alexandria (c.\u2009AD 335\u2013c. 405) a \"man of the Mouseion\". According to classical historian Edward J. Watts, however, Theon was probably the head of a school called the \"Mouseion\", which was named in emulation of the Hellenistic Mouseion that had once included the Library of Alexandria, but which had little other connection to it. Theon's school was exclusive, highly prestigious, and doctrinally conservative. Theon does not seem to have had any connections to the militant Iamblichean Neoplatonists who taught in the Serapeum. Instead, he seems to have rejected the teachings of Iamblichus and may have taken pride in teaching a pure, Plotinian Neoplatonism. In around 400 AD, Theon's daughter Hypatia (born c. 350\u2013370; died 415 AD) succeeded him as the head of his school. Like her father, she rejected the teachings of Iamblichus and instead embraced the original Neoplatonism formulated by Plotinus.\nTheophilus, the bishop involved in the destruction of the Serapeum, tolerated Hypatia's school and even encouraged two of her students to become bishops in territory under his authority. Hypatia was extremely popular with the people of Alexandria and exerted profound political influence. Theophilus respected Alexandria's political structures and raised no objection to the close ties Hypatia established with Roman prefects. Hypatia was later implicated in a political feud between Orestes, the Roman prefect of Alexandria, and Cyril of Alexandria, Theophilus' successor as bishop. Rumors spread accusing her of preventing Orestes from reconciling with Cyril and, in March of 415 AD, she was murdered by a mob of Christians, led by a lector named Peter. She had no successor and her school collapsed after her death.\nLater schools and libraries in Alexandria.\nNonetheless, Hypatia was not the last pagan in Alexandria, nor was she the last Neoplatonist philosopher. Neoplatonism and paganism both survived in Alexandria and throughout the eastern Mediterranean for centuries after her death. British Egyptologist Charlotte Booth notes that many new academic lecture halls were built in Alexandria at Kom el-Dikka shortly after Hypatia's death, indicating that philosophy was clearly still taught in Alexandrian schools. The late fifth-century writers Zacharias Scholasticus and Aeneas of Gaza both speak of the \"Mouseion\" as occupying some kind of a physical space. Archaeologists have identified lecture halls dating to around this time period, located near, but not on, the site of the Ptolemaic Mouseion, which may be the \"Mouseion\" to which these writers refer.\nCollection.\nIt is not possible to determine the collection's size in any era with certainty. Papyrus scrolls constituted the collection, and although codices were used after 300 BC, the Alexandrian Library is never documented as having switched to parchment, perhaps because of its strong links to the papyrus trade. The Library of Alexandria in fact was indirectly causal in the creation of writing on parchment, as the Egyptians refused to export papyrus to their competitor in the Library of Pergamum. Consequently, the Library of Pergamum developed parchment as its own writing material.\nA single piece of writing might occupy several scrolls, and this division into self-contained \"books\" was a major aspect of editorial work. King Ptolemy II Philadelphus (309\u2013246 BC) is said to have set 500,000 scrolls as an objective for the library. The library's index, Callimachus' \"Pinakes\", has only survived in the form of a few fragments, and it is not possible to know with certainty how large and how diverse the collection may have been. At its height, the library was said to possess nearly half a million scrolls, and, although historians debate the precise number, the highest estimates claim 900,000 scrolls while the most conservative estimates are as low as 40,000, which is still an enormous collection that required vast storage space.\nAs a research institution, the library filled its stacks with new works in mathematics, astronomy, physics, natural sciences, and other subjects. Its empirical standards were applied in one of the first and certainly strongest homes for serious textual criticism. As the same text often existed in several different versions, comparative textual criticism was crucial for ensuring their veracity. Once ascertained, canonical copies would then be made for scholars, royalty, and wealthy bibliophiles all over the world, this commerce bringing income to the library.\nLegacy.\nIn antiquity.\nThe Library of Alexandria was one of the largest and most prestigious libraries of the ancient world, but it was far from the only one. By the end of the Hellenistic Period, almost every city in the Eastern Mediterranean had a public library and so did many medium-sized towns. During the Roman Period, the number of libraries only proliferated. By the fourth century AD, there were at least two dozen public libraries in the city of Rome alone. As the Library of Alexandria declined, centers of academic excellence arose in various other capital cities. It is possible most of the material from the Library of Alexandria survived, by way of the Imperial Library of Constantinople, the Academy of Gondishapur, and the House of Wisdom. This material may then have been preserved by the Reconquista, which led to the formation of European universities and the recompilation of ancient texts from formerly scattered fragments.\nIn late antiquity, as the Roman Empire became Christianized, Christian libraries modeled directly on the Library of Alexandria and other great libraries of earlier pagan times began to be founded all across the Greek-speaking eastern part of the empire. Among the largest and most prominent of these libraries were the Theological Library of Caesarea Maritima, the Library of Jerusalem, and a Christian library in Alexandria. These libraries held both pagan and Christian writings side-by-side and Christian scholars applied to the Christian scriptures the same philological techniques that the scholars of the Library of Alexandria had used for analyzing the Greek classics. Nonetheless, the study of pagan authors remained secondary to the study of the Christian scriptures until the Renaissance.\nThe survival of ancient texts owes a great deal to the fact that they were exhaustingly copied and recopied. At first, they were copied by professional scribes during the Roman period. Mediaeval Muslim scholars also played a crucial role in preserving and translating the knowledge of the ancient world. The Graeco-Arabic translation movement translated a significant number of ancient texts into Arabic, keeping the texts intact and preserving them. Later, they were translated and re-introduced to Europe. This movement began in earnest under the Abbasid Caliphate where it played a significant role in the Islamic Golden Age. The translation movement encompassed scholars of various religions in the Abbasid empire. For example, under the patronage of Caliph al-Ma'mun, a Christian scholar and translator named Hunayn ibn Ishaq completed major translation projects of Aristotle, Hypocrates, and Galen so that they remained accessible to scholars. These translations were translated into Latin and re-introduced to Europe. These texts were copied by monks during Middle Ages and Renaissance, making them more easily available to European scholars once more.\nModern library: Bibliotheca Alexandrina.\nThe idea of reviving the ancient Library of Alexandria in the modern era was first proposed in 1974, when Lotfy Dowidar was president of the University of Alexandria. In May 1986, Egypt requested the executive board of UNESCO to allow the international organization to conduct a feasibility study for the project. This marked the beginning of UNESCO and the international community's involvement in trying to bring the project to fruition. Starting in 1988, UNESCO and the UNDP worked to support the international architectural competition to design the Library. Egypt devoted four hectares of land for the building of the Library and established the National High Commission for the Library of Alexandria. Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak took a personal interest in the project, which greatly contributed to its advancement. An international architectural competition took place in 1989 with Norwegian architectural firm Sn\u00f8hetta winning the competition. Completed in 2002, the Bibliotheca Alexandrina now functions as a modern library and cultural center, commemorating the original Library of Alexandria. In line with the mission of the Great Library of Alexandria, the Bibliotheca Alexandrina also houses the International School of Information Science, a school for students preparing for highly specialized post-graduate degrees, whose goal is to train professional staff for libraries in Egypt and across the Middle East.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17727", "revid": "50121126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17727", "title": "Library", "text": "Organized collection of books or other information resources\nA library is a collection of books, and possibly other materials and media, that is accessible for use by its members and members of allied institutions. Libraries provide physical (hard copies) or digital (soft copies) materials, and may be a physical location, a virtual space, or both. A library's collection normally includes printed materials which can be borrowed, and usually also includes a reference section of publications which may only be utilized inside the premises. Resources such as commercial releases of films, television programmes, other video recordings, radio, music and audio recordings may be available in many formats. These include DVDs, Blu-rays, CDs, cassettes, or other applicable formats such as microform. They may also provide access to information, music or other content held on bibliographic databases. In addition, some libraries offer creation stations for makers which offer access to a 3D printing station with a 3D scanner.\nLibraries can vary widely in size and may be organised and maintained by a public body such as a government, an institution (such as a school or museum), a corporation, or a private individual. In addition to providing materials, libraries also provide the services of librarians who are trained experts in finding, selecting, circulating and organising information while interpreting information needs and navigating and analysing large amounts of information with a variety of resources. The area of study is known as library and information science or studies.\nLibrary buildings often provide quiet areas for studying, as well as common areas for group study and collaboration, and may provide public facilities for access to their electronic resources, such as computers and access to the Internet.\nThe library's clientele and general services offered vary depending on its type, size and sometimes location: users of a public library have different needs from those of a special library or academic library, for example. Libraries may also be community hubs, where programmes are made available and people engage in lifelong learning. Modern libraries extend their services beyond the physical walls of the building by providing material accessible by electronic means, including from home via the Internet.\nThe services that libraries offer are variously described as library services, information services, or the combination \"library and information services\", although different institutions and sources define such terminology differently.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"library\" is based on the Latin word for 'book' or 'document', contained in Latin 'collection of books' and 'container for books'. Other modern languages use derivations from Ancient Greek (), originally meaning 'book container', via Latin (cf. French or German ).\nHistory.\nThe history of libraries began with the first efforts to organize collections of documents. The first libraries consisted of archives of the earliest form of writing\u2014the clay tablets in cuneiform script discovered in Sumer, some dating back to 2600 BC. Private or personal libraries made up of written books appeared in classical Greece in the 5th century BC. In the 6th century, at the very close of the Classical period, the great libraries of the Mediterranean world remained those of Constantinople and Alexandria.\nThe Fatimids (r. 909\u20131171) also possessed many great libraries within their domains. The historian Ibn Abi Tayyi\u2019 describes their palace library, which probably contained the largest collection of literature on earth at the time, as a \"wonder of the world\". Throughout history, along with bloody massacres, the destruction of libraries has been critical for conquerors who wish to destroy every trace of the vanquished community's recorded memory. A prominent example of this can be found in the Mongol massacre of the Nizaris at Alamut in 1256 and the torching of their library, \"the fame of which\", boasts the conqueror Juwayni, \"had spread throughout the world\".\nThe libraries of Timbuktu were established in the fourteenth century and attracted scholars from all over the world.\nThe oldest modern public library was the Za\u0142uski Library (, ) established in 1732 in Warsaw, Poland-Lithuania, which ultimately evolved into the National Library of Poland.\nFunctions.\nLibraries may provide physical or digital access to material, and may be a physical location, virtual space, or both (hybrid). A library's collection can include books, periodicals, newspapers, manuscripts, films, maps, prints, documents, microform, CDs, cassettes, videotapes, DVDs, Blu-ray Discs, e-books, audiobooks, databases, table games, video games, and other formats. Libraries range widely in size, up to millions of items.\nLibraries often provide quiet spaces for private studying, common areas to facilitate group study and collaboration, and public facilities for access to their electronic resources and the Internet. Public and institutional collections and services may be intended for use by people who choose not to\u2014or cannot afford to\u2014purchase an extensive collection themselves, who need material no individual can reasonably be expected to have, or who require professional assistance with their research.\nServices offered by a library are variously described as library services, information services, or the combination \"library and information services\", although different institutions and sources define such terminology differently. Organizations or departments are often called by one of these names.\nInternal organization.\nMost libraries have materials arranged in a specified order according to a library classification system, so that items may be located quickly and collections browsed efficiently. Some libraries have additional galleries beyond the public ones, where \"reference\" materials are stored. These reference stacks may be open to selected members of the public while others may require patrons to submit a \"stack request\" \u2013 a request for an assistant to retrieve the material from the closed stacks: see List of closed stack libraries.\nLarger libraries are often divided into departments staffed by both paraprofessionals and professional librarians. Their department names and occupational designations may change depending on their location and the needs of the library.\nBasic tasks in library management include planning acquisitions (which materials the library should acquire, by purchase or otherwise), classifying and preserving items (especially rare and fragile archival materials such as manuscripts), deaccessioning materials, patron borrowing, and developing and administering library computer systems and technology. More long-term issues include planning the construction of new libraries or extensions to existing ones, and the development and implementation of outreach services and reading-enhancement services (such as adult literacy and children's programming). Library materials like books, magazines, periodicals, CDs, etc. are managed using a library classification system such as the Dewey Decimal Classification Theory, though libraries will usually adjust their classification system to fit their needs.\nThe International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published several standards regarding the management of libraries through its Technical Committee 46 (TC 46), which is focused on \"libraries, documentation and information centers, publishing, archives, records management, museum documentation, indexing and abstracting services, and information science\". The following is a partial list of some of them:\nUsage.\nSome patrons may not know how to fully utilize library resources, or feel unease in approaching a staff member. Ways in which a library's content is displayed or accessed may have an impact on use. An antiquated or clumsy search system, or staff unwilling or not properly trained to engage their patrons, will limit a library's usefulness. In the public libraries of the United States, beginning in the 19th century, these problems drove the emergence of the library instruction movement, which advocated library user education. One of the early leaders was John Cotton Dana. The basic form of library instruction is sometimes known as information literacy.\nLibraries should inform their users of what materials are available in their collections and how to access that information. Before the computer age, this was accomplished by the card catalogue\u2014a cabinet (or multiple cabinets) containing many drawers filled with index cards that identified books and other materials. In a large library, the card catalogue often filled a large room.\nThe emergence of desktop computers and the Internet, however, has led to the adoption of electronic catalogue databases (often referred to as \"webcats\" or as online public access catalogues, OPACs), which allow users to search the library's holdings from any location with Internet access. This style of catalogue maintenance is compatible with new types of libraries, such as digital libraries and distributed libraries, as well as older libraries that have been retrofitted. Large libraries may be scattered within multiple buildings across a town, each having multiple floors, with multiple rooms housing their resources across a series of shelves called bays. Once a user has located a resource within the catalogue, they must then use navigational guidance to retrieve the resource physically, a process that may be assisted through signage, maps, GPS systems, or RFID tagging.\nFinland has the highest number of registered book borrowers per capita in the world. Over half of Finland's population are registered borrowers. In the US, public library users have borrowed on average roughly 15 books per user per year from 1856 to 1978. From 1978 to 2004, book circulation per user declined approximately 50%. The growth of audiovisuals circulation, estimated at 25% of total circulation in 2004, accounts for about half of this decline.\nRelationship with the Internet.\nA library may make use of the Internet in a number of ways, from creating its own library website to making the contents of its catalogues searchable online. Some specialised search engines such as Google Scholar offer a way to facilitate searching for academic resources such as journal articles and research papers. The Online Computer Library Center allows anyone to search the world's largest repository of library records through its WorldCat online database. Websites such as LibraryThing and Amazon provide abstracts, reviews, and recommendations of books. Libraries provide computers and Internet access to allow people to search for information online. Online information access is particularly attractive to younger library users.\nDigitization of books, particularly those that are out-of-print, in projects such as Google Books provides resources for library and other online users. Due to their holdings of valuable material, some libraries are important partners for search engines such as Google in realizing the potential of such projects and have received reciprocal benefits in cases where they have negotiated effectively. As the prominence of and reliance on the Internet has grown, library services have moved the emphasis from mainly providing print resources to providing more computers and more Internet access. Libraries face a number of challenges in adapting to new ways of information seeking that may stress convenience over quality, reducing the priority of information literacy skills. The potential decline in library usage, particularly reference services, puts the necessity for these services in doubt.\nLibrary scholars have acknowledged that libraries need to address the ways that they market their services if they are to compete with the Internet and mitigate the risk of losing users. This includes promoting the information literacy skills training considered vital across the library profession. Many US-based research librarians rely on the ACRL Framework for Information Literacy in order to guide students and faculty in research. However, marketing of services has to be adequately supported financially in order to be successful. This can be problematic for library services that are publicly funded and find it difficult to justify diverting tight funds to apparently peripheral areas such as branding and marketing.\nThe privacy aspect of library usage in the Internet age is a matter of growing concern and advocacy; privacy workshops are run by the Library Freedom Project which teach librarians about digital tools (such as the Tor network) to thwart mass surveillance.\nLibrarians.\nLibraries are usually staffed by a combination of professionally trained librarians, paraprofessional staff sometimes called library technicians, and support staff. Some topics related to the education of librarians and allied staff include accessibility of the collection, acquisition of materials, arrangement and finding tools, the book trade, the influence of the physical properties of the different writing materials, language distribution, role in education, rates of literacy, budgets, staffing, libraries for specially targeted audiences, architectural merit, patterns of usage, the role of libraries in a nation's cultural heritage, and the role of government, church, or private sponsorship. Since the 1960s, issues of computerization and digitization have arisen.\nTypes.\nMany institutions make a distinction between a circulating or lending library, where materials are expected and intended to be loaned to patrons, institutions, or other libraries, and a reference library where material is not lent out. Travelling libraries, such as the early horseback libraries of eastern Kentucky and bookmobiles, are generally of the lending type. Modern libraries are often a mixture of both, containing a general collection for circulation, and a reference collection which is restricted to the library premises. Also, increasingly, digital collections enable broader access to material that may not circulate in print, and enables libraries to expand their collections even without building a larger facility. Lamba (2019) reinforced this idea by observing that \"today's libraries have become increasingly multi-disciplinary, collaborative and networked\" and that applying Web 2.0 tools to libraries would \"not only connect the users with their community and enhance communication but will also help the librarians to promote their library's activities, services, and products to target both their actual and potential users\".\nLibrary system.\nA library system is a central organization created to manage and coordinate operations and services in or between different centers, buildings or libraries branches and library patrons. They use a library classification to organize their volumes and nowadays also use an Integrated library system - an enterprise resource planning system for a library used to track items owned, orders made, bills paid, and patrons who have borrowed information resources. Many counties, states and universities have developed their own library systems. For example, the Arrowhead Library System is a geographically based library system, established in 1965 to serve seven counties in Northeastern Minnesota with 29 member libraries in the system. In 2012 it merged with the North Country Library Cooperative to become the state's first regional public and multitype library system. The London Public Library in Canada has 16 branches, and the Helsinki Metropolitan Area Libraries, in Finland, has 63 libraries. Some countries, such as Venezuela, have only one library system for the whole country; the National Library of Venezuela has 685 branches.\nLibrary branch.\nA library branch, branch library or community library is a local library that forms part of a larger library system, using the same library classification for its catalogs and is interconnected with all the other branches of the system through an integrated library system.\nSome countries' municipalities have their own library system, such as London Public Library (Canada) with 16 library branches, Helsinki Metropolitan Area Libraries (Finland) with 63 libraries, and the National Library of Venezuela with 685 branches.\nSome popular library branches include New York Public Library Main Branch, part of New York Public Library System, and Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library, a branch of District of Columbia Public Library System.\nAcademic libraries.\nAcademic libraries are generally located on college and university campuses and primarily serve the students and faculty of that and other academic institutions. Some academic libraries, especially those at public institutions, are accessible to members of the general public in whole or in part. Library services are sometimes extended to the general public at a fee; some academic libraries create such services in order to enhance literacy levels in their communities.\nAcademic libraries are libraries that are hosted in post-secondary educational institutions, such as colleges and universities. Their main functions are to provide support in research, consultancy and resource linkage for students and faculty of the educational institution. Academic libraries house current, reliable and relevant information resources spread through all the disciplines which serve to assuage the information requirements of students and faculty. In cases where not all books are housed some libraries have E-resources, where they subscribe for a given institution they are serving, in order to provide backups and additional information that is not practical to have available as hard copies. Furthermore, most libraries collaborate with other libraries in exchange of books.\nSpecific course-related resources are usually provided by the library, such as copies of textbooks and article readings held on 'reserve' (meaning that they are loaned out only on a short-term basis, usually a matter of hours). Some academic libraries provide resources not usually associated with libraries, such as the ability to check out laptop computers, web cameras, or scientific calculators.\nAcademic libraries offer workshops and courses outside of formal, graded coursework, which are meant to provide students with the tools necessary to succeed in their programs. These workshops may include help with citations, effective search techniques, journal databases, and electronic citation software. These workshops provide students with skills that can help them achieve success in their academic careers (and often, in their future occupations), which they may not learn inside the classroom.\nThe academic library provides a quiet study space for students on campus; it may also provide group study space, such as meeting rooms. In North America, Europe, and other parts of the world, academic libraries are becoming increasingly digitally oriented. The library provides a \"gateway\" for students and researchers to access various resources, both print/physical and digital. Academic institutions are subscribing to electronic journals databases, providing research and scholarly writing software, and usually provide computer workstations or computer labs for students to access journals, library search databases and portals, institutional electronic resources, Internet access, and course- or task-related software (i.e. word processing and spreadsheet software). Some academic libraries take on new roles, for instance, acting as an electronic repository for institutional scholarly research and academic knowledge, such as the collection and curation of digital copies of students' theses and dissertations. Moreover, academic libraries are increasingly acting as publishers on their own on a not-for-profit basis, especially in the form of fully Open Access institutional publishers.\nChildren's libraries.\nChildren's libraries are special collections of books intended for juvenile readers and usually kept in separate rooms of general public libraries. Some children's libraries have entire floors or wings dedicated to them in bigger libraries while smaller ones may have a separate room or area for children. They are an educational agency seeking to acquaint the young with the world's literature and to cultivate a love for reading. Their work supplements that of the public schools.\nServices commonly provided by public libraries may include storytelling sessions for infants, toddlers, preschool children, or after-school programs, all with an intention of developing early literacy skills and a love of books. One of the most popular programs offered in public libraries are summer reading programs for children, families, and adults.\nAnother popular reading program for children is PAWS TO READ or similar programs where children can read to certified therapy dogs. Since animals are a calming influence and there is no judgment, children learn confidence and a love of reading. Many states have these types of programs: parents need simply ask their librarian to see if it is available at their local library.\nMedia libraries.\nIn some countries, a difference is made between libraries that hold multimedia materials like videos, such as movies and documentaries, and sound recordings, such as music and audio books, and libraries that hold physical books. The French term describes this sort of multimedia library and came from a period in the history of French libraries during the 1970s. Notable media libraries include Sendai Mediatheque in Japan, and from within France the M\u00e9diath\u00e8que Musicale Mahler, and M\u00e9diath\u00e8ques de Saint-\u00c9tienne.\nNational libraries.\nA national or state library serves as a national repository of information, and has the right of legal deposit, which is a legal requirement that publishers in the country need to deposit a copy of each publication with the library. Unlike a public library, a national library rarely allows citizens to borrow books. Often, their collections include numerous rare, valuable, or significant works. There are wider definitions of a national library, putting less emphasis on the repository character. The first national libraries had their origins in the royal collections of the sovereign or some other supreme body of the state.\nMany national libraries cooperate within the National Libraries Section of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) to discuss their common tasks, define and promote common standards, and carry out projects helping them to fulfill their duties. The national libraries of Europe participate in The European Library which is a service of the Conference of European National Librarians (CENL).\nPublic lending libraries.\nA public library provides services to the general public. If the library is part of a countywide library system, citizens with an active library card from around that county can use the library branches associated with the library system. A library can serve only their city, however, if they are not a member of the county public library system. Much of the materials located within a public library are available for borrowing. The library staff decides upon the number of items patrons are allowed to borrow, as well as the details of borrowing time allotted. Typically, libraries issue library cards to community members wishing to borrow books. Often visitors to a city are able to obtain a public library card.\nMany public libraries also serve as community organizations that provide free services and events to the public, such as reading groups and toddler story time. For many communities, the library is a source of connection to a vast world, obtainable knowledge and understanding, and entertainment. According to a study by the Pennsylvania Library Association, public library services play a major role in fighting rising illiteracy rates among youths. Public libraries are protected and funded by the public they serve.\nAs the number of books in libraries have steadily increased since their inception, the need for compact storage and access with adequate lighting has grown. The \"stack system\" involves keeping a library's collection of books in a space separate from the reading room. This arrangement arose in the 19th century. Book stacks quickly evolved into a fairly standard form in which the cast iron and steel frameworks supporting the bookshelves also supported the floors, which often were built of translucent blocks to permit the passage of light (but were not transparent, for reasons of modesty). The introduction of electric lights had a huge impact on lighting in libraries. The use of glass floors was largely discontinued, though floors were still often composed of metal grating to allow air to circulate in multi-story stacks. As more space was needed, a method of moving shelves on tracks (compact shelving) was introduced to cut down on otherwise wasted aisle space.\nLibrary 2.0, a term coined in 2005, is the library's response to the challenge of Google and an attempt to meet the changing needs of users by using Web 2.0 technology. Some of the aspects of Library 2.0 include, commenting, tagging, bookmarking, discussions, use of online social networks by libraries, plug-ins, and widgets. Inspired by Web 2.0, it is an attempt to make the library a more user-driven institution.\nDespite the importance ascribed to public libraries, their budgets are often cut by legislatures. In some cases, funding has dwindled so much that libraries have been forced to cut their hours and release employees.\nReference libraries.\nA reference library does not lend books and other items; instead, they can only be read at the library itself. Typically, such libraries are used for research purposes, for example at a university. Some items at reference libraries may be historical and even unique. Many lending libraries contain a \"reference section\", which holds books, such as dictionaries, which are common reference books, and are therefore not lent out. Such reference sections may be referred to as \"reading rooms\" or \"study rooms\", which may also include newspapers and periodicals. An example of a reading room is the Hazel H. Ransom Reading Room at the Harry Ransom Center of the University of Texas at Austin, which maintains the papers of literary agent Audrey Wood.\nResearch libraries.\nA research library is a collection of materials on one or more subjects. A research library supports scholarly or scientific research and will generally include primary as well as secondary sources; it will maintain permanent collections and attempt to provide access to all necessary materials. A research library is most often an academic or national library, but a large special library may have a research library within its special field, and a very few of the largest public libraries also serve as research libraries. A large university library may be considered a research library; and in North America, such libraries may belong to the Association of Research Libraries. In the United Kingdom, they may be members of Research Libraries UK (RLUK). Particularly important collections in England may be \"designated\" by Arts Council England.\nA research library can be either a reference library, which does not lend its holdings, or a lending library, which does lend all or some of its holdings. Some extremely large or traditional research libraries are entirely reference in this sense, lending none of their materials; most academic research libraries, at least in the US and the UK, now lend books, but not periodicals or other materials. Many research libraries are attached to a parent organization and may serve only members of that organization. Examples of research libraries include the British Library, the Bodleian Library at Oxford University and the New York Public Library Main Branch on 42nd Street in Manhattan, State Public Scientific Technological Library of the Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Science.\nDigital libraries.\nDigital libraries are libraries that house digital resources, such as text, photographs, and audio. These are curated by digital librarians. In the 21st century, there has been increasing use of the internet to gather and retrieve data. The shift to digital libraries has greatly impacted the way people use physical libraries. Between 2002 and 2004, the average American academic library saw the overall number of transactions decline approximately 2.2%. The University of California Library System saw a 54% decline in circulation between 1991 and 2001 of 8,377,000 books to 3,832,000.\nSpecial libraries.\nMany private businesses and public organizations, including hospitals, churches, museums, research laboratories, law firms, and many government departments and agencies, maintain their own libraries for the use of their employees in doing specialized research related to their work. Depending on the particular institution, special libraries may or may not be accessible to the general public or elements thereof.\nIn more specialized institutions such as law firms and research laboratories, librarians employed in special libraries are commonly specialists in the institution's field rather than generally trained librarians, and often are not required to have advanced degrees in a specifically library-related field due to the specialized content and clientele of the library.\nSpecial libraries can also include women's libraries or LGBTQ libraries, which serve the needs of women and the LGBTQ community. Libraries and the LGBTQ community have an extensive history, and there are currently many libraries, archives, and special collections devoted to preserving and helping the LGBTQ community. Women's libraries, such as the Vancouver Women's Library or the Women's Library @LSE are examples of women's libraries that offer services to women and girls and focus on women's history.\nSome special libraries, such as governmental law libraries, hospital libraries, and military base libraries commonly are open to public visitors to the institution in question. Depending on the particular library and the clientele it serves, special libraries may offer services similar to research, reference, public, academic, or children's libraries, often with restrictions such as only lending books to patients at a hospital or restricting the public from parts of a military collection. Given the highly individual nature of special libraries, visitors to a special library are often advised to check what services and restrictions apply at that particular library.\nSpecial libraries are distinguished from special collections, which are branches or parts of a library intended for rare books, manuscripts, and other special materials, though some special libraries have special collections of their own, typically related to the library's specialized subject area.\nFor more information on specific types of special libraries, see law libraries, medical libraries, music libraries, or transportation libraries.\nLibrary makerspaces.\nA library makerspace is a creative, hands-on makerspace located within a library that provides tools, technology, and spaces for patrons to design, prototype, and create projects. Some makerspaces in libraries could include a photographic studio, digital recording studio, sewing room, computer lab cubicles, woodshop / machine shop and other hardware equipment spaces or fab labs for 3D printers, CNC machines, laser cutters, laser engraving, injection molding machines, sewing machines, electronics and electronic kits. They may also offer software for graphic design, video editing, 3D modeling \\ 3D rendering, or computer programming educational resources. Library makerspaces aim to expand the traditional role of libraries from primarily providing access to books and information toward enhancing hard skills and enabling active learning by doing. These spaces support STEM and STEAM education, digital literacy, and lifelong learning for all ages. Activities can range from code clubs, robotics clubs to arts, crafts, and multimedia production.\nAssociations.\nThe International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) is the leading international association of library organizations. It is the global voice of the library and information profession, and its annual conference provides a venue for librarians to learn from one another.\nLibrary associations in Asia include the Indian Library Association (ILA), Indian Association of Special Libraries and Information Centers (IASLIC), Bengal Library Association (BLA), Kolkata, Pakistan Library Association, the Pakistan Librarians Welfare Organization, the Bangladesh Association of Librarians, Information Scientists and Documentalists, the Library Association of Bangladesh, and the Sri Lanka Library Association (founded 1960).\nNational associations of the English-speaking world include the American Library Association, the Australian Library and Information Association, the Canadian Library Association, the Library and Information Association of New Zealand Aotearoa, and the Research Libraries UK (a consortium of 30 university and other research libraries in the United Kingdom). Library bodies such as CILIP (formerly the Library Association, founded 1877) may advocate the role that libraries and librarians can play in a modern Internet environment, and in the teaching of information literacy skills. The Nigerian Library Association is the recognized group for librarians working in Nigeria and it was founded in 1962.\nPublic library advocacy is support given to a public library for its financial and philosophical goals or needs. Most often this takes the form of monetary or material donations or campaigning to the institutions which oversee the library, sometimes by advocacy groups such as Friends of Libraries and community members. Originally, library advocacy was centered on the library itself, but current trends show libraries positioning themselves to demonstrate they provide \"economic value to the community\" in means that are not directly related to the checking out of books and other media.\nProtection.\nLibraries are considered part of the cultural heritage and are one of the primary objectives in many state and domestic conflicts and are at risk of destruction and looting. Financing is often carried out by robbing valuable library items. National and international coordination regarding military and civil structures for the protection of libraries is operated by Blue Shield International and UNESCO. From an international perspective, despite the partial dissolution of state structures and very unclear security situations as a result of the wars and unrest, robust undertakings to protect libraries are being carried out. The topic is also the creation of \"no-strike lists\", in which the coordinates of important cultural monuments such as libraries have been preserved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17728", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17728", "title": "Line Islands", "text": "Chain of eleven atolls and low coral islands in the central Pacific Ocean\nThe Line Islands, Teraina Islands or Equatorial Islands () are a chain of 11 atolls (with partly or fully enclosed lagoons, except Vostok and Jarvis) and coral islands (with a surrounding reef) in the central Pacific Ocean, south of the Hawaiian Islands. Eight of the atolls are parts of Kiribati. The remaining three\u2014Jarvis Island, Kingman Reef, and Palmyra Atoll\u2014are territories of the United States grouped with the United States Minor Outlying Islands. The Line Islands, all of which were formed by volcanic activity, are one of the longest island chains in the world, stretching from northwest to southeast. One of them, Starbuck Island, is near the geographic center of the Pacific Ocean (). Another, Kiritimati, has the largest land area of any atoll in the world. Only Kiritimati, Tabuaeran, and Teraina have a permanent population. Besides the 11 confirmed atolls and islands, Filippo Reef is shown on some maps, but its existence is doubted.\nThe International Date Line passes through the Line Islands. The ones that are parts of Kiribati are in the world's farthest forward time zone, . The time of day in these atolls is 24 hours ahead of the state of Hawaii in the United States, which uses , and 26 hours ahead of some other islands in Oceania, such as Baker Island, which uses .\nOverview.\nCopra and pet fish are the islands' main export products (along with seaweed).\nArchaeologists have identified the remains of coral Marae platforms and/or village complexes on several of the islands, including the Kiritimati and Tabuaeran atolls, Teraina Island, Malden, Millennium Atoll and Flint Island. These remains are dateable as far back as the 14th century, and show that the inhabitants of the Line Islands were likely permanent or at least semi-permanent.\nMost 18th-century visitors to these isles overlooked these telltale signs of former Polynesian settlement. This included Captain Cook, who landed on Christmas Island (now called Kiritimati) in 1777, as well as Captain Fanning, who visited Teraina (Washington Island) and Tabuaeran (Fanning Atoll) in 1798.\nIn the 19th century, whaling ships were regular visitors to the islands. They came in search of water, wood and provisions. The first whaler recorded to have visited one of them was the \"Coquette\", which docked at Kiritimati (then called Christmas Island) in 1822.\nIn 1888, the United Kingdom was planning to lay the Pacific cable, and annexed the islands with a view to using Tabuaeran (then Fanning Island) as one of the relay stations for the cable. The cable was laid and was operational between 1902 and 1963 (except for a short period in 1914).\nIn 1916, the British annexed Fanning and Washington islands, making them part of the British colony of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands. In 1919, they annexed Christmas Island to the same colony. The Line Islands occasionally featured briefly in the biennial reports furnished by the Colony's resident commissioner to the Colonial Office and Parliament in London (see, for example, the reports submitted in 1966 and 1967).\nThe United States contested the British annexations, based on the U.S. Guano Islands Act of 1856, which allowed for very wide-ranging territorial claims. It relinquished these claims only in 1979, when it entered into the Treaty of Tarawa, which recognised Kiribati's sovereignty over the majority of the Line Islands chain.\nList of atolls, islands and reefs.\nGeographically, the Line Islands is divided into three subgroups: the Northern, Central, and Southern Line Islands (however, the Central Line Islands are sometimes grouped with the Southern Line Islands). The table below lists the islands from north to south.\nNote:\nTime zone realignment.\nOn 23 December 1994, the Republic of Kiribati announced a change of time zone for the Line Islands, to take effect from 31 December 1994. This adjustment effectively moved the International Date Line more than to the east within Kiribati, which placed all of Kiribati on the Asian or western side of the date line, despite the fact that Millennium Island's longitude of 150 degrees west corresponds to rather than to its official time zone of . Millennium Island is now at the same time as the Hawaiian Islands (Hawaii\u2013Aleutian Time Zone), but one day ahead. This move made Millennium Island (then Caroline Island) the easternmost land in the earliest time zone (by some definitions, the easternmost point on Earth), and one of the first points of land which saw sunrise on 1 January 2000 \u2013 at 5:43 am, as measured by local time.\nThe move was the fulfilment of a campaign promise by Kiribati President Teburoro Tito. Previously, the country straddled the Date Line, thus being constantly in two different days. Kiribati officials later capitalised on the nation's new status as owners of the first land to see sunrise in 2000. Other Pacific nations, including Tonga and New Zealand's Chatham Islands, protested the move, objecting that it interfered with their own claims to be the first land to see dawn in the year 2000.\nIn 1999, to further capitalise upon the massive public interest in celebrations marking the arrival of the year 2000, Caroline Island was officially renamed Millennium Island. Although the island is uninhabited, a special celebration was held there to mark the occasion. It featured performances by native Kiribati entertainers and was attended by Kiribati's President Tito. Over 70 Kiribati singers and dancers travelled to Millennium Island from the capital, South Tarawa, accompanied by approximately 25 journalists. The celebration, which was broadcast worldwide by satellite, had an estimated audience size of as many as one billion viewers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17729", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17729", "title": "Language and dialect", "text": ""}
{"id": "17730", "revid": "38153918", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17730", "title": "Latin", "text": "Indo-European language of the Italic branch\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLatin ( or ) is a classical language belonging to the Italic branch of the Indo-European languages. Latin was originally spoken by the Latins in Latium (now known as Lazio), the lower Tiber area around Rome, Italy. Through the expansion of the Roman Republic, it became the dominant language in the Italian Peninsula and subsequently throughout the Roman Empire. It has greatly influenced many languages, including English, having contributed many words to the English lexicon, particularly after the Christianisation of the Anglo-Saxons and the Norman Conquest. Latin roots appear frequently in the technical vocabulary used by fields such as theology, the sciences, medicine, and law.\nBy the late Roman Republic, Old Latin had evolved into standardised Classical Latin. Vulgar Latin refers to the less prestigious colloquial registers, attested in inscriptions and some literary works such as those of the comic playwrights Plautus and Terence and the author Petronius. While often called a \"dead language\", Latin did not undergo language death. Between the 6th and 9th centuries, natural language change in the vernacular Latin of different regions evolved into distinct Romance languages. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Latin remained the common language of international communication, science, scholarship and academia in Europe into the early 19th century, by which time modern languages had supplanted it in common academic and political usage.\nLate Latin is the literary form of the language from the 3rd century AD onward. No longer spoken as a native language, Medieval Latin was used across Western and Catholic Europe during the Middle Ages as a working and literary language from the 9th century to the Renaissance, which then developed a classicising form, called Renaissance Latin. This was the basis for Neo-Latin, which evolved during the early modern period. Latin was taught to be written and spoken at least until the late seventeenth century, when spoken skills began to erode; Contemporary Latin is generally studied to be read rather than spoken. Ecclesiastical Latin remains the official language of the Holy See and the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church.\nLatin grammar is highly fusional, with classes of inflections for case, number, person, gender, tense, mood, voice, and aspect. The Latin alphabet is directly derived from the Etruscan and Greek alphabets.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nA number of phases of the language have been recognised, each distinguished by subtle differences in vocabulary, usage, spelling, and syntax. There are no hard and fast rules of classification; different scholars emphasise different features. As a result, the list has variants, as well as alternative names.\nIn addition to the historical phases, Ecclesiastical Latin refers to the styles used by the writers of the Roman Catholic Church from late antiquity onward, as well as by Protestant scholars.\nOld Latin.\nThe earliest known form of Latin is Old Latin, also called Archaic or Early Latin, which was spoken from the Roman Kingdom, traditionally founded in 753 BC, through the later part of the Roman Republic, up to 75 BC, i.e. before the age of Classical Latin. It is attested both in inscriptions and in some of the earliest extant Latin literary works, such as the comedies of Plautus and Terence. The Latin alphabet was devised from the Etruscan alphabet. The writing later changed from what was initially either a right-to-left or a boustrophedon script to what ultimately became a strictly left-to-right script.\nClassical Latin.\nDuring the late republic and into the first years of the empire, from about 75 BC to AD 200, a new Classical Latin arose, a conscious creation of the orators, poets, historians and other literate men, who wrote the great works of classical literature, which were taught in grammar and rhetoric schools. Today's instructional grammars trace their roots to such schools, which served as a sort of informal language academy dedicated to maintaining and perpetuating educated speech.\nVulgar Latin.\nPhilological analysis of Archaic Latin works, such as those of Plautus, which contain fragments of everyday speech, gives evidence of an informal register of the language, Vulgar Latin (termed 'the speech of the masses', by Cicero). Some linguists, particularly in the nineteenth century, believed this to be a separate language, existing more or less in parallel with the literary or educated Latin, but this is now widely dismissed.\nThe term 'Vulgar Latin' remains difficult to define, referring both to informal speech at any time within the history of Latin, and the kind of informal Latin that had begun to move away from the written language significantly in the post-Imperial period, that led ultimately to the Romance languages.\nDuring the Classical period, informal language was rarely written, so philologists have been left with only individual words and phrases cited by classical authors, inscriptions such as Curse tablets and those found as graffiti. In the Late Latin period, language changes reflecting spoken (non-classical) norms tend to be found in greater quantities in texts.\nAs it was free to develop on its own, there is no reason to suppose that the speech was uniform either diachronically or geographically. On the contrary, Romanised European populations developed their own dialects of the language, which eventually led to the differentiation of Romance languages.\nLate Latin.\nLate Latin is a kind of written Latin used in the 3rd to 6th centuries. This began to diverge from Classical forms at a faster pace. It is characterised by greater use of prepositions, and word order that is closer to modern Romance languages, for example, while grammatically retaining more or less the same formal rules as Classical Latin.\nUltimately, Latin diverged into a distinct written form, where the commonly spoken form was perceived as a separate language, for instance early French or Italian dialects, that could be transcribed differently. It took some time for these to be viewed as wholly different from Latin however.\nAfter the Western Roman Empire fell in 476 and Germanic kingdoms took its place, the Germanic people adopted Latin as a language more suitable for legal and other, more formal uses.\nRomance languages.\nWhile the written form of Latin was increasingly standardised into a fixed form, the spoken forms began to diverge more greatly. Currently, the five\u00a0most widely spoken Romance languages\u00a0by number of native speakers are Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, and Romanian. Despite dialectal variation, which is found in any widespread language, the languages of Spain, France, Portugal, and Italy have retained a remarkable unity in phonological forms and developments, bolstered by the stabilising influence of their common Christian (Roman Catholic) culture.\nIt was not until the Muslim conquest of the Iberian Peninsula in 711, cutting off communications between the major Romance regions, that the languages began to diverge seriously. The spoken Latin that would later become Romanian diverged somewhat more from the other varieties, as it was largely separated from the unifying influences in the western part of the Empire.\nSpoken Latin began to diverge into distinct languages by the 9th century at the latest, when the earliest extant Romance writings begin to appear. They were, throughout the period, confined to everyday speech, as Medieval Latin was used for writing.\nFor many Italians using Latin, though, there was no complete separation between Italian and Latin, even into the beginning of the Renaissance. Petrarch for example saw Latin as a literary version of the spoken language.\nMedieval Latin.\nMedieval Latin is the written Latin in use during that portion of the post-classical period when no corresponding Latin vernacular existed, that is from around 700 to 1500 AD. The spoken language had developed into the various Romance languages; however, in the educated and official world, Latin continued without its natural spoken base. Moreover, this Latin spread into lands that had never spoken Latin, such as the Germanic and Slavic nations. It became useful for international communication between the member states of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies.\nWithout the institutions of the Roman Empire that had supported its uniformity, Medieval Latin was much more liberal in its linguistic cohesion: for example, in classical Latin and are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive, which are compound tenses. Medieval Latin might use and instead. Furthermore, the meanings of many words were changed and new words were introduced, often under influence from the vernacular. Identifiable individual styles of classically incorrect Latin prevail.\nRenaissance and Neo-Latin.\nRenaissance Latin, in use from around 1300 to 1500, and the classicised Latin that followed through to the present are often grouped together as \"Neo-Latin\", or New Latin, which have in recent decades become a focus of renewed study, given their importance for the development of European culture, religion and science. The vast majority of written Latin belongs to this period, but its full extent is unknown.\nThe Renaissance reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken and written language by the scholarship by the Renaissance humanists. Petrarch and others began to change their usage of Latin as they explored the texts of the Classical Latin world. Skills of textual criticism evolved to create much more accurate versions of extant texts through the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and some important texts were rediscovered. Comprehensive versions of authors' works were published by Isaac Casaubon, Joseph Scaliger and others. Nevertheless, despite the careful work of Petrarch, Politian and others, first the demand for manuscripts, and then the rush to bring works into print, led to the circulation of inaccurate copies for several centuries following.\nNeo-Latin literature was extensive and prolific, but less well known or understood today. Works covered poetry, prose stories and early novels, occasional pieces and collections of letters, to name a few. Famous and well regarded writers included Petrarch, Erasmus, Salutati, Celtis, George Buchanan and Thomas More. Non fiction works were long produced in many subjects, including the sciences, law, philosophy, historiography and theology. Famous examples include Isaac Newton's \"Principia\". Latin was also used as a convenient medium for translations of important works first written in a vernacular, such as those of Descartes.\nLatin education underwent a process of reform to classicise written and spoken Latin. Schooling remained largely Latin medium until approximately 1700. Until the end of the 17th century, the majority of books and almost all diplomatic documents were written in Latin. Afterwards, most diplomatic documents were written in French (a Romance language) and later native or other languages. Education methods gradually shifted towards written Latin, and eventually concentrating solely on reading skills. The decline of Latin education took several centuries and proceeded much more slowly than the decline in written Latin output.\nContemporary Latin.\nDespite having no native speakers, Latin is still used for a variety of purposes in the contemporary world.\nReligious use.\nThe largest organisation that retains Latin in official and quasi-official contexts is the Catholic Church. The Catholic Church required that Mass be carried out in Latin until the Second Vatican Council of 1962\u20131965, which permitted the use of the vernacular. Latin remains the language of the Roman Rite. The Tridentine Mass (also known as the Extraordinary Form or Traditional Latin Mass) is celebrated in Latin. Although the Mass of Paul VI (also known as the Ordinary Form or the Novus Ordo) is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, it can be and often is said in Latin, in part or in whole, especially at multilingual gatherings. It is the official language of the Holy See, the primary language of its public journal, the , and the working language of the Roman Rota. Vatican City is also home to the world's only automatic teller machine that gives instructions in Latin. In the pontifical universities postgraduate courses of Canon law are taught in Latin, and papers are written in the same language.\nThere are a small number of Latin services held in the Anglican church. These include an annual service in Oxford, delivered with a Latin sermon; a relic from the period when Latin was the normal spoken language of the university.\nUse of Latin for mottos.\nIn the Western world, many organisations, governments and schools use Latin for their mottos due to its association with formality, tradition, and the roots of Western culture.\nCanada's motto (\"from sea to sea\") and most provincial mottos are also in Latin. The Canadian Victoria Cross is modelled after the British Victoria Cross which has the inscription \"For Valour\". Because Canada is officially bilingual, the Canadian medal has replaced the English inscription with the Latin .\nSpain's motto 'even further', or figuratively \"Further!\", is also Latin in origin. It is taken from the personal motto of Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor and King of Spain (as Charles I), and is a reversal of the original phrase (\"No land further beyond\", \"No further!\"). According to legend, this phrase was inscribed as a warning on the Pillars of Hercules, the rocks on both sides of the Strait of Gibraltar and the western end of the known Mediterranean world. Charles adopted the motto following the discovery of the New World by Columbus, and it also has metaphorical suggestions of taking risks and striving for excellence.\nIn the United States the unofficial national motto until 1956 was meaning \"Out of many, one\". The motto continues to be featured on the Great Seal. It also appears on the flags and seals of both houses of congress and the flags of the states of Michigan, North Dakota, New York, and Wisconsin. The motto's 13 letters symbolically represent the original Thirteen Colonies which revolted from the British Crown. The motto is featured on all presently minted coinage and has been featured in most coinage throughout the nation's history.\nSeveral states of the United States have Latin mottos, such as:\nMany military organisations today have Latin mottos, such as:\nSome law governing bodies in the Philippines have Latin mottos, such as:\nSome colleges and universities have adopted Latin mottos, for example Harvard University's motto is (\"truth\"). Veritas was the goddess of truth, a daughter of Saturn, and the mother of Virtue.\nOther modern uses.\nSwitzerland has adopted the country's Latin short name on coins and stamps, since there is no room to use all of the nation's four official languages. For a similar reason, it adopted the international vehicle and internet code \"CH\", which stands for , the country's full Latin name.\nSome film and television in ancient settings, such as \"Sebastiane\", \"The Passion of the Christ\" and \"Barbarians (2020 TV series)\", have been made with dialogue in Latin. Occasionally, Latin dialogue is used because of its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/television series as \"The Exorcist\" and \"Lost\" (\"Jughead\"). Subtitles are usually shown for the benefit of those who do not understand Latin. There are also songs written with Latin lyrics. The libretto for the opera-oratorio by Igor Stravinsky is in Latin.\nThe continued instruction of Latin is seen by some as a highly valuable component of a liberal arts education. Latin is taught at many high schools, especially in Europe and the Americas. It is most common in British public schools and grammar schools, the Italian and , the German and the Dutch .\nOccasionally, some media outlets, targeting enthusiasts, broadcast in Latin. Notable examples include Radio Bremen in Germany, YLE radio in Finland (the Nuntii Latini broadcast from 1989 until it was shut down in June 2019), and Vatican Radio &amp; Television, all of which broadcast news segments and other material in Latin.\nA variety of organisations, as well as informal Latin 'circles', have been founded in more recent times to support the use of spoken Latin. Moreover, a number of university classics departments have begun incorporating communicative pedagogies in their Latin courses. These include the University of Kentucky, the University of Oxford and Princeton University.\nThere are many websites and forums maintained in Latin by enthusiasts. The Latin Wikipedia has more than 140,000 articles.\nLegacy.\nItalian, French, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, Catalan, Romansh, Sardinian and other Romance languages are direct descendants of Latin. There are also many Latin loanwords in English and Albanian, as well as a few in German, Dutch, Norwegian, Danish and Swedish. Latin is still spoken in Vatican City, a city-state situated in Rome that is the seat of the Catholic Church.\nLiterature.\nThe works of several hundred ancient authors who wrote in Latin have survived in whole or in part, in substantial works or in fragments to be analysed in philology. They are in part the subject matter of the field of classics. Their works were published in manuscript form before the invention of printing and are now published in carefully annotated printed editions, such as the Loeb Classical Library, published by Harvard University Press, or the Oxford Classical Texts, published by Oxford University Press.\nLatin translations of modern literature such as: \"The Hobbit\", \"Treasure Island\", \"Robinson Crusoe\", \"Paddington Bear\", \"Winnie the Pooh\", \"The Adventures of Tintin\", \"Asterix\", \"Harry Potter\", , \"Max and Moritz\", \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\", \"The Cat in the Hat\", and a book of fairy tales, , are intended to garner popular interest in the language. Additional resources include phrasebooks and resources for rendering everyday phrases and concepts into Latin, such as Meissner's Latin Phrasebook.\nInscriptions.\nSome inscriptions have been published in an internationally agreed, monumental, multivolume series, the . Authors and publishers vary, but the format is about the same: volumes detailing inscriptions with a critical apparatus stating the provenance and relevant information. The reading and interpretation of these inscriptions is the subject matter of the field of epigraphy. About 270,000 inscriptions are known.\nInfluence on present-day languages.\nThe Latin influence in English has been significant at all stages of its insular development. In the Middle Ages, borrowing from Latin occurred from ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century or indirectly after the Norman Conquest, through the Anglo-Norman language. From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek words, dubbed \"inkhorn terms\", as if they had spilled from a pot of ink. Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten, but some useful ones survived, such as \"imbibe\" and \"extrapolate\". Many of the most common polysyllabic English words are of Latin origin through the medium of Old French. Romance words make respectively 59%, 20% and 14% of English, German and Dutch vocabularies. Those figures can rise dramatically when only non-compound and non-derived words are included. \nThe influence of Roman governance and Roman technology on the less-developed nations under Roman dominion led to the adoption of Latin phraseology in some specialised areas, such as science, technology, medicine, and law. For example, the Linnaean system of plant and animal classification was heavily influenced by \"Historia Naturalis\", an encyclopaedia of people, places, plants, animals, and things published by Pliny the Elder. Roman medicine, recorded in the works of such physicians as Galen, established that today's medical terminology would be primarily derived from Latin and Greek words, the Greek being filtered through the Latin. Roman engineering had the same effect on scientific terminology as a whole. Latin law principles have survived partly in a long list of Latin legal terms.\nThe Logudorese dialect of the Sardinian language and Standard Italian are the two closest contemporary languages to Latin.\nEducation.\nThroughout European history, an education in the classics was considered crucial for those who wished to join literate circles. The prominence of Latin in classical education rested not only on tradition but also on its reputation for clarity, logical structure, and intellectual rigor, a view expressed by the mathematics educator Theodor Haagaas, who remarked that \"Latin, it is mathematics, language mathematics.\"\nThis also was true in the United States where many of the nation's founders obtained a classically based education in grammar schools or from tutors. Admission to Harvard in the Colonial era required that the applicant \"Can readily make and speak or write true Latin prose and has skill in making verse\" Latin Study and the classics were emphasised in American secondary schools and colleges well into the Antebellum era.\nInstruction in Latin is an essential aspect. In today's world, a large number of Latin students in the United States learn from \"Wheelock's Latin: The Classic Introductory Latin Course, Based on Ancient Authors\". This book, first published in 1956, was written by Frederic M. Wheelock. \"Wheelock's Latin\" has become the standard text for many American introductory Latin courses.\nThe numbers of people studying Latin varies significantly by country. In the United Kingdom, Latin is available in around 2.3% of state primary schools, representing a significant increase in availability. In Germany, over 500,000 students study Latin each year, representing a decrease from over 800,000 in 2008. Latin is still required for some University courses, but this has become less frequent.\nThe Living Latin movement attempts to teach Latin in the same way that living languages are taught, as a means of both spoken and written communication. It is available in Vatican City and at some institutions in the US, such as the University of Kentucky and Iowa State University. The British Cambridge University Press is a major supplier of Latin textbooks for all levels, such as the Cambridge Latin Course series. It has also published a subseries of children's texts in Latin by Bell &amp; Forte, which recounts the adventures of a mouse called Minimus.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Classical Association encourages the study of antiquity through various means, such as publications and grants. The University of Cambridge, the Open University, a number of independent schools, for example Eton, Harrow, Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School, Merchant Taylors' School, and Rugby, and The Latin Programme/Via Facilis, a London-based charity, run Latin courses. In the United States and in Canada, the American Classical League supports every effort to further the study of classics. Its subsidiaries include the National Junior Classical League (with more than 50,000 members), which encourages high school students to pursue the study of Latin, and the National Senior Classical League, which encourages students to continue their study of the classics into college. The league also sponsors the National Latin Exam. Classicist Mary Beard wrote in \"The Times Literary Supplement\" in 2006 that the reason for learning Latin is because of what was written in it.\nOfficial status.\nLatin was or is the official language of several European states. It had official status in the Kingdom of Hungary from the 11th to mid-19th centuries, when Hungarian became the exclusive official language in 1844. The best known Latin language poet of Hungarian origin was Janus Pannonius. Similarly, in the Kingdom of Poland and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Latin was officially recognised and widely used between the 10th and 18th centuries, commonly used in foreign relations and popular as a second language among some of the nobility. Latin was also the official language of the Croatian Parliament from the 13th to the 19th century (1847). The oldest preserved records of the parliamentary sessions ()\u2014held in Zagreb (), Croatia\u2014date from 19 April 1273. An extensive Croatian Latin literature exists. Latin was used on Croatian coins on even years until 1 January 2023, when Croatia adopted the Euro as its official currency.\nPhonology.\nThe ancient pronunciation of Latin has been reconstructed; among the data used for reconstruction are explicit statements about pronunciation by ancient authors, misspellings, puns, ancient etymologies, the spelling of Latin loanwords in other languages, and the historical development of Romance languages.\nConsonants.\nThe consonant phonemes of Classical Latin are as follows:\n was not native to Classical Latin. It appeared in Greek loanwords starting c.\u2009the 1st century\u00a0BC, when it was probably pronounced (at least by educated speakers) initially and doubled between vowels, in accordance with its pronunciation in Koine Greek. In Classical Latin poetry, the letter \u27e8\u27e9 between vowels always counts as two consonants for metrical purposes. The consonant \u27e8b\u27e9 usually sounds as [b]; however, when \u27e8t\u27e9 or \u27e8s\u27e9 follows \u27e8b\u27e9 then it is pronounced as in [pt] or [ps]. In Latin, \u27e8q\u27e9 is always followed by the vowel \u27e8u\u27e9. Together they make a [k\u02b7] sound.\nIn Old and Classical Latin, the Latin alphabet had no distinction between uppercase and lowercase, and the letters \u27e8J U W\u27e9 did not exist. In place of \u27e8J U\u27e9, \u27e8I V\u27e9 were used, respectively; \u27e8I V\u27e9 represented both vowels and consonants. Most of the letter forms were similar to modern uppercase, as can be seen in the inscription from the Colosseum shown at the top of the article.\nThe spelling systems used in Latin dictionaries and modern editions of Latin texts, however, normally use \u27e8j u\u27e9 in place of Classical-era \u27e8i v\u27e9. Some systems use \u27e8j v\u27e9 for the consonant sounds except in the combinations \u27e8gu su qu\u27e9 for which \u27e8v\u27e9 is never used.\nSome notes concerning the mapping of Latin phonemes to English graphemes are given below:\nIn Classical Latin, as in modern Italian, double consonant letters were pronounced as long consonant sounds distinct from short versions of the same consonants. Thus the \"nn\" in Classical Latin 'year' (and in Italian ) is pronounced as a doubled as in English \"unnamed\". (In English, distinctive consonant length or doubling occurs only at the boundary between two words or morphemes, as in that example.)\nVowels.\nIn Classical Latin, \u27e8U\u27e9 did not exist as a letter distinct from \u27e8V\u27e9; the written form \u27e8V\u27e9 was used to represent both a vowel and a consonant. \u27e8Y\u27e9 was adopted to represent upsilon in loanwords from Greek, but it was pronounced like \u27e8u\u27e9 and \u27e8i\u27e9 by some speakers. It was also used in native Latin words by confusion with Greek words of similar meaning, such as and .\nClassical Latin distinguished between long and short vowels. Then, long vowels, except for \u27e8i\u27e9, were frequently marked using the apex, which was sometimes similar to an acute accent \u27e8\u00c1 \u00c9 \u00d3 V\u0301 \u00dd\u27e9. Long was written using a taller version of \u27e8I\u27e9, called 'long \"I\"': \u27e8\ua7fe\u27e9. In modern texts, long vowels are often indicated by a macron \u27e8\u0101 \u0113 \u012b \u014d \u016b\u27e9, and short vowels are usually unmarked except when it is necessary to distinguish between words, when they are marked with a breve \u27e8\u0103 \u0115 \u012d \u014f \u016d\u27e9. However, they would also signify a long vowel by writing the vowel larger than other letters in a word or by repeating the vowel twice in a row. The acute accent, when it is used in modern Latin texts, indicates stress, as in Spanish, rather than length.\nAlthough called long vowels, their exact quality in Classical Latin is different from short vowels. The difference is described in the table below:\nThis difference in quality is posited by W. Sidney Allen in his book \"Vox Latina\". However, Andrea Calabrese has disputed this assertion, based in part upon the observation that in Sardinian and some Lucanian dialects, each long and short vowel pair merged, as opposed to in Italo-Western languages in which short /i/ and /u/ merged with long and /o:/ (cf. Latin , Italian , and Sardinian ).\nA vowel letter followed by \u27e8m\u27e9 at the end of a word, or a vowel letter followed by \u27e8n\u27e9 before \u27e8s\u27e9 or \u27e8f\u27e9, represented a short nasal vowel, as in .\nDiphthongs.\nClassical Latin had several diphthongs. The two most common were \u27e8ae au\u27e9. The former is pronounced like the \"i\" in \"mine\", and the latter like the \"ow\" in \"power\". \u27e8oe\u27e9 was fairly rare, and \u27e8ui eu ei\u27e9 were very rare, at least in native Latin words. There has also been debate over whether \u27e8ui\u27e9 is truly a diphthong in Classical Latin, due to its rarity, absence in works of Roman grammarians, and the roots of Classical Latin words (e.g. to , to ) not matching or being similar to the pronunciation of classical words if \u27e8ui\u27e9 were to be considered a diphthong.\nThe sequences sometimes did not represent diphthongs. \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 also represented a sequence of two vowels in different syllables in 'bronze' and 'began', and \u27e8au ui eu ei ou\u27e9 represented sequences of two vowels or of a vowel and one of the semivowels , in 'beware!', 'whose', 'I warned', 'I released', 'I destroyed', 'his', and 'new'.\nOld Latin had more diphthongs, but most of them changed into long vowels in Classical Latin. The Old Latin diphthong \u27e8ai\u27e9 and the sequence \u27e8\u0101\u012b\u27e9 became Classical \u27e8ae\u27e9. Old Latin \u27e8oi\u27e9 and \u27e8ou\u27e9 changed to Classical \u27e8\u016b\u27e9, except in a few words whose \u27e8oi\u27e9 became Classical \u27e8oe\u27e9. These two developments sometimes occurred in different words from the same root: for instance, Classical \"punishment\" and \"to punish\". Early Old Latin \u27e8ei\u27e9 usually monophthongised to a later Old Latin \u27e8\u0113\u27e9, to Classical \u27e8\u012b\u27e9.\nBy the late Roman Empire, \u27e8ae oe\u27e9 had merged with \u27e8e \u0113\u27e9. During the Classical period this sound change was present in some rural dialects, but deliberately avoided by well-educated speakers.\nSyllables.\nSyllables in Latin are signified by the presence of diphthongs and vowels. The number of syllables is the same as the number of vowel sounds.\nFurther, if a consonant separates two vowels, it will go into the syllable of the second vowel. When there are two consonants between vowels, the last consonant will go with the second vowel. An exception occurs when a phonetic stop and liquid come together. In this situation, they are thought to be a single consonant, and as such, they will go into the syllable of the second vowel.\nLength.\nSyllables in Latin are considered either long or short (less often called \"heavy\" and \"light\" respectively). Within a word, a syllable may either be long by nature or long by position. A syllable is long by nature if it has a diphthong or a long vowel. On the other hand, a syllable is long by position if the vowel is followed by more than one consonant.\nStress.\nThere are two rules that define which syllable is stressed in Classical Latin.\nOrthography.\nLatin was written in the Latin alphabet (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, X), derived from the Etruscan alphabet, which was in turn drawn from the Greek alphabet and ultimately the Phoenician alphabet. This alphabet has continued to be used over the centuries as the script for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Finnic and many Slavic languages (Polish, Slovak, Slovene, Croatian, Bosnian, Serbian and Czech); and it has been adopted by many languages around the world, including Vietnamese, the Austronesian languages, many Turkic languages, and most languages in sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas and Oceania, making it by far the world's single most widely used writing system.\nThe number of letters in the Latin alphabet has varied. When it was first derived from the Etruscan alphabet, it contained only 21 letters. Later, \"G\" was added to represent , which had previously been spelled \"C\", and \"Z\" ceased to be included in the alphabet, as the language then had no voiced alveolar fricative. The letters K, \"Y\", and \"Z\" were later added to represent Greek letters kappa, upsilon, and zeta respectively, in Greek loanwords.\n\"W\" was created in the 11th century from \"VV\" in some areas and \"UU\" in others. It represented in Germanic languages, not Latin, which still uses \"V\" for the purpose. \"J\" was distinguished from the original \"I\" only during the late Middle Ages, as was the letter \"U\" from \"V\". Although some Latin dictionaries use \"J\", it is rarely used for Latin text, as it was not used in classical times, but many other languages use it.\nPunctuation.\nClassical Latin did not contain sentence punctuation, letter case, or interword spacing, but apices were sometimes used to distinguish length in vowels and the interpunct was used at times to separate words.\nThe first line of Catullus 3 (\"Mourn, O Venuses and Cupids\") was originally written as:\nIt would be rendered in a modern edition as:\nThe Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain. Most notable is the fact that while most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era.\nAlternative scripts.\nOccasionally, Latin has been written in other scripts:\nGrammar.\nLatin is a synthetic, fusional language in the terminology of linguistic typology. Words involve an objective semantic element and markers (usually suffixes) specifying the grammatical use of the word, expressing gender, number, and case in adjectives, nouns, and pronouns (\"declension\") and verbs to denote person, number, tense, voice, mood, and aspect (\"conjugation\"). Some words are uninflected and undergo neither process, such as adverbs, prepositions, and interjections.\nLatin inflection can result in words with much ambiguity: For example, 'he/she/it will love', is formed from , a future tense morpheme and a third person singular morpheme, , the last of which does not express masculine, feminine, or neuter gender. A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context. Latin word order is relatively free because inflections disambiguate semantic connections, but different word orders can indicate different nuances of meaning.\nNouns.\nA regular Latin noun belongs to one of five main declensions, a group of nouns with similar inflected forms. The declensions are identified by the genitive singular form of the noun.\nThere are seven Latin noun cases, which also apply to adjectives and pronouns and mark a noun's syntactic role in the sentence by means of inflections. Thus, word order in Latin is not as important as it is in English, which is less inflected. The general structure and word order of a Latin sentence can therefore vary. The cases are as follows:\nLatin lacks both definite and indefinite articles so can mean either 'the boy is running' or 'a boy is running'.\nAdjectives.\nThere are two types of regular Latin adjectives: first- and second-declension and third-declension. They are so-called because their forms are similar or identical to first- and second-declension and third-declension nouns, respectively. Latin adjectives also have comparative and superlative forms. There are also a number of Latin participles.\nLatin numbers are sometimes declined as adjectives; see .\nFirst- and second-declension adjectives are declined like first-declension nouns for the feminine forms and like second-declension nouns for the masculine and neuter forms. For example, for 'dead', is declined like a regular first-declension noun (such as 'girl', is declined like a regular second-declension masculine noun (such as 'lord, master', and is declined like a regular second-declension neuter noun (such as 'help'.\nThird-declension adjectives are mostly declined like normal third-declension nouns, with a few exceptions. In the plural nominative neuter, for example, the ending is \"-ia\" ( 'all, everything', and for third-declension nouns, the plural nominative neuter ending is \"-a\" or \"-ia\" ( 'heads', 'animals'. They can have one, two or three forms for the masculine, feminine, and neuter nominative singular.\nParticiples.\nLatin participles, like English participles, are formed from a verb. There are a few main types of participles: Present Active Participles, Perfect Passive Participles, Future Active Participles, and Future Passive Participles.\nPrepositions.\nLatin sometimes uses prepositions, depending on the type of prepositional phrase being used. Most prepositions are followed by a noun in either the accusative or ablative case: 'with the boy', with being the accusative form of 'boy', and 'without the boy'\u00a0\u2013 being the ablative form. A few adpositions, however, govern a noun in the genitive, such as and .\nVerbs.\nA regular verb in Latin belongs to one of four main conjugations. A conjugation is \"a class of verbs with similar inflected forms\". The conjugations are identified by the last letter of the verb's present stem. The present stem can be found by omitting the - (- in deponent verbs) ending from the present infinitive form. The infinitive of the first conjugation ends in or (active and passive respectively): 'to love', 'to exhort'; of the second conjugation by or : 'to warn', 'to fear', of the third conjugation by , : 'to lead', 'to use'; of the fourth by , : 'to hear', 'to attempt'. The stem categories descend from Indo-European and can therefore be compared to similar conjugations in other Indo-European languages.\nIrregular verbs are verbs that do not follow the regular conjugations in the formation of the inflected form. Irregular verbs in Latin are \"esse\" 'to be'; \"velle\" 'to want'; \"ferre\" 'to carry'; \"edere\" 'to eat'; \"dare\" 'to give 'ire 'to go'; \"posse\" 'to be able'; \"fieri\" 'to happen'; and their compounds.\nThere are six simple tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect and future perfect), three moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive, participle, gerund, gerundive and supine), three persons (first, second and third), two numbers (singular and plural), two voices (active and passive) and two aspects (perfective and imperfective). Verbs are described by four principal parts:\nThe six simple tenses of Latin are divided into two systems: the present system, which is made up of the present, imperfect and future forms, and the perfect system, which is made up of the perfect, pluperfect and future perfect forms. Each simple tense has a set of endings corresponding to the person, number, and voice of the subject. Subject (nominative) pronouns are generally omitted for the first (\"I, we\") and second (\"you\") persons except for emphasis.\nThe table below displays the common inflected endings for the indicative mood in the active voice in all six tenses. For the future tense, the first listed endings are for the first and second conjugations, and the second listed endings are for the third and fourth conjugations:\nDeponent verbs.\nSome Latin verbs are deponent, causing their forms to be in the passive voice but retain an active meaning: 'to urge'.\nVocabulary.\nAs Latin is an Italic language, most of its vocabulary is likewise Italic, ultimately from the ancestral Proto-Indo-European language. However, because of close cultural interaction, the Romans not only adapted the Etruscan alphabet to form the Latin alphabet but also borrowed some Etruscan words into their language, including 'mask' and 'actor'. Latin also included vocabulary borrowed from Oscan, another Italic language.\nAfter the Fall of Tarentum in 272\u00a0BC, the Romans began Hellenising, or adopting features of Greek culture, including the borrowing of Greek words, such as 'vaulted roof', 'symbol', and 'bath'. This Hellenisation led to the addition of \"Y\" and \"Z\" to the alphabet to represent Greek sounds. Subsequently, the Romans transplanted Greek art, medicine, science and philosophy to Italy, paying almost any price to entice Greek skilled and educated persons to Rome and sending their youth to be educated in Greece. Thus, many Latin scientific and philosophical words were Greek loanwords or had their meanings expanded by association with Greek words, as 'craft' and 'art'.\nBecause of the Roman Empire's expansion and subsequent trade with outlying European tribes, the Romans borrowed some northern and central European words, such as 'beaver', of Germanic origin, and 'breeches', of Celtic origin. The specific dialects of Latin across Latin-speaking regions of the former Roman Empire after its fall were influenced by languages specific to the regions. The dialects of Latin evolved into different Romance languages.\nDuring and after the adoption of Christianity into Roman society, Christian vocabulary became a part of the language, either from Greek or Hebrew borrowings or as Latin neologisms. Into the Middle Ages, Latin incorporated many more words from surrounding languages, including Old English and other Germanic languages.\nOver the ages, Latin-speaking populations produced new adjectives, nouns, and verbs by affixing or compounding meaningful segments. For example, the compound adjective, 'all-powerful', was produced from the adjectives 'all', and 'powerful', by dropping the final \"s\" of and concatenating. Often, the concatenation changed the part of speech, and nouns were produced from verb segments or verbs from nouns and adjectives.\nNumbers.\nIn ancient times, numbers in Latin were written only with letters. Today, the numbers can be written with the Arabic numbers as well as with Roman numerals. The numbers 1, 2 and 3 and every whole hundred from 200 to 900 are declined as nouns and adjectives, with some differences.\nThe numbers from 4 to 100 do not change their endings. As in modern descendants such as Spanish, the gender for naming a number in isolation is masculine, so that \"1, 2, 3\" is counted as .\nExample text.\n, also called (\"The Gallic War\"), written by Gaius Julius Caesar, begins with the following passage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe same text may be marked for all long vowels (before any possible elisions at word boundary) with apices over vowel letters, including customarily before \"nf\" and \"ns\" where a long vowel is automatically produced:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAn example of Late Latin is the Latin Vulgate by Saint Jerome. Below is Psalm One (Psalmum Unum) from the Clementine Vulgate.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17731", "revid": "31322263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17731", "title": "LiveScript (programming language)", "text": "Functional programming language\nLiveScript is a functional programming language that transpiles to JavaScript. It was created by Jeremy Ashkenas, the creator of CoffeeScript, along with Satoshi Muramaki, George Zahariev, and many others. (The name may be a homage to the beta name of JavaScript; for a few months in 1995, it was called LiveScript before the official release.)\nSyntax.\nLiveScript is an indirect descendant of CoffeeScript. The following \"Hello, World!\" program is written in LiveScript, but is also compatible with CoffeeScript:\nhello = -&gt;\n console.log 'hello, world!'\nWhile calling a function can be done with empty parens, codice_1, LiveScript treats the exclamation mark as a single-character shorthand for function calls with zero arguments: codice_2\nLiveScript introduces a number of other incompatible idioms:\nName mangling.\nAt compile time, the LiveScript parser implicitly converts kebab case (dashed variables and function names) to camel case.\nhello-world = -&gt;\n console.log 'Hello, World!'\nWith this definition, both the following calls are valid. However, calling using the same dashed syntax is recommended.\nhello-world!\nhelloWorld!\nThis does not preclude developers from using camel case explicitly or using snake case. Dashed naming is however, common in idiomatic LiveScript\nPipes.\nA pipe operator codice_3 passes the result of an expression on the left of the operator as an argument to the expression on the right of it. LiveScript supports these, as do some other functional languages such as F# and Elixir; the argument passed in F# is the last one, but in Elixir is the first one.\n\"hello!\" |&gt; capitalize |&gt; console.log\nOperators as functions.\nWhen parenthesized, operators such as codice_4 or codice_5 can be included in pipelines or called as if they are functions.\n111 |&gt; (+) 222\n(+) 1 2\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17735", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17735", "title": "Li\u00e8ge (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "17737", "revid": "43451808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17737", "title": "Legislative power", "text": ""}
{"id": "17739", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17739", "title": "Local area network", "text": "Computer network that connects devices over a limited area\nA local area network (LAN) is a computer network that interconnects computers within a limited area such as a residence, campus, or building, and has its network equipment and interconnects locally managed. LANs facilitate the distribution of data and sharing network devices, such as printers.\nThe LAN contrasts the wide area network (WAN), which not only covers a larger geographic distance, but also generally involves leased telecommunication circuits or Internet links. An even greater contrast is the Internet, which is a system of globally connected business and personal computers.\nEthernet and Wi-Fi are the two most common technologies used for local area networks; historical network technologies include ARCNET, Token Ring, and LocalTalk.\nCabling.\nMost wired network infrastructures utilize Category 5 or Category 6 \"twisted pair\" cabling with RJ45 compatible terminations. This medium provides physical connectivity between the Ethernet interfaces present on a large number of IP-aware devices. Depending on the grade of cable and quality of installation, speeds of up to 10\u00a0Mbit/s, 100\u00a0Mbit/s, 1\u00a0Gbit/s, or 10\u00a0Gbit/s are supported.\nWireless LAN.\nIn a wireless LAN, users have unrestricted movement within the coverage area. Wireless networks have become popular in residences and small businesses because of their ease of installation, convenience, and flexibility. Most wireless LANs consist of devices containing wireless radio technology that conforms to 802.11 standards as certified by the IEEE. Most wireless-capable residential devices operate at both the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequencies and fall within the 802.11n or 802.11ac standards. Some older home networking devices operate exclusively at a frequency of 2.4 GHz under 802.11b and 802.11g, or 5 GHz under 802.11a. Some newer devices operate at the aforementioned frequencies in addition to 6 GHz under Wi-Fi 6E. Wi-Fi is a marketing and compliance certification for IEEE 802.11 technologies. The Wi-Fi Alliance has tested compliant products, and certifies them for interoperability. The technology may be integrated into smartphones, tablet computers and laptops. Guests are often offered Internet access via a hotspot service.\nInfrastructure and technicals.\nSimple LANs in office or school buildings generally consist of cabling and one or more network switches; a switch is used to allow devices on a LAN to talk to one another via Ethernet. A switch can be connected to a router, cable modem, or ADSL modem for Internet access. LANs at residential homes usually tend to have a single router and often may include a wireless repeater. A LAN can include a wide variety of other network devices such as firewalls, load balancers, and network intrusion detection. A wireless access point is required for connecting wireless devices to a network; when a router includes this device, it is referred to as a wireless router.\nAdvanced LANs are characterized by their use of redundant links with switches using the Spanning Tree Protocol to prevent loops, their ability to manage differing traffic types via quality of service (QoS), and their ability to segregate traffic with VLANs. A network bridge binds two different LANs or LAN segments to each other, often in order to grant a wired-only device access to a wireless network medium. \nNetwork topology describes the layout of interconnections between devices and network segments. At the data link layer and physical layer, a wide variety of LAN topologies have been used, including ring, bus, mesh and star. The star topology is the most common in contemporary times. Wireless LAN (WLAN) also has its topologies: independent basic service set (IBSS, an ad-hoc network) where each node connects directly to each other (this is also standardized as Wi-Fi Direct), or basic service set (BSS, an infrastructure network that uses an wireless access point).\nNetwork layer configuration.\nDHCP is used to assign internal IP addresses to members of a local area network. A DHCP server typically runs on the router with end devices as its clients. All DHCP clients request configuration settings using the DHCP protocol in order to acquire their IP address, a default route and one or more DNS server addresses. Once the client implements these settings, it will be able to communicate on that internet.\nProtocols.\nAt the higher network layers, protocols such as NetBIOS, IPX/SPX, AppleTalk and others were once common, but the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP) has prevailed as the standard of choice for almost all local area networks today.\nConnection to other LANs.\nLANs can maintain connections with other LANs via leased lines, leased services, or across the Internet using virtual private network technologies. Depending on how the connections are established and secured, and the distance involved, such linked LANs may also be classified as a metropolitan area network (MAN) or a wide area network (WAN).\nConnection to the Internet.\nLocal area networks may be connected to the Internet (a type of WAN) via fixed-line means (such as a DSL/ADSL modem) or alternatively using a cellular or satellite modem. These would additionally make use of telephone wires such as VDSL and VDSL2, coaxial cables, or fiber to the home for running fiber-optic cables directly into a house or office building, or alternatively a cellular modem or satellite dish in the latter non-fixed cases. With Internet access, the Internet service provider (ISP) would grant a single WAN-facing IP address to the network. A router is configured with the provider's IP address on the WAN interface, which is shared among all devices in the LAN by network address translation. \nA gateway establishes physical and data link layer connectivity to a WAN over a service provider's native telecommunications infrastructure. Such devices typically contain a cable, DSL, or optical modem bound to a network interface controller for Ethernet. Home and small business class routers are often incorporated into these devices for additional convenience, and they often also have integrated wireless access point and 4-port Ethernet switch. \nThe ITU-T G.hn and IEEE Powerline standard, which provide high-speed (up to 1\u00a0Gbit/s) local area networking over existing home wiring, are examples of home networking technology designed specifically for IPTV delivery.\nHistory and development of LAN.\nEarly installations.\nThe increasing demand and usage of computers in universities and research labs in the late 1960s generated the need to provide high-speed interconnections between computer systems. A 1970 report from the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory detailing the growth of their \"Octopus\" network gave a good indication of the situation.\nA number of experimental and early commercial LAN technologies were developed in the 1970s. Ethernet was developed at Xerox PARC between 1973 and 1974. The Cambridge Ring was developed at Cambridge University starting in 1974. ARCNET was developed by Datapoint Corporation in 1976 and announced in 1977. It had the first commercial installation in December 1977 at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York. In 1979, the electronic voting system for the European Parliament was the first installation of a LAN connecting hundreds (420) of microprocessor-controlled voting terminals to a polling/selecting central unit with a multidrop bus with Master/slave (technology) arbitration. It used 10 kilometers of simple unshielded twisted pair category 3 cable\u2014the same cable used for telephone systems\u2014installed inside the benches of the European Parliament Hemicycles in Strasbourg and Luxembourg.\nThe development and proliferation of personal computers using the CP/M operating system in the late 1970s, and later DOS-based systems starting in 1981, meant that many sites grew to dozens or even hundreds of computers. The initial driving force for networking was to share storage and printers, both of which were expensive at the time. There was much enthusiasm for the concept, and for several years, from about 1983 onward, computer industry pundits habitually declared the coming year to be, \"The year of the LAN\".\nCompeting standards.\nIn practice, the concept was marred by the proliferation of incompatible physical layer and network protocol implementations, and a plethora of methods of sharing resources. Typically, each vendor would have its own type of network card, cabling, protocol, and network operating system. A solution appeared with the advent of Novell NetWare which provided even-handed support for dozens of competing card and cable types, and a much more sophisticated operating system than most of its competitors.\nOf the competitors to NetWare, only Banyan Vines had comparable technical strengths, but Banyan never gained a secure base. 3Com produced 3+Share and Microsoft produced MS-Net. These then formed the basis for collaboration between Microsoft and 3Com to create a simple network operating system LAN Manager and its cousin, IBM's LAN Server. None of these enjoyed any lasting success; Netware dominated the personal computer LAN business from early after its introduction in 1983 until the mid-1990s when Microsoft introduced Windows NT.\nIn 1983, TCP/IP was first shown capable of supporting actual defense department applications on a Defense Communication Agency LAN testbed located at Reston, Virginia. The TCP/IP-based LAN successfully supported Telnet, FTP, and a Defense Department teleconferencing application. This demonstrated the feasibility of employing TCP/IP LANs to interconnect Worldwide Military Command and Control System (WWMCCS) computers at command centers throughout the United States. However, WWMCCS was superseded by the Global Command and Control System (GCCS) before that could happen.\nDuring the same period, Unix workstations were using TCP/IP networking. Although the workstation market segment is now much reduced, the technologies developed in the area continue to be influential on the Internet and in all forms of networking\u2014and the TCP/IP protocol has replaced IPX, AppleTalk, NBF, and other protocols used by the early PC LANs.\nEconet was Acorn Computers's low-cost local area network system, intended for use by schools and small businesses. It was first developed for the Acorn Atom and Acorn System 2/3/4 computers in 1981.\nFurther development.\nIn the 1980s, several token ring network implementations for LANs were developed. IBM released its own implementation of token ring in 1985, It ran at . IBM claimed that their token ring systems were superior to Ethernet, especially under load, but these claims were debated; while the slow but inexpensive AppleTalk was popular for Macs, in 1987 \"InfoWorld\" said, \"No LAN has stood out as the clear leader, even in the IBM world\". IBM's implementation of token ring was the basis of the IEEE 802.5 standard. A 16\u00a0Mbit/s version of Token Ring was standardized by the 802.5 working group in 1989. IBM had market dominance over Token Ring, for example, in 1990, IBM equipment was the most widely used for Token Ring networks.\nFiber Distributed Data Interface (FDDI), a LAN standard, was considered an attractive campus backbone network technology in the early to mid 1990s since existing Ethernet networks only offered 10\u00a0Mbit/s data rates and Token Ring networks only offered 4\u00a0Mbit/s or 16\u00a0Mbit/s rates. Thus it was a relatively high-speed choice of that era, with speeds such as 100\u00a0Mbit/s.\nBy 1994, vendors included Cisco Systems, National Semiconductor, Network Peripherals, SysKonnect (acquired by Marvell Technology Group), and 3Com. FDDI installations have largely been replaced by Ethernet deployments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17740", "revid": "28324398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17740", "title": "Louis Pasteur", "text": "French chemist, pharmacist and microbiologist (1822\u20131895)\nLouis Pasteur (, ; 27 December 1822 \u2013 28 September 1895) was a French chemist, pharmacist, and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation, and pasteurization, the last of which was named after him. His research in chemistry led to remarkable breakthroughs in the understanding of the causes and preventions of diseases, which laid down the foundations of hygiene, public health and much of modern medicine. Pasteur's works are credited with saving millions of lives through the developments of vaccines for rabies and anthrax. He is regarded as one of the founders of modern bacteriology and has been honored as the \"father of bacteriology\" and the \"father of microbiology\" (together with Robert Koch; the latter epithet also attributed to Antonie van Leeuwenhoek).\nPasteur was responsible for disproving the doctrine of spontaneous generation. Under the auspices of the French Academy of Sciences, his experiment demonstrated that in sterilized and sealed flasks, nothing ever developed; conversely, in sterilized but open flasks, microorganisms could grow. For this experiment, the academy awarded him the Alhumbert Prize carrying 2,500 francs in 1862.\nPasteur is also regarded as one of the fathers of the germ theory of diseases, which was a minor medical concept at the time. His many experiments showed that diseases could be prevented by killing or stopping germs, thereby directly supporting the germ theory and its application in clinical medicine. He is best known to the general public for his invention of the technique of treating milk and wine to stop bacterial contamination, a process now called pasteurization. Pasteur also made significant discoveries in chemistry, most notably on the molecular basis for the asymmetry of certain crystals and racemization. Early in his career, his investigation of sodium ammonium tartrate initiated the field of optical isomerism. This work had a profound effect on structural chemistry, with eventual implications for many areas including medicinal chemistry.\nHe was the director of the Pasteur Institute, established in 1887, until his death, and his body was interred in a vault beneath the institute. Although Pasteur made groundbreaking experiments, his reputation became associated with various controversies. Historical reassessment of his notebook revealed that he practiced deception to overcome his rivals.\nEarly life and education.\nLouis Pasteur was born on 27 December 1822, in Dole, Jura, France, to a Catholic family of a poor tanner. He was the third child of Jean-Joseph Pasteur and Jeanne-Etiennette Roqui. The family moved to Marnoz in 1826 and then to Arbois in 1827. Pasteur entered primary school in 1831. He was dyslexic and dysgraphic.\nHe was an average student in his early years, and not particularly academic, as his interests were fishing and sketching. He drew many pastels and portraits of his parents, friends and neighbors. Pasteur attended secondary school at the Coll\u00e8ge d'Arbois. In October 1838, he left for Paris to enroll in a boarding school, but became homesick and returned in November.\nIn 1839, he entered the Coll\u00e8ge Royal at Besan\u00e7on to study philosophy and earned his Bachelor of Letters degree in 1840. He was appointed a tutor at the Besan\u00e7on college while continuing a degree science course with special mathematics. He failed his first examination in 1841. He managed to pass the \"baccalaur\u00e9at scientifique\" (general science) degree from Dijon, where he earned his Bachelor of Science in Mathematics degree (Bachelier \u00e8s Sciences Math\u00e9matiques) in 1842, but with a mediocre grade in chemistry.\nLater in 1842, Pasteur took the entrance test for the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure. During the test, he had to fight fatigue and only felt comfortable with physics and mathematics. He passed the first set of tests, but because his ranking was low, Pasteur decided not to continue and try again next year. He went back to the Parisian boarding school to prepare for the test. He also attended classes at the Lyc\u00e9e Saint-Louis and lectures of Jean-Baptiste Dumas at the Sorbonne. In 1843, he passed the test with a high ranking and entered the \u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure. Later, he was a student of Jean-Baptiste Boussingault at the Conservatoire national des arts et m\u00e9tiers. In 1845 he received the \"licenci\u00e9 \u00e8s sciences\u200a\" degree. In 1846, he was appointed professor of physics at the Coll\u00e8ge de Tournon in Ard\u00e8che. But the chemist Antoine J\u00e9r\u00f4me Balard wanted him back at the \"\u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure\" as a graduate laboratory assistant (\"agr\u00e9g\u00e9 pr\u00e9parateur\"). He joined Balard and simultaneously started his research in crystallography and in 1847, he submitted his two theses, one in chemistry and the other in physics: (a) Chemistry Thesis: \"Recherches sur la capacit\u00e9 de saturation de l'acide ars\u00e9nieux. Etudes des ars\u00e9nites de potasse, de soude et d'ammoniaque.\"; (b) Physics Thesis: \"1. \u00c9tudes des ph\u00e9nom\u00e8nes relatifs \u00e0 la polarisation rotatoire des liquides. 2. Application de la polarisation rotatoire des liquides \u00e0 la solution de diverses questions de chimie.\"\nAfter serving briefly as professor of physics at the Dijon Lyc\u00e9e in 1848, he became professor of chemistry at the University of Strasbourg, where he met and courted Marie Laurent, daughter of the university's rector in 1849. They were married on 29 May 1849, and together had five children, only two of whom survived to adulthood; the other three died of typhoid.\nCareer.\nPasteur was appointed professor of chemistry at the University of Strasbourg in 1848, and became the chair of chemistry in 1852.\nIn February 1854, so that he would have time to carry out work that could earn him the title of correspondent of the Institute, he got three months' paid leave with the help of a medical certificate of convenience. He extended the leave until 1 August, the date of the start of the exams. \"I tell the Minister that I will go and do the examinations so as not to increase the embarrassment of the service. It is also so as not to leave to another a sum of 6 or 700 francs\".\nIn this same year 1854, he was named dean of the new faculty of sciences at University of Lille, where he began his studies on fermentation. It was on this occasion that Pasteur uttered his oft-quoted remark: \"dans les champs de l'observation, le hasard ne favorise que les esprits pr\u00e9par\u00e9s\" (\"In the field of observation, chance favors only the prepared mind\").\nIn 1857, he moved to Paris as the director of scientific studies at the \"\u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure\" where he took control from 1858 to 1867 and introduced a series of reforms to improve the standard of scientific work. The examinations became more rigid, which led to better results, greater competition, and increased prestige. Many of his decrees, however, were rigid and authoritarian, leading to two serious student revolts. During \"the bean revolt\" he decreed that a mutton stew, which students had refused to eat, would be served and eaten every Monday. On another occasion he threatened to expel any student caught smoking, and 73 of the 80 students in the school resigned.\nIn 1863, he was appointed professor of geology, physics, and chemistry at the \"\u00c9cole nationale sup\u00e9rieure des Beaux-Arts\", a position he held until his resignation in 1867. In 1867, he became the chair of organic chemistry at the Sorbonne, but he later gave up the position because of poor health. In 1867, the \u00c9cole Normale's laboratory of physiological chemistry was created at Pasteur's request, and he was the laboratory's director from 1867 to 1888. In Paris, he established the Pasteur Institute in 1887 and served as its director for the rest of his life.\nResearch.\nMolecular asymmetry.\nIn Pasteur's early work as a chemist, beginning at the \"\u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure\", and continuing at Strasbourg and Lille, he examined the chemical, optical and crystallographic properties of a group of compounds known as tartrates.\nHe resolved a problem concerning the nature of tartaric acid in 1848. A solution of this compound derived from living things rotated the plane of polarization of light passing through it. The problem was that tartaric acid derived by chemical synthesis had no such effect, even though its chemical reactions were identical and its elemental composition was the same.\nPasteur noticed that crystals of tartrates had small faces. Then he observed that, in racemic mixtures of tartrates, half of the crystals were right-handed and half were left-handed. In solution, the right-handed compound was dextrorotatory, and the left-handed one was levorotatory. Pasteur determined that optical activity related to the shape of the crystals, and that an asymmetric internal arrangement of the molecules of the compound was responsible for twisting the light. The (2\"R\",3\"R\")- and (2\"S\",3\"S\")- tartrates were isometric, non-superposable mirror images of each other. This was the first time anyone had demonstrated molecular chirality, and also the first explanation of isomerism.\nSome historians consider Pasteur's work in this area to be his \"most profound and most original contributions to science\", and his \"greatest scientific discovery.\"\nFermentation and germ theory of diseases.\nPasteur was motivated to investigate fermentation while working at Lille. In 1856 a local wine manufacturer, M. Bigot, whose son was one of Pasteur's students, sought for his advice on the problems of making beetroot alcohol and souring. Pasteur began his research in the topic by repeating and confirming works of Theodor Schwann, who demonstrated a decade earlier that yeast were alive.\nAccording to his son-in-law, Ren\u00e9 Vallery-Radot, in August 1857 Pasteur sent a paper about lactic acid fermentation to the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Sciences de Lille, but the paper was read three months later. A memoire was subsequently published on 30 November 1857. In the memoir, he developed his ideas stating that: \"I intend to establish that, just as there is an alcoholic ferment, the yeast of beer, which is found everywhere that sugar is decomposed into alcohol and carbonic acid, so also there is a particular ferment, a lactic yeast, always present when sugar becomes lactic acid.\"\nThis memoir on alcoholic fermentation was published in full form in 1858. J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius and Justus von Liebig had proposed the theory that fermentation was caused by decomposition. Pasteur demonstrated that this theory was incorrect, and that yeast was responsible for fermentation to produce alcohol from sugar. He also demonstrated that, when a different microorganism contaminated the wine, lactic acid was produced, making the wine sour. In 1861, Pasteur observed that less sugar fermented per part of yeast when the yeast was exposed to air. The lower rate of fermentation aerobically became known as the Pasteur effect.\nPasteur's research also showed that the growth of micro-organisms was responsible for spoiling beverages, such as beer, wine and milk. With this established, he invented a process in which liquids such as milk were heated to a temperature between 60 and 100\u00a0\u00b0C. This killed most bacteria and moulds already present within them. Pasteur and Claude Bernard completed tests on blood and urine on 20 April 1862. Pasteur patented the process, to fight the \"diseases\" of wine, in 1865. The method became known as pasteurization, and was soon applied to beer and milk.\nBeverage contamination led Pasteur to the idea that micro-organisms infecting animals and humans cause disease. He proposed preventing the entry of micro-organisms into the human body, leading Joseph Lister to develop antiseptic methods in surgery.\nIn 1866, Pasteur published \"\u00c9tudes sur le Vin\", about the diseases of wine, and he published \"\u00c9tudes sur la Bi\u00e8re\" in 1876, concerning the diseases of beer.\nIn the early 19th century, Agostino Bassi had shown that muscardine was caused by a fungus that infected silkworms. Since 1853, two diseases called \"p\u00e9brine\" and \"flacherie\" had been infecting great numbers of silkworms in southern France, and by 1865 they were causing huge losses to farmers. In 1865, Pasteur went to Al\u00e8s and worked for five years until 1870.\nSilkworms with p\u00e9brine were covered in corpuscles. In the first three years, Pasteur thought that the corpuscles were a symptom of the disease. In 1870, he concluded that the corpuscles were the cause of p\u00e9brine (it is now known that the cause is a microsporidian). Pasteur also showed that the disease was hereditary. Pasteur developed a system to prevent p\u00e9brine: after the female moths laid their eggs, the moths were turned into a pulp. The pulp was examined with a microscope, and if corpuscles were observed, the eggs were destroyed. Pasteur concluded that bacteria caused flacherie. The primary cause is currently thought to be viruses. The spread of flacherie could be accidental or hereditary. Hygiene could be used to prevent accidental flacherie. Moths whose digestive cavities did not contain the microorganisms causing flacherie were used to lay eggs, preventing hereditary flacherie.\nSpontaneous generation.\nFollowing his fermentation experiments, Pasteur demonstrated that the skin of grapes was the natural source of yeasts, and that sterilized grapes and grape juice never fermented. He drew grape juice from under the skin with sterilized needles, and also covered grapes with sterilized cloth. Both experiments could not produce wine in sterilized containers.\nHis findings and ideas were against the prevailing notion of spontaneous generation. He received a particularly stern criticism from F\u00e9lix Archim\u00e8de Pouchet, who was director of the Rouen Museum of Natural History. To settle the debate between the eminent scientists, the French Academy of Sciences offered the Alhumbert Prize carrying 2,500 francs to whoever could experimentally demonstrate for or against the doctrine.\nPouchet stated that air everywhere could cause spontaneous generation of living organisms in liquids. In the late 1850s, he performed experiments and claimed that they were evidence of spontaneous generation. Francesco Redi and Lazzaro Spallanzani had provided some evidence against spontaneous generation in the 17th and 18th centuries, respectively. Spallanzani's experiments in 1765 suggested that air contaminated broths with bacteria. In the 1860s, Pasteur repeated Spallanzani's experiments, but Pouchet reported a different result using a different broth.\nPasteur performed several experiments to disprove spontaneous generation. He placed boiled liquid in a flask and let hot air enter the flask. Then he closed the flask, and no organisms grew in it. In another experiment, when he opened flasks containing boiled liquid, dust entered the flasks, causing organisms to grow in some of them. The number of flasks in which organisms grew was lower at higher altitudes, showing that air at high altitudes contained less dust and fewer organisms. Pasteur also used swan neck flasks containing a fermentable liquid. Air was allowed to enter the flask via a long curving tube that made dust particles stick to it. Nothing grew in the broths unless the flasks were tilted, making the liquid touch the contaminated walls of the neck. This showed that the living organisms that grew in such broths came from outside, on dust, rather than spontaneously generating within the liquid or from the action of pure air.\nThese were some of the most important experiments disproving the theory of spontaneous generation. Pasteur gave a series of five presentations of his findings before the French Academy of Sciences in 1881, which were published in 1882 as \"M\u00e9moire\" \"Sur les corpuscules organis\u00e9s qui existent dans l'atmosph\u00e8re: Examen de la doctrine des g\u00e9n\u00e9rations spontan\u00e9es\" (\"Account of Organized Corpuscles Existing in the Atmosphere: Examining the Doctrine of Spontaneous Generation\"). Pasteur won the Alhumbert Prize in 1862. He concluded that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSilkworm disease.\nIn 1865, Jean-Baptiste Dumas, chemist, senator and former Minister of Agriculture and Commerce, asked Pasteur to study a new disease that was decimating silkworm farms from the south of France and Europe, the p\u00e9brine, characterized on a macroscopic scale by black spots and on a microscopic scale by the \"Cornalia corpuscles\". Pasteur accepted and made five long stays in Al\u00e8s, between 7 June 1865 and 1869.\nInitial errors.\nArriving in Al\u00e8s, Pasteur familiarized himself with p\u00e9brine and also with another disease of the silkworm, known earlier than pebrine: flacherie or dead-flat disease. Contrary, for example, to Quatrefages, who coined the new word \"p\u00e9brine\", Pasteur made the mistake of believing that the two diseases were the same and even that most of the diseases of silkworms known up to that time were identical with each other and with p\u00e9brine. It was in letters of 30 April and 21 May 1867 to Dumas that he first made the distinction between p\u00e9brine and flacherie.\nHe made another mistake: he began by denying the \"parasitic\" (microbial) nature of p\u00e9brine, which several scholars (notably Antoine B\u00e9champ) considered well established. Even a note published on 27 August 1866 by Balbiani, which Pasteur at first seemed to welcome favourably had no effect, at least immediately. \"Pasteur is mistaken. He would only change his mind in the course of 1867\".\nVictory over p\u00e9brine.\nAt a time when Pasteur had not yet understood the cause of the p\u00e9brine, he propagated an effective process to stop infections: a sample of chrysalises was chosen, they were crushed and the corpuscles were searched for in the crushed material; if the proportion of corpuscular pupae in the sample was very low, the chamber was considered good for reproduction. This method of sorting \"seeds\" (eggs) is close to a method that Osimo had proposed a few years earlier, but whose trials had not been conclusive. By this process, Pasteur curbed p\u00e9brine and saved much of the silk industry in the C\u00e9vennes.\nFlacherie resists.\nIn 1878, at the \"Congr\u00e8s international s\u00e9ricicole\", Pasteur admitted that \"if p\u00e9brine is overcome, flacherie still exerts its ravages\". He attributed the persistence of flacherie to the fact that the farmers had not followed his advice.\nIn 1884, Balbiani, who disregarded the theoretical value of Pasteur's work on silkworm diseases, acknowledged that his practical process had remedied the ravages of p\u00e9brine, but added that this result tended to be counterbalanced by the development of flacherie, which was less well known and more difficult to prevent.\nDespite Pasteur's success against p\u00e9brine, French sericulture had not been saved from damage. (See in the French Wikipedia.)\nImmunology and vaccination.\nChicken cholera.\nPasteur's first work on vaccine development was on chicken cholera. He received the bacteria samples (later called \"Pasteurella multocida\" after him) from Henry Toussaint. Being unable to conduct the experiments himself due to a stroke in 1868, Pasteur relied heavily on his assistants Emile Roux and Charles Chamberland. The work with chicken cholera was initiated in 1877, and by the next year, Roux was able to maintain a stable culture using broths. As documented later by Pasteur in his notebook in March 1880, in October 1879, being delayed in returning to the laboratory due to his daughter\u2019s wedding and ill health, he instructed Roux to start a new chicken cholera culture using bacteria from a culture that had sat since July. The two chickens inoculated with this new culture showed some symptoms of infection, but instead of the infections being fatal, as they usually were, the chickens recovered completely. After further incubation of the culture for an additional 8 days, Roux again inoculated the same two chickens. As was also noted by Pasteur in his notebook in March 1880, and contrary to some accounts, this time the chickens died. Thus, although the attenuated bacteria did not provide immunity, these experiments provided important clues as to how bacteria could be artificially attenuated in the laboratory. As a result, upon Pasteur\u2019s return to the laboratory, the focus of the research was directed at creating a vaccine through attenuation.\nIn February 1880, Pasteur presented his results to the French Academy of Sciences as \"\"Sur les maladies virulentes et en particulier sur la maladie appel\u00e9e vulgairement chol\u00e9ra des poules\" (On virulent diseases, and in particular on the disease commonly called chicken cholera)\" and published it in the academy's journal (\"Comptes-Rendus hebdomadaires des s\u00e9ances de l'Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences\"). He attributed that the bacteria were weakened by contact with oxygen. He explained that bacteria kept in sealed containers never lost their virulence, and only those exposed to air in culture media could be used as vaccine. Pasteur introduced the term \"attenuation\" for this weakening of virulence as he presented before the academy, saying:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We can diminish the microbe's virulence by changing the mode of culturing. This is the crucial point of my subject. I ask the Academy not to criticize, for the time being, the confidence of my proceedings that permit me to determine the microbe's attenuation, in order to save the independence of my studies and to better assure their progress... [In conclusion] I would like to point out to the Academy two main consequences to the facts presented: the hope to culture all microbes and to find a vaccine for all infectious diseases that have repeatedly afflicted humanity, and are a major burden on agriculture and breeding of domestic animals.\nIn fact, Pasteur's vaccine against chicken cholera did not consistently produce immunity, and has subsequently been proven to be ineffective.\nAnthrax.\nFollowing the results with chicken cholera, Pasteur eventually utilized the immunization method developed for chicken cholera to create a vaccine for anthrax, which affected cattle. In 1877, Pasteur had earlier directed his laboratory to culture the bacteria from the blood of infected animals, following the discovery of the bacterium by Robert Koch.\n When animals were infected with the bacteria, anthrax occurred, proving that the bacteria was the cause of the disease. Many cattle were dying of anthrax in \"cursed fields\". Pasteur was told that sheep that died from anthrax were buried in the field. Pasteur thought that earthworms might have brought the bacteria to the surface. He found anthrax bacteria in earthworms' excrement, showing that he was correct. He told the farmers not to bury dead animals in the fields.\nPasteur's interest in creating a vaccine for anthrax was greatly stimulated when on 12 July 1880, Henri Bouley read before the French Academy of Sciences a report from Henry Toussaint, a veterinary surgeon, who was not a member of the academy. Toussaint had developed anthrax vaccine by killing the bacilli by heating at 55\u00a0\u00b0C for 10 \u2009minutes. He tested his vaccine on eight dogs and 11 sheep, half of which died after inoculation. It was not a great success. Upon hearing the news, Pasteur immediately wrote to the academy that he could not believe that dead vaccine would work and that Toussaint's claim \"overturns all the ideas I had on viruses, vaccines, etc.\" Following Pasteur's criticism, Toussaint switched to carbolic acid (phenol) to kill anthrax bacilli and tested the vaccine on sheep in August 1880. Pasteur thought that this type of killed vaccine should not work because he believed that attenuated bacteria used up nutrients that the bacteria needed to grow. He thought oxidizing bacteria when sitting in culture broth for prolonged periods made them less virulent.\nHowever, Pasteur's laboratory found that anthrax bacillus was not easily weakened by culturing in air as it formed spores \u2013 unlike chicken cholera bacillus. In early 1881, his laboratory discovered that growing anthrax bacilli at about 42\u00a0\u00b0C made them unable to produce spores, and he described this method in a speech to the French Academy of Sciences on 28 February. On 21 March, despite inconsistent results, he announced successful vaccination of sheep. To this news, veterinarian Hippolyte Rossignol proposed that the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 d'agriculture de Melun organize an experiment to test Pasteur's vaccine. Pasteur signed an agreement accepting the challenge on 28 April. Pasteur's assistants, Roux and Chamberland, who were assigned the task of conducting the trial, were concerned about the unreliability of the attenuated vaccine, and therefore Chamberland secretly prepared an alternative vaccine using chemical inactivation. Without divulging their method of preparing the vaccine to anyone but Pasteur, Roux and Chamberland performed the public experiment on May at Pouilly-le-Fort. 58 sheep, 2 goats and 10 cattle were used, half of which were given the vaccine on 5 and 17 May; while the other half was untreated. On 31 May, Roux and Chamberland next injected the animals with the fresh virulent culture of anthrax bacillus. The official result was observed and analyzed on 2 June in the presence of over 200 spectators, with Pasteur himself in attendance. The results were as Pasteur had bravely predicted: \"I hypothesized that the six vaccinated cows would not become very ill, while the four unvaccinated cows would perish or at least become very ill.\" However, all vaccinated sheep and goats survived, while unvaccinated ones had died or were dying before the viewers. His report to the French Academy of Sciences on 13 June concludes:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pasteur did not directly disclose how he prepared the vaccines used at Pouilly-le-Fort. Although his report indicated it as a \"live vaccine\", his laboratory notebooks show that he actually used potassium dichromate-killed vaccine, as developed by Chamberland, quite similar to Toussaint's method.\nThe notion of a weak form of a disease causing immunity to the virulent version was not new; this had been known for a long time for smallpox. Inoculation with smallpox (variolation) was known to result in a much less severe disease, and greatly reduced mortality, in comparison with the naturally acquired disease. Edward Jenner had also studied vaccination using cowpox (\"vaccinia\") to give cross-immunity to smallpox in the late 1790s, and by the early 1800s vaccination had spread to most of Europe.\nThe difference between smallpox vaccination and anthrax or chicken cholera vaccination was that the latter two disease organisms had been artificially weakened, so a naturally weak form of the disease organism did not need to be found. Pasteur's development of artificially weakened pathogens revolutionized work in infectious diseases, and he gave these artificially weakened diseases the generic name of \"vaccines\", in honour of Jenner's discovery.\nIn 1876, Robert Koch had shown that \"Bacillus anthracis\" caused anthrax. In his papers published between 1878 and 1880, Pasteur only mentioned Koch's work in a footnote. Koch met Pasteur at the Seventh International Medical Congress in 1881. A few months later, Koch wrote that Pasteur had used impure cultures and made errors. In 1882, Pasteur replied to Koch in a speech, to which Koch responded aggressively. Koch stated that Pasteur tested his vaccine on unsuitable animals and that Pasteur's research was not properly scientific. In 1882, Koch wrote \"On the Anthrax Inoculation\", in which he refuted several of Pasteur's conclusions about anthrax and criticized Pasteur for keeping his methods secret, jumping to conclusions, and being imprecise. In 1883, Pasteur wrote that he used cultures prepared in a similar way to his successful fermentation experiments and that Koch misinterpreted statistics and ignored Pasteur's work on silkworms.\nSwine erysipelas.\nIn 1882, Pasteur sent his assistant Louis Thuillier to southern France because of an epizootic of swine erysipelas. Thuillier identified the bacillus that caused the disease in March 1883. Pasteur and Thuillier increased the bacillus's virulence after passing it through pigeons. Then they passed the bacillus through rabbits, weakening it and obtaining a vaccine. Pasteur and Thuillier incorrectly described the bacterium as a figure-eight shape. Roux described the bacterium as stick-shaped in 1884.\nRabies.\nPasteur's laboratory produced the first vaccine for rabies using a method developed by his assistant Roux, which involved growing the virus in rabbits, and then weakening it by drying the affected nerve tissue. The rabies vaccine was initially created by Emile Roux, a French doctor and a colleague of Pasteur, who had produced a killed vaccine using this method. The vaccine had been tested in 50 dogs before its first human trial. This vaccine was used on 9-year-old Joseph Meister, on 6 July 1885, after the boy was badly mauled by a rabid dog. This was done at some personal risk for Pasteur, since he was not a licensed physician and could have faced prosecution for treating the boy. After consulting with physicians, he decided to go ahead with the treatment. Over 11 days, Meister received 13 inoculations, each inoculation using viruses that had been weakened for a shorter period of time. Three months later he examined Meister and found that he was in good health. Pasteur was hailed as a hero and the legal matter was not pursued. Analysis of his laboratory notebooks shows that Pasteur had treated two people before his vaccination of Meister. One survived but may not actually have had rabies, and the other died of rabies. Pasteur began treatment of Jean-Baptiste Jupille on 20 October 1885, and the treatment was successful. Later in 1885, people, including four children from the United States, went to Pasteur's laboratory to be inoculated. In 1886, he treated 350 people, of which only one developed rabies. The treatment's success laid the foundations for the manufacture of many other vaccines. The first of the Pasteur Institutes was also built on the basis of this achievement.\nIn \"The Story of San Michele\", Axel Munthe writes of some risks Pasteur undertook in the rabies vaccine research:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pasteur himself was absolutely fearless. Anxious to secure a sample of saliva straight from the jaws of a rabid dog, I once saw him with the glass tube held between his lips draw a few drops of the deadly saliva from the mouth of a rabid bull-dog, held on the table by two assistants, their hands protected by leather gloves.\nBecause of his study in germs, Pasteur encouraged doctors to sanitize their hands and equipment before surgery. Prior to this, few doctors or their assistants practiced these procedures. Ignaz Semmelweis and Joseph Lister had earlier practiced hand sanitizing in medical contexts in the 1860s.\nControversies.\nA French national hero at age 55, in 1878 Pasteur discreetly told his family to never reveal his laboratory notebooks to anyone. His family obeyed, and all his documents were held and inherited in secrecy. Being that Pasteur did not allow others in his laboratory to keep notebooks, this secrecy kept many aspects of Pasteur's research unknown until relatively recently. Finally, in 1964 Pasteur's grandson and last surviving male descendant, Pasteur Vallery-Radot, donated the papers to the French national library. Yet the papers were restricted for historical studies until the death of Vallery-Radot in 1971. The documents were given a catalogue number only in 1985.\nIn 1995, the centennial of the death of Louis Pasteur, a historian of science Gerald L. Geison published an analysis of Pasteur's private notebooks in his \"The Private Science of Louis Pasteur\", and declared that Pasteur had given several misleading accounts and played deceptions in his most important discoveries. Max Perutz published a defense of Pasteur in \"The New York Review of Books\". Based on further examinations of Pasteur's documents, French immunologist Patrice Debr\u00e9 concluded in his book\" Louis Pasteur\" (1998) that, in spite of his genius, Pasteur had some faults. A book review states that Debr\u00e9 \"sometimes finds him unfair, combative, arrogant, unattractive in attitude, inflexible and even dogmatic\".\nFermentation.\nScientists before Pasteur had studied fermentation. In the 1830s, Charles Cagniard-Latour, Friedrich Traugott K\u00fctzing and Theodor Schwann used microscopes to study yeasts and concluded that yeasts were living organisms. In 1839, Justus von Liebig, Friedrich W\u00f6hler and J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius stated that yeast was not an organism and was produced when air acted on plant juice.\nIn 1855, Antoine B\u00e9champ, Professor of Chemistry at the University of Montpellier, conducted experiments with sucrose solutions and concluded that water was the factor for fermentation. He changed his conclusion in 1858, stating that fermentation was directly related to the growth of moulds, which required air for growth. He regarded himself as the first to show the role of microorganisms in fermentation.\nPasteur started his experiments in 1857 and published his findings in 1858 (April issue of \"Comptes Rendus Chimie\", B\u00e9champ's paper appeared in January issue). B\u00e9champ noted that Pasteur did not bring any novel idea or experiments. On the other hand, B\u00e9champ was probably aware of Pasteur's 1857 preliminary works. With both scientists claiming priority on the discovery, a dispute, extending to several areas, lasted throughout their lives.\nHowever, B\u00e9champ was on the losing side, as the \"BMJ\" obituary remarked: His name was \"associated with bygone controversies as to priority which it would be unprofitable to recall\". B\u00e9champ proposed the incorrect theory of microzymes. According to K. L. Manchester, anti-vivisectionists and proponents of alternative medicine promoted B\u00e9champ and microzymes, unjustifiably claiming that Pasteur plagiarized B\u00e9champ.\nPasteur thought that succinic acid inverted sucrose. In 1860, Marcellin Berthelot isolated invertase and showed that succinic acid did not invert sucrose. Pasteur believed that fermentation was only due to living cells. He and Berthelot engaged in a long argument subject of vitalism, in which Berthelot was vehemently opposed to any idea of vitalism. Hans Buchner discovered that zymase (not an enzyme, but a mixture of enzymes) catalyzed fermentation, showing that fermentation was catalyzed by enzymes within cells. Eduard Buchner also discovered that fermentation could take place outside living cells.\nAnthrax vaccine.\nPasteur publicly claimed his success in developing the anthrax vaccine in 1881. However, his admirer-turned-rival Henry Toussaint was the one who developed the first vaccine. Toussaint isolated the bacteria that caused chicken cholera (later named \"Pasteurella\" in honour of Pasteur) in 1879 and gave samples to Pasteur who used them for his own works. On 12 July 1880, Toussaint presented his successful result to the French Academy of Sciences, using an attenuated vaccine against anthrax in dogs and sheep. Pasteur on grounds of jealousy contested the discovery by publicly displaying his vaccination method at Pouilly-le-Fort on 5 May 1881. Pasteur then gave a misleading account of the preparation of the anthrax vaccine used in the experiment. He claimed that he made a \"live vaccine\", but used potassium dichromate to inactivate anthrax spores, a method similar to Toussaint's. The promotional experiment was a success and helped Pasteur sell his products, getting the benefits and glory.\nExperimental ethics.\nPasteur's experiments are often cited as against medical ethics, especially on his vaccination of Meister. He did not have any experience in medical practice, and more importantly, lacked a medical license. This is often cited as a serious threat to his professional and personal reputation. His closest partner \u00c9mile Roux, who had medical qualifications, refused to participate in the clinical trial, likely because he considered it unjust. However, Pasteur executed vaccination of the boy under the close watch of practising physicians Jacques-Joseph Grancher, head of the Paris Children's Hospital's paediatric clinic, and Alfred Vulpian, a member of the Commission on Rabies. He was not allowed to hold the syringe, although the inoculations were entirely under his supervision. It was Grancher who was responsible for the injections, and he defended Pasteur before the French National Academy of Medicine in the issue.\nPasteur has also been criticized for keeping secrecy of his procedure and not giving proper pre-clinical trials on animals. Pasteur stated that he kept his procedure secret in order to control its quality. He later disclosed his procedures to a small group of scientists. Pasteur wrote that he had successfully vaccinated 50 rabid dogs before using it on Meister. According to Geison, Pasteur's laboratory notebooks show that he had vaccinated only 11 dogs.\nAwards and honours.\nPasteur was awarded 1,500 francs in 1853 by the Pharmaceutical Society for the synthesis of racemic acid. In 1856 the Royal Society of London presented him the Rumford Medal for his discovery of the nature of racemic acid and its relations to polarized light, and the Copley Medal in 1874 for his work on fermentation. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1869.\nThe French Academy of Sciences awarded Pasteur the 1859 Montyon Prize for experimental physiology in 1860, and the Jecker Prize in 1861 and the Alhumbert Prize in 1862 for his experimental refutation of spontaneous generation. Though he lost elections in 1857 and 1861 for membership to the French Academy of Sciences, he won the 1862 election for membership to the mineralogy section. He was elected to permanent secretary of the physical science section of the academy in 1887 and held the position until 1889.\nDuring this time he was elected to honorary membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, in 1866.\nIn 1873, Pasteur was elected to the Acad\u00e9mie Nationale de M\u00e9decine and was made the commander in the Brazilian Order of the Rose. In 1881 he was elected to a seat at the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise left vacant by \u00c9mile Littr\u00e9. Pasteur received the Albert Medal from the Royal Society of Arts in 1882. In 1883 he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. In 1885, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society. On 8 June 1886, the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II awarded Pasteur with the Order of the Medjidie (I Class) and 10000 Ottoman liras. He was awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh in 1889. Pasteur won the Leeuwenhoek Medal from the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences for his contributions to microbiology in 1895.\nPasteur was made a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1853, promoted to Officer in 1863, to Commander in 1868, to Grand Officer in 1878 and made a Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor in 1881.\nLegacy.\nIn many localities worldwide, streets are named in his honor. For example, in the US: Palo Alto and Irvine, California, Boston and Polk, Florida, adjacent to the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio; Jonqui\u00e8re, Qu\u00e9bec; San Salvador de Jujuy and Buenos Aires (Argentina), Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, in the United Kingdom, Jericho and Wulguru in Queensland, Australia; Phnom Penh in Cambodia; Ho Chi Minh City and Da Nang, Vietnam; Batna in Algeria; Bandung in Indonesia, Tehran in Iran, near the central campus of the Warsaw University in Warsaw, Poland; adjacent to the Odesa State Medical University in Odesa, Ukraine; Milan in Italy and Bucharest, Cluj-Napoca and Timi\u0219oara in Romania. The Avenue Pasteur in Saigon, Vietnam, is one of the few streets in that city to retain its French name. \"Avenue Louis Pasteur\" in the Longwood Medical and Academic Area in Boston was named in his honor in the French manner with \"Avenue\" preceding the name of the dedicatee.\nBoth the Institut Pasteur and Universit\u00e9 Louis Pasteur were named after Pasteur. The schools Lyc\u00e9e Pasteur in Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, and Lyc\u00e9e Louis Pasteur in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, are named after him. In South Africa, the Louis Pasteur Private Hospital in Pretoria, and Life Louis Pasteur Private Hospital, Bloemfontein, are named after him. Louis Pasteur University Hospital in Ko\u0161ice, Slovakia is also named after Pasteur.\nA statue of Pasteur is erected at San Rafael High School in San Rafael, California. A bronze bust of him resides on the French Campus of Kaiser Permanente's San Francisco Medical Center in San Francisco. The sculpture was designed by Harriet G. Moore and cast in 1984 by Artworks Foundry.\nThe UNESCO/Institut Pasteur Medal was created on the centenary of Pasteur's death, and is given every two years in his name, \"in recognition of outstanding research contributing to a beneficial impact on human health\".\nThe French Academician Henri Mondor stated: \"\"Louis Pasteur was neither a physician nor a surgeon, but no one has done as much for medicine and surgery as he has\".\"\nPasteur Institute.\nAfter developing the rabies vaccine, Pasteur proposed an institute for the vaccine. In 1887, fundraising for the Pasteur Institute began, with donations from many countries. The official statute was registered in 1887, stating that the institute's purposes were \"the treatment of rabies according to the method developed by M. Pasteur\" and \"the study of virulent and contagious diseases\". The institute was inaugurated on 14 November 1888. He brought together scientists with various specialties. The first five departments were directed by two graduates of the \"\u00c9cole Normale Sup\u00e9rieure\": \u00c9mile Duclaux (general microbiology research) and Charles Chamberland (microbe research applied to hygiene), as well as a biologist, \u00c9lie Metchnikoff (morphological microbe research) and two physicians, Jacques-Joseph Grancher (rabies) and \u00c9mile Roux (technical microbe research). One year after the inauguration of the institute, Roux set up the first course of microbiology ever taught in the world, then entitled \"Cours de Microbie Technique\" (Course of microbe research techniques). Since 1891 the Pasteur Institute had been extended to different countries, and currently there are 32 institutes in 29 countries in various parts of the world.\nPersonal life.\nPasteur married Marie Pasteur (n\u00e9e Laurent) in 1849. She was the daughter of the rector of the University of Strasbourg, and was Pasteur's scientific assistant. They had five children together, three of whom died as children. Their eldest daughter, Jeanne, was born in 1850. She died from typhoid fever, aged 9, whilst at the boarding school Arbois in 1859. In 1865, 2-year-old Camille died of a liver tumour. Shortly after they decided to bring C\u00e9cile home from boarding school, but she too died of typhoid fever on 23 May 1866 at the age of 12. Only Jean Baptiste (b. 1851) and Marie Louise (b. 1858) survived to adulthood. Jean Baptiste would be a soldier in the Franco-Prussian War between France and Prussia.\nFaith and spirituality.\nHis grandson, Louis Pasteur Vallery-Radot, wrote that Pasteur had kept from his Catholic background only a spiritualism without religious practice. However, Catholic observers often said that Pasteur remained an ardent Christian throughout his whole life, and his son-in-law wrote, in a biography of him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Absolute faith in God and in Eternity, and a conviction that the power for good given to us in this world will be continued beyond it, were feelings which pervaded his whole life; the virtues of the gospel had ever been present to him. Full of respect for the form of religion which had been that of his forefathers, he came simply to it and naturally for spiritual help in these last weeks of his life.\nThe \"Literary Digest\" of 18 October 1902 gives this statement from Pasteur that he prayed while he worked:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Posterity will one day laugh at the foolishness of modern materialistic philosophers. The more I study nature, the more I stand amazed at the work of the Creator. I pray while I am engaged at my work in the laboratory.\nMaurice Vallery-Radot, grandson of the brother of the son-in-law of Pasteur and outspoken Catholic, also holds that Pasteur fundamentally remained Catholic. According to both Pasteur Vallery-Radot and Maurice Vallery-Radot, the following well-known quotation attributed to Pasteur is apocryphal: \"The more I know, the more nearly is my faith that of the Breton peasant. Could I but know all I would have the faith of a Breton peasant's wife\". According to Maurice Vallery-Radot, the false quotation appeared for the first time shortly after the death of Pasteur. However, despite his belief in God, it has been said that his views were that of a freethinker rather than a Catholic, a spiritual more than a religious man. He was also against mixing science with religion.\nDeath.\nIn 1868, Pasteur suffered a severe stroke that paralysed the left side of his body, but he recovered. A stroke or uremia in 1894 severely impaired his health. Failing to fully recover, he died on 28 September 1895, near Paris. He was given a state funeral and was buried in the Cathedral of Notre Dame, but his remains were reinterred in the Pasteur Institute in Paris, in a vault covered in depictions of his accomplishments in Byzantine mosaics.\nPublications.\nPasteur's principal published works are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Botanist/styles.css\"/&gt;The standard author abbreviation Pasteur is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17741", "revid": "32589484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17741", "title": "Ludwig Wittgenstein", "text": "Austrian philosopher and logician (1889\u20131951)\nLudwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein ( ; ; 26 April 1889 \u2013 29 April 1951) was an Austro-British philosopher who worked primarily in logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language.\nFrom 1929 to 1947, Wittgenstein taught at the University of Cambridge. Despite his position, only one book of his philosophy was published during his life: the 75-page \"Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung\" (\"Logical-Philosophical Treatise\", 1921), which appeared, together with an English translation, in 1922 under the Latin title \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\". His only other published works were an article, \"Some Remarks on Logical Form\" (1929); a review of \"The Science of Logic\", by P. Coffey; and a children's dictionary. His voluminous manuscripts were edited and published posthumously. The first and best-known of this posthumous series is the 1953 book \"Philosophical Investigations\". A 1999 survey among American university and college teachers ranked the \"Investigations\" as the most important book of 20th-century philosophy, standing out as \"the one crossover masterpiece in twentieth-century philosophy, appealing across diverse specializations and philosophical orientations\".\nHis philosophy is often divided into an early period, exemplified by the \"Tractatus\", and a later period, articulated primarily in the \"Philosophical Investigations\". The \"early Wittgenstein\" was concerned with the logical relationship between propositions and the world, and he believed that by providing an account of the logic underlying this relationship, he had solved all philosophical problems. The \"later Wittgenstein\", however, rejected many of the assumptions of the \"Tractatus\", arguing that the meaning of words is best understood as their use within a given language game. More precisely, Wittgenstein wrote, \"For a \"large\" class of cases of the employment of the word 'meaning'\u2014though not for \"all\"\u2014this word can be explained in this way: the meaning of a word is its use in the language.\"\nBorn in Vienna into one of Europe's richest families, he inherited a fortune from his father in 1913. Before World War I, he \"made a very generous financial bequest to a group of poets and artists chosen by Ludwig von Ficker, the editor of \"Der Brenner\", from artists in need. These included [Georg] Trakl as well as Rainer Maria Rilke and the architect Adolf Loos\", as well as the painter Oskar Kokoschka. \"In autumn 1916, as his sister reported, 'Ludwig made a donation of a million crowns [equivalent to about $\u00a0million in 2024] for the construction of a 30\u00a0cm mortar.'\" Later, in a period of severe personal depression after World War I, he gave away his remaining fortune to his brothers and sisters. Three of his four older brothers died by separate acts of suicide.\nWittgenstein left academia several times: serving as an officer on the front line during World War I, where he was decorated a number of times for his courage; teaching in schools in remote Austrian villages, where he encountered controversy for using sometimes violent corporal punishment on both girls and boys (see, for example, the Haidbauer incident), especially during mathematics classes; working during World War II as a hospital porter in London; and working as a hospital laboratory technician at the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle upon Tyne.\nBackground.\nThe Wittgensteins.\nAccording to a family tree prepared in Jerusalem after World War II, Wittgenstein's paternal great-great-grandfather was Moses Meier, an Ashkenazi Jewish land agent who lived with his wife, Brendel Simon, in Bad Laasphe in the Principality of Wittgenstein, Westphalia. In July 1808, Napoleon issued a decree that everyone, including Jews, must adopt an inheritable family surname, so Meier's son, also Moses, took the name of his employers, the Sayn-Wittgensteins, and became Moses Meier Wittgenstein. His son, Hermann Christian Wittgenstein \u2014 who took the middle name \"Christian\" to distance himself from his Jewish background \u2014 married Fanny Figdor, also Jewish, who converted to Protestantism just before they married, and the couple founded a successful business trading in wool in Leipzig. Ludwig's grandmother Fanny was a first cousin of the violinist Joseph Joachim.\nThey had 11 children \u2013 among them Wittgenstein's father. Karl Otto Clemens Wittgenstein (1847\u20131913) became an industrial tycoon, and by the late 1880s was one of the richest men in Europe, with an effective monopoly on Austria's steel cartel. Thanks to Karl, the Wittgensteins became the second wealthiest family in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, only the Rothschilds being wealthier. Karl Wittgenstein was viewed as the Austrian equivalent of Andrew Carnegie, with whom he was friends, and was one of the wealthiest men in the world by the 1890s. As a result of his decision in 1898 to invest substantially in the Netherlands and in Switzerland as well as overseas, particularly in the US, the family was to an extent shielded from the hyperinflation that hit Austria in 1922. However, their wealth diminished due to post-1918 hyperinflation and subsequently during the Great Depression, although even as late as 1938 they owned 13 mansions in Vienna alone.\nEarly life.\nWittgenstein was ethnically Jewish. His mother was Leopoldine Maria Josefa Kalmus, known among friends as \"Poldi\". Her father was a Bohemian Jew, and her mother was an Austrian-Slovene Catholic\u2014she was Wittgenstein's only non-Jewish grandparent. Poldi was an aunt of the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich Hayek on his maternal side. Wittgenstein was born at 8:30\u00a0PM on 26 April 1889 in the \"Villa Wittgenstein\" at what is today Neuwaldegger Stra\u00dfe 38 in the suburban parish Neuwaldegg outside Vienna.\nKarl and Poldi had nine children in all\u2014four girls: Hermine, Margaret (Gretl), Helene, and a fourth daughter Dora who died as a baby; and five boys: Johannes (Hans), Kurt, Rudolf (Rudi), Paul\u2014who became a concert pianist despite losing an arm in World War I\u2014and Ludwig, who was the youngest of the family.\nThe children were baptized as Catholics, received formal Catholic instruction, and were raised in an exceptionally intense environment. The family was at the centre of Vienna's cultural life; Bruno Walter described the life at the Wittgensteins' palace as an \"all-pervading atmosphere of humanity and culture\". Karl was a leading patron of the arts, commissioning works by Auguste Rodin and financing the city's exhibition hall and art gallery, the Secession Building. Gustav Klimt painted a portrait of Wittgenstein's sister Margaret for her wedding, and Johannes Brahms and Gustav Mahler gave regular concerts in the family's numerous music rooms. Ludwig had intense blue eyes, according to philosopher Peter Hacker, who knew some people who met him, as no colour photos were taken of him.\nWittgenstein, who valued precision and discipline, never considered contemporary classical music acceptable. He said to his friend Drury in 1930: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Music came to a full stop with Brahms; and even in Brahms I can begin to hear the noise of machinery. Ludwig Wittgenstein himself had absolute pitch, and his devotion to music remained vitally important to him throughout his life; he made frequent use of musical examples and metaphors in his philosophical writings, and he was unusually adept at whistling lengthy and detailed musical passages. He also learnt to play the clarinet in his 30s. A fragment of music (three bars), composed by Wittgenstein, was discovered in one of his 1931 notebooks, by Michael Nedo, director of the Wittgenstein Institute in Cambridge.\nFamily temperament and the brothers' suicides.\nRay Monk writes that Karl's aim was to turn his sons into captains of industry; they were not sent to school lest they acquire bad habits but were educated at home to prepare them for work in Karl's industrial empire. Three of the five brothers later committed suicide. Psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald argues that Karl was a harsh perfectionist who lacked empathy, and that Wittgenstein's mother was anxious and insecure, unable to stand up to her husband. Johannes Brahms said of the family, whom he visited regularly: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They seemed to act towards one another as if they were at court.The family appeared to have a strong streak of depression running through it. Anthony Gottlieb tells a story about Paul practising on one of the pianos in the Wittgensteins' main family mansion, when he suddenly shouted at Ludwig in the next room:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe family palace housed seven grand pianos and each of the siblings pursued music \"with an enthusiasm that, at times, bordered on the pathological\". The eldest brother, Hans, was hailed as a musical prodigy. At the age of four, writes Alexander Waugh, Hans could identify the Doppler effect in a passing siren as a quarter-tone drop in pitch, and at five started crying \"Wrong! Wrong!\" when two brass bands in a carnival played the same tune in different keys. But he died in mysterious circumstances in May 1902, when he ran away to the US and disappeared from a boat in Chesapeake Bay, most likely having committed suicide.\nTwo years later, aged 22 and studying chemistry at the Berlin Academy, the third eldest brother, Rudi, committed suicide in a Berlin bar. He had asked the pianist to play Thomas Koschat's \"Verlassen, verlassen, verlassen bin ich\" (\"Forsaken, forsaken, forsaken am I\"), before mixing himself a drink of milk and potassium cyanide. He had left several suicide notes, one to his parents that said he was grieving over the death of a friend, and another that referred to his \"perverted disposition\". It was reported at the time that he had sought advice from the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, an organization that was campaigning against Paragraph 175 of the German Criminal Code, which prohibited homosexual sex. His father forbade the family from ever mentioning his name again. (Ludwig also may have been a closeted homosexual, who separated sexual intercourse from love, despising all forms of the former.) The second eldest brother, Kurt, an officer and company director, shot himself on 27 October 1918, just before the end of World War I, when the Austrian troops he was commanding refused to obey his orders and deserted \"en masse\". According to Gottlieb, Hermine had said Kurt seemed to carry \"the germ of disgust for life within himself\". Later, Ludwig wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I ought to have ... become a star in the sky. Instead of which I have remained stuck on earth.\n1903\u20131906: Realschule in Linz.\nRealschule in Linz.\nWittgenstein was taught at home by private tutors until he was 14 years old. Subsequently, he attended a school for three years. After the deaths of Hans and Rudi, Karl relented and allowed Paul and Ludwig to attend school. Waugh writes that it was too late for Wittgenstein to pass his exams for the more academic Gymnasium in Wiener Neustadt; having had no formal schooling, he failed his entrance exam and only barely managed after extra tutoring to pass the exam for the more technically oriented Imperial and Royal \"Realschule\" in Linz, a small state school whose 300 pupils included Adolf Hitler. In 1903, when he was 14, he began his three years of formal schooling there, lodging nearby during the term with the family of Josef Strigl, a teacher at the local gymnasium, the family giving him the nickname Luki.\nOn starting at the \"Realschule\", Wittgenstein had been moved forward a year. Historian Brigitte Hamann writes that he stood out from the other boys: he spoke an unusually pure form of High German with a stutter, dressed elegantly, and was sensitive and unsociable. Monk writes that the other boys made fun of him, singing after him: \"\"(Wittgenstein wanders wistfully Vienna-wards [in] worsening winds). In his leaving certificate, he received a top mark\u2014a 5\u2014in religious studies; a 2 for conduct and English; 3s for French, geography, history, mathematics, and physics; and 4s for German, chemistry, geometry, and freehand drawing. He had particular difficulty with spelling and failed his written German exam because of it. He wrote in 1931:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My bad spelling in youth, up to the age of about 18 or 19, is connected with the whole of the rest of my character (my weakness in study).\nFaith.\nWittgenstein was baptized as an infant by a Catholic priest and received formal instruction in Catholic doctrine as a child, as was common at the time. In an interview, his sister Gretl Stonborough-Wittgenstein says that their grandfather's \"strong, severe, partly ascetic Christianity\" was a strong influence on all the Wittgenstein children. While he was at the \"Realschule\", he decided he lacked religious faith. He nevertheless believed in the importance of the practice of confession. He wrote in his diaries that he had made some confessions to his oldest sister, Hermine, while he was at the \"Realschule\"; Monk speculates that it may have been about his loss of faith. He also discussed it with Gretl, his other sister, and began reading Arthur Schopenhauer's\"The World as Will and Representation\" per Gretl's recommendation. As a teenager, Wittgenstein adopted Arthur Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism. However, after he studied the philosophy of mathematics, he abandoned epistemological idealism for Gottlob Frege's conceptual realism. In later years, Wittgenstein was highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately \"shallow\" thinker:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One could call Schopenhauer a quite \"crude\" mind... Where real depth starts, his finishes. \nWittgenstein's engagement with Christianity and religion in general, to which he consistently expressed sincere and devoted sympathy, evolved, much as his philosophical outlook did. In 1912, Wittgenstein wrote to Bertrand Russell saying that Mozart and Beethoven were the 'actual' sons of God. However, Wittgenstein resisted organized religion, saying it was hard for him to \"bend the knee\", though his grandfather's beliefs continued to influence Wittgenstein\u2014as he said, \"I cannot help seeing every problem from a religious point of view.\" Wittgenstein referred to Augustine of Hippo in his \"Philosophical Investigations\". Philosophically, Wittgenstein's thought shows alignment with religious discourse. For example, he would become one of the century's fiercest critics of scientism.\nWittgenstein's religious belief emerged during his service for the Austrian army in World War I, and he was a devoted reader of Fyodor Dostoevsky's and Leo Tolstoy's religious writings. He viewed his wartime experiences as a trial in which he strove to conform to the will of God, and in a journal entry from 29 April 1915, he writes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Perhaps the nearness of death will bring me the light of life. May God enlighten me. I am a worm, but through God I become a man. God be with me. Amen. Around this time, Wittgenstein wrote that \"Christianity is indeed the only sure way to happiness\", but he rejected the idea that religious belief was merely thinking that a certain doctrine was true. From this time on, Wittgenstein viewed religious faith as a way of living and opposed rational argumentation or proofs for the existence of God.\nWith age, a deepening personal spirituality led to several elucidations and clarifications, as he untangled language problems in religion\u2014attacking, for example, the temptation to think of God's existence as a matter of scientific evidence. In 1947, finding it rather difficult to work, he wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have had a letter from an old friend in Austria, a priest. In it he says that he hopes my work will go well, if it should be God's will. Now that is all I want: if it should be God's will. In \"Culture and Value\", Wittgenstein writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Is what I am doing (my work in philosophy) really worth the effort? Yes, but only if a light shines on it from above. His close friend Norman Malcolm wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wittgenstein's mature life was strongly marked by religious thought and feeling. I am inclined to think that he was more deeply religious than are many people who correctly regard themselves as religious believers. Toward the end, Wittgenstein wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bach wrote on the title page of his \"Orgelb\u00fcchlein\", \"To the glory of the most high God, and that my neighbour may be benefited thereby\". That is what I would have liked to say about my work.\nInfluence of Otto Weininger.\nWhile a student at the \"Realschule\", Wittgenstein was influenced by Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger's 1903 book \"Geschlecht und Charakter\" (Sex and Character). Weininger, who was Jewish, argued that the concepts of male and female exist only as Platonic forms and that Jews tend to embody the form of Platonic femininity. Furthermore, he argued, whereas men are basically rational, women operate only at the level of their emotions and sexual organs. Jews, Weininger contended, are similar, saturated with femininity, with no sense of right and wrong, and no soul. Weininger argues that man must choose between his masculine and feminine sides, consciousness and unconsciousness, Platonic love and sexuality. Love and sexual desire stand in contradiction, and love between a woman and a man is therefore doomed to misery or immorality. The only life worth living is the spiritual one\u2014to live as a woman or a Jew means one has no right to live at all; the choice is genius or death. Weininger committed suicide, shooting himself in 1903, shortly after publishing the book. Wittgenstein, then 14, attended Weininger's funeral. Many years later, as a professor at the University of Cambridge, Wittgenstein distributed copies of Weininger's book to his bemused academic colleagues. He said that Weininger's arguments were wrong, but that it was the way they were wrong that was interesting. In a letter dated 23 August 1931, Wittgenstein wrote the following to G. E. Moore:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dear Moore,Thanks for your letter. I can quite imagine that you don't admire Weininger very much, what with that beastly translation and the fact that W. must feel very foreign to you. It is true that he is fantastic but he is great and fantastic. It isn't necessary or rather not possible to agree with him but the greatness lies in that with which we disagree. It is his enormous mistake which is great. I.e. roughly speaking if you just add a \"~\" to the whole book it says an important truth. In an unusual move, Wittgenstein took out a copy of Weininger's work on 1 June 1931 from the special order books section in the university library. He met Moore on 2 June, when he probably gave Moore this copy.\nJewish background and Hitler.\nDespite their and their forebears' Christianization, the Wittgensteins considered themselves Jewish. This was evident during the Nazi era, when an official assured Ludwig's sister that they would not be considered Jews under the racial policy of Nazi Germany. Indignant at the state's attempt to dictate her identity, she demanded papers certifying their Jewish lineage.\nIn his own writings, Wittgenstein frequently referred to himself as Jewish, often in a self-deprecating manner. For instance, while criticizing himself for being a \"reproductive\" rather than a \"productive\" thinker, he attributed this to his Jewish sense of identity. He wrote: \"The saint is the only Jewish 'genius'. Even the greatest Jewish thinker is no more than talented. (Myself for instance.)\"\nThere is much discussion regarding the extent to which Wittgenstein and his siblings\u2014who were of three-quarters Jewish descent\u2014saw themselves as Jews. The issue has arisen in particular regarding Wittgenstein's schooldays, because Adolf Hitler was, for a while, at the same school at the same time. Laurence Goldstein argues that it is \"overwhelmingly probable\" that the boys met each other and that Hitler would have disliked Wittgenstein, a \"stammering, precocious, precious, aristocratic upstart\". Strathern flatly states they never met. Other commentators have dismissed as irresponsible and uninformed any suggestion that Wittgenstein's wealth and unusual personality might have fed Hitler\u2019s antisemitism, in part because there is no indication that Hitler would have seen Wittgenstein as Jewish.\nWittgenstein and Hitler were born just six days apart, though Hitler had to re-sit his mathematics exam before being allowed into a higher class, while Wittgenstein was moved forward by one, so they ended up two grades apart at the \"Realschule\". Monk estimates that they were both at the school during the 1904\u20131905 school year, but says there is no evidence they had anything to do with each other. Several commentators have argued that a school photograph of Hitler may show Wittgenstein in the lower left corner.\nWittgenstein would later claim that \"[m]y thoughts are 100% Hebraic\". If so, Hans Sluga has argued,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;his was a self-doubting Judaism, which had always the possibility of collapsing into a destructive self-hatred (as it did in Weininger's case) but which also held an immense promise of innovation and genius. By \"Hebraic\", he meant to include the Christian tradition that descended from Judaism, in contradistinction to the Greek tradition, holding that good and evil could not be reconciled.\n1906\u20131913: University.\nEngineering at Berlin and Manchester.\nHe began his studies in mechanical engineering at the Technische Hochschule Berlin in Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 23 October 1906, lodging with the family of Professor Jolles. He attended for three semesters, and was awarded a diploma (\"Abgangzeugnis\") on 5 May 1908.\nDuring his time at the Institute, Wittgenstein developed an interest in aeronautics. He arrived at the Victoria University of Manchester in the spring of 1908 to study for a doctorate, full of plans for aeronautical projects, including designing and flying his own plane. He conducted research into the behaviour of kites in the upper atmosphere, experimenting at a meteorological observation site near Glossop in Derbyshire. Specifically, the Royal Meteorological Society researched and investigated the ionization of the upper atmosphere, by suspending instruments on balloons or kites. At Glossop, Wittgenstein worked under Professor of Physics Sir Arthur Schuster.\nHe also worked on the design of a propeller with small jet (Tip jet) engines on the end of its blades, something he patented in 1911, and that earned him a research studentship from the university in the autumn of 1908. At the time, contemporary propeller designs were not advanced enough to actually put Wittgenstein's ideas into practice, and it would be years before a blade design that could support Wittgenstein's innovative design was created. Wittgenstein's design required air and gas to be forced along the propeller arms to combustion chambers on the end of each blade, where they were then compressed by the centrifugal force exerted by the revolving arms and ignited. Propellers of the time were typically wood, whereas modern blades are made from pressed steel laminates as separate halves, which are then welded together. This gives the blade a hollow interior and thereby creates an ideal pathway for the air and gas.\nWork on the jet-powered propeller proved frustrating for Wittgenstein, who had very little experience working with machinery. Jim Bamber, a British engineer who was his friend and classmate at the time, reported that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;when things went wrong, which often occurred, he would throw his arms around, stomp about, and swear volubly in German.According to William Eccles, another friend from that period, Wittgenstein then turned to more theoretical work, focusing on the design of the propeller \u2013 a problem that required relatively sophisticated mathematics.\nIt was at this time that he became interested in the foundations of mathematics, particularly after reading Bertrand Russell's \"The Principles of Mathematics\" (1903), and Gottlob Frege's \"The Foundations of Arithmetic\", vol. 1 (1893) and vol. 2 (1903). Wittgenstein's sister Hermine said he became obsessed with mathematics as a result, and was anyway losing interest in aeronautics. He decided instead that he needed to study logic and the foundations of mathematics, describing himself as in a \"constant, indescribable, almost pathological state of agitation\". In the summer of 1911 he visited Frege at the University of Jena to show him some philosophy of mathematics and logic he had written, and to ask whether it was worth pursuing. He wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was shown into Frege's study. Frege was a small, neat man with a pointed beard who bounced around the room as he talked. He absolutely wiped the floor with me, and I felt very depressed; but at the end he said 'You must come again', so I cheered up. I had several discussions with him after that. Frege would never talk about anything but logic and mathematics, if I started on some other subject, he would say something polite and then plunge back into logic and mathematics.\nArrival at Cambridge.\nWittgenstein wanted to study with Frege, but Frege suggested he attend the University of Cambridge to study under Russell, so on 18\u00a0October 1911 Wittgenstein arrived unannounced at Russell's rooms in Trinity College. Russell was having tea with C. K. Ogden, when, according to Russell, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;an unknown German [\"sic\"] appeared, speaking very little English but refusing to speak German. He turned out to be a man who had learned engineering at Charlottenburg, but during this course had acquired, by himself, a passion for the philosophy of mathematics &amp; has now come to Cambridge on purpose to hear me.He was soon not only attending Russell's lectures but dominating them. The lectures were poorly attended and Russell often found himself lecturing only to C. D. Broad, E. H. Neville, and H. T. J. Norton. Wittgenstein started following him after lectures back to his rooms to discuss more philosophy, until it was time for the evening meal in Hall. Russell grew irritated; he wrote to his lover Lady Ottoline Morrell: \"My German friend threatens to be an infliction.\"\nRussell soon came to believe that Wittgenstein was a genius, especially after he had examined Wittgenstein's written work. He wrote in November\u00a01911 that he had at first thought Wittgenstein might be a crank, but soon decided he was a genius: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Some of his early views made the decision difficult. He maintained, for example, at one time that all existential propositions are meaningless. This was in a lecture room, and I invited him to consider the proposition: 'There is no hippopotamus in this room at present.' When he refused to believe this, I looked under all the desks without finding one; but he remained unconvinced. Three months after Wittgenstein's arrival Russell told Morrell:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I love him &amp; feel he will solve the problems I am too old to solve ... He is \"the\" young man one hopes for. Wittgenstein later told David Pinsent that Russell's encouragement had proven his salvation, and had ended nine years of loneliness and suffering, during which he had continually thought of suicide. In encouraging him to pursue philosophy and in justifying his inclination to abandon engineering, Russell had, quite literally, saved Wittgenstein's life. The role-reversal between Bertrand Russell and Wittgenstein was soon such that Russell wrote in 1916 after Wittgenstein had criticized Russell's own work:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His [Wittgenstein's] criticism, tho' I don't think you realized it at the time, was an event of first-rate importance in my life, and affected everything I have done since. I saw that he was right, and I saw that I could not hope ever again to do fundamental work in philosophy.\nCambridge Moral Sciences Club and Apostles.\nIn 1912 Wittgenstein joined the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club, an influential discussion group for philosophy dons and students, delivering his first paper there on 29\u00a0November that year, a four-minute talk defining philosophy as \"all those primitive propositions which are assumed as true without proof by the various sciences\".He dominated the society and for a time would stop attending in the early 1930s after complaints that he gave no one else a chance to speak.\nThe club became infamous within popular philosophy because of a meeting on 25\u00a0October 1946 at Richard Braithwaite's rooms in King's College, Cambridge, where Karl Popper, another Viennese philosopher, had been invited as the guest speaker. Popper's paper was \"Are there philosophical problems?\", in which he struck up a position against Wittgenstein's, contending that problems in philosophy are real, not just linguistic puzzles as Wittgenstein argued. Accounts vary as to what happened next, but Wittgenstein apparently started waving a hot poker, demanding that Popper give him an example of a moral rule. Popper offered one \u2013 \"Not to threaten visiting speakers with pokers\" \u2014 at which point Russell told Wittgenstein he had misunderstood and Wittgenstein left. Popper maintained that Wittgenstein \"stormed out\", but it had become accepted practice for him to leave early (because of his aforementioned ability to dominate discussion). It was the only time the philosophers, three of the most eminent in the 20th CE, were ever in the same room together. The minutes record that the meeting was \"charged to an unusual degree with a spirit of controversy\".\nCambridge Apostles.\nThe economist John Maynard Keynes also invited him to join the Cambridge Apostles, an elite secret society formed in 1820, which both Bertrand Russell and G. E. Moore had joined as students, but Wittgenstein did not greatly enjoy it and attended only infrequently. Russell had been worried that Wittgenstein would not appreciate the group's raucous style of intellectual debate, its precious sense of humour, and the fact that the members were often in love with one another. He was admitted in 1912 but resigned almost immediately because he could not tolerate the style of discussion. Nevertheless, the Cambridge Apostles allowed Wittgenstein to participate in meetings again in the 1920s when he returned to Cambridge. Reportedly, Wittgenstein also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club.\nFrustrations at Cambridge.\nWittgenstein was quite vocal about his depression in his years at Cambridge and before he went to war; on many an occasion, he told Russell of his woes. His mental anguish seemed to stem from two sources: his work and his personal life. Wittgenstein made numerous remarks to Russell about the logic driving him mad. Wittgenstein also stated to Russell that he \"felt the curse of those who have half a talent\". He later expressed this same worry and told of being in mediocre spirits due to his lack of progress in his logical work. Monk writes that Wittgenstein lived and breathed logic, and a temporary lack of inspiration plunged him into despair. Wittgenstein told of his work in logic affecting his mental status in an extreme way. However, he also told Russell another story. Around Christmas, in 1913, he wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;how can I be a logician before I'm a human being? For the most important thing is coming to terms with myself! He also told Russell on an occasion in Russell's rooms that he was worried about logic and his sins; also, once upon arriving in Russell's rooms one night, Wittgenstein announced to Russell that he would kill himself once he left. Of things Wittgenstein personally told Russell, Ludwig's temperament was also recorded in the diary of David Pinsent. Pinsent wrote &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have to be frightfully careful and tolerant when he gets these sulky fits and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am afraid he is in an even more sensitive neurotic state just now than usual when talking about Wittgenstein's emotional fluctuations.\nSexual orientation and relationship with David Pinsent.\nWittgenstein had romantic relations with both men and women. He is generally believed to have fallen in love with at least three men, and had a relationship with the latter two: David Hume Pinsent in 1912, Francis Skinner in 1930, and Ben Richards in the late 1940s. He later claimed that, as a teenager in Vienna, he had had an affair with a woman. Additionally, in the 1920s Wittgenstein fell in love with a young Swiss woman, Marguerite Respinger, sculpting a bust modelled on her and seriously considering marriage, albeit on condition that they would not have children; she decided that he was not right for her.\nWittgenstein's relationship with David Pinsent occurred during an intellectually formative period and is well documented. Bertrand Russell introduced Wittgenstein to Pinsent in the summer of 1912. Pinsent was a mathematics undergraduate and a relation of David Hume. Wittgenstein and he soon became very close. The men worked together on experiments in the psychology laboratory about the role of rhythm in the appreciation of music, and Wittgenstein delivered a paper on the subject to the British Psychological Association in Cambridge in 1912. They also travelled together, including to Iceland in September 1912\u2014the expenses paid by Wittgenstein, including first class travel, the hiring of a private train, and new clothes and spending money for Pinsent. In addition to Iceland, Wittgenstein and Pinsent travelled to Norway in 1913. In determining their destination, Wittgenstein and Pinsent visited a tourist office in search of a location that would fulfil the following criteria: a small village located on a fjord, a location away from tourists, and a peaceful destination to allow them to study logic and law. Choosing \u00d8ystese, Wittgenstein and Pinsent arrived in the small village on 4 September 1913. During a vacation lasting almost three weeks, Wittgenstein was able to work vigorously on his studies. The immense progress on logic during their stay led Wittgenstein to express to Pinsent his notion of leaving Cambridge and returning to Norway to continue his work on logic. Pinsent's diaries provide valuable insights into Wittgenstein's personality: sensitive, nervous, and attuned to the tiniest slight or change in mood from Pinsent. Pinsent also writes of Wittgenstein being \"absolutely sulky and snappish\" at times, as well. In his diaries Pinsent wrote about shopping for furniture with Wittgenstein in Cambridge when the latter was given rooms in Trinity. Most of what they found in the stores was not minimalist enough for Wittgenstein's aesthetics: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I went and helped him interview a lot of furniture at various shops ... It was rather amusing: He is terribly fastidious and we led the shopman a frightful dance, Vittgenstein [sic] ejaculating \"No \u2013 Beastly!\" to 90\u00a0percent of what he shewed us!He wrote in May 1912 that Wittgenstein had just begun to study the history of philosophy: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He expresses the most naive surprise that all the philosophers he once worshipped in ignorance are after all stupid and dishonest and make disgusting mistakes!The last time they saw each other was on 8\u00a0October 1913 at Lordswood House in Birmingham, then residence of the Pinsent family: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wittgenstein left to live in Norway.\n1913\u20131920: World War I and the \"Tractatus\".\nWork on \"Logik\".\nKarl Wittgenstein died on 20\u00a0January 1913, and after receiving his inheritance Wittgenstein became one of the wealthiest men in Europe. He donated some of his money, at first anonymously, to Austrian artists and writers, including Rainer Maria Rilke and Georg Trakl. Trakl requested to meet his benefactor but in 1914 when Wittgenstein went to visit, Trakl had killed himself. Wittgenstein came to feel that he could not get to the heart of his most fundamental questions while surrounded by other academics, and so in 1913, he retreated to the village of Skjolden in Norway, where he rented the second floor of a house for the winter. He later saw this as one of the most productive periods of his life, writing \"Logik\" (\"Notes on Logic\"), the predecessor of much of the \"Tractatus\".\nWhile in Norway, Wittgenstein learned Norwegian to converse with the local villagers, and Danish to read the works of the Danish philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard. He adored the \"quiet seriousness\" of the landscape but even Skjolden became too busy for him. He soon designed a small wooden house which was erected on a remote rock overlooking the Eidsvatnet Lake just outside the village. The place was called \"\u00d8sterrike\" (Austria) by locals. He lived there during various periods until the 1930s, and substantial parts of his works were written there. (The house was broken up in 1958 to be rebuilt in the village. A local foundation collected donations and bought it in 2014; it was dismantled again and re-erected at its original location; the inauguration took place on 20\u00a0June 2019 with international attendance.)\nIt was during this time that Wittgenstein began addressing what he considered to be a central issue in \"Notes on Logic\", a general decision procedure for determining the truth value of logical propositions that would stem from a single primitive proposition. He became convinced during this time that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; All the propositions of logic are generalizations of tautologies and all generalizations of tautologies are propositions of logic. There are no other logical propositions. Based on this, Wittgenstein argued that propositions of logic express their truth or falsehood in the sign itself, and one need not know anything about the constituent parts of the proposition to determine it true or false. Rather, one simply needs to identify the statement as a tautology (true), a contradiction (false), or neither.\nThe problem lay in forming a primitive proposition that encompassed this and would act as the basis for all of logic. As he stated in correspondence with Russell in late 1913, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The big question now is, how must a system of signs be constituted in order to make every tautology recognizable as such IN ONE AND THE SAME WAY? This is the fundamental problem of logic!The importance Wittgenstein placed upon this fundamental problem was so great that he believed if he did not solve it, he had no right or desire to live. Despite this apparent life-or-death importance, Wittgenstein had given up on this primitive proposition by the time he wrote the \"Tractatus\". The \"Tractatus\" does not offer any general process for identifying propositions as tautologies; in a simpler manner, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology. This shift to understanding tautologies through mere identification or recognition occurred in 1914 when Wittgenstein asked Moore to assist him in dictating his notes.\nAt Wittgenstein's insistence, Moore, who was now a Cambridge don, visited him in Norway in April 1914, reluctantly because Wittgenstein exhausted him. David Edmonds and John Eidinow write that Wittgenstein regarded Moore, an internationally known philosopher, as an example of how far someone could get in life with \"\"absolutely no intelligence whatever\".\" In Norway it was clear that Moore was expected to act as Wittgenstein's secretary, taking down his notes, with Wittgenstein falling into a rage when Moore got something wrong.\nBrian McGuinness notes that a letter from Wittgenstein to Moore of 7 May 1914 indicates that he had intended to submit an essay he referred to as \"Logik\" as the dissertation required for his completion of a bachelor's degree. McGuinness asserts that the essay is unlikely to be identical with \"Notes on Logic\" but suggests it is at least summarised in \"Notes dictated to G. E. Moore in Norway\" (published in Appendix II of \"Notebooks 1914-1916\") and that \"much speaks\" for the supposition that it was indeed these notes that Wittgenstein had intended to submit. According to the relevant regulations, however, such a dissertation had to contain a preface and notes in which the student stated the sources on which he had relied and the extent to which he had done so, qualities lacking in Wittgenstein's essay. Moore, though himself secretary of the relevant Moral Sciences degrees committee, showed the essay to Walter Morley Fletcher \u2013 perhaps, McGuinness suggests, \"for an impartial opinion from an outsider\" \u2013 and had \"been told that it could not possibly pass for a dissertation\" and wrote to Wittgenstein accordingly,\nWittgenstein was furious, writing to Moore: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If I am not worth your making an exception for me \"even in some\" STUPID \"details\" then I may as well go to HELL directly; and if I \"am\" worth it and you don't do it then \u2013 by God \u2013 \"you\" might go there.Moore was apparently distraught; writing in his diary that he felt sick and could not get the letter out of his head. Wittgenstein wrote to Moore In July of that year conceding that he had \"probably no sufficient reason to write to you as I did\" but the two did not speak again until 1929.\nMilitary service.\nOn the outbreak of World War\u00a0I, Wittgenstein immediately volunteered for the Austro-Hungarian Army, despite being eligible for a medical exemption. He served first on a ship and then in an artillery workshop \"several miles from the action\". He was wounded in an accidental explosion, and hospitalised to Krak\u00f3w. In March\u00a01916, he was posted to a fighting unit on the front line of the Russian front, as part of the Austrian 7th\u00a0Army, where his unit was involved in some of the heaviest fighting, defending against the Brusilov Offensive. Wittgenstein directed the fire of his own artillery from an observation post in no-man's land against Allied troops\u2014one of the most dangerous jobs since he was targeted by enemy fire. He was decorated with the Military Merit Medal with Swords on the Ribbon, and was commended by the army for \"exceptionally courageous behaviour, calmness, sang-froid, and heroism\" that \"won the total admiration of the troops\". In January\u00a01917, he was sent as a member of a howitzer regiment to the Russian front, where he won several more medals for bravery including the Silver Medal for Valour, First Class. In 1918, he was promoted to lieutenant and sent to the Italian front as part of an artillery regiment. For his part in the final Austrian offensive of June\u00a01918, he was recommended for the Gold Medal for Valour, one of the highest honours in the Austrian army, but was instead awarded the Band of the Military Service Medal with Swords\u2014it being decided that this particular action, although extraordinarily brave, had been insufficiently consequential to merit the highest honour.\nThroughout the war, he kept notebooks in which he frequently wrote philosophical reflections alongside personal remarks, including his contempt for the character of the other soldiers. His notebooks also attest to his philosophical and spiritual reflections, and it was during this time that he experienced a kind of religious awakening. In his entry from 11 June 1915, Wittgenstein states that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The meaning of life, i.e. the meaning of the world, we can call God. And connect with this the comparison of God to a father. To pray is to think about the meaning of life. and on 8 July that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To believe in God means to understand the meaning of life. To believe in God means to see that the facts of the world are not the end of the matter. To believe in God means to see that life has a meaning ... When my conscience upsets my equilibrium, then I am not in agreement with Something. But what is this? Is it \"the world\"? Certainly it is correct to say: Conscience is the voice of God. He discovered Leo Tolstoy's 1896 \"The Gospel in Brief\" at a bookshop in Tarn\u00f3w, and carried it everywhere, recommending it to anyone in distress, to the point where he became known to his fellow soldiers as \"the man with the gospels\".\nThe extent to which \"The Gospel in Brief\" influenced Wittgenstein can be seen in the \"Tractatus\", in the unique way both books number their sentences. In 1916 Wittgenstein read Dostoevsky's \"The Brothers Karamazov\" so often that he knew whole passages of it by heart, particularly the speeches of the elder Zosima, who represented for him a powerful Christian ideal, a holy man \"who could see directly into the souls of other people\".\nIain King has suggested that Wittgenstein's writing changed substantially in 1916 when he started confronting much greater dangers during frontline fighting. Russell said he returned from the war a changed man, one with a deeply mystical and ascetic attitude.\nCompletion of the \"Tractatus\".\nIn the summer of 1918, Wittgenstein took military leave and went to stay in one of his family's Vienna summer houses, Neuwaldegg. It was there in August\u00a01918 that he completed the \"Tractatus\", which he submitted with the title \"Der Satz\" (German: proposition, sentence, phrase, set, but also \"leap\") to the publishers Jahoda and Siegel.\nA series of events around this time left him deeply upset. On 13\u00a0August, his uncle Paul died. On 25\u00a0October, he learned that Jahoda and Siegel had decided not to publish the \"Tractatus\", and on 27\u00a0October, his brother Kurt killed himself, the third of his brothers to commit suicide. It was around this time he received a letter from David Pinsent's mother to say that Pinsent had been killed in a plane crash on 8\u00a0May. Wittgenstein was distraught to the point of being suicidal. He was sent back to the Italian front after his leave and, as a result of the defeat of the Austrian army, he was captured by Allied forces on 3\u00a0November in Trentino. He subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp.\nHe returned to his family in Vienna on 25\u00a0August 1919, by all accounts physically and mentally spent. He apparently talked incessantly about suicide, terrifying his sisters and brother Paul. He decided to do two things: to enroll in a teacher training college as an elementary school teacher, and to get rid of his fortune. In 1914, it had been providing him with an income of 300,000\u00a0Kronen a year, but by 1919 was worth a great deal more, with a sizable portfolio of investments in the United States and the Netherlands. He divided it among his siblings, except for Margarete, insisting that it not be held in trust for him. His family saw him as ill and acquiesced.\n1920\u20131928: Teaching, the \"Tractatus\", Haus Wittgenstein.\nTeacher training in Vienna.\nIn September\u00a01919 he enrolled in the \"Lehrerbildungsanstalt\" (teacher training college) in the \"Kundmanngasse\" in Vienna. His sister Hermine said that Wittgenstein working as an elementary teacher was like using a precision instrument to open crates, but the family decided not to interfere. Thomas Bernhard, more critically, wrote of this period in Wittgenstein's life: \"the multi-millionaire as a village schoolmaster is surely a piece of perversity\".\nTeaching posts in Austria.\nIn the summer of 1920, Wittgenstein worked as a gardener for a monastery. At first, he applied under a false name, for a teaching post at Reichenau, and was awarded the job, but he declined it when his identity was discovered. As a teacher, he wished to no longer be recognized as a member of the Wittgenstein family. In response, his brother Paul wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is out of the question, really completely out of the question, that anybody bearing our name and whose elegant and gentle upbringing can be seen a thousand paces off, would not be identified as a member of our family... That one can neither simulate nor dissimulate anything including a refined education I need hardly tell you.\nIn 1920, Wittgenstein was given his first job as a primary school teacher in Trattenbach, under his real name, in a remote village of a few hundred people. His first letters describe it as beautiful, but, in October\u00a01921, he wrote to Russell: \"I am still at Trattenbach, surrounded, as ever, by odiousness and baseness. I know that human beings on the average are not worth much anywhere, but here they are much more good-for-nothing and irresponsible than elsewhere.\" He was soon the object of gossip among the villagers, who found him eccentric at best. He did not get on well with the other teachers; when he found his lodgings too noisy, he made a bed for himself in the school kitchen. He was an enthusiastic teacher, offering late-night extra tuition to several of the students, something that did not endear him to the parents, though some of them came to adore him; his sister Hermine occasionally watched him teach and said the students \"literally crawled over each other in their desire to be chosen for answers or demonstrations\".\nTo the less able, it seems that he became something of a tyrant. The first two hours of each day were devoted to mathematics, hours that Monk writes some of the pupils recalled years later with horror. They reported that he caned the boys and boxed their ears, and also that he pulled the girls' hair; this was not unusual at the time for boys, but for the villagers he went too far in doing it to the girls too; girls were not expected to understand algebra, much less have their ears boxed over it. The corporal punishment apart, Monk writes that he quickly became a village legend, shouting \"Krautsalat!\" (\"coleslaw\" \u2013 i.e. shredded cabbage) when the headmaster played the piano, and \"Nonsense!\" when a priest was answering children's questions.\nPublication of the \"Tractatus\".\nWhile Wittgenstein was living in isolation in rural Austria, the \"Tractatus\" was published to considerable interest, first in German in 1921 as \"Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung\", part of Wilhelm Ostwald's journal \"Annalen der Naturphilosophie\", though Wittgenstein was not happy with the result and called it a pirate edition. Russell had agreed to write an introduction to explain why it was important because it was otherwise unlikely to have been published: it was difficult if not impossible to understand, and Wittgenstein was unknown in philosophy. In a letter to Russell, Wittgenstein wrote \"The main point is the theory of what can be expressed (gesagt) by prop[osition]s \u2013 i.e. by language \u2013 (and, which comes to the same thing, what can be \"thought\") and what can not be expressed by pro[position]s, but only shown (gezeigt); which, I believe, is the cardinal problem of philosophy.\" But Wittgenstein was not happy with Russell's help. He had lost faith in Russell, finding him glib and his philosophy mechanistic, and felt he had fundamentally misunderstood the \"Tractatus\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatleft\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:left; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nAn English translation was prepared in Cambridge by Frank Ramsey, a mathematics undergraduate at King's commissioned by C. K. Ogden. It was Moore who suggested \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" for the title, an allusion to Baruch Spinoza's \"Tractatus Theologico-Politicus.\" Initially, there were difficulties in finding a publisher for the English edition too, because Wittgenstein was insisting it appear without Russell's introduction; Cambridge University Press turned it down for that reason. Finally in 1922 an agreement was reached with Wittgenstein that Kegan Paul would print a bilingual edition with Russell's introduction and the Ramsey-Ogden translation. This is the translation that was approved by Wittgenstein, but it is problematic in a number of ways. Wittgenstein's English was poor at the time, and Ramsey was a teenager who had only recently learned German, so philosophers often prefer to use a 1961 translation by David Pears and Brian McGuinness.\nAn aim of the \"Tractatus\" is to reveal the relationship between language and the world: what can be said about it, and what can only be shown. Wittgenstein argues that the logical structure of language provides the limits of meaning. The limits of language, for Wittgenstein, are the limits of philosophy. Much of philosophy involves attempts to say the unsayable: \"What we can say at all can be said clearly,\" he argues. Anything beyond that \u2013 religion, ethics, aesthetics, the mystical \u2013 cannot be discussed. They are not in themselves nonsensical, but any statement about them must be. He wrote in the preface: \"The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rather \u2013 not to thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit (we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought).\"\nThe book is 75\u00a0pages long \u2013 \"As to the shortness of the book, I am \"awfully sorry for it\" ... If you were to squeeze me like a lemon you would get nothing more out of me,\" he told Ogden \u2013 and presents seven numbered propositions (1\u20137), with various sub-levels (1, 1.1, 1.11):\nVisit from Frank Ramsey, Puchberg.\nIn September 1922 he moved to a secondary school in a nearby village, Hassbach, but considered the people there just as bad \u2013 \"These people are not human \"at all\" but loathsome worms,\" he wrote to a friend \u2013 and he left after a month. In November he began work at another primary school, this time in Puchberg in the Schneeberg mountains. There, he told Russell, the villagers were \"one-quarter animal and three-quarters human\".\nFrank P. Ramsey visited him on 17\u00a0September 1923 to discuss the \"Tractatus\", which he had already reviewed for \"Mind\". During their talks, a number of corrections were made to both the German and English texts in Ramsey's copy of the book, most of which would be incorporated into the second edition of 1933. \nRamsey reported in a letter home that Wittgenstein was living frugally in one tiny whitewashed room that had space only for a bed, a washstand, a small table, and one small hard chair. Ramsey shared an evening meal with him of coarse bread, butter, and cocoa. Wittgenstein's school hours were eight to twelve or one, and he had afternoons free. After Ramsey returned to Cambridge, a long campaign began among Wittgenstein's friends to persuade him to return to Cambridge and away from what they saw as a hostile environment for him. He was accepting no help even from his family. Ramsey wrote to John Maynard Keynes:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Wittgenstein's family] are very rich and extremely anxious to give him money or do anything for him in any way, and he rejects all their advances; even Christmas presents or presents of invalid's food, when he is ill, he sends back. And this is not because they aren't on good terms but because he won't have any money he hasn't earned ... It is an awful pity.\nTeaching continues, Otterthal; Standard Austrian German; Haidbauer incident.\nHe moved schools again in September\u00a01924, this time to Otterthal, near Trattenbach; the socialist headmaster, Josef Putre, was someone Wittgenstein had become friends with while at Trattenbach. While he was there, he wrote a 42-page pronunciation and spelling dictionary for the children, \"W\u00f6rterbuch f\u00fcr Volksschulen\", published in Vienna in 1926 by , the only book of his apart from the \"Tractatus\" that was published in his lifetime. A first edition sold in 2005 for \u00a375,000. In 2020, an English version entitled \"Word Book\" translated by art historian Bettina Funcke and illustrated by artist / publisher Paul Chan was released.\nThe \"W\u00f6rterbuch f\u00fcr Volksschulen\" is remarkable for its pluricentric conceptualization, decades before such a linguistic approach existed. In Wittgenstein's preface to the \"W\u00f6rterbuch\", which was withheld at the publisher's request but which survives in a 1925 typescript, Wittgenstein takes a clear stance for a Standard Austrian German, which he aimed to document for elementary pupils in the text. Wittgenstein states (translated from German) thatThe dictionary should include only words, but all such words, that are known to Austrian elementary students. Therefore it excludes many a good German word unusual in Austria.Wittgenstein is through his school dictionary one of the earliest proponents of a German with more than one standard variety. This is especially noteworthy in the German language context, in which expert debates over the status and relevance of standard varieties are so common that some speak of a One Standard German Axiom in that field today. Wittgenstein was taking a stance for multiple standards, against such an axiom, long before these debates ensued.\nAn incident occurred in April\u00a01926 and became known as \"Der Vorfall Haidbauer\" (the Haidbauer incident). Josef Haidbauer was an 11-year-old pupil whose father had died and whose mother worked as a local maid. He was a slow learner, and one day Wittgenstein hit him two or three times on the head, causing him to collapse. Wittgenstein carried him to the headmaster's office, then quickly left the school, bumping into a parent, Herr Piribauer, on the way out. Piribauer had been sent for by the children when they saw Haidbauer collapse; Wittgenstein had previously pulled Piribauer's daughter, Hermine, so hard by the ears that her ears had bled. Piribauer said that when he met Wittgenstein in the hall that day: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I called him all the names under the sun. I told him he wasn't a teacher, he was an animal-trainer! And that I was going to fetch the police right away!Piribauer tried to have Wittgenstein arrested, but the village's police station was empty, and when he tried again the next day he was told Wittgenstein had disappeared. On 28 April 1926, Wittgenstein handed in his resignation to Wilhelm Kundt, a local school inspector, who tried to persuade him to stay; however, Wittgenstein was adamant that his days as a schoolteacher were over. Proceedings were initiated in May, and the judge ordered a psychiatric report; in August\u00a01926 a letter to Wittgenstein from a friend, Ludwig H\u00e4nsel, indicates that hearings were ongoing, but nothing is known about the case after that. Alexander Waugh writes that Wittgenstein's family and their money may have had a hand in covering things up. Waugh writes that Haidbauer died shortly afterwards of haemophilia; Monk says he died when he was 14 of leukaemia.\nTen years later, in 1936, as part of a series of \"confessions\" he engaged in that year, Wittgenstein appeared without warning at the village saying he wanted to confess personally and ask for pardon from the children he had hit. He visited at least four of the children, including Hermine Piribauer, who apparently replied only with a \"Ja, ja,\" though other former students were more hospitable. Monk writes that the purpose of these confessions was not&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;to hurt his pride, as a form of punishment; it was to dismantle it \u2013 to remove a barrier, as it were, that stood in the way of honest and decent thought. Of the apologies, Wittgenstein wrote, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This brought me into more settled waters... and to greater seriousness.\nThe Vienna Circle.\nThe \"Tractatus\" was now the subject of much debate among philosophers, and Wittgenstein was a figure of increasing international fame. In particular, a discussion group of philosophers, scientists, and mathematicians, known as the Vienna Circle, had developed purportedly as a result of the inspiration they had received from reading the \"Tractatus\". Though many assume that Wittgenstein was a part of the Vienna Circle, in reality, he was not. German philosopher Oswald Hanfling writes bluntly: \"Wittgenstein was never a member of the Circle, though he was in Vienna during much of the time.\" Indeed it is doubtful, as Brian McGuinness notes, that Wittgenstein ever attended any meetings of the Vienna Circle proper. Yet, Hanfling asserts, \"his influence on the Circle's thought was at least as important as that of any of its members.\"\nPhilosopher A. C. Grayling, however, contends that while certain superficial similarities between Wittgenstein's early philosophy and logical positivism led its members to study the \"Tractatus\" in detail and to arrange discussions with him, Wittgenstein's influence on the Circle was rather limited. The fundamental philosophical views of Circle had been established before they met Wittgenstein and had their origins in the British empiricists, Ernst Mach, and the logic of Frege and Russell. Whatever influence Wittgenstein did have on the Circle was largely limited to Moritz Schlick and Friedrich Waismann and, even in these cases, had little lasting effect on their positivism. Grayling states that \"it is no longer possible to think of the \"Tractatus\" as having inspired a philosophical movement, as most earlier commentators claimed.\"\nSchlick first met Wittgenstein in 1927 and did so several times before the latter would agree to be introduced to some of his colleagues. From 1927 to 1928 Wittgenstein met with small groups that included Schlick, almost always Waismann, sometimes Rudolf Carnap, and sometimes Herbert Feigl and his future wife Maria Kesper. From 1929, Wittgenstein's contact with the Circle would be restricted to meetings with Schlick and Waismann only. Conversations from these later meetings (December 1929 up to March 1932) were recorded by Waismann and eventually published in English translation in \"Ludwig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle\" (1979). By the time they began Schlick had tasked Waismann with writing an exposition of Wittgenstein's philosophy. This project would undergo radical transformation but the final text, inspired by Wittgenstein but very much Waismann's own work, was eventually published in English as \"The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy\" (1965). Some further draft materials for the project and dictations were published in English under the editorship of Gordon Baker in 2003.\nIn his autobiography, Rudolf Carnap describes Wittgenstein as the thinker who most inspired him. However, he also wrote that \"there was a striking difference between Wittgenstein's attitude toward philosophical problems and that of Schlick and myself. Our attitude toward philosophical problems was not very different from that which scientists have toward their problems.\" As for Wittgenstein:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His point of view and his attitude toward people and problems, even theoretical problems, were much more similar to those of a creative artist than to those of a scientist; one might almost say, similar to those of a religious prophet or a seer... When finally, sometimes after a prolonged arduous effort, his answers came forth, his statement stood before us like a newly created piece of art or a divine revelation ... the impression he made on us was as if insight came to him as through divine inspiration, so that we could not help feeling that any sober rational comment or analysis of it would be a profanation.\nHaus Wittgenstein.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatleft\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:left; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:20em; \"\nIn 1926 Wittgenstein was again working as a gardener for a number of months, this time at the monastery of H\u00fctteldorf, where he had also inquired about becoming a monk. His sister, Margaret, invited him to help with the design of her new townhouse in Vienna's \"Kundmanngasse\". Wittgenstein, his friend Paul Engelmann, and a team of architects developed a spare modernist house. In particular, Wittgenstein focused on the windows, doors, and radiators, demanding that every detail be exactly as he specified. When the house was nearly finished Wittgenstein had an entire ceiling raised 30\u00a0mm so that the room had the exact proportions he wanted. Monk writes that \"This is not so marginal as it may at first appear, for it is precisely these details that lend what is otherwise a rather plain, even ugly house its distinctive beauty.\"\nIt took him a year to design the door handles and another to design the radiators. Each window was covered by a metal screen that weighed , moved by a pulley Wittgenstein designed. Bernhard Leitner, author of \"The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein\", said there is barely anything comparable in the history of interior design: \"It is as ingenious as it is expensive. A metal curtain that could be lowered into the floor.\"\nThe house was finished by December\u00a01928 and the family gathered there at Christmas to celebrate its completion. Wittgenstein's sister Hermine wrote: \"Even though I admired the house very much. ... It seemed indeed to be much more a dwelling for the gods.\" Wittgenstein said \"the house I built for Gretl is the product of a decidedly sensitive ear and \"good\" manners, and expression of great \"understanding\"... But \"primordial\" life, wild life striving to erupt into the open \u2013 that is lacking.\" Monk comments that the same might be said of the technically excellent, but austere, terracotta sculpture Wittgenstein had modelled of Marguerite Respinger in 1926, and that, as Russell first noticed, this \"wild life striving to be in the open\" was precisely the substance of Wittgenstein's philosophical work.\n1929\u20131941: Fellowship at Cambridge.\nPhD and fellowship.\nAccording to Feigl (as reported by Monk), upon attending a conference in Vienna by mathematician L. E. J. Brouwer, Wittgenstein remained quite impressed, taking into consideration the possibility of a \"return to Philosophy\". At the urging of Ramsey and others, Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in 1929. Keynes wrote in a letter to his wife: \"Well, God has arrived. I met him on the 5.15 train.\" Despite this fame, he could not initially work at Cambridge as he had failed to obtain a degree, so he applied as an advanced undergraduate. Russell noted that his previous residency was sufficient to fulfil eligibility requirements for a PhD, and urged him to offer the \"Tractatus\" as his thesis. Frank Ramsey was formally appointed as his supervisor. As the \"Tractatus\" was already completed and published this was a nominal role. He did however, at Wittgenstein's request, fulfill the administrative requirement that every PhD be accompanied with an abstract by writing the same himself. Wittgenstein was examined in 1929 by Russell and Moore At the end of the thesis defence, Wittgenstein clapped the two examiners on the shoulder and said, '\"Don't worry, I know you'll never understand it.\" Braithwaite, quoting from memory, recalls that Moore wrote in the examiner's report: \"I myself consider that this is a work of genius; but, even if I am completely mistaken and it is nothing of the sort, it is well above the standard required for the Ph.D. degree.\" Wittgenstein was appointed as a lecturer and was made a fellow of Trinity College.\nOn 17 November 1929 he delivered a lecture on ethics to the Heretics Society in Cambridge.\nAnschluss.\nFrom 1936 to 1937, Wittgenstein lived again in Norway, where he worked on the \"Philosophical Investigations\". In the winter of 1936/7, he delivered a series of \"confessions\" to close friends, most of them about minor infractions like white lies, in an effort to cleanse himself. In 1938, he travelled to Ireland to visit Maurice O'Connor Drury, a friend who became a psychiatrist, and considered such training himself, with the intention of abandoning philosophy for it. \nWhile he was in Ireland in March 1938, Germany annexed Austria in the \"Anschluss\"; the Viennese Wittgenstein was now a Jew under the 1935 Nuremberg racial laws, because three of his grandparents had been born as Jews. He would also, in July, become by law a 'national' of the enlarged Germany being, as a Jew, ineligible to become a Reich citizen. The Nuremberg Laws classified people as Jews (\"Volljuden\") if they had three or four Jewish grandparents, and as mixed blood (\"Mischling\") if they had one or two. It meant, among other things, that the Wittgensteins were restricted in whom they could marry or have sex with, and where they could work.\nAfter the Anschluss, his brother Paul left almost immediately for England, and later the US. The Nazis discovered his relationship with Hilde Schania, a brewer's daughter with whom he had had two children but whom he had never married, though he did later. Because she was not Jewish, he was served with a summons for (racial defilement). He told no one he was leaving the country, except for Hilde who agreed to follow him. He left so suddenly and quietly that for a time people believed he was the fourth Wittgenstein brother to have committed suicide.\nWittgenstein began to investigate acquiring British or Irish citizenship with the help of Keynes, and apparently had to confess to his friends in England that he had earlier misrepresented himself to them as having just one Jewish grandparent, when in fact he had three.\nA few days before the invasion of Poland, Hitler personally granted \"Mischling\" status to the Wittgenstein siblings. In 1939 there were 2,100 applications for \"Mischling\" status (or for 'promotions' within such status) and Hitler granted only 12. Anthony Gottlieb writes that the pretext was that their paternal grandfather had been the bastard son of a German prince, which allowed the Reichsbank to claim foreign currency, stocks and 1700\u00a0kg of gold held in Switzerland by a Wittgenstein family trust. Gretl, an American citizen by marriage, started the negotiations over the racial status of their grandfather, and the family's large foreign currency reserves were used as a bargaining tool. Paul had escaped to Switzerland and then the US in July\u00a01938, and disagreed with the negotiations, leading to a permanent split between the siblings. After the war, when Paul was performing in Vienna, he did not visit Hermine who was dying there, and he had no further contact with Ludwig or Gretl.\nProfessor of philosophy.\nAfter G. E. Moore resigned the chair in philosophy in 1939, Wittgenstein was elected. He was naturalised as a British subject shortly after on 12 April 1939. In July\u00a01939 he travelled to Vienna to assist Gretl and his other sisters, visiting Berlin for one day to meet an official of the Reichsbank. After this, he travelled to New York to persuade Paul, whose agreement was required, to back the scheme. The required \"Befreiung\" was granted in August\u00a01939. The unknown amount signed over to the Nazis by the Wittgenstein family, a week or so before the outbreak of war, included amongst many other assets 1,700\u00a0kg of gold.\nNorman Malcolm, at the time a post-graduate research fellow at Cambridge, describes his first impressions of Wittgenstein in 1938: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At a meeting of the Moral Science Club, after the paper for the evening was read and the discussion started, someone began to stammer a remark. He had extreme difficulty in expressing himself and his words were unintelligible to me. I whispered to my neighbour, 'Who's that?': he replied, 'Wittgenstein'. I was astonished because I had expected the famous author of the \"Tractatus\" to be an elderly man, whereas this man looked \"young\" \u2013 perhaps about 35. (His actual age was 49.) His face was lean and brown, his profile was aquiline and strikingly beautiful, his head was covered with a curly mass of brown hair. I observed the respectful attention that everyone in the room paid to him. After this unsuccessful beginning, he did not speak for a time but was obviously struggling with his thoughts. His look was concentrated, he made striking gestures with his hands as if he was discoursing ... Whether lecturing or conversing privately, Wittgenstein always spoke emphatically and with a distinctive intonation. He spoke excellent English, with the accent of an educated Englishman, although occasional Germanisms would appear in his constructions. His voice was resonant ... His words came out, not fluently, but with great force. Anyone who heard him say anything knew that this was a singular person. His face was remarkably mobile and expressive when he talked. His eyes were deep and often fierce in their expression. His whole personality was commanding, even imperial.\nDescribing Wittgenstein's lecture programme, Malcolm continues: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is hardly correct to speak of these meetings as 'lectures', although this is what Wittgenstein called them. For one thing, he was carrying on original research in these meetings ... Often the meetings consisted mainly of dialogue. Sometimes, however, when he was trying to draw a thought out of himself, he would prohibit, with a peremptory motion of the hand, any questions or remarks. There were frequent and prolonged periods of silence, with only an occasional mutter from Wittgenstein, and the stillest attention from the others. During these silences, Wittgenstein was extremely tense and active. His gaze was concentrated; his face was alive; his hands made arresting movements; his expression was stern. One knew that one was in the presence of extreme seriousness, absorption, and force of intellect ... Wittgenstein was a frightening person at these classes.\nAfter work, the philosopher would often relax by watching Westerns, where he preferred to sit at the very front of the cinema, or reading detective stories especially the ones written by Norbert Davis. Norman Malcolm wrote that Wittgenstein would rush to the cinema when class ended.\nBy this time, Wittgenstein's view on the foundations of mathematics had changed considerably. In his early 20s, Wittgenstein had thought logic could provide a solid foundation, and he had even considered updating Russell and Whitehead's \"Principia Mathematica\". Now he denied there were any mathematical facts to be discovered. He gave a series of lectures on mathematics, discussing this and other topics, documented in a book, with some of his lectures and discussions between him and several students, including the young Alan Turing, who described Wittgenstein as \"a \"very\" peculiar man\". The two had many discussions about the relationship between computational logic and everyday notions of truth.\nWittgenstein's lectures from this period have also been discussed by another of his students, the Greek philosopher and educator Helle Lambridis. Wittgenstein's teachings in the years 1940\u20131941 were used in the mid-1950s by Lambridis to write a long text in the form of an imagined dialogue with him, where she begins to develop her own ideas about resemblance in relation to language, elementary concepts and basic-level mental images. Initially, only a part of it was published in 1963 in the German education theory review \"Club Voltaire\", but the entire imagined dialogue with Wittgenstein was published after Lambridis's death by her archive holder, the Academy of Athens, in 2004.\n1941\u20131947: Guy's Hospital and Royal Victoria Infirmary.\nMonk writes that Wittgenstein found it intolerable that a war (World War II) was going on and he was teaching philosophy. He grew angry when any of his students wanted to become professional philosophers.\nIn September\u00a01941, he asked John Ryle, the brother of the philosopher Gilbert Ryle, if he could get a manual job at Guy's Hospital in London. John Ryle was professor of medicine at Cambridge and had been involved in helping Guy's prepare for the Blitz. Wittgenstein told Ryle he would die slowly if left at Cambridge, and he would rather die quickly. He started working at Guy's shortly afterwards as a dispensary porter, delivering drugs from the pharmacy to the wards where he apparently advised the patients not to take them. In the new year of 1942, Ryle took Wittgenstein to his home in Sussex to meet his wife who had been determined to meet him. His son recorded the weekend in his diary;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wink is awful strange [sic] \u2013 not a very good english speaker, keeps on saying 'I mean' and 'its \"tolerable\"' meaning intolerable. The hospital staff were not told he was one of the world's most famous philosophers, though some of the medical staff did recognize him \u2013 at least one had attended Moral Sciences Club meetings \u2013 but they were discreet. \"Good God, don't tell anybody who I am!\" Wittgenstein begged one of them. Some of them nevertheless called him Professor Wittgenstein, and he was allowed to dine with the doctors. He wrote on 1\u00a0April 1942: \"I no longer feel any hope for the future of my life. It is as though I had before me nothing more than a long stretch of living death. I cannot imagine any future for me other than a ghastly one. Friendless and joyless.\" It was at this time that Wittgenstein had an operation at Guy's to remove a gallstone that had troubled him for some years.\nHe had developed a friendship with Keith Kirk, a working-class teenage friend of Francis Skinner, the mathematics undergraduate he had had a relationship with until Skinner's death in 1941 from polio. Skinner had given up academia, thanks at least in part to Wittgenstein's influence, and had been working as a mechanic in 1939, with Kirk as his apprentice. Kirk and Wittgenstein struck up a friendship, with Wittgenstein giving him lessons in physics to help him pass a City and Guilds exam. During his period of loneliness at Guy's he wrote in his diary: \"For ten days I've heard nothing more from K, even though I pressed him a week ago for news. I think that he has perhaps broken with me. A \"tragic\" thought!\" Kirk had in fact got married, and they never saw one another again.\nWhile Wittgenstein was at Guy's he met Basil Reeve, a young doctor with an interest in philosophy, who, with R. T. Grant, was studying the effect of wound shock (a state associative to hypovolaemia) on air-raid casualties. When the Blitz ended there were fewer casualties to study. In November\u00a01942, Grant and Reeve moved to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, to study road traffic and industrial casualties. Grant offered Wittgenstein a position as a laboratory assistant at a wage of \u00a34 per week, and he lived in Newcastle (at 28\u00a0Brandling Park, Jesmond) from 29\u00a0April 1943 until February\u00a01944. While there he worked\n and associated socially with Erasmus Barlow, a great-grandson of Charles Darwin.\nIn the summer of 1946, Wittgenstein thought often of leaving Cambridge and resigning his position as Chair. Wittgenstein grew further dismayed at the state of philosophy, particularly about articles published in the journal \"Mind\". It was around this time that Wittgenstein fell in love with Ben Richards (who was a medical student), writing in his diary, \"The only thing that my love for B. has done for me is this: it has driven the other small worries associated with my position and my work into the background.\" On 30\u00a0September, Wittgenstein wrote about Cambridge after his return from Swansea, \"Everything about the place repels me. The stiffness, the artificiality, the self-satisfaction of the people. The university atmosphere nauseates me.\"\nWittgenstein had only maintained contact with Fouracre, from Guy's hospital, who had joined the army in 1943 after his marriage, only returning in 1947. Wittgenstein maintained frequent correspondence with Fouracre during his time away displaying a desire for Fouracre to return home urgently from the war.\nIn May\u00a01947, Wittgenstein addressed a group of Oxford philosophers for the first time at the Jowett Society. The discussion was on the validity of Descartes' \"Cogito ergo sum\", where Wittgenstein ignored the question and applied his own philosophical method. Harold Arthur Prichard who attended the event was not pleased with Wittgenstein's methods;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wittgenstein: If a man says to me, looking at the sky, 'I think it will rain, therefore I exist', I do not understand him.Prichard: That's all very fine; what we want to know is: is the \"cogito\" valid or not?\n1947\u20131951: Final years.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatleft\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:left; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:20em; \"\nWittgenstein resigned from the professorship at Cambridge in 1947 to concentrate on his writing, and in 1947 and 1948 travelled to Ireland, staying at Ross's Hotel in Dublin and at a farmhouse in Redcross, County Wicklow, where he began the manuscript MS\u00a0137, volume\u00a0R. Seeking solitude he moved to a holiday cottage in Rosroe overlooking Killary Harbour, Connemara owned by Drury's brother.\nHe also accepted an invitation from Norman Malcolm, then a professor at Cornell University, to stay with him and his wife for several months in Ithaca, New York. He made the trip in April\u00a01949, although he told Malcolm he was too unwell to do philosophical work: \"I haven't done any work since the beginning of March &amp; I haven't had the strength of even trying to do any.\" A doctor in Dublin had diagnosed anaemia and prescribed iron and liver pills. The details of Wittgenstein's stay in the US are recounted in Norman Malcolm's \"Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir\". During his summer in the US, Wittgenstein began his epistemological discussions, in particular his engagement with philosophical scepticism, that would eventually become the final fragments \"On Certainty\".\nHe returned to London, where he was diagnosed with an inoperable prostate cancer, which had spread to his bone marrow. He spent the next two months in Vienna, where his sister Hermine died on 11\u00a0February 1950; he went to see her every day, but she was hardly able to speak or recognize him. \"Great loss for me and all of us,\" he wrote. \"Greater than I would have thought.\" He moved frequently after Hermine's death, staying with various friends: to Cambridge in April\u00a01950, where he stayed with G. H. von\u00a0Wright; to London to stay with Rush Rhees; then to Oxford to see Elizabeth Anscombe, writing to Norman Malcolm that he was doing hardly any philosophy. He went to Norway in August with Ben Richards, then returned to Cambridge, where on 27\u00a0November he moved into \"Storey's End\" at 76\u00a0Storey's Way, the home of his doctor, Edward Bevan, and his wife Joan; he had told them he did not want to die in a hospital, so they said he could spend his last days in their home instead. Joan at first was afraid of Wittgenstein, but they soon became good friends.\nBy the beginning of 1951, it was clear that he had little time left. He wrote a new will in Oxford on 29\u00a0January, naming Rhees as his executor, and Anscombe and von\u00a0Wright as his literary administrators, and wrote to Norman Malcolm that month to say, \"My mind's completely dead. This isn't a complaint, for I don't really suffer from it. I know that life must have an end once and that mental life can cease before the rest does.\" In February, he returned to the Bevans' home to work on MS\u00a0175 and MS\u00a0176. These and other manuscripts were later published as \"Remarks on Colour\" and \"On Certainty\". He wrote to Malcolm on 16\u00a0April, 13\u00a0days before his death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An extraordinary thing happened to me. About a month ago I suddenly found myself in the right frame of mind for doing philosophy. I had been \"absolutely\" certain that I'd never again be able to do it. It's the first time after more than 2\u00a0years that the curtain in my brain has gone up. \u2013 Of course, so far I've only worked for about 5\u00a0weeks &amp; it may be all over by tomorrow; but it bucks me up a lot now.\nDeath.\nWittgenstein began work on his final manuscript, MS\u00a0177, on 25\u00a0April 1951. It was his 62nd birthday on 26\u00a0April. He went for a walk the next afternoon, and wrote his last entry that day, 27\u00a0April. That evening, he became very ill; when his doctor told him he might live only a few days, he reportedly replied, \"Good!\". Joan stayed with him throughout that night, and just before losing consciousness for the last time on 28\u00a0April, he told her: \"Tell them I've had a wonderful life.\" Norman Malcolm describes this as a \"strangely moving utterance\".\nFour of Wittgenstein's former students arrived at his bedside \u2013 Ben Richards, Elizabeth Anscombe, Yorick Smythies, and Maurice O'Connor Drury. Anscombe and Smythies were Catholics, and, at the latter's request, a Dominican friar, Father Conrad Pepler, also attended. (Wittgenstein had asked for a \"priest who was not a philosopher\" and had met with Pepler several times.) They were at first unsure what Wittgenstein would have wanted, but then remembered he had said he hoped his Catholic friends would pray for him, so they did, and he was pronounced dead shortly afterwards.\nWittgenstein was given a Catholic burial at Ascension Parish Burial Ground in Cambridge. Drury later said he had been troubled ever since about whether that was the right thing to do. In 2015 the ledger gravestone was refurbished by the British Wittgenstein Society.\nAs for his religious views, Wittgenstein was said to be greatly interested in Catholicism, and was sympathetic to it, but did not consider himself to be a Catholic. According to Norman Malcolm, Wittgenstein saw Catholicism more as a way of life than as a set of beliefs he held, considering that he did not accept any religious faith.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wittgenstein has no goal to either support or reject religion; his only interest is to keep discussions, whether religious or not, clear. \u2014 T. Labron (2006)\nWittgenstein was said by some commentators to be agnostic, in a qualified sense.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatleft\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:left; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:; \"\n1953: Publication of the \"Philosophical Investigations\".\nThe \"Blue Book\", a set of notes dictated to his class at Cambridge in 1933\u20131934, contains the seeds of Wittgenstein's later thoughts on language and is widely read as a turning point in his philosophy of language.\n\"Philosophical Investigations\" was published in two parts in 1953. Most of Part I was ready for printing in 1946, but Wittgenstein withdrew the manuscript from his publisher. The shorter Part\u00a0II was added by his editors, Elizabeth Anscombe and Rush Rhees. Wittgenstein asks the reader to think of language as a multiplicity of language games within which parts of language develop and function. He argues that the bewitchments of philosophical problems arise from philosophers' misguided attempts to consider the meaning of words independently of their context, usage, and grammar \u2014 what he called \"language gone on holiday\".\nAccording to Wittgenstein, philosophical problems arise when language is forced from its proper home into a metaphysical environment, where all the familiar and necessary landmarks and contextual clues are removed. He describes this metaphysical environment as like being on frictionless ice: where the conditions are apparently perfect for a philosophically and logically perfect language, all philosophical problems can be solved without the muddying effects of everyday contexts; but where, precisely because of the lack of friction, language can in fact do no work at all. Wittgenstein argues that philosophers must leave the frictionless ice and return to the \"rough ground\" of ordinary language in use. Much of the \"Investigations\" consists of examples of how the first false steps can be avoided, so that philosophical problems are dissolved, rather than solved: \"The clarity we are aiming at is indeed \"complete\" clarity. But this simply means that the philosophical problems should \"completely\" disappear.\"\nOther posthumous publications.\nWittgenstein's archive of unpublished papers included 83\u00a0manuscripts, 46\u00a0typescripts and 11 dictations, amounting to an estimated 20,000\u00a0pages. Choosing among repeated drafts, revisions, corrections, and loose notes, editorial work has found nearly one-third of the total suitable for print. An Internet facility hosted by the University of Bergen allows access to images of almost all the material and to search the available transcriptions. In 2011, two new boxes of Wittgenstein papers, thought to have been lost during the Second World War, were found.\nWhat became the \"Philosophical Investigations\" was already close to completion in 1951. Wittgenstein's three literary executors prioritized it, both because of its intrinsic importance and because he had explicitly intended publication. The book was published in 1953.\nAt least three other works were more or less finished. Two were already \"bulky typescripts\", the \"Philosophical Remarks\" and \"Philosophical Grammar\". Literary co-executor G. H. von Wright stated, \"They are virtually completed works. But Wittgenstein did not publish them.\" The third was \"Remarks on Colour\". \"He wrote \"i.a.\" a fair amount on colour-concepts, and this material he did excerpt and polish, reducing it to a small compass.\"\nLegacy.\nAssessment.\nBertrand Russell described Wittgenstein as \"perhaps the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived; passionate, profound, intense, and dominating.\"\nIn 1999, a survey among American university and college teachers ranked the \"Investigations\" as the most important book of 20th-century philosophy, standing out as \"the one crossover masterpiece in twentieth-century philosophy, appealing across diverse specializations and philosophical orientations\". The \"Investigations\" also ranked 54th on a list of most influential twentieth-century works in cognitive science prepared by the University of Minnesota's Center for Cognitive Sciences.\nDuncan J. Richter of the Virginia Military Institute, writing for the \"Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy\", has described Wittgenstein as \"one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century, and regarded by some as the most important since Immanuel Kant.\" Peter Hacker argues that Wittgenstein's influence on 20th-century analytical philosophy can be attributed to his early influence on the Vienna Circle and later influence on the Oxford \"ordinary language\" school and Cambridge philosophers.\nHe is considered by some to be one of the greatest philosophers of the modern era. But despite its deep influence on analytical philosophy, Wittgenstein's work did not always gain a positive reception. Argentine-Canadian philosopher Mario Bunge asserts that \"Wittgenstein is popular because he is trivial.\"\nScholarly interpretation.\nThere are many diverging interpretations of Wittgenstein's thought. In the words of his friend and colleague Georg Henrik von Wright: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was of the opinion ... that his ideas were generally misunderstood and distorted even by those who professed to be his disciples. He doubted that he would be better understood in the future. He once said that he felt as though he were writing for people who would think in a quite different way, breathe a different air of life, from that of present-day men.\nSince Wittgenstein's death, scholarly interpretations of his philosophy have differed. Scholars have differed on the continuity between the so-called early Wittgenstein and the so-called late(r) Wittgenstein (that is, the difference between his views expressed in the \"Tractatus\" and those in \"Philosophical Investigations\"), with some seeing the two as starkly disparate and others stressing the gradual transition between the two works through analysis of Wittgenstein's unpublished papers (the \"Nachlass\").\nThe New Wittgenstein.\nOne significant debate in Wittgenstein scholarship concerns the work of interpreters who are referred to under the banner of The New Wittgenstein school such as Cora Diamond, Alice Crary, and James F. Conant. While the \"Tractatus\", particularly in its conclusion, seems paradoxical and self-undermining, New Wittgenstein scholars advance a \"therapeutic\" understanding of Wittgenstein's work \u2013 \"an understanding of Wittgenstein as aspiring, not to advance metaphysical theories, but rather to help us work ourselves out of confusions we become entangled in when philosophizing.\" To support this goal, the New Wittgenstein scholars propose a reading of the \"Tractatus\" as \"plain nonsense\" \u2013 arguing it does not attempt to convey a substantive philosophical project but instead simply tries to push the reader to abandon philosophical speculation. The therapeutic approach traces its roots to the philosophical work of John Wisdom and of Oets Kolk Bouwsma.54\nThe therapeutic approach is not without critics: Hans-Johann Glock argues that the \"plain nonsense\" reading of the \"Tractatus\" \"is at odds with the external evidence, writings and conversations in which Wittgenstein states that the \"Tractatus\" is committed to the idea of ineffable insight.\"56\nHans Sluga and Rupert Read have advocated a \"post-therapeutic\" or \"liberatory\" interpretation of Wittgenstein.\nBertrand Russell.\nIn October 1944, Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge around the same time as did Russell, who had been living in the United States for several years. Russell returned to Cambridge after a backlash in the US to his writings on morals and religion. Wittgenstein said of Russell's works to Drury:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Russell's books should be bound in two colours...those dealing with mathematical logic in red \u2013 and all students of philosophy should read them; those dealing with ethics and politics in blue \u2013 and no one should be allowed to read them.Russell made similar disparaging comments about Wittgenstein's later work:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have not found in Wittgenstein's \"Philosophical Investigations\" anything that seemed to me interesting and I do not understand why a whole school finds important wisdom in its pages. Psychologically this is surprising. The earlier Wittgenstein, whom I knew intimately, was a man addicted to passionately intense thinking, profoundly aware of difficult problems of which I, like him, felt the importance, and possessed (or at least so I thought) of true philosophical genius. The later Wittgenstein, on the contrary, seems to have grown tired of serious thinking and to have invented a doctrine which would make such an activity unnecessary. I do not for one moment believe that the doctrine which has these lazy consequences is true. I realize, however, that I have an overpoweringly strong bias against it, for, if it is true, philosophy is, at best, a slight help to lexicographers, and at worst, an idle tea-table amusement.\nSaul Kripke.\nSaul Kripke's 1982 book \"Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language\" contends that the central argument of Wittgenstein's \"Philosophical Investigations\" is a devastating rule-following paradox that undermines the possibility of ever following rules in our use of language. Kripke writes that this paradox is \"the most radical and original sceptical problem that philosophy has seen to date\".\nKripke's book generated a large secondary literature, divided between those who find his sceptical problem interesting and perceptive, and others, such as John McDowell, Stanley Cavell, Gordon Baker, Peter Hacker, Colin McGinn, and Peter Winch who argue that his scepticism of meaning is a pseudo-problem that stems from a confused, selective reading of Wittgenstein. Kripke's position has, however, recently been defended against these and other attacks by the Cambridge philosopher Martin Kusch (2006).\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA collection of Ludwig Wittgenstein's manuscripts is held by Trinity College, Cambridge.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* https://, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.\n* http://, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010."}
{"id": "17742", "revid": "31238856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17742", "title": "Luxemburg", "text": ""}
{"id": "17743", "revid": "48683141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17743", "title": "Low Saxon", "text": "Group of Low German dialects\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nLow Saxon (, ), also known as West Low German () are a group of Low German dialects spoken in parts of the Netherlands, northwestern Germany and southern Denmark (in North Schleswig by parts of the German-speaking minority). It is one of two dialect groups, the other being East Low German.\nExtent.\nThe language area comprises the North German states of Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia (the Westphalian part), Bremen, Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein and Saxony-Anhalt (the northwestern areas around Magdeburg) as well as the northeast of the Netherlands (i.e. Dutch Low Saxon, spoken in Groningen, Drenthe, Overijssel, northern Gelderland and Urk) and the Schleswigsch dialect spoken by the North Schleswig Germans in the southernmost part of Denmark.\nIn the south the Benrath line and Uerdingen line isoglosses form the border with the area, where West Central German variants of High German are spoken.\nList of dialects.\nNetherlands.\nWhile Dutch is a Low Franconian language, the Dutch Low Saxon varieties form a dialect continuum with Westphalian. They consist of:\nSituation in the Netherlands.\nA 2005 study found that there were approximately 1.8 million \"daily speakers\" of Low Saxon in the Netherlands. 53% spoke Low Saxon or Low Saxon and Dutch at home and 71% could speak it. According to another study the percentage of speakers among parents dropped from 34% in 1995 to 15% in 2011. The percentage of speakers among their children dropped from 8% to 2% in the same period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17744", "revid": "18377792", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17744", "title": "Lanthanum", "text": "element with atomic number 57 (La)\nLanthanum is a chemical element; it has symbol La and atomic number\u00a057. It is a soft, ductile, silvery-white metal that tarnishes slowly when exposed to air. It is the first and the prototype of the lanthanide series, a group of 15\u00a0similar elements between lanthanum and lutetium in the periodic table. Lanthanum is traditionally counted among the rare earth elements. Like most other rare earth elements, its usual oxidation state is +3, although some compounds are known with an oxidation state of +2. Lanthanum has no biological role in humans but is used by some bacteria. It is not particularly toxic to humans but does show some antimicrobial activity.\nLanthanum usually occurs together with cerium and the other rare earth elements. Lanthanum was first found by the Swedish chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander in 1839 as an impurity in cerium nitrate \u2013 hence the name \"lanthanum\", from the ancient Greek (), meaning 'to lie hidden'. Although it is classified as a rare earth element, lanthanum is the 28th most abundant element in the Earth's crust, almost three times as abundant as lead. In minerals such as monazite and bastn\u00e4site, lanthanum composes about a quarter of the lanthanide content. It is extracted from those minerals by a process of such complexity that pure lanthanum metal was not isolated until 1923.\nLanthanum compounds have numerous applications including catalysts, additives in glass, carbon arc lamps for studio lights and projectors, ignition elements in lighters and torches, electron cathodes, scintillators, and gas tungsten arc welding electrodes. Lanthanum carbonate is used as a phosphate binder to treat high levels of phosphate in the blood accompanied by kidney failure.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical.\nLanthanum is the first element and prototype of the lanthanide series. In the periodic table, it appears to the right of the alkaline earth metal barium and to the left of the lanthanide cerium. Lanthanum is generally considered the first of the f-block elements by authors writing on the subject. The 57\u00a0electrons of a lanthanum atom are arranged in the configuration [Xe]5d16s2, with three valence electrons outside the noble gas core. In chemical reactions, lanthanum almost always gives up these three valence electrons from the 5d and 6s subshells to form the +3 oxidation state, achieving the stable configuration of the preceding noble gas xenon. Some lanthanum(II) compounds are also known, but they are usually much less stable. Lanthanum monoxide (LaO) produces strong absorption bands in some stellar spectra.\nAmong the lanthanides, lanthanum is exceptional as it has no 4f electrons as a single gas-phase atom. Thus it is only very weakly paramagnetic, unlike the strongly paramagnetic later lanthanides (with the exceptions of the last two, ytterbium and lutetium, where the 4f shell is completely full). However, the 4f shell of lanthanum can become partially occupied in chemical environments and participate in chemical bonding. For example, the melting points of the trivalent lanthanides (all but europium and ytterbium) are related to the extent of hybridisation of the 6s, 5d, and 4f electrons (lowering with increasing 4f involvement), and lanthanum has the second-lowest melting point among them: 920\u00a0\u00b0C. (Europium and ytterbium have lower melting points because they delocalise about two electrons per atom rather than three.) This chemical availability of f orbitals justifies lanthanum's placement in the f-block despite its anomalous ground-state configuration (which is merely the result of strong interelectronic repulsion making it less profitable to occupy the 4f shell, as it is small and close to the core electrons).\nThe lanthanides become harder as the series is traversed: as expected, lanthanum is a soft metal. Lanthanum has a relatively high resistivity of 615\u00a0n\u03a9m at room temperature; in comparison, the value for the good conductor aluminium is only 26.50\u00a0n\u03a9m. Lanthanum is the least volatile of the lanthanides. Like most of the lanthanides, lanthanum has a hexagonal crystal structure at room temperature (\u03b1-La). At 310\u00a0\u00b0C, lanthanum changes to a face-centered cubic structure (\u03b2-La), and at 865\u00a0\u00b0C, it changes to a body-centered cubic structure (\u03b3-La).\nChemical.\nAs expected from periodic trends, lanthanum has the largest atomic radius of the lanthanides. Hence, it is the most reactive among them, tarnishing quite rapidly in air, turning completely dark after several hours and can readily burn to form lanthanum(III) oxide, La2O3, which is almost as basic as calcium oxide. A centimeter-sized sample of lanthanum will corrode completely in a year as its oxide spalls off like iron rust, instead of forming a protective oxide coating like aluminium, scandium, yttrium, and lutetium. Lanthanum reacts with the halogens at room temperature to form the trihalides, and upon warming will form binary compounds with the nonmetals nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, phosphorus, boron, selenium, silicon and arsenic. Lanthanum reacts slowly with water to form lanthanum(III) hydroxide, La(OH)3. In dilute sulfuric acid, lanthanum readily forms the aquated tripositive ion [La(H2O)9]3+: This is colorless in aqueous solution since La3+ has no d or f electrons. Lanthanum is the strongest and hardest base among the rare earth elements, which is again expected from its being the largest of them.\nSome lanthanum(II) compounds are also known, but they are much less stable. Therefore, in officially naming compounds of lanthanum its oxidation number always is to be mentioned.\nIsotopes.\nNaturally occurring lanthanum is made up of two isotopes, the stable 139La and the primordial long-lived radioisotope 138La. 139La is by far the most abundant, making up 99.911% of natural lanthanum: it is produced in the s-process (slow neutron capture, which occurs in low- to medium-mass stars) and the r-process (rapid neutron capture, which occurs in core-collapse supernovae). It is the only stable isotope of lanthanum. The very rare isotope 138La is one of the few primordial odd\u2013odd nuclei, with a long half-life of 1.03\u00d71011 years. It is one of the proton-rich p-nuclei which cannot be produced in the s- or r-processes. 138La, along with the even rarer 180mTa, is produced in the \u03bd-process, where neutrinos interact with stable nuclei. All other lanthanum isotopes are synthetic: with the exception of 137La, which has a half-life of about 60,000\u00a0years, all of them have half-lives less than two days, and most have half-lives less than a minute. The isotopes 139La and 140La occur as fission products of uranium.\nCompounds.\nLanthanum oxide is a white solid that can be prepared by direct reaction of its constituent elements. Due to the large size of the La3+ ion, La2O3 adopts a hexagonal 7-coordinate structure that changes to the 6-coordinate structure of scandium oxide (Sc2O3) and yttrium oxide (Y2O3) at high temperature. When it reacts with water, lanthanum hydroxide is formed: a lot of heat is evolved in the reaction and a hissing sound is heard. Lanthanum hydroxide will react with atmospheric carbon dioxide to form the basic carbonate.\nLanthanum fluoride is insoluble in water and can be used as a qualitative test for the presence of La3+. The heavier halides are all very soluble deliquescent compounds. The anhydrous halides are produced by direct reaction of their elements, as heating the hydrates causes hydrolysis: for example, heating hydrated LaCl3 produces LaOCl.\nLanthanum reacts exothermically with hydrogen to produce the dihydride LaH2, a black, pyrophoric, brittle, conducting compound with the calcium fluoride structure. This is a non-stoichiometric compound, and further absorption of hydrogen is possible, with a concomitant loss of electrical conductivity, until the more salt-like LaH3 is reached. Like LaI2 and LaI, LaH2 is probably an electride compound.\nDue to the large ionic radius and great electropositivity of La3+, there is not much covalent contribution to its bonding and hence it has a limited coordination chemistry, like yttrium and the other lanthanides. Lanthanum oxalate does not dissolve very much in alkali-metal oxalate solutions, and [La(acac)3(H2O)2] decomposes around 500\u00a0\u00b0C. Oxygen is the most common donor atom in lanthanum complexes, which are mostly ionic and often have high coordination numbers over 6 : 8 is the most characteristic, forming square antiprismatic and dodecadeltahedral structures. These high-coordinate species, reaching up to coordination number\u00a012 with the use of chelating ligands such as in La2(SO4)3\u00b7 9(H2O), often have a low degree of symmetry because of stereo-chemical factors.\nLanthanum chemistry tends not to involve due to the electron configuration of the element: thus its organometallic chemistry is quite limited. The best characterized organolanthanum compounds are the cyclopentadienyl complex La(C5H5)3, which is produced by reacting anhydrous LaCl3 with NaC5H5 in tetrahydrofuran, and its methyl-substituted derivatives.\nHistory.\nIn 1751, the Swedish mineralogist Axel Fredrik Cronstedt discovered a heavy mineral from the mine at Bastn\u00e4s, later named cerite. Thirty years later, the fifteen-year-old Wilhelm Hisinger, from the family owning the mine, sent a sample of it to Carl Scheele, who did not find any new elements within. In 1803, after Hisinger had become an ironmaster, he returned to the mineral with J\u00f6ns Jacob Berzelius and isolated a new oxide which they named \"ceria\" after the dwarf planet Ceres, which had been discovered two years earlier. Ceria was simultaneously independently isolated in Germany by Martin Heinrich Klaproth. Between 1839 and 1843, ceria was shown to be a mixture of oxides by the Swedish surgeon and chemist Carl Gustaf Mosander, who lived in the same house as Berzelius and studied under him: he separated out two other oxides which he named \"lanthana\" and \"didymia\". He partially decomposed a sample of cerium nitrate by roasting it in air and then treating the resulting oxide with dilute nitric acid. That same year, Axel Erdmann, a student also at the Karolinska Institute, discovered lanthanum in a new mineral from L\u00e5ven island located in a Norwegian fjord.\nFinally, Mosander explained his delay, saying that he had extracted a second element from cerium, and this he called didymium. Although he did not realise it, didymium too was a mixture, and in 1885 it was separated into praseodymium and neodymium.\nSince lanthanum's properties differed only slightly from those of cerium, and occurred along with it in its salts, he named it from the Ancient Greek [] (lit. \"to lie hidden\"). Relatively pure lanthanum metal was first isolated in 1923.\nOccurrence and production.\nLanthanum makes up 39\u00a0mg/kg of the Earth's crust, behind neodymium at 41.5\u00a0mg/kg and cerium at 66.5\u00a0mg/kg. Despite being among the so-called \"rare earth metals\", lanthanum is thus not rare at all, but it is historically so-named because it is rarer than \"common earths\" such as lime and magnesia, and at the time it was recognized only a few deposits were known. Lanthanum is also ruefully considered a 'rare earth' metal because the process to mine it is difficult, time-consuming, and expensive. Lanthanum is rarely the dominant lanthanide found in the rare earth minerals, and in their chemical formulas it is usually preceded by cerium. Rare examples of La-dominant minerals are monazite-(La) and lanthanite-(La).\nThe La3+ ion is similarly sized to the early lanthanides of the cerium group (those up to samarium and europium) that immediately follow in the periodic table, and hence it tends to occur along with them in phosphate, silicate and carbonate minerals, such as monazite () and bastn\u00e4site (), where M refers to all the rare earth metals except scandium and the radioactive promethium (mostly Ce, La, and Y). Bastn\u00e4site is usually lacking in thorium and the heavy lanthanides, and the purification of the light lanthanides from it is less involved. The ore, after being crushed and ground, is first treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid, evolving carbon dioxide, hydrogen fluoride, and silicon tetrafluoride: the product is then dried and leached with water, leaving the early lanthanide ions, including lanthanum, in solution.\nThe procedure for monazite, which usually contains all the rare earths as well as thorium, is more involved. Monazite, because of its magnetic properties, can be separated by repeated electromagnetic separation. After separation, it is treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid to produce water-soluble sulfates of rare earths. The acidic filtrates are partially neutralized with sodium hydroxide to pH\u00a03\u20134. Thorium precipitates out of solution as hydroxide and is removed. After that, the solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths to their insoluble oxalates. The oxalates are converted to oxides by annealing. The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components, cerium, whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3. Lanthanum is separated as a double salt with ammonium nitrate by crystallization. This salt is relatively less soluble than other rare earth double salts and therefore stays in the residue. Care must be taken when handling some of the residues as they contain 228Ra, the daughter of 232Th, which is a strong gamma emitter. Lanthanum is relatively easy to extract as it has only one neighbouring lanthanide, cerium, which can be removed by making use of its ability to be oxidised to the +4 state; thereafter, lanthanum may be separated out by the historical method of fractional crystallization of La(NO3)3\u00b7 2 NH4NO3\u00b7 4 H2O, or by ion-exchange techniques when higher purity is desired.\nLanthanum metal is obtained from its oxide by heating it with ammonium chloride or fluoride and hydrofluoric acid at 300\u2013400\u00a0\u00b0C to produce the chloride or fluoride:\n La2O3 + 6 NH4Cl \u2192 2 LaCl3 + 6 NH3 + 3 H2O\nThis is followed by reduction with alkali or alkaline earth metals in vacuum or argon atmosphere:\n LaCl3 + 3 Li \u2192 La + 3 LiCl\nAlso, pure lanthanum can be produced by electrolysis of molten mixture of anhydrous LaCl3 and NaCl or KCl at elevated temperatures.\nApplications.\nThe first historical application of lanthanum was in gas lantern mantles. Carl Auer von Welsbach used a mixture of lanthanum oxide and zirconium oxide, which he called \"Actinophor\" and patented in 1886. The original mantles gave a green-tinted light and were not very successful, and his first company, which established a factory in Atzgersdorf in 1887, failed in 1889.\nModern uses of lanthanum include:\nBiological role.\nLanthanum has no known biological role in humans. The element is very poorly absorbed after oral administration and when injected its elimination is very slow. Lanthanum carbonate (Fosrenol) was approved as a phosphate binder to absorb excess phosphate in cases of end stage renal disease.\nWhile lanthanum has pharmacological effects on several receptors and ion channels, its specificity for the GABA receptor is unique among trivalent cations. Lanthanum acts at the same modulatory site on the GABA receptor as zinc, a known negative allosteric modulator. The lanthanum cation La3+ is a positive allosteric modulator at native and recombinant GABA receptors, increasing open channel time and decreasing desensitization in a subunit configuration dependent manner.\nLanthanum is a cofactor for the methanol dehydrogenase of the methanotrophic bacterium \"Methylacidiphilum fumariolicum\" SolV, although the great chemical similarity of the lanthanides means that it may be substituted with cerium, praseodymium, or neodymium without ill effects, and with the smaller samarium, europium, or gadolinium giving no side effects other than slower growth.\nPrecautions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nLanthanum has a low to moderate level of toxicity and should be handled with care. The injection of lanthanum solutions produces hyperglycemia, low blood pressure, degeneration of the spleen and hepatic alterations. The application in carbon arc light led to the exposure of people to rare earth element oxides and fluorides, which sometimes led to pneumoconiosis. As the La3+ ion is similar in size to the Ca2+ ion, it is sometimes used as an easily traced substitute for the latter in medical studies. Lanthanum, like the other lanthanides, is known to affect human metabolism, lowering cholesterol levels, blood pressure, appetite, and risk of blood coagulation. When injected into the brain, it acts as a painkiller, similarly to morphine and other opiates, though the mechanism behind this is still unknown. Lanthanum meant for ingestion, typically as a chewable tablet or oral powder, can interfere with gastrointestinal (GI) imaging by creating opacities throughout the GI tract; if chewable tablets are swallowed whole, they will dissolve but present initially as coin-shaped opacities in the stomach, potentially confused with ingested metal objects such as coins or batteries.\nPrices.\nThe price for a (metric) ton [1000\u00a0kg] of \"Lanthanum oxide 99% (FOB China in USD/Mt)\" is given by the Institute of Rare Earths Elements and Strategic Metals (IREESM) as below $2,000 for most of the period from early 2001 to September 2010 (at $10,000 in the short term in 2008); it rose steeply to $140,000 in mid-2011 and fell back just as rapidly to $38,000 by early 2012. The average price for the last six months (April\u2013September\u00a02022) is given by the IREESM as follows: \"Lanthanum Oxide - 99.9%min FOB China - 1308 EUR/mt\" and for \"Lanthanum Metal - 99%min FOB China - 3706 EUR/mt\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17745", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17745", "title": "Lutetium", "text": "element with atomic number 71 (Lu)\nLutetium is a chemical element; it has symbol Lu and atomic number 71. It is a silvery white metal, which resists corrosion in dry air, but not in moist air. Lutetium is the last element in the lanthanide series, and it is traditionally counted among the rare earth elements; it can also be classified as the first element of the 6th-period transition metals.\nLutetium was independently discovered in 1907 by French scientist Georges Urbain, Austrian mineralogist Baron Carl Auer von Welsbach, and American chemist Charles James. All of these researchers found lutetium as an impurity in ytterbium. The dispute on the priority of the discovery occurred shortly after, with Urbain and Welsbach accusing each other of publishing results influenced by the published research of the other; the naming honor went to Urbain, as he had published his results earlier. He chose the name \"lutecium\" for the new element, but in 1949 the spelling was changed to \"lutetium\". In 1909, the priority was finally granted to Urbain and his names were adopted as official ones; however, the name \"cassiopeium\" (or later \"cassiopium\") for element 71 proposed by Welsbach was used by many German scientists until the 1950s.\nLutetium is not a particularly abundant element, although it is significantly more common than silver in the Earth's crust. It has few specific uses. Lutetium-176 is a relatively abundant (2.5%) radioactive isotope with a half-life of about 38 billion years, used to determine the age of minerals and meteorites. Lutetium usually occurs in association with the element yttrium and is sometimes used in metal alloys and as a catalyst in various chemical reactions. 177Lu-DOTA-TATE is used for radionuclide therapy (see Nuclear medicine) on neuroendocrine tumours. Lutetium has the highest Brinell hardness of any lanthanide, at 890\u20131300 MPa.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nA lutetium atom has 71 electrons, arranged in the configuration [Xe]\u00a04f145d16s2. Lutetium is generally encountered in the +3 oxidation state, having lost its two outermost 6s and the single 5d-electron. The lutetium atom is the smallest among the lanthanide atoms, due to the lanthanide contraction, and as a result lutetium has the highest density, melting point, and hardness of the lanthanides. As lutetium's 4f orbitals are highly stabilized only the 5d and 6s orbitals are involved in chemical reactions and bonding; thus it is characterized as a d-block rather than an f-block element, and on this basis some consider it not to be a lanthanide at all, but a transition metal like its lighter congeners scandium and yttrium.\nChemical properties and compounds.\nLutetium's compounds almost always contain the element in the +3 oxidation state. Aqueous solutions of most lutetium salts are colorless and form white crystalline solids upon drying, with the common exception of the iodide, which is brown. The soluble salts, such as nitrate, sulfate and acetate form hydrates upon crystallization. The oxide, hydroxide, fluoride, carbonate, phosphate and oxalate are insoluble in water.\nLutetium metal is slightly unstable in air at standard conditions, but it burns readily at 150\u00a0\u00b0C to form lutetium oxide. The resulting compound is known to absorb water and carbon dioxide, and it may be used to remove vapors of these compounds from closed atmospheres. Similar observations are made during reaction between lutetium and water (slow when cold and fast when hot); lutetium hydroxide is formed in the reaction. Lutetium metal is known to react with the four lightest halogens to form trihalides; except the fluoride they are soluble in water. \nLutetium dissolves readily in weak acids and dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the colorless lutetium ions, which are coordinated by between seven and nine water molecules, the average being .\nOxidation states.\nLutetium is usually found in the +3 oxidation state, like most other lanthanides. However, it can also be in the 0, +1 and +2 states as well.\nIsotopes.\nLutetium occurs on the Earth in two isotopes: lutetium-175 and lutetium-176. Out of these two, only the former is stable, making the element monoisotopic. The latter one, lutetium-176, decays via beta decay with a half-life of ; it makes up about 2.5% of natural lutetium.\nTo date, 40 synthetic radioisotopes of the element have been characterized, ranging in mass number from 149 to 188; the most stable such isotopes are lutetium-174 with a half-life of 3.31 years, and lutetium-173 with a half-life of 1.37 years. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 9 days, and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than half an hour. Isotopes lighter than the stable lutetium-175 decay via electron capture (to produce isotopes of ytterbium), with some alpha and positron emission; the heavier isotopes decay primarily via beta decay, producing hafnium isotopes. Experiments at the \nFacility for Rare Isotope Beams have reported lutetium-190 in fragments of platinum-198 colliding with a carbon target.\nThe element also has 43 known nuclear isomers, of which the most stable of them are lutetium-177m3, with a half-life of 160.4 days, and lutetium-174m with a half-life of 142 days; longer than the ground states of all lutetium isotopes except 173-176.\nHistory.\nThree scientists were involved in the discovery of lutetium: French scientist Georges Urbain, Austrian mineralogist Baron Carl Auer von Welsbach, and American chemist Charles James. They found lutetium as an impurity in ytterbia, which was thought by Swiss chemist Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac to consist entirely of ytterbium. Of the three, Urbain was the first to publish, followed by Welsbach; James was about to publish when he learned of Urbain's work, and thereafter gave up his claim and did not publish. Despite staying out of the priority argument, James worked on a much larger scale and possessed the largest supply of lutetium at the time.\nUrbain and Welsbach proposed different names. Urbain chose \"neoytterbium\" for ytterbium and \"lutecium\" for the new element. Welsbach chose \"aldebaranium\" and \"cassiopeium\" (after Aldebaran and Cassiopeia). Both authors accused the other man of publishing results based on their work.\nThe International Commission on Atomic Weights, which was then responsible for the attribution of new element names, settled the dispute in 1909 by granting priority to Urbain and adopting his choice for a name, one derived from the Latin \"Lutetia\" (Paris). This decision was based on the fact that the separation of lutetium from Marignac's ytterbium was first described by Urbain. \nWelsbach had achieved the separation before Urbain, but Urbain had published 44 days earlier. Since Urbain was on the commission which made the decision, its objectivity could be questioned and furthermore Welsbach protested that Urbain's spectral evidence was weak and argued that his rival's lutetium was very impure, but to no avail. After Urbain's names were recognized, neoytterbium was reverted to ytterbium. \nThe controversy died down after 1910, only to be reignited with the discovery of element 72. Urbain claimed in 1911 to have discovered a new rare earth named celtium and identified it as element 72. However, Niels Bohr had demonstrated from his quantum theory that element 72 had to be a group 4 element and not a rare earth, and based on an idea by Fritz Paneth, Bohr's friend George de Hevesy worked with Dirk Coster to search for it in zirconium minerals. This they succeeded in doing, discovering hafnium in 1923. This discovery announcement, being in direct conflict with Urbain's celtium, ignited a controversy on element 72 throughout the 1920s; the resulting investigations on the nature of Urbain's celtium, since it was not the same as hafnium, reopened the case on element 71. The physicists Hans M. Hansen and Sven Werner, at Bohr's Copenhagen institute, found in 1923 that Welsbach's 1907 samples of cassiopeium had been pure element 71, while Urbain's 1907 lutecium samples only contained traces of element 71 and his 1911 samples identified as celtium were actually pure element 71 \u2013 confirming Welsbach's criticism. The Copenhagen physicists then started a campaign to re-award priority for element 71 to Welsbach and replace the name lutetium with cassiopeium, writing to Welsbach in 1923 of their intentions. This campaign encountered success in the physics literature, but in spite of strong German and Scandinavian support for cassiopeium, lutetium remained embedded in most of the chemical literature, with the International Commission on Atomic Weights in 1930 accepting that element 72 was hafnium but using lutetium for element 71.\nIn 1949, it was decided by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry to recommend the name lutetium, since cassiopeium by then was only used in German and sometimes Dutch, and it was a difficult name to adapt to other languages; it was nonetheless clarified that this was not intended as a statement on priority. Urbain's spelling \"lutecium\" was changed to \"lutetium\", in order to derive the name from Latin \"Lutetia\" instead of French \"Lut\u00e8ce\". Pure lutetium metal was first produced in 1953.\nOccurrence and production.\nFound with almost all other rare-earth metals but never by itself, lutetium is very difficult to separate from other elements. Its principal commercial source is as a by-product from the processing of the rare earth phosphate mineral monazite (Ce,La...)PO4, which has concentrations of only 0.0001% of the element, not much higher than the abundance of lutetium in the Earth crust of about 0.5\u00a0mg/kg. No lutetium-dominant minerals are currently known. The main mining areas are China, United States, Brazil, India, Sri Lanka and Australia. The world production of lutetium (in the form of oxide) is about 10 tonnes per year. Pure lutetium metal is very difficult to prepare. It is one of the rarest and most expensive of the rare earth metals with the price about US$10,000 per kilogram, or about one-fourth that of gold.\nCrushed minerals are treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid to produce water-soluble sulfates of rare earths. Thorium precipitates out of solution as hydroxide and is removed. After that the solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths into their insoluble oxalates. The oxalates are converted to oxides by annealing. The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components, cerium, whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3. Several rare earth metals, including lutetium, are separated as a double salt with ammonium nitrate by crystallization. Lutetium is separated by ion exchange. In this process, rare-earth ions are adsorbed onto suitable ion-exchange resin by exchange with hydrogen, ammonium or cupric ions present in the resin. Lutetium salts are then selectively washed out by suitable complexing agent. Lutetium metal is then obtained by reduction of anhydrous LuCl3 or LuF3 by either an alkali metal or alkaline earth metal.\n \n177Lu is produced by neutron activation of 176Lu or by indirectly by neutron activation of 176Yb followed by beta decay. The 6.693-day half-life allows transport from the production reactor to the point of use without significant loss in activity.\nApplications.\nSmall quantities of lutetium have many speciality uses. \nStable isotopes.\nStable lutetium can be used as catalysts in petroleum cracking in refineries and can also be used in alkylation, hydrogenation, and polymerization applications.\nLutetium aluminium garnet () has been proposed for use as a lens material in high refractive index immersion lithography. Additionally, a tiny amount of lutetium is added as a dopant to gadolinium gallium garnet, which was used in magnetic bubble memory devices. Cerium-doped lutetium oxyorthosilicate is currently the preferred compound for detectors in positron emission tomography (PET). Lutetium aluminium garnet (LuAG) is used as a phosphor in light-emitting diode light bulbs.\nLutetium tantalate (LuTaO4) is the densest known stable white material (density 9.81\u00a0g/cm3) and therefore is an ideal host for X-ray phosphors. The only denser white material is thorium dioxide, with density of 10\u00a0g/cm3, but the thorium it contains is radioactive.\nLutetium is also a compound of several scintillating materials, which convert X-rays to visible light. It is part of LYSO, LuAG and lutetium iodide scintillators.\nResearch indicates that lutetium-ion atomic clocks could provide greater accuracy than any existing atomic clock.\nUnstable isotopes.\nThe suitable half-life and decay mode made lutetium-176 used as a pure beta emitter, using lutetium which has been exposed to neutron activation, and in lutetium\u2013hafnium dating to date meteorites. \nThe isotope 177Lu emits low-energy beta particles and gamma rays and has a half-life around 7 days, positive characteristics for commercial applications, especially in therapeutic nuclear medicine.\nThe synthetic isotope lutetium-177 bound to octreotate (a somatostatin analogue), is used experimentally in targeted radionuclide therapy for neuroendocrine tumors. Lutetium-177 is used as a radionuclide in neuroendocrine tumor therapy and bone pain palliation. \nLutetium (177Lu) vipivotide tetraxetan is a therapy for prostate cancer, FDA approved in 2022.\nPrecautions.\nLike other rare-earth metals, lutetium is regarded as having a low degree of toxicity, but its compounds should be handled with care nonetheless: for example, lutetium fluoride inhalation is dangerous and the compound irritates skin. Lutetium nitrate may be dangerous as it may explode and burn once heated. Lutetium oxide powder is toxic as well if inhaled or ingested.\nSimilarly to the other rare-earth metals, lutetium has no known biological role, but it is found even in humans, concentrating in bones, and to a lesser extent in the liver and kidneys. Lutetium salts are known to occur together with other lanthanide salts in nature; the element is the least abundant in the human body of all lanthanides. Human diets have not been monitored for lutetium content, so it is not known how much the average human takes in, but estimations show the amount is only about several micrograms per year, all coming from tiny amounts absorbed by plants. Soluble lutetium salts are mildly toxic, but insoluble ones are not.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17746", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17746", "title": "Lawrencium", "text": "element with atomic number 103 (Lr)\nLawrencium is a synthetic chemical element; it has symbol Lr (formerly Lw) and atomic number 103. It is named after Ernest Lawrence, inventor of the cyclotron, a device that was used to discover many artificial radioactive elements. A radioactive metal, lawrencium is the eleventh transuranium element, the third transfermium, and the last member of the actinide series. Like all elements with atomic number over 100, lawrencium can only be produced in particle accelerators by bombarding lighter elements with charged particles. Fourteen isotopes of lawrencium are currently known; the most stable is 266Lr with half-life 11 hours, but the shorter-lived 260Lr (half-life 2.7 minutes) is most commonly used in chemistry because it can be produced on a larger scale.\nChemistry experiments confirm that lawrencium behaves as a heavier homolog to lutetium in the periodic table, and is a trivalent element. It thus could also be classified as the first of the 7th-period transition metals. Its electron configuration is anomalous for its position in the periodic table, having an s2p configuration instead of the s2d configuration of its homolog lutetium. However, this does not appear to affect lawrencium's chemistry.\nIn the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, many claims of the synthesis of element 103 of varying quality were made from laboratories in the Soviet Union and the United States. The priority of the discovery and therefore the name of the element was disputed between Soviet and American scientists. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) initially established \"lawrencium\" as the official name for the element and gave the American team credit for the discovery; this was reevaluated in 1992, giving both teams shared credit for the discovery but not changing the element's name.\nHistory.\nIn 1958, scientists at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory claimed the discovery of element 102, now called nobelium. At the same time, they also tried to synthesize element 103 by bombarding the same curium target used with nitrogen-14 ions. Eighteen tracks were noted, with decay energy around and half-life around 0.25 s; the Berkeley team noted that while the cause could be the production of an isotope of element 103, other possibilities could not be ruled out. While the data agrees reasonably with that later discovered for 257Lr (alpha decay energy 8.87\u00a0MeV, half-life 0.6\u00a0s), the evidence obtained in this experiment fell far short of the strength required to conclusively demonstrate synthesis of element 103. A follow-up on this experiment was not done, as the target was destroyed. Later, in 1960, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory attempted to synthesize the element by bombarding 252Cf with 10B and 11B. The results of this experiment were not conclusive.\nThe first important work on element 103 was done at Berkeley by the nuclear-physics team of Albert Ghiorso, Torbj\u00f8rn Sikkeland, Almon Larsh, Robert M. Latimer, and their co-workers on February 14, 1961. The first atoms of lawrencium were reportedly made by bombarding a three-milligram target consisting of three isotopes of californium with boron-10 and boron-11 nuclei from the Heavy Ion Linear Accelerator (HILAC). The Berkeley team reported that the isotope 257103 was detected in this manner, and that it decayed by emitting an 8.6\u00a0MeV alpha particle with a half-life of . This identification was later corrected to 258103, as later work proved that 257Lr did not have the properties detected, but 258Lr did. This was considered at the time to be convincing proof of synthesis of element 103: while the mass assignment was less certain and proved to be mistaken, it did not affect the arguments in favor of element 103 having been synthesized. Scientists at Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna (then in the Soviet Union) raised several criticisms: all but one were answered adequately. The exception was that 252Cf was the most common isotope in the target, and in the reactions with 10B, 258Lr could only have been produced by emitting four neutrons, and emitting three neutrons was expected to be much less likely than emitting four or five. This would lead to a narrow yield curve, not the broad one reported by the Berkeley team. A possible explanation was that there was a low number of events attributed to element 103. This was an important intermediate step to the unquestioned discovery of element 103, although the evidence was not completely convincing. The Berkeley team proposed the name \"lawrencium\" with symbol \"Lw\", after Ernest Lawrence, inventor of the cyclotron. The IUPAC Commission on Nomenclature of Inorganic Chemistry accepted the name, but changed the symbol to \"Lr\". This acceptance of the discovery was later characterized as being hasty by the Dubna team.\nCf + B \u2192 Lr* \u2192 Lr + 5 n\nThe first work at Dubna on element 103 came in 1965, when they reported to have made 256103 in 1965 by bombarding 243Am with 18O, identifying it indirectly from its granddaughter fermium-252. The half-life they reported was somewhat too high, possibly due to background events. Later 1967 work on the same reaction identified two decay energies in the ranges 8.35\u20138.50\u00a0MeV and 8.50\u20138.60\u00a0MeV: these were assigned to 256103 and 257103. Despite repeat attempts, they were unable to confirm assignment of an alpha emitter with a half-life of 8 seconds to 257103. The Russians proposed the name \"rutherfordium\" for the new element in 1967: this name was later proposed by Berkeley for element 104.\nAm + O \u2192 Lr* \u2192 Lr + 5 n\nFurther experiments in 1969 at Dubna, and in 1970 at Berkeley, demonstrated an actinide chemistry for the new element; so by 1970 it was known that element 103 is the last actinide. In 1970, the Dubna group reported the synthesis of 255103 with half-life 20\u00a0s and alpha decay energy 8.38\u00a0MeV. However, it was not until 1971, when the nuclear physics team at University of California at Berkeley successfully did a whole series of experiments aimed at measuring the nuclear decay properties of the lawrencium isotopes with mass numbers 255 to 260, that all previous results from Berkeley and Dubna were confirmed, apart from the Berkeley's group initial erroneous assignment of their first produced isotope to 257103 instead of the probably correct 258103. All final doubts were dispelled in 1976 and 1977 when the energies of X-rays emitted from 258103 were measured.\nIn 1971, the IUPAC granted the discovery of lawrencium to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, even though they did not have ideal data for the element's existence. But in 1992, the IUPAC Transfermium Working Group (TWG) officially recognized the nuclear physics teams at Dubna and Berkeley as co-discoverers of lawrencium, concluding that while the 1961 Berkeley experiments were an important step to lawrencium's discovery, they were not yet fully convincing; and while the 1965, 1968, and 1970 Dubna experiments came very close to the needed level of confidence taken together, only the 1971 Berkeley experiments, which clarified and confirmed previous observations, finally resulted in complete confidence in the discovery of element 103. Because the name \"lawrencium\" had been in use for a long time by this point, it was retained by IUPAC, and in August 1997, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) ratified the name lawrencium and the symbol \"Lr\" during a meeting in Geneva.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical.\nLawrencium is the last actinide. Authors considering the subject generally consider it a group 3 element, along with scandium, yttrium, and lutetium, as its filled f-shell is expected to make it resemble the other 7th-period transition metals. In the periodic table, it is to the right of the actinide nobelium, to the left of the 6d transition metal rutherfordium, and under the lanthanide lutetium with which it shares many physical and chemical properties. Lawrencium is expected to be a solid under normal conditions and have a hexagonal close-packed crystal structure (\"c\"/\"a\"\u00a0=\u00a01.58), similar to its lighter congener lutetium, though this is not yet known experimentally. The enthalpy of sublimation of lawrencium is estimated at 352\u00a0kJ/mol, close to the value of lutetium and strongly suggesting that metallic lawrencium is trivalent with three electrons delocalized, a prediction also supported by a systematic extrapolation of the values of heat of vaporization, bulk modulus, and atomic volume of neighboring elements to lawrencium. This makes it unlike the immediately preceding late actinides which are known to be (fermium and mendelevium) or expected to be (nobelium) divalent. The estimated enthalpies of vaporization show that lawrencium deviates from the trend of the late actinides and instead matches the trend of the succeeding 6d elements rutherfordium and dubnium, consistent with lawrencium's interpretation as a group 3 element. Some scientists prefer to end the actinides with nobelium and consider lawrencium to be the first transition metal of the seventh period.\nLawrencium is expected to be a trivalent, silvery metal, easily oxidized by air, steam, and acids, and having an atomic volume similar to that of lutetium and a trivalent metallic radius of 171\u00a0pm. It is expected to be a rather heavy metal with a density of around 14.4\u00a0g/cm3. It is also predicted to have a melting point of around 1900\u00a0K (1600\u00a0\u00b0C), not far from the value for lutetium (1925\u00a0K).\nChemical.\nIn 1949, Glenn T. Seaborg, who devised the actinide concept, predicted that element 103 (lawrencium) should be the last actinide and that the ion should be about as stable as in aqueous solution. It was not until decades later that element 103 was finally conclusively synthesized and this prediction was experimentally confirmed.\nStudies on the element, performed in 1969, showed that lawrencium reacts with chlorine to form a product that was most likely the trichloride, . Its volatility was found to be similar to the chlorides of curium, fermium, and nobelium and much less than that of rutherfordium chloride. In 1970, chemical studies were performed on 1500\u00a0atoms of 256Lr, comparing it with divalent (No, Ba, Ra), trivalent (Fm, Cf, Cm, Am, Ac), and tetravalent (Th, Pu) elements. It was found that lawrencium coextracted with the trivalent ions, but the short half-life of 256Lr precluded a confirmation that it eluted ahead of in the elution sequence. Lawrencium occurs as the trivalent ion in aqueous solution and hence its compounds should be similar to those of the other trivalent actinides: for example, lawrencium(III) fluoride () and hydroxide () should both be insoluble in water. Due to the actinide contraction, the ionic radius of should be smaller than that of , and it should elute ahead of when ammonium \u03b1-hydroxyisobutyrate (ammonium \u03b1-HIB) is used as an eluant. Later 1987 experiments on the longer-lived isotope 260Lr confirmed lawrencium's trivalency and that it eluted in roughly the same place as erbium, and found that lawrencium's ionic radius was , larger than would be expected from simple extrapolation from periodic trends. Later 1988 experiments with more lawrencium atoms refined this to and calculated an enthalpy of hydration value of . It was also found that the actinide contraction at the end of the actinides was larger than the analogous lanthanide contraction, with the exception of the last actinide, lawrencium: the cause was speculated to be relativistic effects.\nIt has been speculated that the 7s electrons are relativistically stabilized, so that in reducing conditions, only the 7p1/2 electron would be ionized, leading to the monovalent ion. However, all experiments to reduce to or in aqueous solution were unsuccessful, similarly to lutetium. On the basis of this, the standard electrode potential of the \"E\"\u00b0() couple was calculated to be less than \u22121.56\u00a0V, indicating that the existence of ions in aqueous solution was unlikely. The upper limit for the \"E\"\u00b0() couple was predicted to be \u22120.44\u00a0V: the values for \"E\"\u00b0() and \"E\"\u00b0() are predicted to be \u22122.06\u00a0V and +7.9\u00a0V. The stability of the group oxidation state in the 6d transition series decreases as RfIV &gt; DbV &gt; SgVI, and lawrencium continues the trend with LrIII being more stable than RfIV.\nIn the molecule lawrencium dihydride (), which is predicted to be bent, the 6d orbital of lawrencium is not expected to play a role in the bonding, unlike that of lanthanum dihydride (). has La\u2013H bond distances of 2.158\u00a0\u00c5, while should have shorter Lr\u2013H bond distances of 2.042\u00a0\u00c5 due to the relativistic contraction and stabilization of the 7s and 7p orbitals involved in the bonding, in contrast to the core-like 5f subshell and the mostly uninvolved 6d subshell. In general, molecular and LrH are expected to resemble the corresponding thallium species (thallium having a 6s26p1 valence configuration in the gas phase, like lawrencium's 7s27p1) more than the corresponding lanthanide species. The electron configurations of and are expected to be 7s2 and 7s1 respectively. However, in species where all three valence electrons of lawrencium are ionized to give at least formally the cation, lawrencium is expected to behave like a typical actinide and the heavier congener of lutetium, especially because the first three ionization potentials of lawrencium are predicted to be similar to those of lutetium. Hence, unlike thallium but like lutetium, lawrencium would prefer to form than LrH, and LrCO is expected to be similar to the also unknown LuCO, both metals having valence configuration \u03c32\u03c01 in their monocarbonyls. The p\u03c0\u2013d\u03c0 bond is expected to be seen in just as it is for and more generally all the . The complex anion is expected to be stable with a configuration of 6d1 for lawrencium; this 6d orbital would be its highest occupied molecular orbital. This is analogous to the electronic structure of the analogous lutetium compound.\nAtomic.\nLawrencium has three valence electrons: the 5f electrons are in the atomic core. In 1970, it was predicted that the ground-state electron configuration of lawrencium was [Rn]5f146d17s2 (ground state term symbol 2D3/2), per the Aufbau principle and conforming to the [Xe]4f145d16s2 configuration of lawrencium's lighter homolog lutetium. But the next year, calculations were published that questioned this prediction, instead expecting an anomalous [Rn]5f147s27p1 configuration. Though early calculations gave conflicting results, more recent studies and calculations confirm the s2p suggestion. 1974 relativistic calculations concluded that the energy difference between the two configurations was small and that it was uncertain which was the ground state. Later 1995 calculations concluded that the s2p configuration should be energetically favored, because the spherical s and p1/2 orbitals are nearest to the atomic nucleus and thus move quickly enough that their relativistic mass increases significantly.\nIn 1988, a team of scientists led by Eichler calculated that lawrencium's enthalpy of adsorption on metal sources would differ enough depending on its electron configuration that it would be feasible to carry out experiments to exploit this fact to measure lawrencium's electron configuration. The s2p configuration was expected to be more volatile than the s2d configuration, and be more similar to that of the p-block element lead. No evidence for lawrencium being volatile was obtained and the lower limit for the enthalpy of adsorption of lawrencium on quartz or platinum was significantly higher than the estimated value for the s2p configuration.\nIn 2015, the first ionization energy of lawrencium was measured, using the isotope 256Lr. The measured value, 4.96 eV, agreed very well with the relativistic theoretical prediction of 4.963(15)\u00a0eV, and also provided a first step into measuring the first ionization energies of the transactinides. This value is the lowest among all the lanthanides and actinides, and supports the s2p configuration as the 7p1/2 electron is expected to be only weakly bound. As ionisation energies generally increase left to right in the f-block, this low value suggests that lutetium and lawrencium belong in the d-block (whose trend they follow) and not the f-block. That would make them the heavier congeners of scandium and yttrium, rather than lanthanum and actinium. Although some alkali metal-like behaviour has been predicted, adsorption experiments suggest that lawrencium is trivalent like scandium and yttrium, not monovalent like the alkali metals. A lower limit on lawrencium's second ionization energy (&gt;13.3\u00a0eV) was experimentally found in 2021.\nEven though s2p is now known to be the ground-state configuration of the lawrencium atom, ds2 should be a low-lying excited-state configuration, with an excitation energy variously calculated as 0.156\u00a0eV, 0.165\u00a0eV, or 0.626\u00a0eV. As such lawrencium may still be considered to be a d-block element, albeit with an anomalous electron configuration (like chromium or copper), as its chemical behaviour matches expectations for a heavier analogue of lutetium.\nIsotopes.\nFourteen isotopes of lawrencium are known, with mass number 251\u2013262, 264, and 266; all are radioactive. Seven nuclear isomers are known. The longest-lived isotope, 266Lr, has a half-life of about ten hours and is one of the longest-lived superheavy isotopes known to date. However, shorter-lived isotopes are usually used in chemical experiments because 266Lr currently can only be produced as a final decay product of even heavier and harder-to-make elements: it was discovered in 2014 in the decay chain of 294Ts. 256Lr (half-life 27\u00a0seconds) was used in the first chemical studies on lawrencium: currently, the longer-lived 260Lr (half-life 2.7\u00a0minutes) is usually used for this purpose. After 266Lr, the longest-lived isotopes are 264Lr (), 262Lr (3.6\u00a0h), and 261Lr (44\u00a0min). All other known lawrencium isotopes have half-lives under 5\u00a0minutes, and the shortest-lived of them (251Lr) has a half-life of 24.4\u00a0milliseconds. The half-lives of lawrencium isotopes mostly increase smoothly from 251Lr to 266Lr, with a dip from 257Lr to 259Lr.\nPreparation and purification.\nMost isotopes of lawrencium can be produced by bombarding actinide (americium to einsteinium) targets with light ions (from boron to neon). The two most important isotopes, 256Lr and 260Lr, can be respectively produced by bombarding californium-249 with 70\u00a0MeV boron-11 ions (producing lawrencium-256 and four neutrons) and by bombarding berkelium-249 with oxygen-18 (producing lawrencium-260, an alpha particle, and three neutrons). The two heaviest and longest-lived known isotopes, 264Lr and 266Lr, can only be produced at much lower yields as decay products of dubnium, whose progenitors are isotopes of moscovium and tennessine.\nBoth 256Lr and 260Lr have half-lives too short to allow a complete chemical purification process. Early experiments with 256Lr therefore used rapid solvent extraction, with the chelating agent thenoyltrifluoroacetone (TTA) dissolved in methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) as the organic phase, and with the aqueous phase being buffered acetate solutions. Ions of different charge (+2, +3, or +4) will then extract into the organic phase under different pH ranges, but this method will not separate the trivalent actinides and thus 256Lr must be identified by its emitted 8.24\u00a0MeV alpha particles. More recent methods have allowed rapid selective elution with \u03b1-HIB to take place in enough time to separate out the longer-lived isotope 260Lr, which can be removed from the catcher foil with 0.05\u00a0M\u00a0hydrochloric acid.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17747", "revid": "43393", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17747", "title": "Lead", "text": "element with atomic number 82 (Pb)\nLead () is a chemical element with the symbol Pb (from the Latin ) and atomic number 82. It is a heavy metal, denser than most common materials. Lead is soft, malleable, and has a relatively low melting point. When freshly cut, it appears shiny gray with a bluish tint, but tarnishes to dull gray on exposure to air. Lead has the highest atomic number of any stable element, and three of its isotopes are endpoints of major nuclear decay chains of heavier elements.\nLead is a relatively unreactive post-transition metal. Its weak metallic character is shown by its amphoteric behavior: lead and lead oxides react with both acids and bases, and it tends to form covalent bonds. Lead compounds usually occur in the +2 oxidation state rather than the +4 state common in lighter members of the carbon group, with exceptions mostly limited to organolead compounds. Like the lighter members of the group, lead can bond with itself, forming chains and polyhedral structures.\nSince lead is easily extracted from its ores, prehistoric people in the Near East were aware of it. Galena is a principal ore of lead which often bears silver. Interest in silver helped initiate widespread extraction and use of lead in ancient Rome. Lead production declined after the fall of Rome and did not reach comparable levels until the Industrial Revolution. Lead played a crucial role in the development of the printing press, as movable type could be relatively easily cast from lead alloys. In 2022, the annual global production of lead was about twelve million tonnes, about two thirds of which was from recycling. Lead's high density, low melting point, ductility and relative inertness to oxidation make it useful. These properties, combined with its relative abundance and low cost, resulted in its extensive use in construction, plumbing, batteries, bullets, shots (pellets), weights, solders, pewter, fusible alloys, lead paints, leaded gasoline, and radiation shielding.\nLead is a neurotoxin that accumulates in soft tissues and bones. It damages the nervous system, interferes with biological enzymes, and can cause neurological disorders ranging from behavioral problems to brain damage. It also affects cardiovascular and renal systems. Lead's toxicity was noted by ancient Greek and Roman writers, but became widely recognized in Europe in the late 19th century. Lead causes an estimated six\u00a0million annual deaths worldwide, and trillions of dollars in economic harms.\nPhysical properties.\nAtomic.\nA lead atom has 82 electrons, with the electron configuration [Xe]4f145d106s26p2. The combined first and second ionization energies\u2014the total energy required to remove the two 6p electrons\u2014are similar to those of tin, lead's immediate neighbor above in the carbon group. This is unusual, as ionization energies typically decrease down a group due to the outer electrons being farther from the nucleus and more shielded by inner orbitals. However, the sum of the first four ionization energies of lead is higher than that of tin, contrary to periodic trends. This anomaly is explained by relativistic effects, which become significant in heavier atoms. These effects contract the s and p orbitals, giving lead's 6s electrons greater binding energies than its 5s electrons. This leads to the inert-pair effect, where the 6s electrons are less likely to participate in bonding. The result is stabilization of the +2 oxidation state and unusually long distances between nearest atoms in crystalline lead.\nLighter carbon-group congeners of lead form stable or metastable allotropes with the tetrahedrally coordinated, covalently bonded diamond cubic structure. In these elements, the s- and p-orbital energy levels are close enough to allow mixing into four hybrid sp3 orbitals. In lead, however, the inert pair effect increases the separation between s- and p-orbitals so much that the energy gain from hybridization is insufficient to overcome this gap. Instead of a diamond cubic arrangement, lead forms metallic bonds in which only the p-electrons are delocalized and shared among Pb2+ ions. Consequently, lead adopts a face-centered cubic structure, similar to the divalent metals calcium and strontium.\nBulk.\nPure lead has a bright, shiny gray appearance with a faint blue tint. It tarnishes when exposed to moist air, developing a dull surface whose color depends on environmental conditions. Lead is characterized by high density, malleability, ductility, and resistance to corrosion due to passivation.\nIts close-packed face-centered cubic structure and high atomic mass give lead a density of 11.34\u00a0g/cm3, greater than that of common metals such as iron (7.87\u00a0g/cm3), copper (8.93\u00a0g/cm3), and zinc (7.14\u00a0g/cm3). This high density is the origin of the idiom \"to go over like a lead balloon\". Some rarer metals are denser: tungsten and gold are both 19.3\u00a0g/cm3, while osmium\u2014the densest known metal\u2014has a density of 22.59\u00a0g/cm3, nearly twice that of lead.\nLead is soft, with a Mohs hardness of 1.5, and can be scratched with a fingernail. It is very malleable and moderately ductile. Its bulk modulus\u2014a measure of resistance to compression\u2014is 45.8\u00a0GPa, compared with 75.2\u00a0GPa for aluminium, 137.8\u00a0GPa for copper, and 160\u2013169\u00a0GPa for mild steel. Lead's tensile strength is low, at 12\u201317 MPa (around six times lower than aluminium, ten times lower than copper, and fifteen times lower than mild steel). Strength can be increased by alloying with small amounts of copper or antimony.\nLead melts at 327.5\u00a0\u00b0C (621.5\u00a0\u00b0F), a relatively low melting point compared to most metals, and has a boiling point of 1749\u00a0\u00b0C (3180\u00a0\u00b0F), the lowest among the carbon-group elements. Its electrical resistivity at 20\u00a0\u00b0C is 192 nanoohm-meters, almost an order of magnitude higher than that of good conductors (copper: ; gold: ; aluminium: ). Lead becomes a superconductor below 7.19\u00a0K, which is the highest critical temperature among type-I superconductors and the third highest among the elemental superconductors.\nIsotopes.\nNatural lead consists of four stable isotopes with mass numbers 204, 206, 207, and 208, along with traces of six short-lived radioisotopes with mass numbers 209\u2013214. The relatively high number of isotopes is consistent with lead's even atomic number. Lead has a magic number of protons (82), making its nucleus especially stable according to the nuclear shell model. Lead-208 also has 126 neutrons, another magic number, which may account for its exceptional stability.\nWith its high atomic number, lead is the heaviest element whose natural isotopes are considered stable; lead-208 is the heaviest stable nucleus known. This distinction previously belonged to bismuth (atomic number 83) until its sole primordial isotope, bismuth-209, was found in 2003 to decay extremely slowly. Although the four stable isotopes of lead could theoretically undergo alpha decay to mercury isotopes with an energy release, no such decay has been observed; their predicted half-lives range from 1035 to 10189 years, at least 1025 times the current age of the universe.\nThree of lead's stable isotopes\u2014lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208\u2014are the end products of the three major natural decay chains: the uranium chain (from uranium-238), the actinium chain (from uranium-235), and the thorium chain (from thorium-232), respectively. The isotopic composition of a rock sample depends on the presence of these parent isotopes; for example, lead-208 abundance can vary from about 52% in ordinary samples to as much as 90% in thorium ores. For this reason, the standard atomic weight of lead is reported to only one decimal place. Over time, the ratios of these isotopes to lead-204 increase as they are produced by radioactive decay. These variations allow for lead\u2013lead and uranium\u2013lead dating. Lead-207 exhibits nuclear magnetic resonance, a property used to study its compounds in both solution and solid states, including in biological systems such as the human body.\nChemistry.\nWhen exposed to moist air, bulk lead develops a protective surface layer of variable composition. Lead(II) carbonate is a common constituent, and in urban or maritime environments, lead(II) sulfate or lead(II) chloride may also be present. This layer renders bulk lead effectively inert under atmospheric conditions. In contrast, finely powdered lead, like many metals, is pyrophoric and burns with a bluish-white flame.\nLead reacts with fluorine at room temperature to form lead(II) fluoride. Its reaction with chlorine is similar but requires heating, as the resulting chloride layer reduces further reactivity. Molten lead combines with the chalcogens to produce lead(II) chalcogenides.\nThe metal resists attack by sulfuric and phosphoric acids but not by hydrochloric or nitric acids; the difference arises from the insolubility and subsequent passivation of certain lead salts. Organic acids, such as acetic acid, dissolve lead in the presence of oxygen. Concentrated alkalis can also dissolve lead, producing plumbites.\nInorganic compounds.\nLead exhibits two principal oxidation states: +4 and +2. While the tetravalent state is characteristic of the carbon group, the divalent state is rare for carbon and silicon, less common for germanium, significant but not dominant for tin, and the most prevalent for lead. This predominance is linked to relativistic effects\u2014specifically the inert pair effect\u2014which occurs when there is a large electronegativity difference between lead and anions such as oxide, halide, or nitride. In such cases, lead develops a pronounced partial positive charge, causing a stronger contraction of the 6s orbital compared to the 6p orbital and rendering it relatively unreactive in ionic compounds. The inert pair effect is less pronounced in compounds where lead forms covalent bonds with elements of similar electronegativity, such as carbon in organolead compounds. In these, the 6s and 6p orbitals remain comparable in size, and sp3 hybridization remains energetically favorable, making lead predominantly tetravalent in such cases.\nThe electronegativity values further reflect this behavior: lead(II) has a value of 1.87, and lead(IV) has 2.33. This represents a reversal in the general trend of increasing stability of the +4 oxidation state down the carbon group; by comparison, tin has electronegativities of 1.80 (+2 state) and 1.96 (+4 state).\nLead(II).\nLead(II) compounds are characteristic of the inorganic chemistry of lead. Even strong oxidizing agents like fluorine and chlorine react with lead to give only PbF2 and PbCl2. Lead(II) ions are usually colorless in solution, and partially hydrolyze to form Pb(OH)+ and finally [Pb4(OH)4]4+ (in which the hydroxyl ions act as bridging ligands), but are not reducing agents as tin(II) ions are. Techniques for identifying the presence of the Pb2+ ion in water generally rely on the precipitation of lead(II) chloride using dilute hydrochloric acid. As the chloride salt is sparingly soluble in water, in very dilute solutions the precipitation of lead(II) sulfide is instead achieved by bubbling hydrogen sulfide through the solution.\nLead monoxide exists in two polymorphs, litharge \u03b1-PbO (red) and massicot \u03b2-PbO (yellow), the latter being stable only above around 488\u00a0\u00b0C. Litharge is the most commonly used inorganic compound of lead. There is no lead(II) hydroxide; increasing the pH of solutions of lead(II) salts leads to hydrolysis and condensation. Lead commonly reacts with heavier chalcogens. Lead sulfide is a semiconductor, a photoconductor, and an extremely sensitive infrared radiation detector. The other two chalcogenides, lead selenide and lead telluride, are likewise photoconducting. They are unusual in that their color becomes lighter going down the group.\nLead dihalides are well-characterized; this includes the diastatide and mixed halides, such as PbFCl. The relative insolubility of the latter forms a useful basis for the gravimetric determination of fluorine. The difluoride was the first solid ionically conducting compound to be discovered (in 1834, by Michael Faraday). The other dihalides decompose on exposure to ultraviolet or visible light, especially the diiodide. Many lead(II) pseudohalides are known, such as the cyanide, cyanate, and thiocyanate. Lead(II) forms an extensive variety of halide coordination complexes, such as [PbCl4]2\u2212, [PbCl6]4\u2212, and the [Pb2Cl9]\"n\"5\"n\"\u2212 chain anion.\nLead(II) sulfate is insoluble in water, like the sulfates of other heavy divalent cations. Lead(II) nitrate and lead(II) acetate are very soluble, and this is exploited in the synthesis of other lead compounds.\nLead(IV).\nFew inorganic lead(IV) compounds are known. They are only formed in highly oxidizing solutions and do not normally exist under standard conditions. Lead(II) oxide gives a mixed oxide on further oxidation, Pb3O4. It is described as lead(II,IV) oxide, or structurally 2PbO\u00b7PbO2, and is the best-known mixed valence lead compound. Lead dioxide is a strong oxidizing agent, capable of oxidizing hydrochloric acid to chlorine gas. This is because the expected PbCl4 that would be produced is unstable and spontaneously decomposes to PbCl2 and Cl2. Analogously to lead monoxide, lead dioxide is capable of forming plumbate anions. Lead disulfide and lead diselenide are only stable at high pressures. Lead tetrafluoride, a yellow crystalline powder, is stable, but less so than the difluoride. Lead tetrachloride (a yellow oil) decomposes at room temperature, lead tetrabromide is less stable still, and the existence of lead tetraiodide is questionable.\nOther oxidation states.\nSome lead compounds exist in formal oxidation states other than +4 or +2. Lead(III) may be obtained, as an intermediate between lead(II) and lead(IV), in larger organolead complexes; this oxidation state is not stable, as both the lead(III) ion and the larger complexes containing it are radicals. The same applies for lead(I), which can be found in such radical species.\nNumerous mixed lead(II,IV) oxides are known. When PbO2 is heated in air, it becomes Pb12O19 at 293\u00a0\u00b0C, Pb12O17 at 351\u00a0\u00b0C, Pb3O4 at 374\u00a0\u00b0C, and finally PbO at 605\u00a0\u00b0C. A further sesquioxide, Pb2O3, can be obtained at high pressure, along with several non-stoichiometric phases. Many of them show defective fluorite structures in which some oxygen atoms are replaced by vacancies: PbO can be considered as having such a structure, with every alternate layer of oxygen atoms absent.\nNegative oxidation states can occur as Zintl phases, as either free lead anions, as in Ba2Pb, with lead formally being lead(\u2212IV), or in oxygen-sensitive ring-shaped or polyhedral cluster ions such as the trigonal bipyramidal Pb52\u2212 ion, where two lead atoms are lead(\u2212I) and three are lead(0). In such anions, each atom is at a polyhedral vertex and contributes two electrons to each covalent bond along an edge from their sp3 hybrid orbitals, the other two being an external lone pair. They may be made in liquid ammonia via the reduction of lead by sodium.\nOrganolead.\nLead can form multiply-bonded chains, a property it shares with its lighter homologs in the carbon group. Its capacity to do so is much less because the Pb\u2013Pb bond energy is over three and a half times lower than that of the C\u2013C bond. With itself, lead can build metal\u2013metal bonds of an order up to three. With carbon, lead forms organolead compounds similar to, but generally less stable than, typical organic compounds (due to the Pb\u2013C bond being rather weak). This makes the organometallic chemistry of lead far less wide-ranging than that of tin. Lead predominantly forms organolead(IV) compounds, even when starting with inorganic lead(II) reactants; very few organolead(II) compounds are known. The most well-characterized exceptions are Pb[CH(SiMe3)2]2 and plumbocene.\nThe lead analog of the simplest organic compound, methane, is plumbane. Plumbane may be obtained in a reaction between metallic lead and atomic hydrogen. Two simple derivatives, tetramethyllead and tetraethyllead, are the best-known organolead compounds. These compounds are relatively stable: tetraethyllead only starts to decompose if heated or if exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet light. With sodium metal, lead readily forms an equimolar alloy that reacts with alkyl halides to form organometallic compounds such as tetraethyllead. The oxidizing nature of many organolead compounds is usefully exploited: lead tetraacetate is an important laboratory reagent for oxidation in organic synthesis. Tetraethyllead, once added to automotive gasoline, was produced in larger quantities than any other organometallic compound, and is still widely used in fuel for small aircraft.\nOther organolead compounds are less chemically stable. For many organic compounds, a lead analog does not exist.\nOrigin and occurrence.\nIn space.\nLead's per-particle abundance in the Solar System is 0.121\u00a0ppb (parts per billion). This figure is two and a half times higher than that of platinum, eight times more than mercury, and seventeen times more than gold. The amount of lead in the universe is slowly increasing as most heavier atoms (all of which are unstable) gradually decay to lead. The abundance of lead in the Solar System since its formation 4.5\u00a0billion years ago has increased by about 0.75%. The Solar System abundances table shows that lead, despite its relatively high atomic number, is more prevalent than most other elements with atomic numbers greater than 40.\nPrimordial lead\u2014which comprises the isotopes lead-204, lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208\u2014was mostly created as a result of repetitive neutron capture processes occurring in stars. The two main modes of capture are the s- and r-processes.\nIn the s-process (s is for \"slow\"), captures are separated by years or decades, allowing less stable nuclei to undergo beta decay. A stable thallium-203 nucleus can capture a neutron and become thallium-204; this undergoes beta decay to give stable lead-204; on capturing another neutron, it becomes lead-205, which has a half-life of around 17\u00a0million years. Further captures result in lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208. On capturing another neutron, lead-208 becomes lead-209, which quickly decays into bismuth-209. On capturing another neutron, bismuth-209 becomes bismuth-210, and this beta decays to polonium-210, which alpha decays to lead-206. The cycle hence ends at lead-206, lead-207, lead-208, and bismuth-209.\nIn the r-process (r is for \"rapid\"), captures happen faster than nuclei can decay. This occurs in environments with a high neutron density, such as a supernova or the merger of two neutron stars. The neutron flux involved may be on the order of 1022 neutrons per square centimeter per second. The r-process does not form as much lead as the s-process. It tends to stop once neutron-rich nuclei reach 126 neutrons. At this point, the neutrons are arranged in complete shells in the atomic nucleus, and it becomes harder to energetically accommodate more of them. When the neutron flux subsides, these nuclei beta decay into stable isotopes of osmium, iridium, platinum.\nOn Earth.\nLead is classified as a chalcophile under the Goldschmidt classification, meaning it is generally found combined with sulfur. It rarely occurs in its native, metallic form. Many lead minerals are relatively light and, over the course of the Earth's history, have remained in the crust instead of sinking deeper into the Earth's interior. This accounts for lead's relatively high crustal abundance of 14\u00a0ppm; it is the 36th most abundant element in the crust.\nThe main lead-bearing mineral is galena (PbS), which is mostly found with zinc ores. Most other lead minerals are related to galena in some way; boulangerite, Pb5Sb4S11, is a mixed sulfide derived from galena; anglesite, PbSO4, is a product of galena oxidation; and cerussite or white lead ore, PbCO3, is a decomposition product of galena. Arsenic, tin, antimony, silver, gold, copper, bismuth are common impurities in lead minerals.\nWorld lead resources exceed two billion tons. Significant deposits are located in Australia, China, Ireland, Mexico, Peru, Portugal, Russia, United States. Global reserves\u2014resources that are economically feasible to extract\u2014totaled 88\u00a0million tons in 2016, of which Australia had 35\u00a0million, China 17\u00a0million, Russia 6.4\u00a0million.\nTypical background concentrations of lead do not exceed 0.1\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 in the atmosphere; 100\u00a0mg/kg in soil; 4\u00a0mg/kg in vegetation, 5\u00a0\u03bcg/L in fresh water and seawater.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"lead\" is of Germanic origin; it comes from the Middle English and Old English (with the macron above the \"e\" signifying that the vowel sound of that letter is long). The Old English word is derived from the hypothetical reconstructed Proto-Germanic ('lead'). According to linguistic theory, this word bore descendants in multiple Germanic languages of exactly the same meaning.\nThere is no consensus on the origin of the Proto-Germanic . One hypothesis suggests it is derived from Proto-Indo-European ('lead'; capitalization of the vowel is equivalent to the macron). Another hypothesis suggests it is borrowed from Proto-Celtic ('lead'). This word is related to the Latin , which gave the element its chemical symbol \"Pb\". The word is thought to be the origin of Proto-Germanic (which also means 'lead'), from which stemmed the German .\nThe name of the chemical element is not related to the verb of the same spelling, which is derived from Proto-Germanic ('to lead').\nHistory.\nPrehistory and early history.\nMetallic lead beads dating back to 7000\u20136500 BC have been found in Asia Minor and may represent the first example of metal smelting. At that time, lead had few (if any) applications due to its softness and dull appearance. The major reason for the spread of lead production was its association with silver, which may be obtained by burning galena (a common lead mineral). The Ancient Egyptians were the first to use lead minerals in cosmetics, an application that spread to Ancient Greece and beyond; the Egyptians had used lead for sinkers in fishing nets, glazes, glasses, enamels, ornaments. Various civilizations of the Fertile Crescent used lead as a writing material, as coins, and as a construction material. Lead was used by the ancient Chinese as a stimulant, as currency, as contraceptive, and in chopsticks. The Indus Valley civilization and the Mesoamericans used it for making amulets; and the eastern and southern Africans used lead in wire drawing.\nClassical era.\nBecause silver was extensively used as a decorative material and an exchange medium, lead deposits came to be worked in Asia Minor from 3000\u00a0BC; later, lead deposits were developed in the Aegean and Laurion. These three regions collectively dominated production of mined lead until c.\u20091200\u00a0BC. Beginning c. 2000\u00a0BC, the Phoenicians worked deposits in the Iberian peninsula; by 1600\u00a0BC, lead mining existed in Cyprus, Greece, and Sardinia.\nRome's territorial expansion in Europe and across the Mediterranean, and its development of mining, led to it becoming the greatest producer of lead during the classical era, with an estimated annual output peaking at 80,000 tonnes. Like their predecessors, the Romans obtained lead mostly as a by-product of silver smelting. Lead mining occurred in central Europe, Britain, Balkans, Greece, Anatolia, Hispania, the latter accounting for 40% of world production.\nLead tablets were commonly used as a material for letters. Lead coffins, cast in flat sand forms and with interchangeable motifs to suit the faith of the deceased, were used in ancient Judea. Lead was used to make sling bullets from the 5th century BC. In Roman times, lead sling bullets were amply used, and were effective at a distance of between 100 and 150 meters. The Balearic slingers, used as mercenaries in Carthaginian and Roman armies, were famous for their shooting distance and accuracy.\nLead was used for making water pipes in the Roman Empire; the Latin word for the metal, , is the origin of the English word \"plumbing\". Its ease of working, its low melting point enabling the easy fabrication of completely waterproof welded joints, and its resistance to corrosion ensured its widespread use in other applications, including pharmaceuticals, roofing, currency, warfare. Writers of the time, such as Cato the Elder, Columella, and Pliny the Elder, recommended lead (and lead-coated) vessels for the preparation of sweeteners and preservatives added to wine and food. The lead conferred an agreeable taste due to the formation of \"sugar of lead\" (lead(II) acetate), whereas copper vessels imparted a bitter flavor through verdigris formation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis metal was by far the most used material in classical antiquity, and it is appropriate to refer to the (Roman) Lead Age. Lead was to the Romans what plastic is to us.\nHeinz Eschnauer and Markus Stoeppler\"Wine\u2014An enological specimen bank\", 1992\nThe Roman author Vitruvius reported the health dangers of lead and modern writers have suggested that lead poisoning played a major role in the decline of the Roman Empire. Other researchers have criticized such claims, pointing out, for instance, that not all abdominal pain is caused by lead poisoning. According to archaeological research, Roman lead pipes increased lead levels in tap water but such an effect was \"unlikely to have been truly harmful\". When lead poisoning did occur, victims were called \"saturnine\", dark and cynical, after the ghoulish father of the gods, Saturn. By association, lead was considered the father of all metals. Its status in Roman society was low as it was readily available and cheap.\nConfusion with tin and antimony.\nSince the Bronze Age, metallurgists and engineers have understood the difference between rare and valuable tin, essential for alloying with copper to produce tough and corrosion resistant bronze, and 'cheap and cheerful' lead. However, the nomenclature in some languages is similar. Romans called lead (\"black lead\"), and tin (\"bright lead\"). The association of lead and tin can be seen in other languages: the word in Czech translates to \"lead\", but in Russian, its cognate () means \"tin\". To add to the confusion, lead bore a close relation to antimony: both elements commonly occur as sulfides (galena and stibnite), often together. Pliny incorrectly wrote that stibnite would give lead on heating, instead of antimony. In countries such as Turkey and India, the originally Persian name () came to refer to either antimony sulfide or lead sulfide, and in some languages, such as Russian, gave its name to antimony ().\nMiddle Ages and the Renaissance.\nLead mining in Western Europe declined after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, with Al-Andalus being the only region having a significant output. The largest production of lead occurred in South Asia and East Asia, especially China and India, where lead mining grew rapidly.\nIn Europe, lead production began to increase in the 11th and 12th centuries, when it was again used for roofing and piping. Starting in the 13th century, lead was used to create stained glass. In the European and Muslim traditions of alchemy, lead (symbol \u2644 in the European tradition) was considered an impure base metal which, by the separation, purification and balancing of its constituent essences, could be transformed to pure and incorruptible gold. During the period, lead was used increasingly for adulterating wine. The use of such wine was forbidden for use in Christian rites by a papal bull in 1498, but it continued to be imbibed and resulted in mass poisonings up to the late 18th century. Lead was a key material in parts of the printing press, and lead dust was commonly inhaled by print workers, causing lead poisoning. Lead also became the chief material for making bullets for firearms: it was cheap, less damaging to iron gun barrels, had a higher density (which allowed for better retention of velocity), and its lower melting point made the production of bullets easier as they could be made using a wood fire. Lead, in the form of Venetian ceruse, was extensively used in cosmetics by Western European aristocracy as whitened faces were regarded as a sign of modesty. This practice later expanded to white wigs and eyeliners, and only faded out with the French Revolution in the late 18th century. A similar fashion appeared in Japan in the 18th century with the emergence of the geishas, a practice that continued long into the 20th century. The white faces of women \"came to represent their feminine virtue as Japanese women\", with lead commonly used in the whitener.\nOutside Europe and Asia.\nIn the New World, lead production was recorded soon after the arrival of European settlers. The earliest record dates to 1621 in the English Colony of Virginia, fourteen years after its foundation. In Australia, the first mine opened by colonists on the continent was a lead mine, in 1841. In Africa, lead mining and smelting were known in the Benue Trough and the lower Congo Basin, where lead was used for trade with Europeans, and as a currency by the 17th century, well before the scramble for Africa.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nIn the second half of the 18th century, Britain, and later continental Europe and the United States, experienced the Industrial Revolution. This was the first time during which lead production rates exceeded those of Rome. Britain was the leading producer, losing this status by the mid-19th century with the depletion of its mines and the development of lead mining in Germany, Spain, and the United States. By 1900, the United States was the leader in global lead production, and other non-European nations\u2014Canada, Mexico, and Australia\u2014had begun significant production; production outside Europe exceeded that within. A great share of the demand for lead came from plumbing and painting\u2014lead paints were in regular use. At this time, more (working class) people were exposed to the metal and lead poisoning cases escalated. This led to research into the effects of lead intake. Lead was proven to be more dangerous in its fume form than as a solid metal. Lead poisoning and gout were linked; British physician Alfred Baring Garrod noted a third of his gout patients were plumbers and painters. The effects of chronic ingestion of lead, including mental disorders, were also studied in the 19th century. The first laws aimed at decreasing lead poisoning in factories were enacted during the 1870s and 1880s in the United Kingdom.\nModern era.\nFurther evidence of the threat that lead posed to humans was discovered in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Mechanisms of harm were better understood, lead blindness was documented, and the element was phased out of public use in the United States and Europe. The United Kingdom introduced mandatory factory inspections in 1878 and appointed the first Medical Inspector of Factories in 1898; as a result, a 25-fold decrease in lead poisoning incidents from 1900 to 1944 was reported. Most European countries banned lead paint\u2014commonly used because of its opacity and water resistance\u2014for interiors by 1930.\nThe last major human exposure to lead was the addition of tetraethyllead to gasoline as an antiknock agent, a practice that originated in the United States in 1921. It was phased out in the United States and the European Union by 2000.\nIn the 1970s, the United States and Western European countries introduced legislation to reduce lead air pollution. The impact was significant: while a study conducted by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States in 1976\u20131980 showed that 77.8% of the population had elevated blood lead levels, in 1991\u20131994, a study by the same institute showed the share of people with such high levels dropped to 2.2%. The main product made of lead by the end of the 20th century was the lead\u2013acid battery.\nFrom 1960 to 1990, lead output in the Western Bloc grew by about 31%. The share of the world's lead production by the Eastern Bloc increased from 10% to 30%, from 1950 to 1990, with the Soviet Union being the world's largest producer during the mid-1970s and the 1980s, and China starting major lead production in the late 20th century. Unlike the European communist countries, China was largely unindustrialized by the mid-20th century; in 2004, China surpassed Australia as the largest producer of lead. As was the case during European industrialization, lead has had a negative effect on health in China.\nProduction.\nAs of 2014, production of lead is increasing worldwide due to its use in lead\u2013acid batteries. There are two major categories of production: primary from mined ores, and secondary from scrap. In 2014, 4.58\u00a0million metric tons came from primary production and 5.64\u00a0million from secondary production. The top three producers of mined lead concentrate in that year were China, Australia, and United States. The top three producers of refined lead were China, United States, and India. According to the Metal Stocks in Society report of 2010, the total amount of lead in use, stockpiled, discarded, or dissipated into the environment, on a global basis, is 8\u00a0kg per capita. Much of this is in more developed countries (20\u2013150\u00a0kg per capita) rather than less developed ones (1\u20134\u00a0kg per capita).\nThe primary and secondary lead production processes are similar. Some primary production plants now supplement their operations with scrap lead, and this trend is likely to increase in the future. Given adequate techniques, lead obtained via secondary processes is indistinguishable from lead obtained via primary processes. Scrap lead from the building trade is usually fairly clean and is re-melted without the need for smelting, though refining is sometimes needed. Secondary lead production is therefore cheaper, in terms of energy requirements, than is primary production, often by 50% or more.\nPrimary.\nMost lead ores contain a low percentage of lead (rich ores have a typical content of 3\u20138%) which must be concentrated for extraction. During initial processing, ores typically undergo crushing, dense-medium separation, grinding, froth flotation, drying. The resulting concentrate, which has a lead content of 30\u201380% by mass (regularly 50\u201360%), is then turned into (impure) lead metal.\nThere are two main ways of doing this: a two-stage process involving roasting followed by blast furnace extraction, carried out in separate vessels; or a direct process in which the extraction of the concentrate occurs in a single vessel. The latter has become the most common route, though the former is still significant.\nTwo-stage process.\nFirst, the sulfide concentrate is roasted in air to oxidize the lead sulfide:\n 2\u00a0PbS(s) + 3\u00a0O2(g) \u2192 2\u00a0PbO(s) + 2\u00a0SO2(g)\u2191\nAs the original concentrate was not pure lead sulfide, roasting yields not only the desired lead(II) oxide, but a mixture of oxides, sulfates, and silicates of lead and of the other metals contained in the ore. This impure lead oxide is reduced in a coke-fired blast furnace to the (again, impure) metal:\n 2\u00a0PbO(s) + C(s) \u2192 2\u00a0Pb(s) + CO2(g)\u2191\nImpurities are mostly arsenic, antimony, bismuth, zinc, copper, silver, and gold. Typically they are removed in a series of pyrometallurgical processes. The melt is treated in a reverberatory furnace with air, steam, sulfur, which oxidizes the impurities except for silver, gold, bismuth. Oxidized contaminants float to the top of the melt and are skimmed off. Metallic silver and gold are removed and recovered economically by means of the Parkes process, in which zinc is added to lead. Zinc, which is immiscible in lead, dissolves the silver and gold. The zinc solution can be separated from the lead, and the silver and gold retrieved. De-silvered lead is freed of bismuth by the Betterton\u2013Kroll process, treating it with metallic calcium and magnesium. The resulting bismuth dross can be skimmed off.\nAlternatively to the pyrometallurgical processes, very pure lead can be obtained by processing smelted lead electrolytically using the Betts process. Anodes of impure lead and cathodes of pure lead are placed in an electrolyte of lead fluorosilicate (PbSiF6). Once electrical potential is applied, impure lead at the anode dissolves and plates onto the cathode, leaving the majority of the impurities in solution. This is a high-cost process and thus mostly reserved for refining bullion containing high percentages of impurities.\nDirect process.\nIn this process, lead bullion and slag is obtained directly from lead concentrates. The lead sulfide concentrate is melted in a furnace and oxidized, forming lead monoxide. Carbon (as coke or coal gas) is added to the molten charge along with fluxing agents. The lead monoxide is thereby reduced to metallic lead, in the midst of a slag rich in lead monoxide.\nIf the input is rich in lead, as much as 80% of the original lead can be obtained as bullion; the remaining 20% forms a slag rich in lead monoxide. For a low-grade feed, all of the lead can be oxidized to a high-lead slag. Metallic lead is further obtained from the high-lead (25\u201340%) slags via submerged fuel combustion or injection, reduction assisted by an electric furnace, or a combination of both.\nAlternatives.\nResearch on a cleaner, less energy-intensive lead extraction process continues; a major drawback is that either too much lead is lost as waste, or the alternatives result in a high sulfur content in the resulting lead metal. Hydrometallurgical extraction, in which anodes of impure lead are immersed into an electrolyte and pure lead is deposited (electrowound) onto cathodes, is a technique that may have potential, but is not currently economical except in cases where electricity is very cheap.\nSecondary.\nSmelting, which is an essential part of the primary production, is often skipped during secondary production. It is only performed when metallic lead has undergone significant oxidation. The process is similar to that of primary production in either a blast furnace or a rotary furnace, with the essential difference being the greater variability of yields: blast furnaces produce hard lead (10% antimony) while reverberatory and rotary kiln furnaces produce semisoft lead (3\u20134% antimony).\nThe ISASMELT process is a more recent smelting method that may act as an extension to primary production; battery paste from spent lead\u2013acid batteries (containing lead sulfate and lead oxides) has its sulfate removed by treating it with alkali, and is then treated in a coal-fueled furnace in the presence of oxygen, which yields impure lead, with antimony the most common impurity. Refining of secondary lead is similar to that of primary lead; some refining processes may be skipped depending on the material recycled and its potential contamination.\nOf the sources of lead for recycling, lead\u2013acid batteries are the most important; lead pipe, sheet, and cable sheathing are also significant.\nApplications.\nContrary to popular belief, pencil leads in wooden pencils have never been made from lead. When the pencil originated as a wrapped graphite writing tool, the particular type of graphite used was named \"plumbago\" (literally, \"lead mockup\").\nElemental form.\nLead metal has several useful mechanical properties, including high density, low melting point, ductility, and relative inertness. Many metals are superior to lead in some of these aspects but are generally less common and more difficult to extract from parent ores. Lead's toxicity has led to its phasing out for some uses.\nLead was used to cover the ramparts protecting the ascent to the Alamut Castle in Persia, which could absorb attacks by siege engines.\nLead has been used for bullets since their invention in the Middle Ages. It is inexpensive; its low melting point means small arms ammunition and shotgun pellets can be cast with minimal technical equipment; and it is denser than other common metals, which allows for better retention of velocity. It remains the main material for bullets, alloyed with other metals as hardeners. Concerns have been raised that lead bullets used for hunting can damage the environment. Shotgun cartridges used for waterfowl hunting must today be lead-free in the United States, Canada, and in Europe.\nLead's high density and resistance to corrosion have been exploited in a number of related applications. It is used as ballast in sailboat keels; its density allows it to take up a small volume and minimize water resistance, thus counterbalancing the heeling effect of wind on the sails. It is used in scuba diving weight belts to counteract the diver's buoyancy. In 1993, the base of the Leaning Tower of Pisa was stabilized with 600 tonnes of lead. Because of its corrosion resistance, lead is used as a protective sheath for underwater cables.\nLead has many uses in the construction industry; lead sheets are used as architectural metals in roofing material, cladding, flashing, gutters and gutter joints, roof parapets. Lead is still used in statues and sculptures, including for armatures. In the past it was often used to balance the wheels of cars; for environmental reasons this use is being phased out in favor of other materials.\nLead is added to copper alloys, such as brass and bronze, to improve machinability and for its lubricating qualities. Being practically insoluble in copper, the lead forms solid globules in imperfections throughout the alloy, such as grain boundaries. In low concentrations, as well as acting as a lubricant, the globules hinder the formation of swarf as the alloy is worked, thereby improving machinability. Copper alloys with larger concentrations of lead are used in bearings. The lead provides lubrication, and the copper provides the load-bearing support.\nLead's high density, atomic number, and formability form the basis for use of lead as a barrier that absorbs sound, vibration, and radiation. Lead has no natural resonance frequencies; as a result, sheet-lead is used as a sound deadening layer in the walls, floors, and ceilings of sound studios. Organ pipes are often made from a lead alloy, mixed with various amounts of tin to control the tone of each pipe. Lead is an established shielding material from radiation in nuclear science and in X-ray rooms due to its denseness and high attenuation coefficient. Molten lead has been used as a coolant for lead-cooled fast reactors.\nBatteries.\nThe largest use of lead in the early 21st century is in lead\u2013acid batteries. The lead in batteries undergoes no direct contact with humans, so there are fewer toxicity concerns. People who work in lead battery production or recycling plants may be exposed to lead dust and inhale it. The reactions in the battery between lead, lead dioxide, and sulfuric acid provide a reliable source of voltage. Supercapacitors incorporating lead\u2013acid batteries have been installed in kilowatt and megawatt scale applications in Australia, Japan, and the United States in frequency regulation, solar smoothing and shifting, wind smoothing, and other applications. These batteries have lower energy density and charge-discharge efficiency than lithium-ion batteries, but are significantly cheaper.\nCoating for cables.\nLead is used in high voltage power cables as shell material to prevent water diffusion into insulation; this use is decreasing as lead is being phased out. Its use in solder for electronics is also being phased out by some countries to reduce the amount of environmentally hazardous waste. Lead is one of three metals used in the Oddy test for museum materials, helping detect organic acids, aldehydes, acidic gases.\nCompounds.\nIn addition to being the main application for lead metal, lead\u2013acid batteries are also the main consumer of lead compounds. The energy storage/release reaction used in these devices involves lead sulfate and lead dioxide:\nPb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2H2SO4(aq) \u2192 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l)\nOther applications of lead compounds are very specialized and often fading. Lead-based coloring agents are used in ceramic glazes and glass, especially for red and yellow shades. While lead paints are phased out in Europe and North America, they remain in use in less developed countries such as China, India, or Indonesia. Lead tetraacetate and lead dioxide are used as oxidizing agents in organic chemistry. Lead is frequently used in the polyvinyl chloride coating of electrical cords. It can be used to treat candle wicks to ensure a longer, more even burn. Because of its toxicity, European and North American manufacturers use alternatives such as zinc. Lead glass is composed of 12\u201328% lead oxide, changing its optical characteristics and reducing the transmission of ionizing radiation, a property used in old TVs and computer monitors with cathode-ray tubes. Lead-based semiconductors such as lead telluride and lead selenide are used in photovoltaic cells and infrared detectors.\nBiological effects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nLead has no confirmed biological role, and there is no confirmed safe level of lead exposure. A 2009 Canadian\u2013American study concluded that even at levels that are considered to pose little to no risk, lead may cause \"adverse mental health outcomes\". Its prevalence in the human body\u2014at an adult average of 120\u00a0mg\u2014is nevertheless exceeded only by zinc (2500\u00a0mg) and iron (4000\u00a0mg) among the heavy metals. Lead salts are very efficiently absorbed by the body. A small amount of lead (1%) is stored in bones; the rest is excreted in urine and feces within a few weeks of exposure. Only about a third of lead is excreted by a child. Continual exposure may result in the bioaccumulation of lead.\nToxicity.\nLead is a highly poisonous metal (whether inhaled or swallowed), affecting almost every organ and system in the human body. At airborne levels of 100\u00a0mg/m3, it is immediately dangerous to life and health. Most ingested lead is absorbed into the bloodstream. The primary cause of its toxicity is its predilection for interfering with the proper functioning of enzymes. It does so by binding to the sulfhydryl groups found on many enzymes, or mimicking and displacing other metals that act as cofactors in many enzymatic reactions. The essential metals that lead interacts with include calcium, iron, and zinc. High levels of calcium and iron tend to provide some protection from lead poisoning; low levels cause increased susceptibility.\nEffects.\nLead can cause severe damage to the brain and kidneys and, ultimately, death. By mimicking calcium, lead can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier. It degrades the myelin sheaths of neurons, reduces their numbers, interferes with neurotransmission routes, and decreases neuronal growth. In the human body, lead inhibits porphobilinogen synthase and ferrochelatase, preventing both porphobilinogen formation and the incorporation of iron into protoporphyrin IX, the final step in heme synthesis. This causes ineffective heme synthesis and microcytic anemia.\nSymptoms of lead poisoning include nephropathy, colic-like abdominal pains, and possibly weakness in the fingers, wrists, or ankles. Small blood pressure increases, particularly in middle-aged and older people, may be apparent and can cause anemia. Several studies, mostly cross-sectional, found an association between increased lead exposure and decreased heart rate variability. In pregnant women, high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage. Chronic, high-level exposure has been shown to reduce fertility in males.\nIn a child's developing brain, lead interferes with synapse formation in the cerebral cortex, neurochemical development (including that of neurotransmitters), and the organization of ion channels. Early childhood exposure has been linked with an increased risk of sleep disturbances and excessive daytime drowsiness in later childhood. High blood levels are associated with delayed puberty in girls. The rise and fall in exposure to airborne lead from the combustion of tetraethyl lead in gasoline during the 20th century has been linked with historical increases and decreases in crime levels.\nExposure sources.\nLead exposure is a global issue since lead mining and smelting, and battery manufacturing, disposal, and recycling, are common in many countries. Lead enters the body via inhalation, ingestion, or skin absorption. Almost all inhaled lead is absorbed into the body; for ingestion, the rate is 20\u201370%, with children absorbing a higher percentage than adults.\nPoisoning typically results from ingestion of food or water contaminated with lead, and less commonly after accidental ingestion of contaminated soil, dust, or lead-based paint. Seawater products can contain lead if affected by nearby industrial waters. Fruit and vegetables can be contaminated by high levels of lead in the soils they were grown in. Soil can be contaminated through particulate accumulation from lead in pipes, lead paint, residual emissions from leaded gasoline.\nThe use of lead for water pipes is a problem in areas with soft or acidic water. Hard water forms insoluble protective layers on the inner surface of the pipes, whereas soft and acidic water dissolves the lead pipes. Dissolved carbon dioxide in the carried water may result in the formation of soluble lead bicarbonate; oxygenated water may similarly dissolve lead as lead(II) hydroxide. Drinking such water, over time, can cause health problems due to the toxicity of the dissolved lead. The harder the water the more calcium bicarbonate and sulfate it contains, and the more the inside of the pipes are coated with a protective layer of lead carbonate or lead sulfate.\nIngestion of applied lead-based paint is the major source of exposure for children: a direct source is chewing on old painted window sills. Additionally, as lead paint on a surface deteriorates, it peels and is pulverized into dust. The dust then enters the body through hand-to-mouth contact or contaminated food or drink. Ingesting certain home remedies may result in exposure to lead or its compounds.\nInhalation is the second major exposure pathway, affecting smokers and especially workers in lead-related occupations. Cigarette smoke contains, among other toxic substances, radioactive lead-210. \"As a result of EPA's regulatory efforts, levels of lead in the air [in the United States] decreased by 86 percent between 2010 and 2020.\" The concentration of lead in the air in the United States fell below the national standard of 0.15\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 in 2014.\nSkin exposure may be significant for people working with organic lead compounds. The rate of skin absorption is lower for inorganic lead.\nLead in foods.\nLead may be found in food when food is grown in soil that is high in lead, airborne lead contaminates the crops, animals eat lead in their diet, or lead enters the food either from what it was stored or cooked in. Ingestion of lead paint and batteries is also a route of exposure for livestock, which can subsequently affect humans. Milk produced by contaminated cattle can be diluted to a lower lead concentration and sold for consumption.\nIn Bangladesh, lead compounds have been added to turmeric to make it more yellow. This is believed to have started in the 1980s and continues as of 2019[ [update]]. It is believed to be one of the main sources of high lead levels in the country. In Hong Kong the maximum allowed lead level in food is 6\u00a0parts per million in solids and 1\u00a0part per million in liquids.\nLead-containing dust can settle on drying cocoa beans when they are set outside near polluting industrial plants. In December 2022, Consumer Reports tested 28 dark chocolate brands and found that 23 of them contained potentially harmful levels of lead, cadmium or both. They have urged the chocolate makers to reduce the level of lead which could be harmful, especially to a developing fetus.\nIn March 2024, the US Food and Drug Administration recommended a voluntary recall on 6 brands of cinnamon due to contamination with lead, after 500 reports of child lead poisoning. The FDA determined that cinnamon was adulterated with lead chromate.\nLead in plastic toys.\nAccording to the United States Center for Disease Control, the use of lead in plastics has not been banned as of 2024. Lead softens the plastic and makes it more flexible so that it can go back to its original shape. Habitual chewing on colored plastic insulation from stripped electrical wires was found to cause elevated lead levels in a 46-year-old man. Lead may be used in plastic toys to stabilize molecules from heat. Lead dust can be formed when plastic is exposed to sunlight, air, and detergents that break down the chemical bond between the lead and plastics.\nTreatment.\nTreatment for lead poisoning normally involves the administration of dimercaprol and succimer. Acute cases may require the use of disodium calcium edetate, the calcium chelate, and the disodium salt of ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). It has a greater affinity for lead than calcium, with the result that lead chelate is formed by exchange and excreted in the urine, leaving behind harmless calcium.\nEnvironmental effects.\nThe extraction, production, use, and disposal of lead and its products have caused significant contamination of the Earth's soils and waters. Atmospheric emissions of lead were at their peak during the Industrial Revolution, and the leaded gasoline period in the second half of the twentieth century.\nLead releases originate from natural sources (i.e., concentration of the naturally occurring lead), industrial production, incineration and recycling, and mobilization of previously buried lead. In particular, as lead has been phased out from other uses, in the Global South, lead recycling operations designed to extract cheap lead used for global manufacturing have become a well documented source of exposure. Elevated concentrations of lead persist in soils and sediments in post-industrial and urban areas; industrial emissions, including those arising from coal burning, continue in many parts of the world, particularly in the developing countries.\nLead can accumulate in soils, especially those with a high organic content, where it remains for hundreds to thousands of years. Environmental lead can compete with other metals found in and on plant surfaces potentially inhibiting photosynthesis and at high enough concentrations, negatively affecting plant growth and survival. Contamination of soils and plants can allow lead to ascend the food chain affecting microorganisms and animals. In animals, lead exhibits toxicity in many organs, damaging the nervous, renal, reproductive, hematopoietic, and cardiovascular systems after ingestion, inhalation, or skin absorption. Fish uptake lead from both water and sediment; bioaccumulation in the food chain poses a hazard to fish, birds, and sea mammals.\nAnthropogenic lead includes lead from shot and sinkers. These are among the most potent sources of lead contamination along with lead production sites. Lead was banned for shot and sinkers in the United States in 2017, although that ban was only effective for a month, and a similar ban is being considered in the European Union.\nAnalytical methods for the determination of lead in the environment include spectrophotometry, X-ray fluorescence, atomic spectroscopy, and electrochemical methods. A specific ion-selective electrode has been developed based on the ionophore \"S\",\"S\"'-methylenebis(\"N\",\"N\"-diisobutyldithiocarbamate). An important biomarker assay for lead poisoning is \u03b4-aminolevulinic acid levels in plasma, serum, and urine.\nRestriction and remediation.\nBy the mid-1980s, there was significant decline in the use of lead in industry. In the United States, environmental regulations reduced or eliminated the use of lead in non-battery products, including gasoline, paints, solders, and water systems. Particulate control devices were installed in coal-fired power plants to capture lead emissions. In 1992, U.S. Congress required the Environmental Protection Agency to reduce the blood lead levels of the country's children. Lead use was further curtailed by the European Union's 2003 Restriction of Hazardous Substances Directive. A large drop in lead deposition occurred in the Netherlands after the 1993 national ban on use of lead shot for hunting and sport shooting: from 230 tonnes in 1990 to 47.5 tonnes in 1995. The usage of lead in Avgas 100LL for general aviation is allowed in the EU as of 2022.\nIn the United States, the permissible exposure limit for lead in the workplace, comprising metallic lead, inorganic lead compounds, and lead soaps, was set at 50\u00a0\u03bcg/m3 over an 8-hour workday, and the blood lead level limit at 5\u00a0\u03bcg per 100\u00a0g of blood in 2012. Lead may still be found in harmful quantities in stoneware, vinyl (such as that used for tubing and the insulation of electrical cords), and Chinese brass. Old houses may still contain lead paint. White lead paint has been withdrawn from sale in industrialized countries, but specialized uses of other pigments such as yellow lead chromate remain, especially in road pavement marking paint. \nStripping old paint by sanding produces dust which can be inhaled. Lead abatement programs have been mandated by some authorities in properties where young children live. The usage of lead in Avgas 100LL for general aviation is generally allowed in United States as of 2023.\nLead waste, depending on the jurisdiction and the nature of the waste, may be treated as household waste (to facilitate lead abatement activities), or potentially hazardous waste requiring specialized treatment or storage. Lead is released into the environment in shooting places and a number of lead management practices have been developed to counter the lead contamination. Lead migration can be enhanced in acidic soils; to counter that, it is advised soils be treated with lime to neutralize the soils and prevent leaching of lead.\nResearch has been conducted on how to remove lead from biosystems by biological means: Fish bones are being researched for their ability to bioremediate lead in contaminated soil. The fungus \"Aspergillus versicolor\" is effective at absorbing lead ions from industrial waste before being released to water bodies. Several bacteria have been researched for their ability to remove lead from the environment, including the sulfate-reducing bacteria \"Desulfovibrio\" and \"Desulfotomaculum\", both of which are highly effective in aqueous solutions. Millet grass \"Urochloa ramosa\" has the ability to accumulate significant amounts of metals such as lead and zinc in its shoot and root tissues making it an important plant for remediation of contaminated soils.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17748", "revid": "48717798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17748", "title": "Limestone", "text": "Type of sedimentary rock\nLimestone is a type of carbonate sedimentary rock which is the main source of the material lime. It is composed mostly of the minerals calcite and aragonite, which are different crystal forms of calcium carbonate . Limestone forms when these minerals precipitate out of water containing dissolved calcium. This can take place through both biological and nonbiological processes, though biological processes, such as the accumulation of corals and shells in the sea, have likely been more important for the last 540 million years. Limestone often contains fossils which provide scientists with information on ancient environments and on the evolution of life.\nAbout 20% to 25% of sedimentary rock is carbonate rock, and most of this is limestone. The remaining carbonate rock is mostly dolomite, a closely related rock, which contains a high percentage of the mineral dolomite, . \"Magnesian limestone\" is an obsolete and poorly defined term used variously for dolomite, for limestone containing significant dolomite (\"dolomitic limestone\"), or for any other limestone containing a significant percentage of magnesium. Most limestone was formed in shallow marine environments, such as continental shelves or platforms, though smaller amounts were formed in many other environments. Much dolomite is secondary dolomite, formed by chemical alteration of limestone. Limestone is exposed over large regions of the Earth's surface, and because limestone is slightly soluble in rainwater, these exposures often are eroded to become karst landscapes. Most cave systems are found in limestone bedrock.\nLimestone has numerous uses: as a chemical feedstock for the production of lime used for cement (an essential component of concrete), as aggregate for the base of roads, as white pigment or filler in products such as toothpaste or paint, as a soil conditioner, and as a popular decorative addition to rock gardens. Limestone formations contain about 30% of the world's petroleum reservoirs.\nDescription.\nLimestone is composed mostly of the minerals calcite and aragonite, which are different crystal forms of calcium carbonate (). Dolomite, , is an uncommon mineral in limestone, and siderite or other carbonate minerals are rare. However, the calcite in limestone often contains a few percent of magnesium. Calcite in limestone is divided into low-magnesium and high-magnesium calcite, with the dividing line placed at a composition of 4% magnesium. High-magnesium calcite retains the calcite mineral structure, which is distinct from dolomite. Aragonite does not usually contain significant magnesium. Most limestone is otherwise chemically fairly pure, with clastic sediments (mainly fine-grained quartz and clay minerals) making up less than 5% to 10% of the composition. Organic matter typically makes up around 0.2% of a limestone and rarely exceeds 1%.\nLimestone often contains variable amounts of silica in the form of chert or siliceous skeletal fragments (such as sponge spicules, diatoms, or radiolarians). Fossils are also common in limestone.\nLimestone is commonly white to gray in color. Limestone that is unusually rich in organic matter can be almost black in color, while traces of iron or manganese can give limestone an off-white to yellow to red color. The density of limestone depends on its porosity, which varies from 0.1% for the densest limestone to 40% for chalk. The density correspondingly ranges from 1.5 to 2.7 g/cm3. Although relatively soft, with a Mohs hardness of 2 to 4, dense limestone can have a crushing strength of up to 180 MPa. For comparison, concrete typically has a crushing strength of about 40 MPa.\nAlthough limestones show little variability in mineral composition, they show great diversity in texture. However, most limestone consists of sand-sized grains in a carbonate mud matrix. Because limestones are often of biological origin and are usually composed of sediment that is deposited close to where it formed, classification of limestone is usually based on its grain type and mud content.\nGrains.\nMost grains in limestone are skeletal fragments of marine organisms such as coral or foraminifera. These organisms secrete structures made of aragonite or calcite, and leave these structures behind when they die. Other carbonate grains composing limestones are ooids, peloids, and limeclasts (intraclasts and extraclasts).\nSkeletal grains have a composition reflecting the organisms that produced them and the environment in which they were produced. Low-magnesium calcite skeletal grains are typical of articulate brachiopods, planktonic (free-floating) foraminifera, and coccoliths. High-magnesium calcite skeletal grains are typical of benthic (bottom-dwelling) foraminifera, echinoderms, and coralline algae. Aragonite skeletal grains are typical of molluscs, calcareous green algae, stromatoporoids, corals, and tube worms. The skeletal grains also reflect specific geological periods and environments. For example, coral grains are more common in high-energy environments (characterized by strong currents and turbulence) while bryozoan grains are more common in low-energy environments (characterized by quiet water).\nOoids (sometimes called ooliths) are sand-sized grains (less than 2mm in diameter) consisting of one or more layers of calcite or aragonite around a central quartz grain or carbonate mineral fragment. These likely form by direct precipitation of calcium carbonate onto the ooid. Pisoliths are similar to ooids, but they are larger than 2\u00a0mm in diameter and tend to be more irregular in shape. Limestone composed mostly of ooids is called an \"oolite\" or sometimes an \"oolitic limestone\". Ooids form in high-energy environments, such as the Bahama platform, and oolites typically show crossbedding and other features associated with deposition in strong currents.\n\"Oncoliths\" resemble ooids but show a radial rather than layered internal structure, indicating that they were formed by algae in a normal marine environment.\nPeloids are structureless grains of microcrystalline carbonate likely produced by a variety of processes. Many are thought to be fecal pellets produced by marine organisms. Others may be produced by endolithic (boring) algae or other microorganisms or through breakdown of mollusc shells. They are difficult to see in a limestone sample except in thin section and are less common in ancient limestones, possibly because compaction of carbonate sediments disrupts them.\nLimeclasts are fragments of existing limestone or partially lithified carbonate sediments. Intraclasts are limeclasts that originate close to where they are deposited in limestone, while extraclasts come from outside the depositional area. Intraclasts include \"grapestone\", which is clusters of peloids cemented together by organic material or mineral cement. Extraclasts are uncommon, are usually accompanied by other clastic sediments, and indicate deposition in a tectonically active area or as part of a turbidity current.\nMud.\nThe grains of most limestones are embedded in a matrix of carbonate mud. This is typically the largest fraction of an ancient carbonate rock. Mud consisting of individual crystals less than in length is described as \"micrite\". In fresh carbonate mud, micrite is mostly small aragonite needles, which may precipitate directly from seawater, be secreted by algae, or be produced by abrasion of carbonate grains in a high-energy environment. This is converted to calcite within a few million years of deposition. Further recrystallization of micrite produces \"microspar\", with grains from in diameter.\nLimestone often contains larger crystals of calcite, ranging in size from , that are described as \"sparry calcite\" or \"sparite\". Sparite is distinguished from micrite by a grain size of over and because sparite stands out under a hand lens or in thin section as white or transparent crystals. Sparite is distinguished from carbonate grains by its lack of internal structure and its characteristic crystal shapes.\nGeologists are careful to distinguish between sparite deposited as cement and sparite formed by recrystallization of micrite or carbonate grains. Sparite cement was likely deposited in pore space between grains, suggesting a high-energy depositional environment that removed carbonate mud. Recrystallized sparite is not diagnostic of depositional environment.\nOther characteristics.\nLimestone outcrops are recognized in the field by their softness (calcite and aragonite both have a Mohs hardness of less than 4, well below common silicate minerals) and because limestone bubbles vigorously when a drop of dilute hydrochloric acid is dropped on it. Dolomite is also soft but reacts only feebly with dilute hydrochloric acid, and it usually weathers to a characteristic dull yellow-brown color due to the presence of ferrous iron. This is released and oxidized as the dolomite weathers. Impurities (such as clay, sand, organic remains, iron oxide, and other materials) will cause limestones to exhibit different colors, especially with weathered surfaces.\nThe makeup of a carbonate rock outcrop can be estimated in the field by etching the surface with dilute hydrochloric acid. This etches away the calcite and aragonite, leaving behind any silica or dolomite grains. The latter can be identified by their rhombohedral shape.\nCrystals of calcite, quartz, dolomite or barite may line small cavities (\"vugs\") in the rock. Vugs are a form of secondary porosity, formed in existing limestone by a change in environment that increases the solubility of calcite.\nDense, massive limestone is sometimes described as \"marble\". For example, the famous Portoro \"marble\" of Italy is actually a dense black limestone. True marble is produced by recrystallization of limestone during regional metamorphism that accompanies the mountain building process (orogeny). It is distinguished from dense limestone by its coarse crystalline texture and the formation of distinctive minerals from the silica and clay present in the original limestone.\nClassification.\nTwo major classification schemes, the Folk and Dunham, are used for identifying the types of carbonate rocks collectively known as limestone.\nFolk classification.\nRobert L. Folk developed a classification system that places primary emphasis on the detailed composition of grains and interstitial material in carbonate rocks. Based on composition, there are three main components: allochems (grains), matrix (mostly micrite), and cement (sparite). The Folk system uses two-part names; the first refers to the grains and the second to the cement. For example, a limestone consisting mainly of ooids, with a crystalline matrix, would be termed an oosparite. It is helpful to have a petrographic microscope when using the Folk scheme, because it is easier to determine the components present in each sample.\nDunham classification.\nRobert J. Dunham published his system for limestone in 1962. It focuses on the depositional fabric of carbonate rocks. Dunham divides the rocks into four main groups based on relative proportions of coarser clastic particles, based on criteria such as whether the grains were originally in mutual contact, and therefore self-supporting, or whether the rock is characterized by the presence of frame builders and algal mats. Unlike the Folk scheme, Dunham deals with the original porosity of the rock. The Dunham scheme is more useful for hand samples because it is based on texture, not the grains in the sample.\nA revised classification was proposed by Wright (1992). It adds some diagenetic patterns to the classification scheme.\nOther descriptive terms.\n\"Travertine\" is a term applied to calcium carbonate deposits formed in freshwater environments, particularly waterfalls, cascades and hot springs. Such deposits are typically massive, dense, and banded. When the deposits are highly porous, so that they have a spongelike texture, they are typically described as \"tufa\". Secondary calcite deposited by supersaturated meteoric waters (groundwater) in caves is also sometimes described as travertine. This produces speleothems, such as stalagmites and stalactites.\n\"Coquina\" is a poorly consolidated limestone composed of abraded pieces of coral, shells, or other fossil debris. When better consolidated, it is described as \"coquinite\".\n\"Chalk\" is a soft, earthy, fine-textured limestone composed of the tests of planktonic microorganisms such as foraminifera, while\n\"marl\" is an earthy mixture of carbonates and silicate sediments.\nFormation.\nLimestone forms when calcite or aragonite precipitate out of water containing dissolved calcium, which can take place through both biological and nonbiological processes. The solubility of calcium carbonate () is controlled largely by the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide () in the water. This is summarized in the reaction:\nIncreases in temperature or decreases in pressure tend to reduce the amount of dissolved and precipitate . Reduction in salinity also reduces the solubility of , by several orders of magnitude for fresh water versus seawater.\nNear-surface water of the earth's oceans are oversaturated with by a factor of more than six. The failure of to rapidly precipitate out of these waters is likely due to interference by dissolved magnesium ions with nucleation of calcite crystals, the necessary first step in precipitation. Precipitation of aragonite may be suppressed by the presence of naturally occurring organic phosphates in the water. Although ooids likely form through purely inorganic processes, the bulk of precipitation in the oceans is the result of biological activity. Much of this takes place on carbonate platforms.\nThe origin of carbonate mud, and the processes by which it is converted to micrite, continue to be a subject of research. Modern carbonate mud is composed mostly of aragonite needles around in length. Needles of this shape and composition are produced by calcareous algae such as \"Penicillus\", making this a plausible source of mud. Another possibility is direct precipitation from the water. A phenomenon known as \"whitings\" occurs in shallow waters, in which white streaks containing dispersed micrite appear on the surface of the water. It is uncertain whether this is freshly precipitated aragonite or simply material stirred up from the bottom, but there is some evidence that whitings are caused by biological precipitation of aragonite as part of a bloom of cyanobacteria or microalgae. However, stable isotope ratios in modern carbonate mud appear to be inconsistent with either of these mechanisms, and abrasion of carbonate grains in high-energy environments has been put forward as a third possibility.\nFormation of limestone has likely been dominated by biological processes throughout the Phanerozoic, the last 540 million years of the Earth's history. Limestone may have been deposited by microorganisms in the Precambrian, prior to 540 million years ago, but inorganic processes were probably more important and likely took place in an ocean more highly oversaturated in calcium carbonate than the modern ocean.\nDiagenesis.\nDiagenesis is the process in which sediments are compacted and turned into solid rock. During diagenesis of carbonate sediments, significant chemical and textural changes take place. For example, aragonite is converted to low-magnesium calcite. Diagenesis is the likely origin of \"pisoliths\", concentrically layered particles ranging from in diameter found in some limestones. Pisoliths superficially resemble ooids but have no nucleus of foreign matter, fit together tightly, and show other signs that they formed after the original deposition of the sediments.\nSilicification occurs early in diagenesis, at low pH and temperature, and contributes to fossil preservation. Silicification takes place through the reaction:\nFossils are often preserved in exquisite detail as chert.\nCementing takes place rapidly in carbonate sediments, typically within less than a million years of deposition. Some cementing occurs while the sediments are still under water, forming hardgrounds. Cementing accelerates after the retreat of the sea from the depositional environment, as rainwater infiltrates the sediment beds, often within just a few thousand years. As rainwater mixes with groundwater, aragonite and high-magnesium calcite are converted to low-calcium calcite. Cementing of thick carbonate deposits by rainwater may commence even before the retreat of the sea, as rainwater can infiltrate over into sediments beneath the continental shelf.\nAs carbonate sediments are increasingly deeply buried under younger sediments, chemical and mechanical compaction of the sediments increases. Chemical compaction takes place by \"pressure solution\" of the sediments. This process dissolves minerals from points of contact between grains and redeposits it in pore space, reducing the porosity of the limestone from an initial high value of 40% to 80% to less than 10%. Pressure solution produces distinctive stylolites, irregular surfaces within the limestone at which silica-rich sediments accumulate. These may reflect dissolution and loss of a considerable fraction of the limestone bed. At depths greater than , burial cementation completes the lithification process. Burial cementation does not produce stylolites.\nWhen overlying beds are eroded, bringing limestone closer to the surface, the final stage of diagenesis takes place. This produces \"secondary porosity\" as some of the cement is dissolved by rainwater infiltrating the beds. This may include the formation of vugs, which are crystal-lined cavities within the limestone.\nDiagenesis may include conversion of limestone to dolomite by magnesium-rich fluids. There is considerable evidence of replacement of limestone by dolomite, including sharp replacement boundaries that cut across bedding. The process of dolomitization remains an area of active research, but possible mechanisms include exposure to concentrated brines in hot environments (\"evaporative reflux\") or exposure to diluted seawater in delta or estuary environments (\"Dorag dolomitization\"). However, Dorag dolomitization has fallen into disfavor as a mechanism for dolomitization, with one 2004 review paper describing it bluntly as \"a myth\". Ordinary seawater is capable of converting calcite to dolomite, if the seawater is regularly flushed through the rock, as by the ebb and flow of tides (tidal pumping). Once dolomitization begins, it proceeds rapidly, so that there is very little carbonate rock containing mixed calcite and dolomite. Carbonate rock tends to be either almost all calcite/aragonite or almost all dolomite.\nOccurrence.\nAbout 20% to 25% of sedimentary rock is carbonate rock, and most of this is limestone. Limestone is found in sedimentary sequences as old as 2.7 billion years. However, the compositions of carbonate rocks show an uneven distribution in time in the geologic record. About 95% of modern carbonates are composed of high-magnesium calcite and aragonite. The aragonite needles in carbonate mud are converted to low-magnesium calcite within a few million years, as this is the most stable form of calcium carbonate. Ancient carbonate formations of the Precambrian and Paleozoic contain abundant dolomite, but limestone dominates the carbonate beds of the Mesozoic and Cenozoic. Modern dolomite is quite rare. There is evidence that, while the modern ocean favors precipitation of aragonite, the oceans of the Paleozoic and middle to late Cenozoic favored precipitation of calcite. This may indicate a lower Mg/Ca ratio in the ocean water of those times. This magnesium depletion may be a consequence of more rapid sea floor spreading, which removes magnesium from ocean water. The modern ocean and the ocean of the Mesozoic have been described as \"aragonite seas\".\nMost limestone was formed in shallow marine environments, such as continental shelves or platforms. Such environments form only about 5% of the ocean basins, but limestone is rarely preserved in continental slope and deep sea environments. The best environments for deposition are warm waters, which have both a high organic productivity and increased saturation of calcium carbonate due to lower concentrations of dissolved carbon dioxide. Modern limestone deposits are almost always in areas with very little silica-rich sedimentation, reflected in the relative purity of most limestones. Reef organisms are destroyed by muddy, brackish river water, and carbonate grains are ground down by much harder silicate grains. Unlike clastic sedimentary rock, limestone is produced almost entirely from sediments originating at or near the place of deposition.\nLimestone formations tend to show abrupt changes in thickness. Large moundlike features in a limestone formation are interpreted as ancient reefs, which when they appear in the geologic record are called \"bioherms\". Many are rich in fossils, but most lack any connected organic framework like that seen in modern reefs. The fossil remains are present as separate fragments embedded in ample mud matrix. Much of the sedimentation shows indications of occurring in the intertidal or supratidal zones, suggesting sediments rapidly fill available accommodation space in the shelf or platform. Deposition is also favored on the seaward margin of shelves and platforms, where there is upwelling deep ocean water rich in nutrients that increase organic productivity. Reefs are common here, but when lacking, ooid shoals are found instead. Finer sediments are deposited close to shore.\nThe lack of deep sea limestones is due in part to rapid subduction of oceanic crust, but is more a result of dissolution of calcium carbonate at depth. The solubility of calcium carbonate increases with pressure and even more with higher concentrations of carbon dioxide, which is produced by decaying organic matter settling into the deep ocean that is not removed by photosynthesis in the dark depths. As a result, there is a fairly sharp transition from water saturated with calcium carbonate to water unsaturated with calcium carbonate, the \"lysocline\", which occurs at the \"calcite compensation depth\" of . Below this depth, foraminifera tests and other skeletal particles rapidly dissolve, and the sediments of the ocean floor abruptly transition from carbonate ooze rich in foraminifera and coccolith remains (\"Globigerina\" ooze) to silicic mud lacking carbonates.\nIn rare cases, turbidites or other silica-rich sediments bury and preserve benthic (deep ocean) carbonate deposits. Ancient benthic limestones are microcrystalline and are identified by their tectonic setting. Fossils typically are foraminifera and coccoliths. No pre-Jurassic benthic limestones are known, probably because carbonate-shelled plankton had not yet evolved.\nLimestones also form in freshwater environments. These limestones are not unlike marine limestone, but have a lower diversity of organisms and a greater fraction of silica and clay minerals characteristic of marls. The Green River Formation is an example of a prominent freshwater sedimentary formation containing numerous limestone beds. Freshwater limestone is typically micritic. Fossils of charophyte (stonewort), a form of freshwater green algae, are characteristic of these environments, where the charophytes produce and trap carbonates.\nLimestones may also form in evaporite depositional environments. Calcite is one of the first minerals to precipitate in marine evaporites.\nLimestone and living organisms.\nMost limestone is formed by the activities of living organisms near reefs, but the organisms responsible for reef formation have changed over geologic time. For example, \"stromatolites\" are mound-shaped structures in ancient limestones, interpreted as colonies of cyanobacteria that accumulated carbonate sediments, but stromatolites are rare in younger limestones. Organisms precipitate limestone both directly as part of their skeletons, and indirectly by removing carbon dioxide from the water by photosynthesis and thereby decreasing the solubility of calcium carbonate.\nLimestone shows the same range of sedimentary structures found in other sedimentary rocks. However, finer structures, such as lamination, are often destroyed by the burrowing activities of organisms (bioturbation). Fine lamination is characteristic of limestone formed in playa lakes, which lack the burrowing organisms. Limestones also show distinctive features such as \"geopetal structures\", which form when curved shells settle to the bottom with the concave face downwards. This traps a void space that can later be filled by sparite. Geologists use geopetal structures to determine which direction was up at the time of deposition, which is not always obvious with highly deformed limestone formations.\nThe cyanobacterium \"Hyella balani\" can bore through limestone; as can the green alga \"Eugamantia sacculata\" and the fungus \"Ostracolaba implexa\".\nMicritic mud mounds.\nMicricitic mud mounds are subcircular domes of micritic calcite that lacks internal structure. Modern examples are up to several hundred meters thick and a kilometer across, and have steep slopes (with slope angles of around 50 degrees). They may be composed of peloids swept together by currents and stabilized by \"Thalassia\" grass or mangroves. Bryozoa may also contribute to mound formation by helping to trap sediments.\nMud mounds are found throughout the geologic record, and prior to the early Ordovician, they were the dominant reef type in both deep and shallow water. These mud mounds likely are microbial in origin. Following the appearance of frame-building reef organisms, mud mounds were restricted mainly to deeper water.\nOrganic reefs.\nOrganic reefs form at low latitudes in shallow water, not more than a few meters deep. They are complex, diverse structures found throughout the fossil record. The frame-building organisms responsible for organic reef formation are characteristic of different geologic time periods: Archaeocyathids appeared in the early Cambrian; these gave way to sponges by the late Cambrian; later successions included stromatoporoids, corals, algae, bryozoa, and rudists (a form of bivalve mollusc). The extent of organic reefs has varied over geologic time, and they were likely most extensive in the middle Devonian, when they covered an area estimated at . This is roughly ten times the extent of modern reefs. The Devonian reefs were constructed largely by stromatoporoids and tabulate corals, which were devastated by the late Devonian extinction.\nOrganic reefs typically have a complex internal structure. Whole body fossils are usually abundant, but ooids and interclasts are rare within the reef. The core of a reef is typically massive and unbedded, and is surrounded by a talus that is greater in volume than the core. The talus contains abundant intraclasts and is usually either \"floatstone\", with 10% or more of grains over 2mm in size embedded in abundant matrix, or \"rudstone\", which is mostly large grains with sparse matrix. The talus grades to planktonic fine-grained carbonate mud, then noncarbonate mud away from the reef.\nLimestone landscape.\nLimestone is partially soluble, especially in acid, and therefore forms many erosional landforms. These include limestone pavements, pot holes, cenotes, caves and gorges. Such erosion landscapes are known as karsts. Limestone is less resistant to erosion than most igneous rocks, but more resistant than most other sedimentary rocks. It is therefore usually associated with hills and downland, and occurs in regions with other sedimentary rocks, typically clays.\nKarst regions overlying limestone bedrock tend to have fewer visible above-ground sources (ponds and streams), as surface water easily drains downward through joints in the limestone. While draining, water and organic acid from the soil slowly (over thousands or millions of years) enlarges these cracks, dissolving the calcium carbonate and carrying it away in solution. Most cave systems are through limestone bedrock. Cooling groundwater or mixing of different groundwaters will also create conditions suitable for cave formation.\nCoastal limestones are often eroded by organisms which bore into the rock by various means. This process is known as bioerosion. It is most common in the tropics, and it is known throughout the fossil record.\nBands of limestone emerge from the Earth's surface in often spectacular rocky outcrops and islands. Examples include the Rock of Gibraltar, the Burren in County Clare, Ireland; Malham Cove in North Yorkshire and the Isle of Wight, England; the Great Orme in Wales; on F\u00e5r\u00f6 near the Swedish island of Gotland, the Niagara Escarpment in Canada/United States; Notch Peak in Utah; the Ha Long Bay National Park in Vietnam; and the hills around the Lijiang River and Guilin city in China.\nThe Florida Keys, islands off the south coast of Florida, are composed mainly of oolitic limestone (the Lower Keys) and the carbonate skeletons of coral reefs (the Upper Keys), which thrived in the area during interglacial periods when sea level was higher than at present.\nUnique habitats are found on alvars, extremely level expanses of limestone with thin soil mantles. The largest such expanse in Europe is the Stora Alvaret on the island of \u00d6land, Sweden. Another area with large quantities of limestone is the island of Gotland, Sweden. Huge quarries in northwestern Europe, such as those of Mount Saint Peter (Belgium/Netherlands), extend for more than a hundred kilometers.\nUses.\nLimestone is a raw material that is used globally in a variety of different ways including construction, agriculture and as industrial materials. Limestone is very common in architecture, especially in Europe and North America. Many landmarks across the world, including the Great Pyramid and its associated complex in Giza, Egypt, were made of limestone. So many buildings in Kingston, Ontario, Canada were, and continue to be, constructed from it that it is nicknamed the 'Limestone City'. Limestone, metamorphosed by heat and pressure produces marble, which has been used for many statues, buildings and stone tabletops. On the island of Malta, a variety of limestone called Globigerina limestone was, for a long time, the only building material available, and is still very frequently used on all types of buildings and sculptures.\nLimestone can be processed into many various forms such as brick, cement, powdered/crushed, or as a filler. Limestone is readily available and relatively easy to cut into blocks or more elaborate carving. Ancient American sculptors valued limestone because it was easy to work and good for fine detail. Going back to the Late Preclassic period (by 200\u2013100 BCE), the Maya civilization (Ancient Mexico) created refined sculpture using limestone because of these excellent carving properties. The Maya would decorate the ceilings of their sacred buildings (known as lintels) and cover the walls with carved limestone panels. Carved on these sculptures were political and social stories, and this helped communicate messages of the king to his people. Limestone is long-lasting and stands up well to exposure, which explains why many limestone ruins survive. However, it is very heavy (density 2.6), making it impractical for tall buildings, and relatively expensive as a building material.\nLimestone was most popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Railway stations, banks and other structures from that era were made of limestone in some areas. It is used as a fa\u00e7ade on some skyscrapers, but only in thin plates for covering, rather than solid blocks. In the United States, Indiana, most notably the Bloomington area, has long been a source of high-quality quarried limestone, called Indiana limestone. Many famous buildings in London are built from Portland limestone. Houses built in Odesa in Ukraine in the 19th century were mostly constructed from limestone and the extensive remains of the mines now form the Odesa Catacombs.\nLimestone was also a very popular building block in the Middle Ages in the areas where it occurred, since it is hard, durable, and commonly occurs in easily accessible surface exposures. Many medieval churches and castles in Europe are made of limestone. Beer stone was a popular kind of limestone for medieval buildings in southern England.\nLimestone is the raw material for production of lime, primarily known for treating soils, purifying water and smelting copper. Lime is an important ingredient used in chemical industries. Limestone and (to a lesser extent) marble are reactive to acid solutions, making acid rain a significant problem to the preservation of artifacts made from this stone. Many limestone statues and building surfaces have suffered severe damage due to acid rain. Likewise limestone gravel has been used to protect lakes vulnerable to acid rain, acting as a pH buffering agent. Acid-based cleaning chemicals can also etch limestone, which should only be cleaned with a neutral or mild alkali-based cleaner.\nOther uses include:\nMany limestone formations are porous and permeable, which makes them important petroleum reservoirs. About 20% of North American hydrocarbon reserves are found in carbonate rock. Carbonate reservoirs are very common in the petroleum-rich Middle East, and carbonate reservoirs hold about a third of all petroleum reserves worldwide. Limestone formations are also common sources of metal ores, because their porosity and permeability, together with their chemical activity, promotes ore deposition in the limestone. The lead-zinc deposits of Missouri and the Northwest Territories are examples of ore deposits hosted in limestone.\nScarcity.\nLimestone is a major industrial raw material that is in constant demand. This raw material has been essential in the iron and steel industry since the nineteenth century. Companies have never had a shortage of limestone; however, it has become a concern as the demand continues to increase and it remains in high demand today. The major potential threats to supply in the nineteenth century were regional availability and accessibility. The two main accessibility issues were transportation and property rights. Other problems were high capital costs on plants and facilities due to environmental regulations and the requirement of zoning and mining permits. These two dominant factors led to the adaptation and selection of other materials that were created and formed to design alternatives for limestone that suited economic demands.\nLimestone was classified as a critical raw material, and with the potential risk of shortages, it drove industries to find new alternative materials and technological systems. This allowed limestone to no longer be classified as critical as replacement substances increased in production; minette ore is a common substitute, for example.\nOccupational safety and health.\nPowdered limestone as a food additive is generally recognized as safe and limestone is not regarded as a hazardous material. However, limestone dust can be a mild respiratory and skin irritant, and dust that gets into the eyes can cause corneal abrasions. Because limestone contains small amounts of silica, inhalation of limestone dust could potentially lead to silicosis or cancer.\nUnited States.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (permissible exposure limit) for limestone exposure in the workplace as total exposure and respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of total exposure and respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.\nGraffiti.\nRemoving graffiti from weathered limestone is difficult because it is a porous and permeable material. The surface is fragile, therefore usual abrasion methods run the risk of severe surface loss. Since it is an acid-sensitive stone, some cleaning agents cannot be used due to adverse effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17749", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17749", "title": "Lubeck", "text": ""}
{"id": "17750", "revid": "21300082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17750", "title": "L\u00fcbeck", "text": "City in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany\nL\u00fcbeck (; or ; Latin: ), officially the Hanseatic City of L\u00fcbeck (), is a city in Northern Germany. With around 220,000 inhabitants, it is the second-largest city on the German Baltic coast and the second-largest city in the state of Schleswig-Holstein, after its capital of Kiel. It is the 36th-largest city in Germany.\nThe city lies in the Holsatian part of Schleswig-Holstein, on the mouth of the Trave, which flows into the Bay of L\u00fcbeck in the borough of Travem\u00fcnde, and on the Trave's tributary Wakenitz. The island with the historic old town and the districts north of the Trave are also located in the historical region of Wagria. L\u00fcbeck is the southwesternmost city on the Baltic Sea, and the closest point of access to the Baltic from Hamburg. The city lies in the Holsatian dialect area of Low German.\nThe name \"L\u00fcbeck\" ultimately stems from the Slavic root ('love-'). Before 819, Polabian Slavs founded a settlement which they called Liubice on the mouth of the Schwartau into the Trave. Since the 10th century, Liubice was the second-most important settlement of the Obotrites after Starigard. L\u00fcbeck was granted Soest city rights in 1160, and, in 1260, it became an immediate city within the Holy Roman Empire. In the middle of the 12th century, L\u00fcbeck developed into the cradle of the Hanseatic League, of which it was considered the de facto capital and most important city from then on. The L\u00fcbeck law was eventually adopted by around 100 cities in the Baltic region. L\u00fcbeck could preserve its status as an independent city, which it held since 1226, until 1937.\nL\u00fcbeck's historic old town, located on a densely built-up island, is Germany's most extensive UNESCO World Heritage Site. With six church towers surpassing , L\u00fcbeck is the city with the highest number of tall church towers worldwide. Nicknamed the \"City of the Seven Towers\" (), L\u00fcbeck's skyline is dominated by the seven towers of its five Protestant main churches: St Mary's, L\u00fcbeck Cathedral, St James', St Peter's, and St Giles's. The cathedral, constructed in various stages between 1173 and 1335, was the first large brickwork church in the Baltic region. St Mary's Church, built between 1265 and 1351, is considered the model on which most of the other Brick Gothic churches in the sphere of influence of the Hanseatic League are based. It is the second-tallest church with two main towers after Cologne Cathedral (which only surpassed it in 1880), has the tallest brick vault, and is the second-tallest brickwork structure after St. Martin's Church in Landshut.\nL\u00fcbeck is home to the University of L\u00fcbeck with its University Medical Center Schleswig Holstein, the Technical University of Applied Sciences L\u00fcbeck, and the L\u00fcbeck Academy of Music. There are 18 museums in L\u00fcbeck, among which are the European Hansemuseum, L\u00fcbeck Museum Port, and the Niederegger Marzipan Museum dedicated to the culinary specialty for which the city is best known, namely L\u00fcbeck Marzipan. Due to their southwestern location, Travem\u00fcnde and the nearby seaside resorts of Niendorf, Timmendorfer Strand, Scharbeutz, Haffkrug, Sierksdorf, and Gr\u00f6mitz are among Germany's most visited.\nL\u00fcbeck Main Station is located on the railway line connecting continental Europe (Hamburg) to Scandinavia (Copenhagen) via the future Fehmarn Belt fixed link. The port of L\u00fcbeck is the second-largest German port on the Baltic Sea after the port of Rostock, and the in Travem\u00fcnde is Germany's most important ferry port, with connections to Scandinavia and the Baltic countries. The city has its own regional airport at L\u00fcbeck-Blankensee, while nearby Hamburg Airport serves as L\u00fcbeck's main air hub.\nHistory.\nHumans settled in the area around what today is L\u00fcbeck after the last Ice Age ended about 9700 BCE. Several Neolithic dolmens can be found in the area.\nAround 700 AD, Slavic peoples started moving into the eastern parts of Holstein, an area previously settled by Germanic inhabitants who had moved on in the Migration Period. Charlemagne, whose efforts to Christianise the area were opposed by the Germanic Saxons, expelled many of the Saxons and brought in Polabian Slavs allies. Liubice (the place-name means \"how lovely\") was founded on the banks of the River Trave about north of the present-day city-center of L\u00fcbeck.\nIn the 10th century, it became the most important settlement of the Obotrite confederacy and a castle was built. In 1128, the pagan Rani from R\u00fcgen razed Liubice.\nIn 1143, Adolf II, Count of Schauenburg and Holstein, founded the modern town as a German settlement on the river island of Bucu. He built a new castle, first mentioned by the chronicler Helmold as existing in 1147. Adolf had to cede the castle to the Duke of Saxony, Henry the Lion, in 1158. After Henry's fall from power in 1181, the town became an Imperial city for eight years.\nEmperor Barbarossa (reigned 1152\u20131190) ordained that the city should have a ruling council of 20 members. With the council dominated by merchants, pragmatic trade interests shaped L\u00fcbeck's politics for centuries. The council survived into the 19th century. The town and castle changed ownership for a period afterwards and formed part of the Duchy of Saxony until 1192, of the County of Holstein until 1217, and of the kingdom of Denmark until the Battle of Bornh\u00f6ved in 1227.\nHanseatic city.\nAround 1200, the port became the main point of departure for colonists leaving for the Baltic territories conquered by the Livonian Order, and later, by the Teutonic Order. In 1226, Emperor Frederick II elevated the town to the status of an Imperial free city, by which it became the Free City of L\u00fcbeck.\nIn the 14th century, L\u00fcbeck became the \"Queen of the Hanseatic League\", being by far the largest and most powerful member of that medieval trade organization. In 1375, Emperor Charles IV named L\u00fcbeck one of the five \"Glories of the Empire\", a title shared with Venice, Rome, Pisa, and Florence.\nSeveral conflicts about trading privileges resulted in fighting between L\u00fcbeck (with the Hanseatic League) and Denmark and Norway \u2013 with varying outcome. While L\u00fcbeck and the Hanseatic League prevailed in conflicts in 1435 and 1512, L\u00fcbeck lost when it became involved in the Count's Feud, a civil war that raged in Denmark from 1534 to 1536. L\u00fcbeck also joined the pro-Lutheran Schmalkaldic League of the mid-16th century.\nDecline.\nAfter its defeat in the Count's Feud, L\u00fcbeck's power slowly declined. The city remained neutral in the Thirty Years' War of 1618\u20131648, but the combination of the devastation from the decades-long war and the new transatlantic orientation of European trade caused the Hanseatic League \u2013 and thus L\u00fcbeck with it \u2013 to decline in importance. However, even after the \"de facto\" disbanding of the Hanseatic League in 1669, L\u00fcbeck still remained an important trading town on the Baltic Sea.\nFrom the Napoleonic wars to the Franco-Prussian war.\nIn the course of the war of the Fourth Coalition against Napoleon, troops under Marshal Jean Baptiste Bernadotte (who would later become King of Sweden) occupied L\u00fcbeck after a battle against Prussian General Gebhard Bl\u00fccher on 6 November 1806 due to the latter's illegal use of the city as a fortress, in violation of L\u00fcbeck's neutrality, following the French pursuit of his corps after the Battle of Jena-Auerstadt. Under the Continental System, the State bank went into bankruptcy. In 1811, the French Empire formally annexed L\u00fcbeck as part of France but the anti-Napoleonic allies liberated the area in 1813.\nAfter Napoleon's defeat, the Congress of Vienna of 1815 recognised L\u00fcbeck as an independent free city. The city became a member of the German Confederation (1815\u20131866), the North German Confederation (1866\u20131871) and the German Empire (1871\u20131918).\nDuring the Franco-Prussian War, the battalion de Fusilier of L\u00fcbeck was part of the \"2nd Hanseatic Infantry Regiment No. 76\".\nOn the day of the Battle of Loigny the commander of the 17th Division, Hugo von Kottwitz, of the morning advanced in front of the Fusilier battalion of the regiment, urging them to \"commemorate the bravery of the Hanseatic League\". his attack in the north while the other battalions turned towards Loigny.\nThis shock surprised the French so much that they were invaded by their flank. They fled to the Fougeu place and were kicked out of this. The battle was to become the founding myth of the last L\u00fcbeck regiment, 3rd Hanseatic Infantry Regiment No. 162, which was founded in 1897. When the battalion commander returned to L\u00fcbeck with his battalion, he was appointed regimental commander.\n20th century.\nAt the end of the First World War and the fall of the German Empire, L\u00fcbeck became a member state of the Weimar Republic (1919\u20131933). After the Nazi seizure of power, L\u00fcbeck, like all other German states, was subjected to the process of \"Gleichschaltung\" (coordination). Subsequent to the enactment of the \"Second Law on the Coordination of the States with the Reich\" on 7 April 1933, Friedrich Hildebrandt was appointed to the new position of \"Reichsstatthalter\" (Reich Governor) of L\u00fcbeck on 26 May 1933. Hildebrandt installed Otto-Heinrich Drechsler as the \"B\u00fcrgermeister\", displacing the duly-elected Social Democrat, Paul L\u00f6wigt.\nAdditionally, on 30 January 1934, the Reich government enacted the \"Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich,\" formally abolishing all the state parliaments and transferring the sovereignty of the states to the central government. With this action, the L\u00fcbeck popular assembly, the \"B\u00fcrgerschaft\", was dissolved and L\u00fcbeck effectively lost its rights as a federal state. Under the provisions of the Greater Hamburg Act, L\u00fcbeck was absorbed into the Prussian Province of Schleswig-Holstein, effective 1 April 1937, thereby losing its 711-year status as an independent free city.\nDuring World War II (1939\u20131945), L\u00fcbeck became the first German city to suffer substantial Royal Air Force (RAF) bombing. The attack of 28 March 1942 created a firestorm that caused severe damage to the historic centre. This raid destroyed three of the main churches and large parts of the built-up area; the bells of St Marienkircke plunged to the stone floor. Nearly 1,500 houses were completely destroyed, 2,200 heavily damaged and 9,000 slightly damaged. More than 320 people lost their lives. The industrial area of L\u00fcbeck was bombed on 25 August 1944 and 110 people were killed. In total, nearly 20% of the city centre was entirely destroyed, with particular damage in the Gr\u00fcndungsviertel neighborhood, where the rich merchants from the Hanseatic League had once lived. Germany operated a prisoner-of-war camp for officers, Oflag X-C, near the city from 1940 until April 1945. The British Second Army entered L\u00fcbeck on 2 May 1945 and occupied it without resistance.\nOn 3 May 1945, one of the biggest disasters in naval history occurred in the Bay of L\u00fcbeck when RAF bombers sank three ships: the SS \"Cap Arcona\", the SS \"Deutschland\", and the SS \"Thielbek\" \u2013 which, unknown to them, were packed with concentration-camp inmates. About 7,000 people died.\nL\u00fcbeck's population grew considerably, from about 150,000 in 1939 to more than 220,000 after the war, owing to an influx of ethnic German refugees expelled from the former eastern provinces of Germany in the Communist Bloc. L\u00fcbeck remained part of Schleswig-Holstein after World War II (and consequently lay within West Germany). It stood directly on what became the inner German border during the division of Germany into two states in the Cold War period. South of the city, the border followed the path of the river Wakenitz, which separated Germany by less than in many parts. The northernmost border crossing was in L\u00fcbeck's district of Schlutup. L\u00fcbeck spent decades restoring its historic city centre. In 1987, UNESCO designated this area a World Heritage Site.\nIn April 2015, L\u00fcbeck hosted the G7 conference.\nClimate.\nL\u00fcbeck has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\"; Trewartha: \"Dobk\"). L\u00fcbeck is located on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea and is greatly regulated by the ocean. The average annual temperature ranges from in winter to in summer. Although the summer is relatively cooler than inland, there is still a high probability of high temperature days. On average, there are 6.6 days per year with maximum temperatures exceeding .\nThe L\u00fcbeck weather station has recorded the following extreme values:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nL\u00fcbeck has a population of about 217,000 people and is the 2nd largest city in Schleswig-Holstein. L\u00fcbeck became a major city after becoming a part of the Hanseatic League in the 15th century. L\u00fcbeck later became one of the important and leading Hanseatic cities in Europe. Following World War II, the population of L\u00fcbeck grew rapidly due to the refugee crisis, as many people from East Prussia and other former parts of Germany and had to flee there after the war. The population began to decline in the 1970s but grew again in 1990s after the German Reunification, as many people from the former East Germany came to L\u00fcbeck due to the fact that it lies directly on the former East German border. Today L\u00fcbeck attracts many tourists due to its rich history and Hanseatic architecture, and it is known as one of the most beautiful cities in Germany.\nThe largest ethnic minority groups are Turks, Central Europeans (Poles), Southern Europeans (mostly Greeks and Italians), Eastern Europeans (e.g. Russians and Ukrainians), Arabs, and several smaller groups.\nPolitics.\nThe current mayor of L\u00fcbeck is Jan Lindenau of the Social Democratic Party (SPD). The most recent mayoral election was held in 2017. The L\u00fcbeck city council governs the city alongside the mayor.\nCulture.\nTourism.\nIn 2019, L\u00fcbeck reached 2 million overnight stays. L\u00fcbeck is famous for its medieval city centre with its churches, Holstentor, and small alleys. L\u00fcbeck has been called \"Die Stadt der 7 T\u00fcrme\" (the city of seven towers) because of its seven prominent church towers. Like many other places in Germany, L\u00fcbeck has a long tradition of a Christmas market in December, which includes the famous handicrafts market inside the Heiligen-Geist-Hospital (Hospital of the Holy Spirit), located at the northern end of K\u00f6nigstrasse.\nBuildings.\nOver 80% of the old town has preserved its medieval appearance, with historic buildings and narrow streets. The rest has been and is currently in a process of restoration and reconstruction. At one time, the town could only be entered by any of four town gates, two of which remain today, the well-known Holstentor (1478) and the Burgtor (1444).\nThe old town centre is dominated by seven church steeples. The oldest are L\u00fcbeck Cathedral and the Marienkirche (Saint Mary's), both dating from the 13th and 14th centuries.\nBuilt in 1286, the Hospital of the Holy Spirit at Koberg is one of the oldest existing social institutions in the world and one of the most important buildings in the city. The Hospital functions both as a retirement and a nursing home. Some historical parts have been made available for public viewing.\nOther sights include:\nMusic, literature and the arts.\nThe composer Franz Tunder was principal organist in the Marienkirche, L\u00fcbeck, when he initiated the tradition of weekly \"Abendmusiken\". In 1668, his daughter Anna Margarethe married the Danish-German composer Dieterich Buxtehude, who became the new organist at the Marienkirche. Some of the rising composers of the day travelled to L\u00fcbeck to witness his performances, notably Handel and Mattheson in 1703, and Bach in 1705.\nWriter and Nobel laureate Thomas Mann was a member of the Mann family of L\u00fcbeck merchants. His well-known 1901 novel \"Buddenbrooks\" made readers in Germany (and later worldwide, through numerous translations) familiar with the manner of life and mores of the 19th-century L\u00fcbeck \"bourgeoisie\".\nL\u00fcbeck became the scene of a notable art scandal in the 1950s. Lothar Malskat was hired to restore medieval frescoes of the Marienkirche, which were unearthed as a result of severe bomb damage during World War II. Instead, he painted new works, which he passed off as restorations, fooling many experts. Malskat later revealed the deception himself. Writer and Nobel laureate G\u00fcnter Grass featured this incident in his 1986 novel \"The Rat\"; from 1995 he lived close to L\u00fcbeck in Behlendorf, where he was buried in 2015.\nMuseums.\nL\u00fcbeck has many small museums, such as the St. Anne's Museum Quarter, L\u00fcbeck, the Behnhaus, the European Hansemuseum, and the Holstentor. L\u00fcbeck Museum of Theatre Puppets is a privately run museum. Waterside attractions are a lightvessel that served Fehmarnbelt and the Lisa von L\u00fcbeck, a reconstruction of a Hanseatic 15th century caravel.\nThe marzipan museum in the second floor of Caf\u00e9 Niederegger in Breite Strasse explains the history of marzipan, and shows historical wood molds for the production of marzipan blocks and a group of historical figures made of marzipan.\nFood and drink.\nL\u00fcbeck is famous for its marzipan industry. According to local legend, marzipan was first made in L\u00fcbeck, possibly in response either to a military siege of the city or a famine year. The story, perhaps apocryphal, is that the city ran out of all food except stored almonds and sugar, which were used to make loaves of marzipan \"bread\". Others believe that marzipan was actually invented in Persia a few hundred years before L\u00fcbeck claims to have invented it. The best known producer is Niederegger, which tourists often visit while in L\u00fcbeck, especially at Christmas time.\nThe L\u00fcbeck wine trade dates back to Hanseatic times. One L\u00fcbeck specialty is Rotspon (), wine made from grapes processed and fermented in France and transported in wooden barrels to L\u00fcbeck, where it is stored, aged and bottled.\nLike other coastal North German communities, Fischbr\u00f6tchen and Brathering are popular takeaway foods, given the abundance of fish varieties.\nSports.\nL\u00fcbeck is home to 3. Liga side VfB L\u00fcbeck who play at the 17,849 capacity Stadion an der Lohm\u00fchle. In addition to the football department the sports club has departments for badminton, women's gymnastics, handball, and table tennis.\nEducation.\nL\u00fcbeck has three universities, the University of L\u00fcbeck, the Technical University of Applied Sciences L\u00fcbeck, and the L\u00fcbeck Academy of Music. The http:// is a central faculty of the university and was founded by the https:// .\nThe International School of New Media is an affiliated institute of the university.The Academy of Hearing Acoustics is Germany's central education facility for Hearing aid professionals, responsible for the industry-wide vocational training.\nDistricts.\nThe city of L\u00fcbeck is divided into 10 zones. These again are arranged into altogether 35 urban districts. The 10 zones with their official numbers, their associated urban districts and the numbers of inhabitants of the quarters:\nThe \"Innenstadt\" is the main tourist attraction and consists of the old town as well as the former ramparts. It is the oldest and smallest part of L\u00fcbeck.\n\"Sankt J\u00fcrgen\" is one of three historic suburbs of L\u00fcbeck (alongside \"St. Lorenz\" and \"St. Gertrud\"). It is located south of the city centre and the biggest of all city parts.\n\"Moisling\" is situated in the far south-west. Its history dates back to the 17th century.\n\"Buntekuh\" lies in the west of L\u00fcbeck. A big part consists of commercial zones such as the \"Citti-Park\", L\u00fcbeck's biggest mall.\n\"Sankt Lorenz-S\u00fcd\" is located right in the south-west of the city centre and has the highest population density. The main train and bus station lie in its northern part.\n\"Sankt Lorenz-Nord\" is situated in the north-west of L\u00fcbeck. It is split from its southern part by the railways.\n\"Sankt Gertrud\" is located in the east of the city centre. This part is mainly characterized by its nature. Many parks, the rivers \"Wakenitz\" and \"Trave\" and the forest \"Lauerholz\" make up a big part of its area.\n\"Schlutup\" lies in the far east of L\u00fcbeck. Due to forest \"Lauerholz\" in its west and river \"Trave\" in the north, Schlutup is relatively isolated from the other city parts.\nNorth of river Trave lies \"K\u00fccknitz\". It is the old main industrial area of L\u00fcbeck.\n\"Travem\u00fcnde\" is located in far northeastern L\u00fcbeck at the Baltic Sea. With its long beach and coast line, Travem\u00fcnde is the second biggest tourist destination.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nL\u00fcbeck is twinned with:\nFriendly cities.\nL\u00fcbeck also has friendly relations with:\nTransport.\nL\u00fcbeck is connected to three main motorways (Autobahnen). The A1 Motorway is heading north to the Island of Fehmarn and Copenhagen (Denmark) and south to Hamburg, Bremen and Cologne. The A20 Motorway heads east towards Wismar, Rostock and Szczecin (Poland) and west to Bad Segeberg and to the North Sea. The A226 Motorway starts in central L\u00fcbeck and is heading to the north-east and the Seaport-City of Travem\u00fcnde.\nL\u00fcbeck is served by multiple railway stations. The principal one is L\u00fcbeck Hauptbahnhof, with about 31,000 passengers per day, is the busiest station in Schleswig-Holstein. The station is mostly served by regional rail services to Hamburg, L\u00fcneburg, Kiel, the Island of Fehmarn and Szczecin (Poland). There are some long-distance trains to Munich, Frankfurt-am-Main and Cologne. During the summer holidays, there are many extra rail services. Until the end of 2019, L\u00fcbeck was a stop on the \"Vogelfluglinie\" train line from Hamburg to Copenhagen (Denmark).\nPublic transport by bus is organised by the L\u00fcbeck City-Traffic-Company (L\u00fcbecker Stadtverkehr). There are 40 bus lines serving the city and the area around L\u00fcbeck, in addition to regional bus services.\nThe district of Travem\u00fcnde is on the Baltic Sea and has the city's main port. The Scandinavienkai (the quay of Scandinavia) is the departure point for ferry routes to Malm\u00f6 and Trelleborg (Sweden); Liep\u0101ja (Latvia); Helsinki (Finland) and Saint Petersburg (Russia). It is the second-biggest German port on the Baltic Sea.\nL\u00fcbeck Airport is located in the south of L\u00fcbeck in the town of Blankensee. It has limited international airlines' services. The nearest major airport is Hamburg Airport, located to the south west of L\u00fcbeck.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17751", "revid": "8155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17751", "title": "Loveparade", "text": ""}
{"id": "17752", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17752", "title": "Laos", "text": "Country in Southeast Asia\nLaos, officially the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR), is the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia. Located on the Indochinese Peninsula, it is bordered by Myanmar and China to the northwest, Vietnam to the east, Cambodia to the southeast, and Thailand to the west and southwest. Having a population of approximately 8 million, its capital and most populous city is Vientiane.\nThe country traces its historic and cultural identity to Lan Xang, a kingdom which existed from the 13th to 18th centuries. Through its location, the kingdom was a hub for overland trade. In 1707, Lan Xang split into three kingdoms: Luang Prabang, Vientiane, and Champasak. In 1893, these kingdoms were unified under French protection as part of French Indochina. Laos was under Japanese administration during World War II, gaining independence in 1945 before returning to French administration until achieving autonomy in 1949. The country regained full independence in 1953 as the Kingdom of Laos, with a constitutional monarchy under Sisavang Vong. A Civil War from 1959 to 1975 saw the communist Pathet Lao, supported by North Vietnam, China and the Soviet Union, oppose the Royal Lao Armed Forces, backed by the United States. The war ended with the establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic in 1975 that aligned with the Soviet Union until the latter's dissolution in 1991.\nLaos is home to several UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the historic town of Luang Prabang, the ancient temple complex of Vat Phou, and the Plain of Jars. As one of the five active communist states as of 2025, and the only one that self-designates as a people's democratic state, Laos has been governed by the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP) since 1975. It has used market-oriented reforms. Laos's development strategy emphasizes regional connectivity through infrastructure development. The 2021 completion of the Laos\u2013China Railway (LCR), connecting Vientiane to Kunming, has increased trade and tourism accessibility. The country participates in the Greater Mekong Subregion economic cooperation program, focusing on cross-border infrastructure and energy projects. The World Bank has recognized Laos as one of Southeast Asia and Pacific's fastest growing economies, with annual GDP growth averaging 7.4% since 2009, driven by expanding tourism, energy exports, and foreign investment. While classified as a least developed country by the United Nations, Laos is a member of ASEAN, the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement, East Asia Summit, La Francophonie, and the World Trade Organization.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nIn 2009, an anatomically modern human skull was recovered from the Tam Pa Ling Cave in the Annamite Mountains in northern Laos; the skull is at least 46,000 years old, making it the oldest modern human fossil found to date in Southeast Asia. Stone artifacts including Hoabinhian types have been found at sites dating to the Pleistocene in northern Laos.\nArchaeological evidence suggests an agriculturist society developed during the 4th millennium BCE, a society in which bronze objects appeared around 1500 BCE, and iron tools were known from 700 BCE. The proto-historic period is characterised by contact with Chinese and Indian civilisations. According to linguistic and other historical evidence, Tai-speaking tribes migrated southwestward to the territories of Laos and Thailand from Guangxi sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries.\nLan Xang.\nLaos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang ('million elephants'), which was founded in the 13th century by a Lao prince, Fa Ngum, whose father had his family exiled from the Khmer Empire. Fa Ngum, with 10,000 Khmer troops, conquered some Lao principalities in the Mekong river basin, culminating in the capture of Vientiane. Ngum was descended from a line of Lao kings that traced back to Khoun Boulom. He made Theravada Buddhism the state religion. His ministers, unable to tolerate his ruthlessness, forced him into exile to what is later the Thai province of Nan in 1373, where he died. Fa Ngum's eldest son, Oun Heuan, ascended to the throne under the name Samsenethai and reigned for 43\u00a0years. Lan Xang became a trade centre during Samsenthai's reign, and after his death in 1421 it collapsed into warring factions for nearly a century.\nIn 1520, Photisarath came to the throne and moved the capital from Luang Prabang to Vientiane to avoid a Burmese invasion. Setthathirath became king in 1548, after his father was killed, and ordered the construction of That Luang. Settathirath disappeared in the mountains on his way back from a military expedition into Cambodia, and Lan Xang fell into more than 70 years of \"instability\", involving Burmese invasion and civil war.\nIn 1637, when Sourigna Vongsa ascended the throne, Lan Xang further expanded its frontiers. When he died without an heir, the kingdom split into three principalities. Between 1763 and 1769, Burmese armies overran northern Laos and annexed Luang Prabang, while Champasak eventually came under Siamese suzerainty.\nChao Anouvong was installed as a vassal king of Vientiane by the Siamese. He encouraged a renaissance of Lao fine arts and literature and improved relations with Luang Phrabang. Under Vietnamese pressure, he rebelled against the Siamese in 1826. The rebellion failed, and Vientiane was ransacked. Anouvong was taken to Bangkok as a prisoner, where he died.\nIn a time period where the acquisition of humans was a priority over the ownership of land, the warfare of pre-modern Southeast Asia revolved around the seizing of people and resources from its enemies. A Siamese military campaign in Laos in 1876 was described by a British observer as having been \"transformed into slave-hunting raids on a large scale\".\nFrench Laos (1893\u20131953).\nIn the 19th century, Luang Prabang was ransacked by the Chinese Black Flag Army. France rescued King Oun Kham and added Luang Phrabang to the protectorate of French Indochina. The Kingdom of Champasak and the territory of Vientiane were added to the protectorate. King Sisavangvong of Luang Phrabang became ruler of a unified Laos, and Vientiane once again became the capital.\nLaos produced tin, rubber, and coffee; the country never accounted for more than 1% of French Indochina's exports. By 1940, around 600 French citizens lived in Laos. Under French rule, the Vietnamese were encouraged to migrate to Laos; this was seen by the French colonists as a rational solution to a labour shortage within the confines of an Indochina-wide colonial space. By 1943, the Vietnamese population stood at nearly 40,000, forming the majority in some cities of Laos and having the right to elect its own leaders. As a result, 53% of the population of Vientiane, 85% of Thakhek, and 62% of Pakse were Vietnamese; the exception was Luang Prabang, where the population was predominantly Lao. As late as 1945, the French drew up a plan to move a number of Vietnamese to three areas (i.e., the Vientiane Plain, Savannakhet region, and the Bolaven Plateau), which was derailed by the Japanese invasion of Indochina. Otherwise, according to Martin Stuart-Fox, the Lao might well have lost control over their own country.\nDuring World War II in Laos, Vichy France, Thailand, Imperial Japan and Free France occupied Laos. On 9 March 1945, a nationalist group declared Laos once more independent, with Luang Prabang as its capital; on 7 April 1945, two battalions of Japanese troops occupied the city. The Japanese attempted to force Sisavang Vong (the king of Luang Phrabang) to declare Laotian independence, and on 8 April he instead declared an end to Laos's status as a French protectorate. The king then secretly sent Prince Kindavong to represent Laos to the Allied forces and Prince Sisavang as representative to the Japanese. When Japan surrendered, some Lao nationalists (including Prince Phetsarath) declared Laotian independence, and by 1946, French troops had reoccupied the country and conferred autonomy on Laos.\nDuring the First Indochina War, the Indochinese Communist Party formed the Pathet Lao independence organisation. The Pathet Lao began a war against the French colonial forces with the aid of the Vietnamese independence organisation, the Viet Minh. In 1950, the French were forced to give Laos semi-autonomy as an \"associated state\" within the French Union. France remained in de facto control until 22 October 1953, when Laos gained full independence as a constitutional monarchy.\nIndependence and communist rule (1953\u2013).\nThe First Indochina War took place across French Indochina and eventually led to French defeat and the signing of a peace accord for Laos at the Geneva Conference of 1954. In 1960, amidst a series of rebellions in the Kingdom of Laos, fighting broke out between the Royal Lao Army (RLA) and the communist North Vietnamese and Soviet Union-backed Pathet Lao guerillas. A second Provisional Government of National Unity formed by Prince Souvanna Phouma in 1962 was unsuccessful, and the situation turned into civil war between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao. The Pathet Lao were backed militarily by the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) and the Viet Cong.\nLaos was a part of the Vietnam War since parts of Laos were invaded and occupied by North Vietnam since 1958 for use as a supply route for its war against South Vietnam. In response, the United States initiated a bombing campaign against the PAVN positions, supported regular and irregular anti-communist forces in Laos, and supported incursions into Laos by the Army of the Republic of Vietnam.\nAerial bombardments against the PAVN/Pathet Lao forces were carried out by the United States to prevent the collapse of the Kingdom of Laos central government, and to deny the use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail to attack US forces in South Vietnam. Between 1964 and 1973, the US dropped 2 million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly equal to the 2.1\u00a0million tons of bombs the US dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II. This made Laos the most heavily bombed country in history relative to the size of its population; \"The New York Times\" notes this was \"nearly a ton for every person in Laos\".\nSome 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country. Unexploded ordnance (UXO), including cluster munitions and mines, kill or maim approximately 50 Laotians every year. Due to the impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was an advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010.\nIn 1975, the Pathet Lao overthrew the royalist government, forcing King Savang Vatthana to abdicate on 2 December 1975. He later died in a re-education camp. Between 20,000 and 62,000 Laotians died during the civil war.\nOn 2 December 1975, after taking control of the country, the Pathet Lao government under Kaysone Phomvihane renamed the country as the \"Lao People's Democratic Republic\"; the government also signed agreements giving Vietnam the right to station armed forces and to appoint advisers to assist in overseeing the country. The ties between Laos and Vietnam were formalised via a treaty signed in 1977, which has since provided direction for Lao foreign policy, and provides the basis for Vietnamese involvement at levels of Lao political and economic life. In 1979, Laos was requested by Vietnam to end relations with the People's Republic of China; this led to isolation in trade by China, the United States, and other countries. In 1979, there were 50,000 PAVN troops stationed in Laos and as many as 6,000 civilian Vietnamese officials including 1,000 directly attached to the ministries in Vientiane.\nRelations with the Hmong.\nThe conflict between Hmong rebels and Laos continued in areas of Laos, including in Saysaboune Closed Military Zone, Xaisamboune Closed Military Zone near Vientiane Province and Xiangkhouang Province. In 1977, a communist newspaper promised the party would hunt down the \"American collaborators\" and their families \"to the last root\". As many as 200,000 Hmong went into exile in Thailand, with some ending up in the US. Other Hmong fighters hid out in mountains in Xiangkhouang Province for years, with a remnant emerging from the jungle in 2003.\nIn 1989, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), with the support of the US government, instituted the Comprehensive Plan of Action, a programme to stem the tide of Indochinese refugees from Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Under the plan, refugee status was evaluated through a screening process. Recognised asylum seekers were given resettlement opportunities, while the remaining refugees were to be repatriated under guarantee of safety. After talks with the UNHCR and the Thai government, Laos agreed to repatriate the 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thailand, including several thousand Hmong people. Some of the Lao refugees were willing to return voluntarily. Pressure to resettle the refugees grew as the Thai government worked to close its remaining refugee camps. While some Hmong people returned to Laos voluntarily, with development assistance from UNHCR, allegations of forced repatriation surfaced. Of those Hmong who did return to Laos, some escaped back to Thailand, describing discrimination and brutal treatment at the hands of Lao authorities. In 1993, Vue Mai, a former Hmong soldier and leader of the largest Hmong refugee camp in Thailand, who had been recruited by the US\u00a0Embassy in Bangkok to return to Laos as proof of the repatriation programme's success, disappeared in Vientiane. According to the US\u00a0Committee for Refugees, he was arrested by Lao security forces and was never seen again.\nFollowing the Vue Mai incident, debate over the Hmong's planned repatriation to Laos intensified, including in the United States, where it drew opposition from American conservatives and some human rights advocates. While some accusations of forced repatriation were denied, thousands of Hmong people refused to return to Laos. In 1996 as the deadline for the closure of Thai refugee camps approached, and under mounting political pressure, the United States agreed to resettle Hmong refugees who passed a screening process. Around 5,000 Hmong people who were not resettled at the time of the camp closures sought asylum at Wat Tham Krabok, a Buddhist monastery in central Thailand where more than 10,000 Hmong refugees had already been living. The Thai government attempted to repatriate these refugees, and the Wat Tham Krabok Hmong refused to leave and the Lao government refused to accept them, claiming they were involved in the illegal drug trade and were of non-Lao origin. Following threats of forcible removal by the Thai government, the United States, in a victory for the Hmong, agreed to accept 15,000 of the refugees in 2003. Several thousand Hmong people, fearing forced repatriation to Laos if they were not accepted for resettlement in the United States, fled the camp to live elsewhere within Thailand where a sizeable Hmong population has been present since the 19th century.\nIn 2004 and 2005, thousands of Hmong fled from the jungles of Laos to a temporary refugee camp in the Thai province of Phetchabun. Lending further support to earlier claims that the government of Laos was persecuting the Hmong, filmmaker Rebecca Sommer documented first-hand accounts in her documentary, \"Hunted Like Animals\", and in a comprehensive report that includes summaries of refugee claims, which was submitted to the UN in May 2006.\nGeography.\nLaos is the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia. It lies mostly between latitudes 14\u00b0 and 23\u00b0N (an area is south of 14\u00b0), and longitudes 100\u00b0 and 108\u00b0E. Its forested landscape consists mostly of mountains, the highest of which is Phou Bia at , with some plains and plateaus. The Mekong River forms a part of the western boundary with Thailand, where the mountains of the Annamite Range form most of the eastern border with Vietnam and the Luang Prabang Range the northwestern border with the Thai highlands. There are two plateaus, the Xiangkhoang in the north and the Bolaven Plateau at the southern end. Laos can be considered to consist of three geographical areas: north, central, and south. Laos had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.59/10, ranking it 98th globally out of 172 countries.\nIn 1993, the Laos government set aside 21% of the nation's land area for habitat conservation preservation. The country is one of four nations in the opium poppy growing region known as the \"Golden Triangle\". According to the October 2007 UNODC fact book \"Opium Poppy Cultivation in South East Asia\", the poppy cultivation area was ; this is down from in 2006.\nClimate.\nThe climate is mostly tropical savanna and influenced by the monsoon pattern. There is a rainy season from May to October, followed by a dry season from November to April. Local tradition holds that there are three seasons: rainy, cool and hot. Further, the latter two months of the climatologically defined dry season are hotter than the earlier four months.\nWildlife.\nLaos, with its forests and river systems, is home to an amount of wildlife. National parks like Nam Et-Phou Louey are critical refuges, supporting endangered species such as the northern white-cheeked gibbon and the saola. These forests shelter more than 50 mammal species and nearly 300 bird species, along with a variety of reptiles and amphibians.\nAdministrative divisions.\nLaos is divided into 17 provinces (\"khoueng\") and one prefecture (\"kampheng nakhon\"), which includes the capital city Vientiane (\"Nakhon Louang Viangchan\").\nPolitics.\nThe LPDR is a communist state that self-designates as a people's democratic state, meaning that it is officially trying to transition the country from capitalism to communism.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], the head of state is President Thongloun Sisoulith. He has been General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party, a position making him the \"de facto\" leader of Laos, since January 2021.\nLaos's first French-written and monarchical constitution was promulgated on 11 May 1947, and declared Laos an independent state within the French Union. The revised constitution of 11 May 1957 omitted reference to the French Union, while educational, health and technical ties with the former colonial power persisted. The 1957 document was abrogated in December 1975, when a communist people's republic was proclaimed. A constitution was adopted in 1991 and enshrined a \"leading role\" for the LPRP.\nIn The Economist's \"Democracy Index 2016\", Laos was classified as an \"authoritarian regime\", ranking lowest of the 9 ASEAN nations included in the study. \nAccording to the V-Dem Democracy indices, Laos in 2024 was autocratic.\nForeign relations.\nThe foreign relations of Laos after the takeover by the Pathet Lao in December 1975 were characterised by a hostile posture toward the West, with the government of the Lao PDR aligning itself with the Soviet Bloc, maintaining ties with the Soviet Union and depending on the Soviets for most of its foreign assistance.\nLaos's emergence from international isolation has been marked through expanded relations with other countries including Russia, China, Thailand, Australia, Germany, Italy, Japan and Switzerland. Trade relations with the United States were normalised in November 2004 through Congress approved legislation. Laos was admitted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in July 1997 and acceded to the World Trade Organization in 2016. In 2005, it attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.\nHuman rights.\nCivil society advocates, human rights defenders, political and religious dissidents, and Hmong refugees have disappeared at the hands of Lao military and security forces.\nOstensibly, the Constitution of Laos that was promulgated in 1991 and amended in 2003 contains safeguards for human rights. For example, Article 8 makes it clear that Laos is a multinational state and is committed to equality between ethnic groups. The constitution contains provisions for gender equality, freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of press and assembly. On 25 September 2009, Laos ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, nine years after signing the treaty. The stated policy objectives of the Lao government and international donors remain focused upon achieving sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction.\nAn organisation raised concerns in relation to freedom of expression, prison conditions, restrictions on freedom of religions, protection of refugees and asylum-seekers, and the death penalty. Laos has been cited as an origin country for human trafficking. A number of citizens, primarily women and girls from ethnic groups and foreigners, have been victims of sex trafficking in Laos. The Lao government sometimes controls media channels to prevent critique of its actions. Lao citizens who have criticised the government have been subjected to enforced disappearances, arrests and torture.\nEconomy.\nThe Lao economy depends on investment and trade with its neighbours, Thailand, Vietnam, and, especially in the north, China. Pakxe has experienced growth based on cross-border trade with Thailand and Vietnam. In 2009, the Obama administration in the US declared Laos was no longer a communist state and lifted bans on Laotian companies receiving financing from the US Export-Import Bank. In 2016, China was the biggest foreign investor in the Laotian economy, having invested US$5.395\u00a0billion since 1989, according to the Laos Ministry of Planning and Investment's 1989\u20132014 report. Thailand (invested US$4.489\u00a0billion) and Vietnam (invested US$3.108\u00a0billion) are the second and third largest investors respectively.\nSubsistence agriculture accounts for half of the GDP and provides 80% of employment. 4% of the country is arable land and 0.3% used as permanent crop land, the lowest percentage in the Greater Mekong Subregion. The irrigated areas account for 28% of the total area under cultivation which, in turn, represents 12% of all of the agricultural land in 2012. Rice dominates agriculture, with about 80% of the arable land area used for growing rice. Approximately 77% of Lao farm households are self-sufficient in rice.\nLaos imports petroleum and gas. Metallurgy is an industry, and the government hopes to attract foreign investment to develop the deposits of coal, gold, bauxite, tin, copper, and other metals. The mining industry of Laos has received attention with foreign direct investments. More than 540 mineral deposits of gold, copper, zinc, lead and other minerals have been identified, explored and mined. The country's water resources and mountainous terrain enable it to produce and export quantities of hydroelectric energy. Of the potential capacity of approximately 18,000 megawatts, around 8,000 megawatts have been committed for export to Thailand and Vietnam. As of 2021, Laos continues to rely on fossil fuels, coal in particular, in domestic electricity production.\nIn 2018, the country ranked 139th on the Human Development Index (HDI), indicating medium development. According to the Global Hunger Index (2018), Laos ranks as the 36th hungriest nation in the world out of the list of the 52 nations with the worst hunger situation(s). In 2019, the UN Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights conducted an official visit to Laos and found that the country's top-down approach to economic growth and poverty alleviation \"is all too often counterproductive, leading to impoverishment and jeopardising the rights of the poor and marginalised.\"\nA product, Beerlao, was exported in 2017 to more than 20 countries worldwide. It is produced by the Lao Brewery Company.\nTourism.\nThe tourism sector has grown from 80,000 international visitors in 1990, to 1.876\u00a0million in 2010, when tourism had been expected to rise to US$1.5857\u00a0billion by 2020. In 2010, 1 in every 11 jobs was in the tourism sector. Export earnings from international visitors and tourism goods are expected to generate 16% of total exports or US$270.3\u00a0million in 2010, growing in nominal terms to US$484.2\u00a0million (12.5% of the total) in 2020. The European Council on Trade and Tourism awarded the country the \"World Best Tourist Destination\" designation for 2013 for architecture and history. In 2024, tourist numbers topped 5 million, contributing over US$1 billion to the economy.\nThe Lao National Tourism Administration, related government agencies and the private sector are working together to realise the vision put forth in the country's National Ecotourism Strategy and Action Plan. This includes decreasing the environmental and cultural impact of tourism; increasing awareness in the importance of ethnic groups and biological diversity; providing a source of income to conserve, sustain and manage the Lao protected area network and cultural heritage sites; and emphasizing the need for tourism zoning and management plans for sites that will be developed as ecotourism destinations.\nTransportation.\nThe mountainous geography of Laos had impeded Laos's ground transportation development throughout the 20th century. Its first railway line, a 3-km long metre-gauge railway that connects southern Vientiane to Thailand, opened in 2009. In December 2021, the 414-km long Boten\u2013Vientiane railway that runs from the capital Vientiane to Boten at the northern border with China and was built as part of China's Belt and Road Initiative was opened.\nThere is external and internal telecommunication. 93% of households have a telephone, either fixed line or mobile. Electricity is available to 93% of the population.\nOn 3 December 2021, the 422-kilometre Boten\u2013Vientiane railway, a flagship of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), was opened.\nWater supply.\nAccording to the World Bank data conducted in 2014, Laos has met the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets on water and sanitation regarding the UNICEF/WHO Joint Monitoring Programme. As of 2018, there are approximately 1.9\u00a0million of Lao's population who could not access an improved water supply and 2.4\u00a0million people without access to improved sanitation.\nLaos has made progress increasing access to sanitation. In 1990 8% of the rural population had access to improved sanitation. Access rose from 10% in 1995 to 38% in 2008. Between 1995 and 2008, approximately 1,232,900 more people had access to improved sanitation in rural areas. The authorities in Laos have developed an innovative regulatory framework for public\u2013private partnership contracts signed with enterprises, in parallel with more conventional regulation of state-owned water enterprises.\nDemographics.\nThe population of Laos in 2024 is estimated to be 7,953,556, with 3,966,320 males and 3,987,236 females, according to The World Factbook. This makes Laos the 103rd most populous country in the world.\nEthnicity.\nThe people of Laos are categorised by their distribution by elevation (lowlands, midlands and upper high lands), as this somewhat correlates with ethnic groupings. More than half of the nation's population is ethnic Lao\u2014the principal lowland inhabitants. The Lao belong to the Tai linguistic group who began migrating south from China in the first millennium AD. 10% belong to other \"lowland\" groups, which together with the Lao people make up the Lao Loum (lowland people).\nIn the central and southern mountains, Mon-Khmer-speaking groups, known as Lao Theung or mid-slope Laotians, predominate. Other terms are Khmu, Khamu (Kammu) or Kha as the Lao Loum refer to them to indicate their Austroasiatic language affiliation. The latter is considered pejorative, meaning 'slave'. They were the indigenous inhabitants of northern Laos. Some Vietnamese, Laotian Chinese and Thai minorities remain, particularly in the towns, and some left after independence in the 1940s, some of whom relocated either to Vietnam, Hong Kong, or to France. Lao Theung constitute about 30% of the population.\nHill people and minority cultures of Laos such as the Hmong, Yao (Mien) (Hmong-Mien), Dao, Shan, and Tibeto-Burman speaking peoples have lived in isolated regions of Laos for years. Mountain/hill tribes of mixed ethno/cultural-linguistic heritage are found in northern Laos, which include the Lua and Khmu people who are indigenous to Laos. Collectively, they are known as Lao Soung or highland Laotians. Lao Soung account for about 10% of the population.\nLanguages.\nThe official language is Lao, a language of the Tai-Kadai language family. More than half of the population speaks Lao fluently. The remainder, particularly in rural areas, speak ethnic minority languages. The Lao alphabet, which evolved sometime between the 13th and 14th centuries, was derived from the Khmer script. Languages like Khmu (Austroasiatic) and Hmong (Hmong-Mien) are spoken by minorities, particularly in the midland and highland areas. A number of Laotian sign languages are used in areas with higher rates of congenital deafness.\nFrench is used in government and commerce, and Laos is a member of the French-speaking organisation of La Francophonie. The organisation estimated in 2010 that there were 173,800 French speakers in Laos. English, the language of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has become increasingly studied.\nReligion.\n66% of Laotians were Theravada Buddhist, 1.5% Christian, 0.1% Muslim, 0.1% Jewish, and 32.3% were other or traditional (mostly practitioners of Satsana Phi) in 2010.\nHealth.\nMale life expectancy at birth was at 62.6 years and female life expectancy was at 66.7 years in 2017. Healthy life expectancy was 54 years in 2007. Government expenditure on health is about 4% of GDP, about US$18 (PPP) in 2006.\nEducation.\nThe adult literacy rate for women in 2017 was 62.9%; for adult men, 78.1%.\nIn 2004, the net primary enrollment rate was 84%. Laos was ranked 109th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nCulture.\nCuisine.\nSticky rice is a staple food. There are traditions and rituals associated with rice production in environments and among ethnic groups. For example, Khammu farmers in Luang Prabang plant the rice variety \"khao kam\" in quantities near the farm house in memory of dead parents, or at the edge of the rice field to indicate that parents are alive.\nA dish is \"larb\" in which chopped meat is blended with toasted rice and then seasoned with herbs, fish sauce, and lime.\nCinema.\nThe first feature-length film made after the monarchy was abolished is \"Gun Voice from the Plain of Jars\" directed by Somchith Pholsena in 1983 and its release was prevented by a censorship board. A commercial feature-length film was \"Sabaidee Luang Prabang\", made in 2008. The 2017 documentary feature film \"Blood Road\" was predominantly shot and produced in Laos with assistance from the Lao government. It was recognised with a News and Documentary Emmy Award in 2018.\nAustralian filmmaker Kim Mordount's first feature film was made in Laos and features a Laotian cast speaking their native language. Entitled \"The Rocket\", the film appeared at the 2013 Melbourne International Film Festival and won three awards at the Berlin International Film Festival. Examples of Lao feature films that have received international recognition include Lao New Wave Cinema's \"At the Horizon\", directed by Anysay Keola, which was screened at the OzAsia Film Festival, and Lao Art Media's \"Chanthaly\" (Lao: \u0e88\u0eb1\u0e99\u0e97\u0eb0\u0ea5\u0eb5), directed by Mattie Do, which was screened at the 2013 Fantastic Fest. In September 2017, Laos submitted \"Dearest Sister\" (Lao: \u0e99\u0ec9\u0ead\u0e87\u0eae\u0eb1\u0e81), Mattie Do's second feature film, to the 90th Academy Awards (or the Oscars) for consideration for Best Foreign Language Film, marking the country's first submission for the Oscars.\nAs of 2018, Laos has three theatres dedicated to showing films.\nFestivals.\nThere are public holidays, festivities and ceremonies in Laos.\nSport.\nThe martial art of muay Lao, the national sport, is a form of kickboxing similar to Thailand's muay Thai, Burmese Lethwei and Cambodian Pradal Serey.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17753", "revid": "44580406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17753", "title": "History of Laos", "text": "Evidence of modern human presence in the northern and central highlands of Indochina, which constitute the territories of what later is Laos, dates back to the Lower Paleolithic. These earliest human migrants are Australo-Melanesians\u2014associated with the Hoabinhian culture\u2014and have populated the highlands and the interior, less accessible regions of Laos and all of Southeast Asia. The subsequent Austroasiatic and Austronesian marine migration waves affected landlocked Laos, and direct Chinese and Indian cultural contact had a greater impact on the country.\nLaos exists in truncated form from the thirteenth-century Lao kingdom of Lan Xang, which existed as a unified kingdom from 1357 to 1707, divided into the 3 rival kingdoms of Luang Prabang, Vientiane, and Champasak, from 1707 to 1779. It fell to Siamese suzerainty from 1779 to 1893 and was reunified under the French Protectorate of Laos in 1893. The borders of Laos were established by the French colonial government in the 19th and 20th centuries.\nPrehistory.\nAnatomically modern human hunter-gatherer migration into Southeast Asia before 50,000 years ago has been confirmed by the fossil record of the region. These immigrants might have, to a certain extent, merged and reproduced with members of the archaic population of \"Homo erectus\", as the 2009 fossil discoveries in the Tam Pa Ling Cave suggest. Dated to between 46,000 and 63,000 years old, it is the oldest fossil found in the region that bears modern human morphological features.\nRecent research also supports more accurate understanding of migration patterns of early humans, who migrated in successive waves moving west to east following the coastlines, but also used river valleys further inland and further north than previously theorized.\nA tradition is discernible in the Hoabinhian, the name given to an industry and cultural continuity of stone tools and flaked cobble artifacts that appears around 10,000 BP in caves and rock shelters first described in \"H\u00f2a B\u00ecnh\", Vietnam and later in Laos.\nNeolithic migrations.\nSome societies contributed to the ancestral gene pool of the upland Lao ethnicities known collectively as \"Lao Theung,\" with the largest ethnic groups being the Khamu of northern Laos, and the Brao and Katang in the south.\nSubsequent Neolithic immigration waves are considered dynamic, very complex and are intensely debated. Researchers resort to linguistic terms and argumentation for group identification and classification.\nAgriculture and bronze production.\nWet-rice and millet farming techniques were introduced from the Yangtze River valley in southern China since around 2,000 years BC. Hunting and gathering was an aspect of food provision; particularly in forested and mountainous inland areas. Earliest known copper and bronze production in Southeast Asia has been confirmed at the site of Ban Chiang in north-east Thailand and among the Phung Nguyen culture of northern Vietnam since around 2000 BCE.\nPlain of Jars.\nFrom the 8th century BCE to as late as the 2nd century CE, an inland trading society emerged on the Xieng Khouang Plateau, around the megalithic site called the Plain of Jars. The plain, nominated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1992, is being cleared from unexploded ordnance, since 1998. The jars, stone sarcophagi dating from the early Iron Age (500 BCE to 800 CE), contained evidence of human remains, burial goods, and ceramics. Some sites contain more than 250 individual jars. The tallest jars are more than in height. The jars and the existence of iron ore in the region suggest that the creators of the site engaged in profitable overland trade.\nEarly Indianised kingdoms.\nFunan kingdom.\nThe first indigenous kingdom to emerge in Indochina was referred to in Chinese histories as the Kingdom of Funan and encompassed an area of what later is Cambodia, and the coasts of southern Vietnam and southern Thailand since the 1st century CE. Funan was an Indianised kingdom,\nthat had incorporated central aspects of Indian institutions, religion, statecraft, administration, culture, epigraphy, writing and architecture and engaged in profitable Indian Ocean trade.\nChampa kingdom.\nFunan expanded and incorporated the Champasak region by the sixth century CE, when it was replaced by its successor polity Chenla. Chenla occupied areas of what later is Laos as it accounts for the earliest kingdom on Laotian soil.\nChenla kingdom.\nBy the 8th century CE, Chenla had divided into \"Land Chenla\" located in Laos, and \"Water Chenla\" founded by Mahendravarman near Sambor Prei Kuk in Cambodia. Land Chenla was known to the Chinese as \"Po Lou\" or \"Wen Dan\" and dispatched a trade mission to the Tang dynasty court in 717 CE. Water Chenla, would come under repeated attack from Champa, the Mataram sea kingdoms in Indonesia based in Java, and finally pirates. From the instability the Khmer emerged.\nDvaravati city-state kingdoms.\nIn the area that later is northern and central Laos and northeast Thailand, the Mon people established their own kingdoms during the 8th century CE, outside the reach of the contracting Chenla kingdoms. By the 6th century in the Chao Phraya River Valley, Mon peoples had coalesced to create the Dvaravati kingdoms. In the north, Haripunjaya (Lamphun) emerged as a rival power to the Dvaravati. By the 8th century the Mon had pushed north to create city states, known as \"muang,\" in Fa Daet (northeast Thailand), Sri Gotapura (Sikhottabong) near modern Tha Khek, Laos, Muang Sua (Luang Prabang), and Chantaburi (Vientiane). In the 8th century CE, Sri Gotapura (Sikhottabong) controlled trade throughout the middle Mekong region. The city states introduced Therevada Buddhism from Sri Lankan missionaries throughout the region.\nTai migrations.\nThere have been theories proposing the origin of the Tai peoples\u2014of which the Lao are a subgroup\u2014including an association of the Tai people with the Kingdom of Nanzhao that has been proven to be invalid.\nJames R. Chamberlain (2016) proposes that Tai-Kadai (Kra-Dai) language family was formed as early as the 12th century BCE in the middle Yangtze basin, coinciding roughly with the establishment of the Chu and the beginning of the Zhou dynasty. Following the southward migrations of Kra and Hlai (Rei/Li) peoples around the 8th century BCE, the Be-Tai people started to break away to the east coast in Zhejiang, in the 6th century BCE, forming the state of Yue. After the destruction of the state of Yue by Chu army around 333 BCE, Yue people (Be-Tai) began to migrate southwards along the east coast of China to what later are Guangxi, Guizhou and northern Vietnam, forming Luo Yue (Central-Southwestern Tai) and Xi Ou (Northern Tai). The Tai peoples, from Guangxi and northern Vietnam began moving south\u2014and westwards in the first millennium CE, eventually spreading across the whole of mainland Southeast Asia. Based on layers of Chinese loanwords in proto-Southwestern Tai and other historical evidence, Pittayawat Pittayaporn (2014) proposes that the southwestward migration of Tai-speaking tribes from Guangxi and northern Vietnam to the mainland of Southeast Asia must have taken place sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries. Tai speaking tribes migrated southwestward along the rivers and over the lower passes into Southeast Asia, perhaps prompted by the Chinese expansion and suppression. Chinese historical texts record that, in 722, 400,000 'Lao' rose in revolt behind Mai Th\u00fac Loan, who declared himself the king of Nanyue in Guangdong. After the 722 revolt, some 60,000 were beheaded. In 726, after the suppression of a rebellion by a 'Lao' leader in the present-day Guangxi, over 30,000 rebels were captured and beheaded. In 756, another revolt attracted 200,000 followers and lasted four years. In the 860s, many local people in what is now north Vietnam sided with attackers from Nanchao, and in the aftermath some 30,000 of them were beheaded. In the 1040s, a matriarch-shamaness by the name of A Nong, her chiefly husband, and their son, Nong Zhigao, raised a revolt, took Nanning, besieged Guangzhou for 57 days, and slew the commanders of 5 Chinese armies sent against them before they were defeated, and some of their leaders were killed. As a result of these 3 centuries, the Tai began to migrate southwestward. A 2016 mitochondrial genome mapping of Thai and Lao populations supports the idea that both ethnicities originate from the Tai\u2013Kadai (TK) language family.\nThe Tai, from their new home in Southeast Asia, were influenced by the Khmer, the Mon and Buddhist India. The Tai kingdom of Lanna was founded in 1259 (in the north of what later is Thailand). The Sukhothai Kingdom was founded in 1279 (in what later is Thailand) and expanded eastward to take the city of \"Chantaburi\" and renamed it to \"Vieng Chan Vieng Kham\" and northward to the city of \"Muang Sua\" which was taken in 1271 and renamed the city to \"Xieng Dong Xieng Thong\" or \"City of Flame Trees beside the River Dong\". The Tai peoples had established control in areas to the northeast of the Khmer Empire. Following the death of the Sukhothai king Ram Khamhaeng, and internal disputes within the kingdom of Lanna, \"Vieng Chan Vieng Kham\" (Vientiane) and \"Xieng Dong Xieng Thong\" (Luang Prabang) were independent city-states until the founding of the kingdom of Lan Xang in 1354. The Sukhothai Kingdom and later the Ayutthaya kingdom were established and \"...conquered the Khmers of the upper and central Menam valley and greatly extended their territory.\"\nThe Legend of Khun Borom.\nThe history of the Tai migrations into Laos were preserved in myth and legends. The \"Nithan Khun Borom\" or \"Story of Khun Borom\" recalls the origin myths of the Lao, and follows the exploits of his 7 sons to found the Tai kingdoms of Southeast Asia. The myths recorded the laws of Khun Borom, which set the basis of common law and identity among the Lao. Among the Khamu the exploits of their folk hero Thao Hung are recounted in the \"Thao Hung Thao Cheuang\" epic, which dramatizes the struggles of the indigenous peoples with the influx of Tai during the migration period. In later centuries the Lao themselves would preserve the legend in written form, becoming a depiction of life in Southeast Asia prior to Therevada Buddhism and Tai cultural influence.\nLan Xang (1353\u20131707).\nLan Xang recovered and reached the apex of its political and economic power during the seventeenth century under King Sourigna Vongsa, who became the longest reigning of Lan Xang's monarchs (1637\u20131694) after defeating 4 rival claimants to the throne. In the 1640s the first European explorers to leave a detailed account of the kingdom arrived looking to establish trade and secure Christian converts. These European visitors reported on the capital's (Vientiane) prosperity and imposing religious buildings. King Sourigna Vongsa was known to uphold the law stricty, an episode exemplified this when he did not intervene when his son (and successor) was sentenced to death when it was found that he seduced the wife of a senior court official. Upon the death of Sourigna Vongsa a succession dispute and exploitation by Ayutthaya and Dai Viet, led to the kingdom of Lan Xang being ultimately divided into constituent kingdoms in 1707.\nRegional kingdoms (1707\u20131779).\nThroughout the 1760s and 1770s the kingdoms of Siam and Burma competed against each other in an armed rivalry, and sought out alliances with the Lao kingdoms to strengthen their relative positions by adding to their own forces and denying them to their enemy. As a result, the use of competing alliances would further militarize the conflict between the northerly Lao kingdoms of Luang Prabang and Vientiane. Between the 2 Lao kingdoms if an alliance with 1 was sought by either Burma or Siam, the other would tend to support the remaining side. The network of alliances shifted with the political and military landscape throughout the latter half of the eighteenth century.\nSiam and suzerainty (1779\u20131893).\nSiribunnyasan the last independent king of Vientiane had died by 1780, and his sons Nanthasen, Inthavong, and Anouvong had been taken to Bangkok as prisoners during the sack of Vientiane in 1779. The sons would become successive kings of Vientiane (under Siamese suzerainty), beginning with Nanthasen in 1781. Nanthasen was allowed to return to Vientiane with the Phra Bang, the palladium of Lan Xang, the Emerald Buddha remained in Bangkok and became a symbol to the Lao of their captivity. One of Nanthasen's first acts was to seize Chao Somphu a Phuan prince from Xieng Khouang who had entered into a tributary relationship with Vietnam, and released him when it was agreed that Xieng Khouang would acknowledge Vientiane as suzerain. In 1791, Anuruttha was confirmed by Rama I as king of Luang Prabang. By 1792 Nanthasen had convinced Rama I that Anuruttha was secretly dealing with the Burmese, and Siam allowed Nanthasen to lead an army and besiege and capture Luang Prabang. Anuruttha was sent to Bangkok as a prisoner, and through diplomatic exchanges facilitated by China, Anuruttha was released in 1795. After Anuruttha's release it was alleged that Nanthasen had been plotting with the governor of Nakhon Phanom to rebel against Siam. Rama I ordered the arrest of Nanthasen, and after he died in captivity. Inthavong (1795\u20131804) became the next king of Vientiane, and dispatched armies to aide Siam against Burmese invasions in 1797 and 1802, and to capture the Sipsong Chau Tai (with his brother Anouvong as general).\nAnouvong's forces pushed south eventually to Saraburi to free the Lao there, and the flood of refugees pushing north slowed the armies' retreat. Anouvong underestimated the Siamese arms stockpile, which under the terms of Burney Treaty had provided Siam with weaponry from the Napoleonic Wars in Europe. A Lao defense was staged at Nong Bua Lamphu the traditional Lao stronghold in the Isan, and the Siamese emerged victorious and leveled the city. The Siamese pushed north to take Vientiane and Anouvong fled southeast to the border with Vietnam. By 1828 Anouvong had been captured, tortured and sent to Bangkok with his family to die in a cage. Rama III ordered Chao Bodin to return and level the city of Vientiane, and forcibly move the entire population of the former Lao capital to the Isan region.\nIn the aftermath of Vientiane's destruction the Siamese divided the Lao lands into 3 administrative regions. In the north, the king of Luang Prabang and a Siamese garrison controlled Luang Prabang, the Sipsong Panna, and Sipsong Chao Tai. The central region was administered from Nong Khai and extended to the borders of Tran Ninh (Xieng Khouang) and south to Champasak. The southern regions were controlled from Champasak and extended to areas bordering Cochin China and Cambodia. From the 1830s through the 1860s rebellions took place across Lao lands and the Khorat Plateau. At the end of each rebellion Siamese troops would return to their administrative centers, and no Lao region was allowed to have a buildup of force which could have been used in rebellion.\nPopulation transfers and slavery.\nThe population transfers and slave raids ameliorated toward the end of the nineteenth century when European observers and anti-slavery groups made their presence increasingly difficult for the Bangkok elite. In 1880, slave raiding and trading became illegal, while debt slavery would persist until 1905 by decree of King Chulalongkorn. The French would use the existence of slavery in Siam as 1 of the major professed motivations for establishing a Protectorate of Laos during the 1880s and 1890s.\nHaw Wars.\nBy the 1860s, the first French explorers were pushing north charting the path of the Mekong River, with hope of a navigable waterway to southern China. Among the French explorers was an expedition led by Francis Garnier, who was killed during an expedition by Haw rebels in Tonkin. The French would increasingly conduct military campaigns against the Haw in Laos and Vietnam (Tonkin) until the 1880s.\nColonial period.\n1893\u20131939.\nUnder French rule, the Vietnamese were encouraged to migrate to Laos, which was seen by the French colonists as a rational solution to a practical problem within the confines of an Indochina-wide colonial space. By 1943, the Vietnamese population stood at nearly 40,000, forming the majority in some cities of Laos and having the right to elect their own leaders.\nAs a result, 53% of the population of Vientiane, 85% of Thakhek and 62% of Pakse were Vietnamese, with an exception of Luang Phrabang where the population was predominantly Lao. As late as 1945, the French drew up a plan to move Vietnamese population to 3 areas, i.e. the Vientiane Plain, Savannakhet region, Bolaven Plateau, which was discarded by Japanese invasion of Indochina. Otherwise, according to Martin Stuart-Fox, the Lao might well have lost control over their own country.\nBy 1920, the majority of French Laos was at peace and colonial order had been established. In 1928, the first school for the training of Lao civil servants was established, and allowed for the upward mobility of Lao to fill positions occupied by the Vietnamese. Throughout the 1920s and 1930s France attempted to implement Western, particularly French, education, healthcare and medicine, and public works. The budget for colonial Laos was secondary to Hanoi, and the worldwide Great Depression further restricted funds. It was in the 1920s and 1930s that the first strings of Lao identity emerged due to the work of Prince Phetsarath Rattanavongsa and the French Ecole Francaise d'Extreme Orient to restore monuments, temples, and conduct general research into Lao history, literature, art and architecture. French interest in indigenous history served a dual purpose in Laos it reinforced the image of the colonial mission as protection against Siamese domination, and was a legitimate route for scholarship.\nWorld War II.\nIn February 1945, a detachment from the Japanese Imperial Army moved into Xieng Khouang. The Japanese preempted that the Vichy administration of French Indochina under Admiral Decoux would be replaced by a representative of the Free French loyal to Charles DeGaulle and initiated Operation Meigo (\"bright moon\"). The Japanese succeeded in the internment of the French living in Vietnam and Cambodia, and in some areas of Laos the French were able with the help of the Lao and \"Garde Indigene\" to establish jungle bases which were supplied by British airdrops from Burma. French control in Laos had been sidelined.\nLao Issara and independence.\nUnder Japanese pressure, King Sisavangvong declared independence in April 1945. The move allowed the independence movements in Laos including the Lao Seri and Lao Pen Lao to coalesce into the Lao Issara or \"Free Lao\" movement which was led by Prince Phetsarath and opposed the return of Laos to the French. The Japanese surrender on 15 August 1945 emboldened pro-French factions and Prince Phetsarath was dismissed by King Sisavangvong. Undeterred Prince Phetsarath staged a coup in September and placed the royal family in Luang Prabang under house arrest. On 12 October 1945 the Lao Issara government was declared under the civil administration of Prince Phetsarath. In the next 6 months the French rallied against the Lao Issara and were able to reassert control over Indochina in April 1946. The Lao Issara government fled to Thailand, where they maintained opposition to the French until 1949, when the group split over questions regarding relations with the Vietminh and the communist Pathet Lao was formed. With the Lao Issara in exile, in August 1946 France instituted a constitutional monarchy in Laos headed by King Sisavangvong, and Thailand agreed to return territories seized during the Franco-Thai War in exchange for a representation at the United Nations. The Franco-Lao General Convention of 1949 provided most members of the Lao Issara with a negotiated amnesty and sought appeasement by establishing the Kingdom of Laos a quasi-independent constitutional monarchy within the French Union. In 1950, additional powers were granted to the Royal Lao Government including training and assistance for a national army. On 22 October 1953, the Franco\u2013Lao Treaty of Amity and Association transferred remaining French powers to the independent Royal Lao Government. By 1954 the defeat at Dien Bien Phu brought 8 years of fighting with the Vietminh, during the First Indochinese War, to an end and France abandoned all claims to the colonies of Indochina.\nKingdom of Laos and the Lao Civil War (1953\u20131975).\nA second Geneva conference, held in 1961\u201362, provided for the independence and neutrality of Laos, and the war resumed. Growing North Vietnamese military presence in the country increasingly drew Laos into the Second Indochina War (1954\u20131975). As a result, for nearly a decade, eastern Laos was subjected to \"some of the heaviest bombing in the history of warfare\".\nAfter the Paris Peace Accords led to the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, a ceasefire between the Pathet Lao and the government led to a new coalition government. After the fall of South Vietnam to communist forces in April 1975, the Pathet Lao with the backing of North Vietnam were able to take total power. On 2 December 1975, the king was forced to abdicate his throne and the Lao People's Democratic Republic was established. Around 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million left Laos by crossing the border into Thailand following the end of the civil war.\nLao People's Democratic Republic (1975\u2013).\nThe government's policies prompted about 10% of the Lao population to leave the country. Laos depended on Soviet aid channeled through Vietnam up until the Soviet collapse in 1991. In the 1990s the communist party gave up centralised management of the economy and still has a monopoly of political power.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17754", "revid": "10248457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17754", "title": "Geography of Laos", "text": "Laos is a landlocked country in mainland Southeast Asia. It covers approximately 236,800 square kilometers and is surrounded by Myanmar, Cambodia, China, Thailand, and Vietnam.\nAbout 70% of its geographic area is made up of mountain ranges, highlands, plateaus, and rivers cut through.\nTopography.\nMost of the western border of Laos is demarcated by the Mekong river, which is an artery for transportation. The Dong Falls at the southern end of the country prevent access to the sea, and cargo boats travel along the entire length of the Mekong in Laos during most of the year. Smaller power boats and pirogues provide an important means of transportation on many of the tributaries of the Mekong.\nPrior to the twentieth century, kingdoms and principalities encompassed areas on both sides of the Mekong, and Thai control in the nineteenth century extended to the left bank. While the Mekong was established as a border by French colonial forces, travel from 1 side to the other has been more limited since the establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR, or Laos) in 1975.\nThe eastern border with Vietnam extends for 2,130 kilometres, mostly along the crest of the Annamite Chain, and serves as a physical barrier between the Chinese-influenced culture of Vietnam and the Indianized states of Laos and Thailand. These mountains are populated by tribal minorities who traditionally have not acknowledged the border with Vietnam any more than lowland Lao have been constrained by the 1,754-kilometre Mekong River border with Thailand. Thus, ethnic minority populations are found on both the Laotian and Vietnamese sides of the frontier. Because of their \"relative isolation\", contact between these groups and lowland Lao has been mostly confined to trading.\nLaos shares a 541 kilometres\u2014southern border with Cambodia, and Khmer ruins at Wat Pho and other southern locations attest to the history of contact between the Lao and the Khmer. In the north, the country is bounded by a 423-kilometre border with China and shares the 235-kilometre-long Mekong River border with Myanmar.\nThe topography of Laos is \"largely mountainous\", with the Annamite Range in the northeast and east and the Luang Prabang Range in the northwest, among other ranges typically characterized by \"steep terrain\". Elevations are typically above 500 metres with river valleys. This landscape extends across most of the north of the country, except for the plain of Vientiane and the Plain of Jars in the Xiangkhoang Plateau.\nThe southern \"panhandle\" of the country contains areas in Savannakh\u00e9t and Champasak provinces that are more suited for paddy rice cultivation and livestock raising. Most of Khammouan Province and the eastern part of all the southern provinces are \"mountainous\". Together, the alluvial plains and terraces of the Mekong and its tributaries cover about 20% of the land area.\nAbout 4% of the total land area is classified as arable. The forested land area has declined since the 1970s as a result of commercial logging and expanded swidden, or slash-and-burn, farming.\nClimate.\nLaos has a tropical climate, with a rainy season from May through October, a cool dry season from November through February, and a hot dry season in March and April. Generally, monsoons occur at the same time across the country, while that time may vary from 1 year to the next.\nRainfall varies regionally, with the highest amounts\u2014 annually\u2014recorded on the Bolaven Plateau in Champasak Province. City rainfall stations have recorded that Savannakh\u00e9t averages of rain annually; Vientiane receives about , and Louangphrabang (Luang Prabang) receives about .\nRainfall is not always adequate for rice cultivation and the average precipitation conceals years where rainfall may be half or less of the norm, causing declines in rice yields. Such droughts sometimes are regional, leaving production in other parts of the country unaffected.\nThe average temperatures in January, coolest month, are, Luang Prabang 20.5\u00a0\u00b0C (minimum 0.8\u00a0\u00b0C), Vientiane 20.3\u00a0\u00b0C (minimum 3.3\u00a0\u00b0C), and Pakse 23.9\u00a0\u00b0C (minimum 7.8\u00a0\u00b0C); the average temperatures for April, usually the hottest month, are, Luang Prabang 28.1\u00a0\u00b0C (maximum 44.8\u00a0\u00b0C), Vientiane 42.5\u00a0\u00b0C. Temperature does vary according to the altitude, there is an average drop of 1.7\u00a0\u00b0C for every 1000 feet (or 300 meters). Temperatures in the upland plateux and in the mountains are considered lower than on the plains around Vientiane.\nAgriculture.\n5 million out of 23,680,000 hectares of Laos's total land area is suitable for cultivation, and 17% of the land area, between 850,000 and 900,000 hectares, was cultivated as of the 1990s. Rice is a crop grown during the rainy season.\nAgricultural cultivation is possible with varying weather on a portion of land area apart from the Vientiane plain and the lowlands along the Mekong Valley. These cultivated areas are situated in the valleys cut by the rivers or the plateau regions of Xieng Khouang in the North and in the Bolavens in the south. Typically there are only two ways to cultivate: either the wet-field paddy system practiced among the Lao Loum or lowland in Lao, or the swidden cultivation system practiced in the hills.\nHuman geography.\nThe overall population density was 18 persons per square kilometer, and in some districts the density was fewer than 10 persons per square kilometer. Population density per cultivated hectare ranged from 3.3 to 7.8 persons per hectare.\nNatural resources and environmental issues.\nThe natural resources of Laos include timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold, and gemstones.\nThe United Nations Development Programme warns: \"Protecting the environment and sustainable use of natural resources in Lao PDR is vital for poverty reduction and economic growth.\"\n* Total: \n**country rank in the world: \"82nd\"\n* Land: \n* Water: \n* Total: \n*Border countries:\n** Cambodia: \n** China: \n** Myanmar: \n** Thailand: \n** Vietnam: \n*Lowest point: Mekong River \n*Highest point: Phou Bia \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "17755", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17755", "title": "Demographics of Laos", "text": "This article describes the demographic aspects of Laos.\nPopulation.\nLao statistics bureau estimates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nStructure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.III.2005):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 01.III.2015):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Because of rounding, totals are not in all cases the sum of the respective components. Estimates or projections based on the 2015 population census.):\nHealth.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) and Crude birth rate (CBR):\nTotal fertility rate and other related statistics by province, as of 2011\u20132012:\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects\"\nEthnic groups.\nSome specialists are in agreement as to the ethnolinguistic classification of the ethnic groups of Laos. For the purposes of the 1995 census, the government of Laos recognised 149 ethnic groups within 47 main ethnicities. whereas the Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC) recently revised the list to include 49 ethnicities consisting of over 160 ethnic groups.\nThe term \"ethnic minorities\" is used by some to classify the non-Lao ethnic groups, while the term \"indigenous peoples\" is not used by the Lao PDR. These 160 ethnic groups speak a total of 82 living languages.\nLao 53.2%, Khmu 11%, Hmong 9.2%, and other (over 100 minor ethnic groups) 26.6% (2015 census).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17756", "revid": "50851964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17756", "title": "Politics of Laos", "text": " \nThe politics of the Lao People's Democratic Republic takes place in the framework of a communist state.\nJudicial branch.\nSupreme People's Court.\nThe Supreme People's Court of the Lao People's Democratic Republic was established in 1982. As outlined in Article 92, the People's Supreme Court of the Lao People's Democratic Republic is the highest judicial body and \"examines the judgments and judgments of the people's courts and military courts\". There has been indications that women have served on the provincial courts. For instance, in 2018, it was announced that Napaporn Phong Thai was appointed as the President of Court Zone 2, Xayaburi Province.\nPublic Prosecutor's Office.\nThe Public Prosecutor's Office was established in 1990. Article 99 of the Constitution of Laos states that the office has the responsibility of \"monitor[ing] the observance and implementation of laws throughout the country, protect[ing] the rights of the state and society...[and] the legitimate interests of the people, and prosecut[ing] detainees in accordance with the law\". The office is organized in the following ways:\n\"Supreme People's Prosecutor\"\nThe Chief of the Supreme Public Prosecutor directs all the activities of the Public Prosecutor at every level. All activities are reported to the National Assembly.\n\"Local People's Procuratorate\"\nMilitary Prosecutor's Office.\nAs of June 2022, the Supreme People's Prosecutor is Xayasana Kotphuthone.\nLaos Bar Association.\nAs for attorneys in general, according to a 2016 article, there are 188 lawyers in Laos who are members of the Laos Bar Association. Most of the attorneys have entered the government sector and do not practice law\u2014seldom giving thought to practicing in the private sector. Pursuant to the Resolution of the National Assembly No. 024 / NA (On the Adoption of the Law on Lawyers; November 9, 2016), requirements include possessing a baccalaureate degree, being a Laos citizen and passing an examination (separate requirements exist for foreign lawyers). While the Laos Bar Association issues certificates to graduates of the legal profession, it is the Ministry of Justice of Laos that sets the legal training standards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17757", "revid": "1317268504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17757", "title": "Economy of Laos", "text": "The economy of Laos is a lower-middle income developing economy. Being a communist state, the Lao economic model bears some resemblance to the Chinese and Vietnamese economies, in that it has implemented market-based economic practices while maintaining a degree of state control and welcoming foreign direct investment.\nFollowing the Civil War, Laos established a Soviet-type planned economy. As part of economic restructuring that aimed to integrate Laos into the globalized world market, the country underwent reforms called the \"New Economic Mechanism\" in 1986 that decentralized government control and encouraged private enterprise alongside state-owned enterprises. As of 2007, Laos averaged 8% a year in GDP growth. It was forecasted that Laos would sustain at least 7% growth through 2019.\nThe key goals for the government included pursuing poverty reduction and education for all children, with an initiative to become a \"land-linked\" country. This was showcased through the construction of the nearly $6 billion high-speed rail from Kunming, China to Vientiane, Laos. The country opened a stock exchange, the Lao Securities Exchange, in 2011, and has become a regional player in its role as a hydroelectric power supplier to its neighbors China, Thailand, and Vietnam. The Lao economy relies on foreign direct investment to attract capital from overseas. The long-term goal of the Lao economy, as enshrined in the constitution, is economic development in the direction of socialism.\nLaos has hydropower resources; the country has potential for hydro- and solar power. Excess electricity from hydropower is exported to other countries. The country relies on coal in its electricity production.\nHistory.\nSeizure of power by the Communists resulted in the withdrawal of mainly American external investment, on which the country had become dependent as a result of the destruction of domestic capital during the Indochina Wars.\nWith the revolutions of 1989 in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, in 1991, the PDR Lao government reached an agreement with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on reforms. The government agreed to introduce fiscal and monetary reform, promote private enterprise and foreign investment, privatize or close state firms, and strengthen banking. It agreed to maintain a market exchange rate, reduce tariffs, and eliminate unneeded trade regulations. A liberal foreign investment code was enacted. Enforcement of intellectual property rights is governed by 2 Prime Minister's Decrees dating from 1995 and 2002.\nThe economy continues to be dominated by an agricultural sector operating largely outside the money economy and in which the public sector continues to play a dominant role. A number of private enterprises have been founded in industries such as https://, beer, http:// and https://. With United Nations, Japanese, and German support, a formerly state-controlled chamber of commerce aims to promote private business: the http:// and its provincial subdivisions.\nA round of state-owned enterprise reform in 2019 aims to ensure that the remaining SOEs become profitable ventures that are efficient and sustainable sources of income for the national treasury. These measures include closing unproductive enterprises, ensure businesses in which the state has investments are reformed into profitable ventures, and reduce corruption. As of 2019, the State-Owned Enterprise Development and Insurance Department of the Lao government has 183 enterprises under its supervision.\nLaos faced an economic crisis in 2022. Caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and external debt primarily from China, it escalated into inflation and a debt crisis, bringing the country to the brink of default. A World Bank report finds that the economic instability \"largely results from low revenue and accumulated debt. There is moreover a need to improve the efficiency of public expenditure and tackle the potential costs of state-owned enterprises and public-private partnerships.\" The Lao kip currency value has fallen and inflation remains higher than before the pandemic. The same World Bank report states that \"the main factor in the kip's falling value has been the lack of foreign currency available (...) a result of the need to repay large external debts, despite some deferrals, and limited capital inflows.\" The per capita GDP of Laos has gone down from $2,595 in 2021 to $1,824 in 2023 because of the kip's depreciation.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2012, the Laos government issued a 4-year moratorium for new mining projects. The reasons cited were environmental and social concerns relating to the use of agricultural land.\nIn 2019 Laos produced:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nTourism.\nAs of 2011, tourism was the fastest-growing industry in the Lao economy. The government opened Laos to the world in the 1990s.\nOther statistics.\nOf the total foreign investment in Laos in 2012, the mining industry got 27% followed by electricity generation which had a 25% share.\nThe country has (as of 2025)\"already begun scaling back supply [of electrical power,] to crypto miners, who currently consume around 150 megawatts of electricity, down 70% from a peak of 500 MW in 2021 and 2022\", according to media's paraphrasing of authorities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17758", "revid": "41719756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17758", "title": "Mass media in Laos", "text": "Mass media in Laos are based on a network of telephone lines, radiotelephone communications, and mobile phone infrastructure.\nInfrastructure and statistics.\nIn 1997 there were 25,000 telephone lines in use, and in 2007 there were 850,000 mobile cellular subscribers. Laos is served by a Russian Intersputnik satellite that covers the Indian Ocean region.\nIn 1998 there were 12 AM stations and 1 FM station. In 1997 there were an estimated 730,000 radios in the country. In 2011 Laos had 3 television channels. In 2000 there was 1 Internet service provider, by 2002 serving about 10,000 users. The top-level domain for Laos is .la.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17759", "revid": "50216028", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17759", "title": "Transport in Laos", "text": " \nThis article concerns the systems of transportation in Laos. Laos is a country in Asia, which possesses a number of modern transportation systems, including several highways and a number of airports. As a landlocked country, Laos possesses no ports or harbours on the sea, and the difficulty of navigation on the Mekong means that this is also not a significant transport route.\nGeography and transport limits.\nBecause of its mountainous topography and lack of development, Laos has few reliable transportation routes. This inaccessibility has historically limited the ability of any government to maintain a presence in areas distant from the national or provincial capitals and has limited interchange and communication among villages and ethnic groups.\nThe Mekong and Nam Ou are the only natural channels suitable for large-draft boat transportation, and from December through May, low water limits the size of the draft that may be used over many routes. Laotians in lowland villages located on the banks of smaller rivers have traditionally traveled in pirogues for fishing, trading, and visiting up and down the river for limited distances.\nOtherwise, travel is done by ox-cart over level terrain or by foot. The steep mountains and lack of roads have caused upland ethnic groups to rely entirely on pack baskets and horse packing for transportation.\nThe road system is not extensive. A rudimentary network begun under the French colonial rule and continued from the 1950s, has provided an important means of increased intervillage communication, movement of market goods, and a focus for new settlements. As of mid-1994, travel in most areas of Laos were difficult and expensive, and most Laotians traveled only limited distances, if at all. As a result of ongoing improvements in the road system started during the early 1990s, it is expected that in the future villagers will more easily be able to seek medical care, send children to schools at district centers, and work outside their villages.\nCurrently, there are several projects to develop transport networks.\nRail.\nLaos has two railway lines: the standard gauge Boten\u2013Vientiane railway spanning northern and central Laos, and a metre gauge spur line connecting Khamsavath with the Thai railway network.\nRail transport has not played a significant part in Laos's transport sector, since the country largely lacks the required infrastructure, though that is expected to change after the opening of the Boten\u2013Vientiane railway.\nHighways.\nIn Laos, there are of roadway, with 1.45% paved with concrete, 12.03% with asphalt concrete and 75.77% with double bituminous surface treatment and 10.75% with gravel road. Right-hand traffic (RHT) is observed in Laos.\nLaos constructed a new highway in 2007 connecting Savannakhet to the Vietnamese border at Lao Bao, with funding from the Japanese government. This has greatly improved transport across Laos. This highway can be traversed in a few hours, while in 2002 the trip took over nine hours.\nLaos is connected across the Mekong River to Thailand by First and Second Thai-Lao Friendship Bridges. Vientiane is linked to Nong Khai by the First Friendship Bridge. The Third Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge began construction in March 2009 linking Nakhon Phanom Province in northeastern Thailand and Khammouane Province in Laos. It was completed on 11 November 2011.\nLaos opened a highway connection to Kunming in April 2008. The Fourth Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge opened to the public on 11 December 2013 linking Kunming to Bokeo, Laos and Chiang Rai. It reduced travel time to five hours.\nExpressway.\nOn 20 December 2020, the Vientiane\u2013Vang Vieng Expressway, the first expressway in Laos, was completed. Construction began at the end of 2018 and was initially scheduled to finish in 2021. The road, which includes twin tunnels almost 900 metres long through Phoupha Mountain, shortens the route by 43\u00a0km as compared with the existing Route No 13. The expressway toll is 550 kip per kilometre, or about 62,000 kip for a one-way trip between Vientiane and Vang Vieng. The Vientiane-Vang Vieng expressway is the first section of a planned expressway from Vientiane through the northern provinces to Boten in Luang Namtha Province, which borders China.\nWater transport.\nAbout of navigable water routes exist in Laos, primarily the Mekong and its tributaries. There are an additional of water routes, which is sectionally navigable by craft drawing less than .\nLaos has an ocean-going merchant marine that consisted of one cargo ship of \u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) in 2004, and still consisted of one ship in 2023.\nPipelines.\nLaos has of pipelines for the transport of petroleum products.\nAirports.\nLaos possesses 52 airports, of which nine have paved runways. Of the airports with paved runways, Wattay International Airport in Vientiane has a runway length of . Of the remainder, four have runways to length, and a further four have lengths between and .\nOf the airports without unpaved runways, one has a runway length of more than . Seventeen have runway lengths between and , leaving 25 with a lengths below .\nExternal links.\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "}
{"id": "17760", "revid": "50889226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17760", "title": "Lao People's Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Laos\nThe Lao People's Armed Forces (LPAF) () is the armed forces of the Lao People's Democratic Republic and the institution of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party.\nOrganization.\nThe LPRP statute states that its political leadership over the military emanates from the LPRP Central Committee's Defence and Public Security Commission (DPSC) and is the highest decision-making institution regarding military and security affairs. The DPSC is chaired by the LPRP General Secretary, making the officeholder the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces.\nHistory.\nAccording to some journalists, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), humanitarian and human rights organisations, the Lao People's Army has repeatedly engaged in egregious human rights violations and the practice of corruption in Laos.\nThe LPAF and its military intelligence play a role in the arrest, imprisonment and torture of foreign prisoners in Vientiane's Phonthong Prison and the communist Lao gulag system where Australians Kerry and Kay Danes were imprisoned and where civic activist Sombath Somphone may be imprisoned following his arrest in December 2012.\nIn 2013, attacks by the Lao People's Army against the Hmong people intensified, with soldiers killing four unarmed Hmong school teachers in addition to engaging in other human rights abuses according to the Lao Human Rights Council, the Centre for Public Policy Analysis and others.\nOn 17 May 2014, Defence Minister and Deputy Prime Minister Douangchay Phichit was killed in a plane crash, along with other officials. The officials were to participate in a ceremony to mark the liberation of the Plain of Jars from the former Royal Lao government forces. Their Russian-built Antonov AN 74-300 with 20 people on board crashed in Xiangkhouang Province.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17761", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17761", "title": "Foreign relations of Laos", "text": "The foreign relations of Laos, internationally designated by its official name as the Lao People's Democratic Republic, after the takeover by the Pathet Lao in December 1975, were characterized by a hostile posture toward the West, with the government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic aligning itself with the Soviet bloc, maintaining close ties with the Soviet Union and depending heavily on the Soviets for most of its foreign assistance. Laos also maintained a \"special relationship\" with Vietnam and formalized a 1977 treaty of friendship and cooperation that created tensions with China.\nWith the collapse of the Soviet Union and with Vietnam's decreased ability to provide assistance, Laos has sought to improve relations with its regional neighbors and has emerged from international isolation through improved and expanded relations with other nations, such as Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, China, Turkey, Australia, France, Japan, and Sweden. Trade relations with the United States were normalized in 2004. Laos was admitted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in July 1997 and applied to join the World Trade Organization in 1998. In 2005 it attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.\nMembership of international bodies.\nLaos is a member of the following international organizations: Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT), ASEAN, ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN-Japan Centre (AJC) Asian Development Bank, Colombo Plan, United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Group of 77, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Development Association (IDA), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), International Finance Corporation (IFC), International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, International Labour Organization (ILO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), Intelsat (nonsignatory user), and Interpol.\nLaos is also a member of the International Olympic Commission (IOC), International Telecommunication Union (ITU), Mekong Group, Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), Pacific Alliance (as observer), Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), United Nations, United Nations Convention on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), Universal Postal Union (UPU), World Federation of Trade Unions, World Health Organization (WHO), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), World Tourism Organization, World Trade Organization (observer).\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Laos maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17762", "revid": "28146993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17762", "title": "History of Latvia", "text": "The history of Latvia began around 9000 BC with the end of the last glacial period in northern Europe. Ancient Baltic peoples arrived in the area during the second millennium BC, and four distinct tribal realms in Latvia's territory were identifiable towards the end of the first millennium AD. Latvia's principal river Daugava, was at the head of an important trade route from the Baltic region through Russia into southern Europe and the Middle East that was used by the Vikings and later Nordic and German traders.\nIn the early medieval period, the region's peoples resisted Christianization and became subject to attack through the Livonian Crusade. Latvia's capital city Riga, founded in 1201 by Germans at the mouth of the Daugava, became a strategic base in a papally-sanctioned conquest of the area by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword. It was to be the first major city of the southern Baltic and, after 1282, a principal trading center in the Hanseatic League.\nBy the 16th century, Baltic German dominance in Terra Mariana was increasingly challenged by other powers. Because of Latvia's strategic location and prosperous trading city of Riga, its territories were a frequent focal point for conflict and conquest between at least four major powers: the State of the Teutonic Order, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden and the Russian Empire. The last period of external hegemony began in 1710, when control over Riga and parts of modern-day Latvia switched from Sweden to Russia during the Great Northern War. Under Russian control, Latvia was in the vanguard of industrialization and the abolition of serfdom, so that by the end of the 19th century, it had become one of the most developed parts of the Russian Empire. The increasing social problems and rising discontent that this brought meant that Riga also played a leading role in the 1905 Russian Revolution.\nThe First Latvian National Awakening began in the 1850s and continued to bear fruit after World War I when, after two years of struggle in the Latvian War of Independence, Latvia finally won sovereign independence, as recognized by Soviet Russia in 1920 and by the international community in 1921. The Constitution of Latvia was adopted in 1922. Political instability and effects of the Great Depression led to the May 15, 1934, coup d'\u00e9tat by Prime Minister K\u0101rlis Ulmanis. Latvia's independence was interrupted in June\u2013July 1940, when the country was occupied and incorporated into the Soviet Union. In 1941 it was invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany, then reconquered by the Soviets in 1944\u201345.\nFrom the mid-1940s the Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic was subject to Soviet economic control and saw considerable Russification of its peoples. However, Latvian culture and infrastructures survived and, during the period of Soviet liberalization under Mikhail Gorbachev, Latvia once again took a path towards independence, eventually succeeding in August 1991 to be recognized by Russia the following month. Since then, under restored independence, Latvia has become a member of the United Nations, entered NATO and joined the European Union.\nLatvia's economy suffered greatly during the Great Recession which caused the 2008 Latvian financial crisis. Worsening economic conditions and better job opportunities in Western Europe have caused a massive Latvian emigration.\nPrehistory.\nThe Ice Age in the territory of present-day Latvia ended 14,000\u201312,000 years ago. The first human settlers arrived here during the Paleolithic Age 11,000\u201312,000 years ago. They were hunters, who following the reindeer herds camped along the rivers and shore of the Baltic Ice Lake. As the geology of the Baltic Sea indicates, the coastline then reached further inland. The earliest tools found near Salaspils date to the late Paleolithic age, circa 12,000 years ago, and belong to the Swiderian culture.\nDuring the Mesolithic Age (9000\u20135400 BC) permanent settlements of hunter-gatherers were established. They hunted and fished, establishing camps near rivers and lakes; 25 settlements have been found near Lake Lub\u0101ns. These people from the Kunda culture made weapons and tools from flint, antler, bone and wood.\nNeolithic Age, 5000\u20131800 BC.\nThe early Neolithic (5400\u20134100 BC) was marked by the beginnings of pottery-making, animal husbandry and agriculture.\nDuring the Middle Neolithic (4100\u20132900 BC) the Narva culture developed in the region. The inhabitants at this time were Finnic, forefathers of Livonians, who were closely related to Estonians and Finns and belonged to Pit\u2013Comb Ware culture.\nAt the beginning of the Late Neolithic (2900\u20131800 BC), present-day Latvia was settled by Balts belonging to the Corded Ware culture. They were forefathers of the Latvians, and these have inhabited most of Latvian territory since the third millennium BCE.\nIron Age, 500 BC\u20131200 AD.\nWith the introduction of iron tools during the early Iron Age (500 BC \u2013 1st cent. BC), agriculture was greatly improved and became the dominant economic activity. Bronze, traded from foreigners since Latvia has no copper or tin, was used for making a wide variety of decorative ornaments.\nStarting from the Middle Iron Age (400\u2013800 AD) the local inhabitants began to form distinct ethnic and regional identities. Baltic peoples eventually became the Curonians, Semigallians, Latgalians and Selonians, while Finnic peoples became the Livonians, Estonians and Vends; local chiefdoms emerged.\nAt the beginning of the current era, the territory known today as Latvia became famous as a trading crossroads. The renowned trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks mentioned in ancient chronicles stretched from Scandinavia through Latvian territory via Daugava to the ancient Kievan Rus' and Byzantine Empire. The ancient Balts actively participated in this trading network. Across Europe, Latvia's coast was known as a place for obtaining amber and Latvia sometimes is still called \"Dzintarzeme\" (Amberland). Up to and into the Middle Ages, amber was more valuable than gold in many places. Latvian amber was known in places as far away as Ancient Greece and the Roman Empire, and the Amber Road was intensively used for the transport of amber to the south of Europe.\nDuring the Vendel Period a Scandinavian settlement was established near the town of Grobi\u0146a, most likely by people from Gotland. This colony which numbered a few hundred people existed from a date between 650 and 850 AD. Many chronicles mention that Curonians paid a tribute to Swedish kings.\nDuring the Late Iron Age (800\u20131200 AD) the three-field system was introduced, rye cultivation began, and the quality of local craftsmanship improved with the introduction of the potter's wheel and better metal working techniques. Arab, Western European and Anglo-Saxon coins dating from this era have been found. A network of wooden hill-forts was built, which provided control and security over the land.\nEarly state formations.\nIn the 10th century, the various ancient Baltic tribal chiefdoms started forming early realms. Regional tribal cultures developed in the territory of modern-day Latvia and northern Lithuania, including the Curonians, Latgalians, Selonians, Semigallians () and the Finnic Livonians, who united under their local chiefs.\nThe largest tribe was the Latgalians who also were the most advanced in their socio-political development. The main Latgalian principality, Jersika, was ruled by Orthodox Christian princes from the Latgalian-Polotsk branch of the Rurik dynasty. The last ruler of Jersika, mentioned in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia (a document that describes events of the late 12th and early 13th centuries) was King Visvaldis (\"Vissewalde, rex de Gercike\"). When he divided his realm in 1211, part of the country was called \"Lettia\" (\"terra, quae Lettia dicitur\"), probably the first time this name is mentioned in written sources.\nIn contrast, the Curonians, whose territories extended into today's Lithuania and Curonian Spit, maintained a lifestyle of sea invasions that included looting and pillaging. On the west coast of the Baltic Sea they became known as the \"Baltic Vikings.\"\nSelonians and Semgallians, closely related to Auk\u0161taitians and Samogitians, were known as prosperous farmers and resisted Germans the longest under such chiefs as Viestards. Livonians lived along the shores of the Gulf of Riga and were fishers and traders, and they gave the first German name to this territory \u2013 Livland.\nBefore the German invasions started in the late 12th century, Latvia was inhabited by about 135,000 Baltic people and 20,000 Livonians.\nGerman period, 1184\u20131561.\nBy the end of the 12th century, Latvia was increasingly often visited by traders from Western Europe who set out on trading journeys along Latvia's longest river, the Daugava, to Kievan Rus'. Among them were German traders who came with Christian preachers who attempted to convert the pagan Baltic and Finnic nations to the Christian faith.\nIn early 1180s Saint Meinhard began his mission among Daugava Livonians. They did not willingly convert to the new beliefs and practices, they particularly opposed the ritual of baptism. News of this reached Pope Celestine III in Rome, and it was decided in 1195 that Livonian Crusade would be undertaken to convert pagans by force. Meinhard was followed by Berthold of Hanover, who was killed in 1198 near the present-day Riga by Livonians.\nBerthold's successor, Bishop Albert of Riga, who spent almost 30 years conquering local rulers, established the German hegemony which lasted until 20th century independence. Much of Albert's rule is described in the Livonian Chronicle of Henry. While Riga had been a trading port since ancient times, Albert is credited with its founding in 1201 when he established it as his seat of power. Riga gradually became the largest city in the southern part of the Baltic Sea.\nA state known as Terra Mariana, later Livonian Confederation, was established in 1207. It consisted of various territories that belonged to the Church and Order in what is now Latvia and Estonia and was under the direct authority of the Pope of Rome. In 1228 the Livonian Confederation was established.\nThe Order of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword was founded in 1202 to subjugate the local population. The Livonians were conquered by 1207 and most of the Latgalians by 1214. When Brothers of the Sword were decimated at the Battle of Saule in 1236, they asked for incorporation into the Teutonic Order as the Livonian Order. In 1260, the Battle of Durbe destroyed Teuton hopes for a wide land bridge between their territories in Prussia and Courland.\nBy the end of the 13th century, the Curonians and Semigallians were subjugated (in 1290 the majority of Semigallians left German-conquered areas and moved to Lithuania), and the development of the separate tribal realms of the ancient Latvians came to an end as Germans introduced direct rule over subjected peoples.\nIn 1282, Riga (and later C\u0113sis, Limba\u017ei, Koknese and Valmiera) were included in the Northern German Trading Organization, better known as the Hanseatic League (Hansa). From this time, Riga became an important point in west\u2013east trading, and it formed closer cultural contacts with Western Europe.\nBetween 1297 and 1330 the Livonian Civil War raged, which started as a conflict between the Bishop of Riga and the Livonian Order.\nNative people initially retained much of their personal freedoms as the number of Germans was too small to implement a total control beyond the requirements to follow Christian rites, pay the required taxes and participate as soldier in wars. In case of Curonian Kings the former tribal nobility retained a privileged status until the proclamation of independent Latvia. During the 14th century peasants had to pay 10% to the Church and work 4 days of socage per year.\nIn the 15th\u201316th centuries, the hereditary landed class of Baltic nobility gradually evolved from the German vassals of the Order and bishops. In time, their descendants came to own vast estates over which they exercised absolute rights. At the end of the Middle Ages this Baltic German minority had established themselves as the governing elite, partly as an urban trading population in the cities, and partly as rural landowners, via a vast manorial network of estates in Latvia. The titled landowners wielded economic and political power; they had a duty to care for the peasants dependent on them, however in practice the latter were forced into serfdom.\nBy 16th century sockage had increased to 4 \u2013 6 days per week and various taxes to 25%. Peasants increasingly tried to escape to freedom, either by moving to Riga (they could gain freedom if they lived there for one year and one day) or another manor. In 1494 a law was passed which forbade peasants to leave their land, virtually enslaving them.\nThe Reformation reached Livonia in 1521 with Luther's follower Andreas Kn\u00f6pken. During the Protestant riot of 1524 Catholic churches were attacked and in 1525 freedom of religion was allowed. First Latvian parishes were established and services were held in Latvian. Protestants gained support in the cities, and by the middle of the 16th century, the majority of the population had converted to Lutheranism.\nThe Livonian Confederation ceased to exist during the long Livonian War of 1558\u201382. The Livonian Order was dissolved by the Treaty of Vilnius in 1561. The following year, the Livonian Landtag decided to ask protection from King Sigismund II of Poland and Grand Duchy of Lithuania. With the end of government by the last Archbishop of Riga, William of Brandenburg, Riga became a Free Imperial City and the rest of the territory was divided into Polish-Lithuanian vassal states - Duchy of Courland and Semigallia (Polish vassal) and the Duchy of Livonia (Lithuanian vassal).\nLivonian War, 1558\u20131583.\nThe Livonian war put an end to the Livonian Confederacy. Despite the very real threat of Muscovite rule over the whole Livonia, Western Christian countries managed to establish their control over this area for the next 150 \u2013 200 years.\nIn September 1557 the Livonian Confederation and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian union signed the Treaty of Pozvol, which created a mutual defensive and offensive alliance. Tsar Ivan the Terrible of Muscovy regarded this as a provocation, and in January 1558 he reacted with the invasion of Livonia that began the Livonian War of 1558\u201383. On August 2, 1560, the forces of Ivan the Terrible destroyed the last few hundred soldiers of the Livonian Order and the Archbishop of Riga at the Battle of \u0112r\u0123eme.\nIn 1561 the weakened Livonian Order was dissolved by the Treaty of Vilnius. Very much following the earlier model of Prussian Homage its lands were secularised as the Duchy of Livonia (Lithuanian vassal) and the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia (Polish vassal) were created. The last Master of the Order Gotthard Kettler became the first Duke of Courland and converted to Lutheranism.\nKingdom of Livonia, 1570\u20131578.\nIn 1560 Johannes IV von M\u00fcnchhausen, the prince-bishop of \u00d6sel-Wiek and Courland, sold his lands to king Frederick II of Denmark for 30,000 thalers. To avoid the partition of his lands, King Frederick II gave these territories to his younger brother Magnus, Duke of Holstein on condition that he renounce his rights to succession in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. Magnus was recognised as sovereign by the Bishop of \u00d6sel-Wiek and Courland and as the prospective ruler of his lands by the authorities of The Bishopric of Dorpat. The Bishopric of Reval with the Harrien-Wierland gentry took his side. Gotthard Kettler, the last Master of the Livonian Order, gave Magnus the portions of Livonia he had taken possession of, along with Archbishop Wilhelm von Brandenburg of the Archbishopric of Riga and his coadjutor Christoph von Mecklenburg.\nOn June 10, 1570 Duke Magnus of Holstein arrived in Moscow, where he was crowned King of Livonia. Magnus took an oath of allegiance to Ivan the Terrible as his overlord and received from him the corresponding charter for the vassal kingdom of Livonia in what Ivan termed his patrimony. The armies of Ivan the Terrible were initially successful, taking Polotsk in 1563 and P\u00e4rnu in 1575 and overrunning much of Grand Duchy of Lithuania almost up to the eastern borders of Vilnius voivodeship.\nIn the next phase of the conflict, in 1577 Ivan IV took the opportunity of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth's internal strife (called the war against Gda\u0144sk in Polish historiography), and during the reign of Stefan Batory invaded Livonia, quickly taking almost the entire territory, with the exception of Riga and Revel.\nIn 1578 Magnus of Livonia recognized the sovereignty of Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (not ratified by the Sejm of Poland-Lithuania, or recognized by Denmark). In 1578 Magnus retired to The Bishopric of Courland where he lived in Piltene Castle and accepted Polish pension. After he died in 1583, Poland annexed his territories to the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia and Frederick II decided to sell his rights of inheritance. Except for the island of \u0152sel, Denmark was out of the Baltic by 1585.\nPolish-Lithuanian and Swedish rule, 1561\u20131721/95.\nDuchy of Livonia, 1561\u20131621.\nJan Hieronimowicz Chodkiewicz became the first Governor of the Duchy (1566\u20131578) with the seat in Sigulda Castle. It was a province of Grand Duchy of Lithuania until 1569. After the Union of Lublin in 1569, it became a joint domain of the Polish Crown and the Grand Duchy. Muscovy recognized Polish\u2013Lithuanian control of Ducatus Ultradunensis in 1582.\nIn 1598 Duchy of Livonia was divided onto:\nInflanty Voivodeship, 1621\u20131772.\nThe larger part of the Duchy was conquered by Swedish Kingdom during the Polish\u2013Swedish War (1626\u201329), and was recognized as Swedish territory in the Truce of Altmark. The Commonwealth retained southeastern parts of the Wenden Voivodeship, renamed to Inflanty Voivodeship with the capital in Daugavpils (\"Dyneburg\"). Catholicism became the dominant religion in this territory, known as Inflanty or Latgale, as a result of Counter-Reformation. During the first Partition of Poland in 1772, when it was annexed by Catherine the Great's Russian Empire and title \"Grand Duke of Livonia\" was added to the grand title of Russian Emperors.\nSwedish Livonia, 1629\u20131721.\nDuring the Polish\u2013Swedish War (1600\u20131629) Riga and the largest part of Duchy of Livonia came under Swedish rule in 1621. During the Swedish rule, this region was known as the \"Swedish Bread Basket\" because it supplied the larger part of the Swedish Kingdom with wheat.\nRiga was the second largest city in the Swedish Empire at the time. Together with other Baltic Sea dominions, Livonia served to secure the Swedish \"Dominium maris baltici\". In contrast to Swedish Estonia, which had submitted to Swedish rule voluntarily in 1561 and where traditional local laws remained largely untouched, the uniformity policy was applied in Swedish Livonia under Karl XI of Sweden: serfdom was abolished in the estates owned by the Swedish crown, peasants were offered education and military, administrative or ecclesiastical careers, and nobles had to transfer domains to the king in the Great Reduction. These reforms were subsequently reversed by Peter I of Russia when he conquered Livonia.\nIn 1632 the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus founded Dorpat University which became the intellectual focus for population of Livonia. The translation of the whole Bible into Latvian in 1685 by Johann Ernst Gl\u00fcck was subsidized by the Swedish government. Schools for Latvian speaking peasantry were set up in the country parishes. In Latvian history this period is generally praised as the \"good Swedish times\".\nDuchy of Courland and Semigallia, 1562\u20131795.\nAfter Gotthard Kettler became the first duke, other members of the Order became the nobility, with their fiefdoms becoming their estates. Kettler received nearly one-third of the land in the new duchy. Mitau (Jelgava) was designated as the capital and a Landtag was to meet there twice a year.\nWhen Gotthard Kettler died in 1587, his sons Friedrich and Wilhelm became the dukes of Courland. They divided the Duchy into two parts in 1596. Friedrich controlled the eastern part, Semigalia (\"Zemgale\"), with his residence in Mitau (Jelgava). Wilhelm owned the western part, Courland (\"Kurzeme\"), with his residence in Goldingen (Kuld\u012bga). Wilhelm regained the Grobi\u0146a district when he married the daughter of the Duke of Prussia. Here he developed metalworking, shipyards, and the new ships delivered the goods of Courland to other countries. Wilhelm's conflict with local nobles ended with his removal from the duke's seat in 1616 and Friedrich became the only duke of Courland after 1616.\nUnder the next duke, Jacob Kettler, the Duchy reached the peak of its prosperity. During his travels in Western Europe, Jacob became the eager proponent of mercantilist ideas. Metalworking and ship building became much more developed, and powder mills began producing gunpowder. Trading relations developed not only with nearby countries but also with Britain, France, the Netherlands and Portugal. Jacob established the merchant fleet of the Duchy of Courland, with its main harbours in Windau and Libau. In Windau 120 ships were built, of which over 40 were warships. The duchy owned a large fleet and established two colonies \u2014 St. Andrews Island in the estuary of Gambia River (in Africa) and Tobago Island (in the Caribbean Sea). Courland related place names from this period still survive today in these places.\nThe last duke, Peter von Biron who ruled under heavy Russian influence founded Academia Petrina in 1775. In April 1786 he purchased the Duchy of Sagan from the Bohemian Lobkovic family, from then additionally using the title of Duke of \u017baga\u0144. In 1795, Russia determined the further fate of Courland when with its allies it began the third division of Poland. Given a \"nice recommendation\" by Russia, Duke gave up his rights in return for a large payment, signing the final document on March 28, 1795.\nEnlightenment and Latvians.\nEnlightenment ideas influenced local Baltic Germans, two of whom played great role in the creation of Latvian nation. Gotthard Friedrich Stender wrote the first Latvian-German and German-Latvian dictionaries. He also wrote the first encyclopedia \u201cThe book of high wisdom of the world and nature\u201d (1774) and the first illustrated Latvian alphabet book (1787).\nGarlieb Merkel in 1796 published his book \u201cThe Latvians\u201d in which exposed the horrible conditions of serfdom under which Latvians were forced to live because of cruelty of their German masters.\nRussian period, 1721/95\u20131915/18.\nIn 1700 the Great Northern War between Sweden and Russia started largely because Peter the Great wanted to secure and enlarge Russian access to the Baltic ports. In 1710 Russians conquered Riga and Estonia and Livonia capitulated. Losses from the military actions were multiplied by the Great Northern War plague outbreak which killed up to 75% of people in some areas.\nIn 1713 Peter established the Riga Governorate, and after various administrative and territorial reforms, the Governorate of Livonia was finally established in 1796. Latvians call it Vidzeme Governorate (\"Vidzemes guber\u0146a\"). Sweden officially gave up its claims to Swedish Livonia with the 1721 Treaty of Nystad. The Treaty enshrined the existing privileges and freedoms of the German Baltic nobility. They were allowed to maintain their financial system, existing customs border, self-governing provincial Landtags and city councils, Lutheran religion and German language. This special position in the Russian Empire was reconfirmed by all Russian Emperors from Peter the Great (reigned 1682\u20131725) to Alexander II (reigned 1855\u20131881). Only the 1889 judicial reform imposed Russian laws and a program of Russification enforced school education in Russian.\nAfter the First Partition of Poland in 1772 Russia gained Inflanty Voivodeship which was first included in the Mogilev Governorate and after 1802 in Vitebsk Governorate. This led to the increased cultural and linguistic separation of Latgalians from the rest of ethnic Latvians. A large Daugavpils fortress was built here.\nAfter the Third Partition of Poland and financial settlement with the last Duke of Courland and Semigallia in 1795 the Courland Governorate was created in which the Germans retained their privileges and autonomy for another century. Russian empire now possessed all the territories inhabited by Latvians.\nIn 1812 Napoleon's troops invaded Russia and the Prussian units under the leadership of Field Marshal Yorck occupied Courland and approached Riga and the Battle of Mesoten was fought. Napoleon proclaimed restoration of Duchy of Courland and Semigallia under French and Polish protectorate. The Russian governor-general of Riga Ivan Essen was expecting attack, and set the wooden houses of Riga suburbs on fire to deflect the invaders leaving thousands of city residents homeless. However, Yorck did not attack Riga and in December Napoleon's army retreated.\nEmancipation of peasantry.\nLivonian peasant law, 1804.\nAfter the October 1802 Kauguri rebellion, czarist authorities reacted with the law of February 20, 1804, which was aimed at improving peasant condition in the Livonian Governorate. Peasants no longer were tied to the land owner, but to the land, so they could be sold only together with the land. Peasants were divided in two classes \u2013 people of manors and plowmen. Plowmen were divided into farm-owners and free people. Farms from now on could be inherited within the family. Amount and length of socage now was regulated and limited. This law was opposed by the nobles, who in 1809 secured changes in the law which again gave them more power over peasants and socage.\nEmancipation in Courland, 1819.\nIn 1816 Governorate of Estonia proposed a law for emancipation of serfs which was based on the model of the Prussian reforms. Czarist authorities ordered Courland Landtag to come up with a similar proposal, which was accepted on August 25, 1817, and proclaimed in Jelgava on August 30, 1818, in presence of Czar Alexander I. Emancipation came into force in 1819 and continued until 1832 as only a selected number of peasants was emancipated each year. Emancipation gave peasants personal freedom, but no land, which they had to lease from land-owners. Peasants were not completely free, as they still could not move to another governorate or city without land-lord's permit.\nEmancipation in Livonia, 1820.\nAfter Emancipation in Estonia and Courland, the situation in Livonia was resolved by the law of March 26, 1819, which was very similar to the Emancipation law of Courland. It was proclaimed on early 1820 and was in force until 1832.\nEmancipation in Latgale, 1861.\nAs Latgale was part of the Russian Vitebsk Governorate, serfdom here lasted until 1861, when the Emancipation reform of 1861 was proclaimed in the Russian Empire. Initially peasants kept their land, but had to continue performing socage and rent payments. This was ended by the new law of March 1, 1863.\nFurther reforms.\nAfter 1832 peasants were allowed freedom of settlement within the governorate, but only in 1848 Courland peasants were allowed to settle in towns and cities, many of which until then had mostly German and Jewish populations.\nThe provisional Livonian agrarian law of July 9, 1849 which came int force on November 20, 1850, maintained German nobility's property rights, but allowed peasants to rent or buy the land. By 1856 only 23% of farmers were paying land rent, while the rest were still performing socage. In 1860 this law became permanent and allowed increasing number of farmers to purchase their homes. An 1864 law permitted creation of credit unions, and this improved access to capital for farmers wanting to buy their homes from German land-lords. Just before the start of World War I about 99% of houses in Courland were bought and 90% in Livonia. This created a land-owning Latvian farmer class which increased in prosperity and sent its sons to schools of higher education.\nIn 1870-80s many peasants who were unable or unwilling to purchase their land, used the opportunity to emigrate to Siberia, where land was given for free. By the start of World War I approximately 200,000 Latvian farmers had moved to farming colonies in Siberia.\nGiving of family names.\nWhile there are records of Latvian last names going as far back as 15th century, almost all of them were inhabitants of large cities and often adopted Germanic family names. Some peasants had family names in the 17th century, but majority had only first name until the emancipation. Most people were identified by the name of their house or manor. Emancipation created the need for identity papers and with this, for family names. Livonian peasants had to choose family names by 1826, in Courland majority names were selected in the campaign that lasted from October 1834 until July 1835. Peasants were prohibited from choosing family names of German nobility and majority chose names related to animals, plants and trees, especially popular were diminutive forms \u2013 \"B\u0113rzs\" (birch), \"B\u0113rzi\u0146\u0161\" (small birch), \"Kalns\" (hill), \"Kalni\u0146\u0161\" (small hill).\nReligion.\nLatvia was predominantly Lutheran and Catholic, but in 1729 Herrnhuter Brethren started their mission in Livonia, with center in Valmiera, their missionaries made significant headway despite the opposition of the German landlords who controlled the Lutheran clergy. The Imperial government proscribed the Moravians 1743\u20131764. This was the first Christian movement where Latvians become involved voluntarily. Brethren operated independently from the German landlords and their meeting houses were run by Latvians, giving them a chance to create their own communities. Brethren reached the peak of their popularity around 1820, a few years after serfdom was abolished in Livonia Governorate. 30 parishes had almost 100 meeting houses and 20,000 members.\nThe Imperial government sponsored the Russian Orthodox Church, as part of its program of russification, but Lutheranism remained the dominant religion, except Latgale where Catholicism was dominant. Other Protestant missions had some success including the Baptists, Methodists and Seventh Day Adventists.\nIn 1571 the first Jews were invited to settle in Piltene and a Courland Jewish community was formed. After incorporation into Russian Empire more Jews from the former Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth settled here.\nLatvian National Awakening.\nLatvian national awakening could start after the emancipation of serfs and growth in literacy and education rates. Educated Latvians no longer wanted to be Germanized.\nIn 1822 \"Latvie\u0161u av\u012bzes (Latvian Newspapers)\" the first weekly in Latvian began publishing. In 1832 weekly \"Tas Latvie\u0161u \u013bau\u017eu Draugs\" began publishing. The first Latvian writers who wrote in Latvian appeared \u2013 Ansis Livent\u0101ls (1803\u201377), J\u0101nis Ru\u0123\u0113ns (1817\u201376) and others. In 1839 institute for the elementary school teachers led by J\u0101nis Cimze opened in Valmiera.\nBy the middle of 19th century, the First Latvian National Awakening began among ethnic Latvian intellectuals, a movement that partly reflected similar nationalist trends elsewhere in Europe. This revival was led by the \"Young Latvians\" (in Latvian: \"jaunlatvie\u0161i\") from the 1850s to the 1880s. Primarily a literary and cultural movement with significant political implications, the Young Latvians soon came into severe conflict with the Baltic Germans. During this time the notion of a united Latvian nation was born. Young Latvians also began to research Latvian folklore (See:Latvian dainas) and ancient beliefs.\nIn the 1880s and 1890s the russification policy was begun by Alexander III aimed at reducing German autonomy in the Baltic provinces. Introduction of the Russian language in administration, court and education was meant to reduce predominance of German language. At the same time these policies banned Latvian language from public sphere, especially schools, which was a heavy blow to the new Latvian culture.\nWith increasing poverty in many rural areas and growing urbanization and industrialization (especially of Riga), a loose but broad leftist movement called the \"New Current\" arose in the late 1880s. It was led by the future National poet Rainis and his brother-in-law P\u0113teris Stu\u010dka, editors of the newspaper \"Dienas Lapa\". This movement was soon influenced by Marxism and led to the creation of the Latvian Social Democratic Labour Party. While Rainis remained a social democrat until his death, Stu\u010dka become allied with Lenin, established the first Bolshevik state in Latvia and died in Moscow.\n1905 Revolution.\nLatvia welcomed the 20th century with an explosion of popular discontent during the 1905 Revolution. It started with the shooting of demonstrators in Riga on January 13, progressed to mass strikes in October and armed uprising in December. The revolution was aimed not only against the czarist authorities, but against the hated German barons. For in Latvia most did not feel primarily oppressed by Russia or Russians, but by the Baltic Germans \u2014roughly seven percent of the population\u2014 who had instituted a feudal system with themselves at the top and Latvian-speakers being left mostly poor and landless. As such, it involved not only left wing social democrats and industrial workers, but also more conservative peasants and Latvian intelligentsia since \u2014despite being second class citizens in their own country\u2014 Latvia was also a highly literate and industrialised society. Riga was behind only St. Petersburg and Moscow by the number of industrial workers, and at the turn of the century over 90% of Latvians could read. In this regard, Latvia was equally primed for radical leftism and nationalism. In all, spearheaded by the Latvian Social Democratic Workers\u2019 Party (LSDSP), the governorates making up what is now Latvia were probably the most ungovernable in the whole Russian Empire.\nFollowing the shooting of demonstrators in St. Petersburg on January 9, 1905, a wide-scale general strike began in Riga. On January 13 Russian army troops opened fire on demonstrators in Riga killing 73 and injuring 200 people.\nDuring the summer of 1905 the main revolutionary events moved to the countryside. 470 new parish administrative bodies were elected in 94% of the parishes in Latvia. The Congress of Parish Representatives was held in Riga in November. Mass meetings and demonstrations took place including violent attacks against Baltic German nobles, burning estate buildings and seizure of estate property, including weapons. In total 449 German manor houses were burned.\nIn the autumn of 1905 armed conflict between the German nobility and the Latvian peasants began in the rural areas of Vidzeme and Courland. In Courland, the peasants seized or surrounded several towns where they established revolutionary councils. In Vidzeme the fighters controlled the R\u016bjiena-P\u00e4rnu railway line. Altogether, a thousand armed clashes were registered in Latvia in 1905.\nMartial law was declared in Courland in August 1905 and in Vidzeme in late November. Special punitive expeditions by Cossack cavalry units and Baltic Germans were dispatched in mid-December to suppress the movement. They executed over 2000 people without trial or investigation and burned 300 houses and public buildings. The executed often were local teachers or peasant activists who had shown disrespect to German nobles, not necessarily hardened revolutionaries. 427 people were court martialed and executed. 2652 people were exiled to Siberia, over 5000 went into exile to Western Europe or the US. In 1906 the revolutionary movement gradually subsided but some local protests and actions of forest guerrillas continued until 1907. They executed some daring raids \u2013 freeing their imprisoned comrades from Riga police HQ on January 17, 1906, February 26, 1906 Helsinki bank robbery and the 1910 Siege of Sidney Street in London.\nAmong the exiles were activists from the left and right who in just 10 years would fight against each other over the future of Latvia, such as the future Prime Minister K\u0101rlis Ulmanis, National poet J\u0101nis Rainis and early Cheka leader J\u0113kabs Peterss.\nWorld War I.\nOn August 1, 1914, Germany declared war on Russia. Since Courland Governorate had a direct border with Germany it was immediately involved in warfare. On August 2 German warships SMS Augsburg and SMS Magdeburg shelled port city Liep\u0101ja, causing it light damage. On August 19 German navy tried to capture U\u017eava Lighthouse but were repelled, after which German artillery destroyed it. In October British submarines HMS E1 and HMS E9 from the British submarine flotilla in the Baltic arrived in Liep\u0101ja. On November 17 German navy again shelled Liep\u0101ja and military installations of Karosta damaging some 100 buildings.\nMany Latvians served in the Russian units stationed at German border and took part in Russian invasion of East Prussia. They participated in the early battles of First Battle of the Masurian Lakes, Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes and Battle of Augustow; total Latvian losses during these battles might have reached 25,000 dead.\nGerman attack and refugees.\nBy May 1915 the war reached most of Latvia. On April 30 Russian Commander-in-Chief ordered the evacuation of all Jews from Courland within 24 hours. On May 2, 1915, German attack against Jelgava was repelled. On May 7 the Germans captured Liep\u0101ja and Kuld\u012bga.\nOn June 29 the Russian Supreme Command ordered the whole population of Courland evacuated, and around 500,000 refugees fled to the east. Much of the crops and housing was destroyed by the army to prevent them from falling into the German hands. Some of the refugees settled in Vidzeme but most continued their way to Russia where they had to settle in primitive conditions, suffering from hunger and diseases. In August 1915 the Latvian Refugee Aid Central Committee was established in Petrograd, it was run by future politicians Vilis Olavs, J\u0101nis \u010cakste and Arveds Bergs. Committee organized refugee housing, organized 54 schools, 25 hospitals and distributed aid. Many refugees returned to Latvia only after 1920, when a peace treaty was signed between Latvia and Soviet Russia. Many Latvians stayed in the new Bolshevik state, achieving high army and party offices, only to be purged and executed by Stalin during 1937\u201338.\nOn July 19, 1915, the Russian War Minister ordered the factories of Riga evacuated together with their workers. In the summer of 1915, 30,000 railway wagons loaded with machines and equipment from factories were taken away reducing the population of Riga by some 50%. This action effectively destroyed Riga as a great industrial center until the later industrialization under the Soviet regime.\nOn August 1, the Germans captured the capital of Courland, Jelgava. A week later Battle of the Gulf of Riga started and eventually was lost by Germany. By October 23, Germans captured Il\u016bkste and were within the striking distance of Daugavpils with its fortress.\nLatvian Riflemen.\nAfter on July 17 and 18, 1915 Germans captured Dobele, Talsi, Tukums and Ventspils, a public proclamation by State Duma members, written by K\u0101rlis Skalbe, called for the formation of volunteer Latvian Riflemen units. In August the formation of Latvian battalions started. From 1915 to 1917, the Riflemen fought in the Russian army against the Germans in defensive positions along the Daugava River, notably the \"N\u0101ves sala\" (Island of Death) bridgehead position. In December 1916 and January 1917, they suffered heavy casualties in month-long Christmas Battles. Many of them were buried in the newly created Riga Brothers' Cemetery.\nAfter the great offensive of 1915, the front line stabilized along the Daugava river until the Russian army started to collapse in early 1917. In February 1917 Revolution broke out in Russia and in the summer the Russian army collapsed. By this time the Riflemen had overwhelmingly transferred their allegiances to the Bolsheviks. The following German offensive was successful and on September 3, 1917, they entered Riga.\nIn November 1917, the Communist Bolsheviks took power in Russia. Even though ethnic Latvians had become important assets in the task of securing Soviet power military (with the first ever commander-in-chief of the Red Army being Latvian Jukums V\u0101cietis) the Bolshevik government tried to end the war and in March 1918, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed which gave Courland and Livland Governorate to the Germans, who quickly established occupational regime which lasted until November 11, 1918. During this time Germans tried to create the United Baltic Duchy in perpetual union with the Crown of Prussia.\nWar damages.\nA survey in 1920 established that 56,7% of parishes had war damages. Population had decreased from 2,55 million to 1,59 million. The number of ethnic Latvians has never again reached the 1914 levels. 87,700 buildings were destroyed. 27% of the arable land laid in waste. Much of the industry was evacuated to Russia and lost forever. Ports were damaged by sunken ships, bridges blown up and railways damaged. 25,000 farms were destroyed, 70,000 horses, 170,000 cattle lost.\nCompeting statehood movements, 1917\u201320.\nThe course of World War I, which directly involved Latvians and Latvian territory, fostered the idea of Latvian statehood. During the summer of 1915 the German army conquered Kurzeme and Zemgale, leading to an exodus of Latvians from these two provinces. Local politicians gained experience organizing refugee relief and Latvian refugee cultural life. Caught between the attacking Germans and incompetent Russians, Latvian riflemen (\"latvie\u0161u str\u0113lnieki\") fought on the Russian side during this war and became increasingly radicalized after repeated setbacks under tsarist generals. During the Russian Civil War of 1917-1923 a significant group (known as Red riflemen) fought for the Bolsheviks. Meanwhile, German-Empire and local Baltic Germans planned to annex the ancient Livonian and Estonian lands to the German state. During the chaotic period of Russian and German empire collapses, the February Revolution of March 1917, the Bolshevik revolution of November 1917, the Soviet westward offensive of 1918\u201319 and the onset of the Russian Civil War, Latvians made various efforts to establish a local government. Not all of these efforts aimed at establishing an independent state or even a Latvian state.\nProvisional Land Councils.\nAfter the February Revolution in the Russian Empire, a majority of Latvians did not expect more for their country than a federated status in a Russian state. \"Free Latvia in Free Russia\" was the slogan of the day. During March 12\u201313, 1917 in Valmiera the Vidzeme Land Congress took place, which set up the Provisional Land Council of Vidzeme. Courland was occupied by Germans, who increasingly supported idea of creating a puppet Duchy of Courland and Semigallia in order to annex it to Germany. Latgalian-inhabited counties of the Vitebsk Governorate were demanding unity with other Latvian provinces (unification of Latgalian Latvians and Baltic Latvians), which came only after the Bolshevik revolution.\nIskolat.\nOn July 5, 1917, the Russian Provisional Government recognized the elected Land councils of Vidzeme and Kurzeme. Encouraged by the liberalism of the Provisional Government, Latvians put forward proposals which envisioned a broad local autonomy. On August 12, 1917, Latvian organizations jointly asked the Provisional Government in Petrograd for autonomy and self-determination. During a Congress from August 11\u201312 (July 29\u201330, Old Style) in Riga, the left-wing Social Democrats, heavily influenced by the Bolsheviks, established the Iskolat government - named for the \"Executive Committee of the Council of Workers, Soldiers and Landless Deputies of Latvia\" ().\nWhen the German Army occupied Riga on September 3, 1917, Iskolat retreated to Vidzeme, where it assumed executive powers. The so-called Iskolat Republic existed from November 21, 1917, until March 3, 1918. Under German attacks it evacuated to C\u0113sis, then to Valka. It disbanded in March 1918 after the Brest-Litovsk treaty of March 3, 1918 assigned the Latvian lands (except Latgale) to Germany.\nDemocratic bloc.\nIn German-occupied Riga, after a preliminary meeting on September 14, on September 23, 1917, the Latvian Social Democratic party, together with the Latvian Farmers' Union and some smaller republican and socialist parties, formed the Democratic Bloc, which petitioned Ober Ost for the restoration of an elected Riga City Council, the re-opening of schools, and press freedoms. The Democratic Bloc was not a formal organization, but a coalition of politicians who shared similar political goals.\nLatvian Social Democrats used their old contacts with the German Social Democrat Party to directly lobby politicians in Berlin. On October 19, 1918, Democratic Bloc representatives delivered a petition to the German Imperial chancellor Prince Maximilian of Baden, in which they asked for the removal of occupational forces, the release of POWs, and recognition of an independent Latvian state.\nLatvian National Council.\nIn October 1917 centrist politicians met in Petrograd and agreed to create a united council of all Latvian parties, refugee-support organizations and soldiers' committees. On November 29, 1917, the Latvian Provisional National Council was established in Valka. On December 2, 1917, it proclaimed Latvia's autonomy in Latvian-inhabited lands and declared itself the only representative organ of Latvians. The council announced three main goals \u2013 convening of a Constitutional Assembly, creation of political autonomy and uniting of all ethnic Latvian-inhabited lands.\nThe National Council, under the chairmanship of Voldem\u0101rs Z\u0101mu\u0113ls, sent a delegation - led by the future Minister of Foreign Affairs Zigfr\u012bds Anna Meierovics - to the Allied countries to get their support for an independent Latvia.\nThe Provisional National Council operated in the same place and at the same time as the Bolshevik-controlled Iskolat \u2013 in the small city of Valka, which is situated on the border between ethnic Estonian and ethnic Latvian lands, and which for a couple of months was the virtual capital of the Latvians. Iskolat moved to ban the Provisional Council in December 1917.\nOn January 5, 1918, during the only meeting of the democratically elected Constituent Assembly of Russia (subsequently dissolved by Bolsheviks), Latvian deputy J\u0101nis Goldmanis, the initiator in 1915 of the formation of the Latvian Riflemen units, read a declaration of separation of Latvia from Russia.\nAt its second meeting, which took place in Petrograd, the Latvian National Council on January 30, 1918, declared that Latvia should be an independent, democratic republic, uniting the Latvian regions of Kurzeme (which includes Zemgale), Vidzeme and Latgale.\nOn March 3, 1918 Soviet Russia signed the treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Central Powers. In terms of the treaty Russia gave up Kurzeme and Vidzeme (but not Latgale). The National Council protested against the splitting of Latvian lands and the annexation of Kurzeme by Germany.\nOn November 11, 1918, the British Empire recognized the Latvian National Council as a \"de facto\" government, confirming a prior verbal communication of October 23 to Zigfr\u012bds Anna Meierovics from the British Minister for Foreign Affairs, A. J. Balfour.\nDespite these diplomatic successes, the National Council had a major problem: the Social Democrats and the Democratic Bloc refused to join it. This prevented the creation of a truly national consensus for proclaiming independence. This disunity came to an end only on November 17, 1918, when the People's Council (\"Tautas padome\") was created.\nUnited Baltic Duchy.\nOn September 22, 1918, German Emperor Wilhelm II proclaimed the Baltic provinces to be free and on November 5 Germans proclaimed a United Baltic Duchy headed by Duke Adolf Friedrich of Mecklenburg. However, this project (just like the similar Kingdom of Lithuania) collapsed together with the German Empire on November 9 and with the Armistice of 11 November 1918.\nOn November 26, 1918, the new General Plenipotentiary of Germany August Winnig recognized the Latvian Provisional Government which the People's Council had established on November 18. On November 28 the Regency Council of the United Baltic Duchy disbanded itself.\nPeople's Council.\nAfter the German collapse on November 9, the National Council and the Democratic Bloc began unification talks. Social Democrats insisted that the new Latvia should be a socialistic state, which other parties found unacceptable. The Social Democrats also refused to join the National Council, instead insisting on creating a new unity organization. The unification talks were led by Farmers' Union leaders K\u0101rlis Ulmanis and Mi\u0137elis Valters, while National Council leaders Voldem\u0101rs Z\u0101mu\u0113ls, Arveds Bergs and \u0100dolfs Kl\u012bve were sidelined.\nOn November 17, 1918, competing Latvian factions finally united in the People's Council, which on November 18, 1918, proclaimed the independence of the Republic of Latvia and created the Latvian Provisional Government.\nOn November 18 Soviet Russia started a westward offensive aimed at regaining Russia's western provinces, and the War of Independence ensued.\nThe left wing of the Latvian Social Democrats had become allied with the Bolsheviks, and during its conference of November 18\u201319, 1918 proclaimed the Latvian commune a part of the Russian Soviet Federation.\nWar of Independence.\nOn December 1, 1918 Soviet Russia invaded Latvia.\nMuch of the invading army in Latvia consisted of Red Latvian Riflemen, which made the invasion easier. The Soviet offensive met little resistance, coming just a few weeks after the collapse of the German Empire and the proclamation of an independent Latvia. The Social Democratic party at this point decided to leave the People's Council - it rejoined it only in April 1918. On December 17, 1918, the Provisional government of Workers and Peasants, led by the veteran left-wing politician P\u0113teris Stu\u010dka proclaimed Soviet rule. On December 18 Lenin officially recognized the new Soviet Latvia.\nThe Soviet Army captured Riga on January 3, 1919. By the end of January the Provisional Government and the remaining German units had retreated all the way to Liep\u0101ja, but then the Red offensive stalled along the Venta river. The Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic was officially proclaimed on January 13 with the political, economic, and military backing of Soviet Russia. Stu\u010dka established a radical communist r\u00e9gime of nationalizations, expropriations and executions of class enemies. Revolutionary tribunals were established, condemning to death German nobles, pastors, and wealthy traders - as well as peasants who refused to surrender their grain: in total some 1000 people were executed. Due to food-supply disruptions, 8590 people starved to death in Riga.\nOn March 3, 1919 German and Latvian forces commenced a counterattack against the forces of Soviet Latvia.\nOn April 16 the Baltic nobility organized a coup d'\u00e9tat in Liep\u0101ja and a puppet government under the\nleadership of Andrievs Niedra (in office from 26 April 1919) was established - it lasted for just two months. The provisional national government took refuge aboard the steamship \"Saratov\" under British protection\nin Liepaja harbour.\nOn May 22, 1919, the German Freikorps under the overall command of the German Major-General R\u00fcdiger von der Goltz recaptured Riga, and the White Terror against any suspected Soviet sympathizers began. At the same time the Estonian Army (including the North Latvian Brigade loyal to the Latvian Provisional Government headed by Ulmanis) started a major offensive against the Soviets in north Latvia. By the middle of June Soviet rule was reduced to Latgale.\nIn June 1919 collisions started between the on one side and the Estonian 3rd division (including the 2nd C\u0113sis regiment of the North Latvian brigade) on the other. The 3rd division defeated the German forces in the Battle of Wenden on June 23. An armistice was signed at Strazdumui\u017ea, under the terms of which the Germans had to leave Latvia.\nInstead the German forces were incorporated into the West Russian Volunteer Army. On October 5 it commenced an offensive on Riga, taking the west bank of the Daugava River - the front line split Riga in half. On November 11 the Latvian counteroffensive began and by the end of the month the West Russian Volunteer Army was driven from Latvia. During battles in Riga, Latvian forces were supported by British naval artillery.\nOn January 3, 1920, the united Latvian and Polish forces launched an attack on the Soviet army in Latgale, and in the Battle of Daugavpils liberated Daugavpils by January 5. By the end of January they reached the ethnographic border of Latvia, and peace negotiations with the Soviets soon began.\nPeace and international recognition.\nDuring the 1919 Paris Peace conference Latvia had unsuccessfully lobbied for international \"de jure\" recognition of its independence by the Allied countries. The Allies still hoped for a quick end of the Bolshevik regime in Moscow and the establishment of a democratic Russian state which would grant Latvia a large degree of autonomy. The internal situation also was unstable, as during 1919 three different governments (Latvians, Germans-White Russians, and Soviets) were fighting for control.\nAccording to Latvian diplomats, during that time the US and France opposed recognizing Latvia; Italy and Japan supported the idea; while the United Kingdom gave limited support and waited for events to play out.\nOn August 11, 1920, according to the terms of the Latvian\u2013Soviet Peace Treaty, Soviet Russia relinquished authority over the Latvian nation and its claims to Latvian territory:\n \"Russia recognizes without objection the independence and sovereignty of the Latvian State and forever renounces all sovereign rights held by Russia in relation to the Latvian nation and land on the basis of the previous State legal regime as well as any international agreements, all of which lose their force and effect for all future time as herein provided. The Latvian nation and land shall have no obligations arising from their previous possession by Russia.\"\nIn 1920 Latvia, together with Lithuania and Estonia, applied to join the League of Nations but was denied membership at that time.\nAs the Soviet victory in the Russian Civil War became clear and after heavy lobbying by the Latvian Foreign Minister Zigfr\u012bds Anna Meierovics, the Allied Supreme War Council, which included United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Italy and Japan, recognized Latvia's independence on January 26, 1921. Recognition from many other countries soon followed. Latvia became a member of the League of Nations on September 22, 1921. The US recognized Latvia only in July 1922. Before 1940, a total of 42 countries recognized Latvia.\nParliamentary era, 1920\u201334.\nAfter Latgale was finally liberated from the Soviets in January 1920, elections to the Constitutional Assembly of Latvia took place on April 17\u201318, 1920. While the population of Latvia had fallen by almost a million, from 2,552,000 to 1,596,000 in 1920 (in Riga from 520,000 to 225,000), 50 party-lists and candidates competed for 150 seats. Close to 85% of eligible voters participated in the elections, and 16 parties were elected. The Social Democratic Workers' Party won 57 seats, the Farmers' Union 26, and the Latgalian Peasant Party 17. This voting pattern marked all the future parliaments \u2013 a high number of parties representing small interest-groups required the formation of unstable coalition governments. While the largest single party, the Social Democrats, held the post of Speaker of the Saeima, they avoided participating in governments. Between 1922 and 1934 Latvia had 13 governments and 9 Prime Ministers.\nOn February 15, 1922, the Constitution of Latvia and in June the new Law on Elections were passed, opening the way to electing the parliament \u2013 the Saeima.\nDuring the parliamentary era, four national elections took place, which elected the 1st Saeima (1922\u201325), 2nd Saeima (1925\u201328), 3rd Saeima (1928\u201331), and 4th Saeima (1931\u201334). Three State Presidents were elected \u2013 J\u0101nis \u010cakste (1922\u201327), who died in office; Gustavs Zemgals (1927\u201330), who refused to stand for re-election; and Alberts Kviesis (1930\u201336), who accepted the May 15 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nBorder conflicts.\nEastern.\nThe Latvian-Soviet peace treaty had set the eastern border between Latvia and Soviet Russia. After 1944 the Soviet Union annexed parts of Abrene District as the Pytalovsky District of the RSFSR. Latvia gave up all legal claims to these lands in 2007.\nNorthern.\nDuring 1919 Estonia had provided military assistance to Latvia on the condition that some of its territorial claims in Vidzeme would be met. The Latvians refused, and Estonia withdrew its support. Estonian claims centered on Valka district as well as territories in Ape, Veclaicene, Ipi\u0137i and Lode. On March 22, 1920, Estonia and Latvia agreed to a settlement commission led by British colonel Stephen Tallents. Latvia retained Aina\u017ei parish, and most of other contested lands, but lost most of Valka city (now Valga, Estonia). The issue of the ethnically Swedish-inhabited Ruhnu island in the Gulf of Riga was left for both countries to decide. Latvia finally renounced all claims on Ruhnu island after signing a military alliance with Estonia on November 1, 1923.\nSouthern.\nLatvia proposed to retain the southern border of the former Courland governorate with Lithuania unchanged, but the Lithuanians wanted to gain access to the sea, as at this time they did not control the German lands of Klaip\u0117da. In September 1919, during an attack against the Soviets, the Lithuanian army occupied much of Il\u016bkste Municipality and threatened to take Daugavpils as well. Between late August and early September 1920 the Latvian army pushed the Lithuanians out. The Lithuanians, weakened by \u017beligowski's Mutiny of October 1920, did not escalate this confrontation. On September 25, 1920, Latvia and Lithuania agreed to have an international arbitration committee led by James Young Simpson settle this dispute. In March 1921, Lithuania was given the port town Palanga, the village of \u0160ventoji, parts of Rucava Municipality and the railroad junction of Ma\u017eeikiai on Riga \u2013 Jelgava \u2013 Liep\u0101ja railroad line, which meant that Latvia had to build a new railway line. Latvia received the town of Akn\u012bste and some smaller territories in the Akn\u012bste Municipality, Ukri parish and Bauska Municipality. Latvia gave up 283,3 square km, while receiving 290\u00a0km2. About 16 to 20 thousand ethnic Latvians thus became Lithuanian citizens.\nAs a result of the Polish\u2013Soviet War of 1918\u20131921, Poland secured a 105\u00a0km long border with Latvia. In July 1919 Poland announced its annexation of all lands south of Daugavpils and their inclusion in Braslaw district. Latvia could not complain, as it still needed Polish military help prior to the decisive Battle of Daugavpils of January 1920 against the Soviets. The issue was solved by a renewed Soviet attack against Poland, and later, by Polish-Lithuanian conflict over Vilnius. During the Soviet attack in July 1920, Polish forces retreated from this area, which Latvian forces then occupied. After \u017beligowski's Mutiny Poland wanted to have good diplomatic relations with Latvia and did not raise any serious territorial claims. The issue was solved in February 1929, when Latvia and Poland signed a trade treaty which included a secret agreement about compensation to Polish landowners for lost properties. By 1937 Latvia had paid the full amount of 5 million golden lats. Over some protests from Lithuania, the Latvian-Polish border was demarcated between 1933 and 1938.\nForeign relations.\nIndependent Latvia's earliest foreign-policy goals involved securing peace with Soviet Russia and with Germany, gaining international recognition, and joining the League of Nations. All this was achieved by the efforts of Zigfr\u012bds Anna Meierovics.\nHopes for the union of Baltic countries \u2013 Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and Finland \u2013 faded after 1922. After that Latvia was the most energetic proponent of Baltic unity and Baltic Entente. On November 1, 1923, Latvia and Estonia signed a military alliance, followed by trade agreements. Latvia tried to maintain good relations with the regional hegemons - Soviet Russia and Germany - and hoped for more support from Great Britain. Foreign governments opened 21 embassies and 45 consulates in Latvia by 1928; some of these consulates were located in the port cities Liep\u0101ja and Ventspils.\nLatvia purchased embassy buildings in Berlin (1922), Tallinn, Warsaw (1923), London (1925), Paris (1927), and Geneva (1938).\nPolitics.\nThe Social Democratic Workers' Party, as the largest party, held the position of the Speaker of the Saeima in all the interwar Saeimas. The 1st Saeima was chaired by Fr\u012bdrihs Veismanis, the Second, Third and Fourth Saeimas were chaired by Pauls Kalni\u0146\u0161. The refusal of the Social Democrats to participate in governments (except twice in short-lived cabinets) meant that government was usually led by the center-right Farmers' Union, or by a coalition of smaller parties, as the Saeima seats were divided among many parties, each with just a few MPs.\nThe Social Democrats were split between the main Social Democratic Workers' Party led by Pauls Kalni\u0146\u0161, Ansis Rudevics and Fricis Menders (which first won 30 seats but had a tendency to lose votes in subsequent elections) and the splinter Social Democrat Minority Party led by Mar\u0123ers Skujenieks, who were more centrist and managed even to lead governments on two occasions. The mainstream Social Democrat party maintained a strong policy of Socialist International ideals and criticized the existing capitalist system. The Party avoided using the State flag and singing the National anthem, instead using the Red flag and singing the \"Internationale\" in their meetings. Their popularity increasingly fell, and in the 4th Saeima they had only 21 seats.\nOfficially banned, the Communist Party of Latvia in the 1928 elections managed to get 5 seats standing as the Left Trade Union (which was banned in 1930). In the 1931 elections Communists won 6 seats as the Trade Union Workers and Peasants Group, but were once again banned in 1933.\nThe Latvian Farmers' Union, comprising the second-largest parliamentary faction with 14 to 17 MPs, was the largest of the conservative parties. It increasingly had to compete with some smaller farmer, catholic-farmer and Latgale-farmer parties which won more votes in each election. The Farmer's Union was led by K\u0101rlis Ulmanis, Zigfr\u012bds Anna Meierovics and Hugo Celmi\u0146\u0161. The decreasing popularity of Ulmanis and of the Farmers' Union may have been one of the reasons behind the May 15, 1934 Latvian coup d'\u00e9tat, as Ulmanis tried to prevent further loss of his political influence and power in the elections scheduled for October 1934.\nThe Democratic Centre Party, led by Gustavs Zemgals represented mostly urban, middle-class office-workers and state employees.\nThe National Union, led by Arveds Bergs, was nationalistic, anti-Soviet, center-right party that attracted urban followers. The extreme nationalists were represented by the antisemitic P\u0113rkonkrusts (founded in 1933), led by Gustavs Celmi\u0146\u0161.\nMost of the remaining small parties were either ethnic \u2013 German, Jewish, or Polish \u2013 or represented single-issue economic groups \u2013 small-holders, house owners, even railroad workers. The small parties usually formed larger coalitions (blocks) and then used their influence to join governing coalition. One of the most influential was coalition of Latgale parties.\nReferendums.\nDuring this time four referendums took place, all indicative of the issues facing the new state.\nOn July 19, 1922, Latvia signed a Concordat with the Vatican. This was motivated by the need to better integrate the heavily Catholic Latgale in the Lutheran-dominated state. In traditionally Lutheran Riga some buildings belonging to Russian Orthodox Church were given to Catholics, and the Lutheran St. James's Cathedral was transferred to Catholics as their new cathedral. On September 1\u20132, 1923 the Church property referendum was held in an attempt to prevent any further forcible transfer of churches and properties from one confession to another. About 200,000 or 20% of voters participated, and the referendum failed.\nOn June 2, 1927, the Saeima once again changed the Citizenship law. An earlier version had granted Latvian citizenship to anyone who had lived in Latvia for 20 years before August 1, 1914 (at the start of World War I). The new law shortened the period of eligibility to 6 months before August 1, 1914. This mainly aimed to allow many Latvian farming colonists, who now were fleeing Soviet Russia, to receive citizenship. However, this also meant that many Soviet Jews now could claim Latvian citizenship. On December 17\u201318, 1927 the Latvian citizenship referendum was held to prevent the proposed changes, but it failed, as only 250,000 or 20% of voters participated.\nThe Concordat with the Vatican occasioned another church-property referendum in 1931. When the St. James's Cathedral was given to Catholics, Latvian Lutherans lost their bishop's cathedral and were sharing the Riga Cathedral with the Baltic German congregation, which belonged to the autonomous German Lutheran confession. Anti-German sentiment was widespread and an initiative to give Riga Cathedral to Latvian Lutherans gained strength. On September 5\u20136, 1931 almost 400,000 voters supported this idea, but the referendum failed, as it did not gather over 50% of votes. In any case, the Saeima soon passed a law confiscating the church from the Germans and giving it to the Latvians.\nOn February 24\u201325, 1934 the Insurance Law referendum took place, aiming to introduce a new old-age- and unemployment-benefit scheme which would be funded by taxing employers, higher-wage earners and municipalities. The referendum was initiated by Social Democrats, who managed to get over 400,000 votes for this idea, but the referendum failed.\nEconomy.\nThe young Latvian state had to deal with two main economic issues: the restoration of industrial plants (especially in Riga), and the implementation of land reform that would transfer most of the land from German nobles to Latvian farmers.\nThe Constituent Assembly passed a land-reform law which expropriated manor lands. Landowners were left with 50 hectares each, and their land was distributed to the landless peasants without cost. In 1897, 61.2% of the rural population had been landless; by 1936, that percentage had reduced to 18%. The extent of cultivated land surpassed the pre-war level as early as 1923.\nBefore the World War I some 2% of landowners owned 53% of land in Kurzeme and Vidzeme, in Latgale it was 38%. The Agrarian reform Law of September 16, 1920 created the State Land Fund, which took over 61% of all land. The German nobles were left with no more than 50 ha of land. This destroyed their manor-house system. Many of them sold their possessions and left for Germany. Former manor-house buildings often became local schools, administrative buildings or hospitals. The land was distributed to a new class of small-holding farmers \u2013 over 54,000 \"Jaunsaimnieki\" (New farmers) with an average farm-size of 17.1 ha, who usually had to establish their farms from nothing, in the process building new houses and clearing fields. Due to their small size of their holdings and unfavorable grain-prices, the new farmers rapidly developed dairy farming. Butter, bacon and eggs became new export industries. Flax and state-owned forests were other export-revenue sources.\nOn March 27, 1919, the Latvian Provisional Government introduced the Latvian ruble, with an exchange rate of 1 Latvian ruble equal to 1 Ostrubel, 2 German marks and 1.5 tsarist ruble. On March 18, 1920, the Latvian ruble became the only legal currency. Due to high inflation, the new Latvian lats was introduced in 1922 at a rate of one lats to 50 rubles. In 1923 the Bank of Latvia was established and the lats replaced the ruble entirely in 1925.\nBetween 1923 and 1930 the state budget ran surpluses. On average, 25.5% went to defense, 11.2% to education and 23.4% to capital-investment projects. The state's spirits monopoly generated around 15% of government income.\nThe restoration of industry proved complicated. Before World War I, 80% of industrial production went to internal (Russian Empire) markets. Latvia signed a trade agreement with the Soviet Union in 1927, but this did not result in high trade-volumes. By the end of the 1920s Latvia's largest export markets were Germany (35.6%), the United Kingdom (20.8%), France, Belgium, Netherlands (22.9%). Latvia had to import almost all its modern machinery and fuels.\nIn 1929 Latvia had three state-owned banks, 19 private banks, 605 credit unions and many more mutual credit unions.\nThe Great Depression reached Latvia in the middle of 1930. Exports fell and imports were strictly limited, to save foreign exchange reserves. State monopolies of sugar and bacon were created. To prevent banks from collapse, between July 31, 1931, and September 1, 1933, a law prohibited withdrawal of more than 5% of the total deposit per week. In 1932 the trade agreement with Soviet Union expired and industrial unemployment reached its peak in January 1932. The national income fell from 600 lats \"per capita\" in 1930 to 390 lats \"per capita\" in 1932.\nIn place of free international trade came interstate clearing-agreements which set the volumes and types of goods that states then would trade. In 1932 Latvia signed clearing agreements with France and Germany, in 1934 with the United Kingdom, in 1935 with Sweden, Estonia and Lithuania.\nEconomic recovery started in 1933 as production increased by some 30%. The state budget deficit fell from the record 24.2 million lats in 1931/32 to 7.8 million lats in the 1933/34 budget.\nUlmanis dictatorship, 1934\u201340.\nOn the night from May 15 to 16, 1934 the Prime Minister K\u0101rlis Ulmanis and Minister of War J\u0101nis Balodis, fathers of Latvian independence, took power by a bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat. Parliament and Constitution were suspended, State of War introduced, all political parties banned and press censorship established. Members of the P\u0113rkonkrusts, Latvian Social Democratic Workers' Party, pro-Nazi activists from the Baltic German community, and other leaders from the extreme right and left were detained. Certain extremist political figures such as Gustavs Celmi\u0146\u0161 were sentenced to imprisonment.\nEconomy.\nJust as in politics, in economy, the new Ulmanis regime was very active in increasing state control and planning mechanisms. In 1934 regime created the Chamber of Trade and Industry was established, followed by the Chamber of Agriculture and the Chamber of Artisans in 1935 and the Chamber of Labour in 1936. The state helped bankrupt farmers by postponing bankruptcy auctions and refinanced their debt at a lower rate. On May 29, 1934, the state took control over cooperative societies and associations. The dairy industry was placed under the control of the Central Union of Dairy Farmers.\nOn April 9, 1935, a state controlled Credit Bank of Latvia was created which reduced the role of foreign capital by creating many state owned industry monopolies and joint stock companies. Buyouts and liquidations of foreign, Baltic German and Jewish owned companies become a norm. In place of many competing companies large state owned companies were created. In 1939 the state owned 38 such companies. The new JSC Vairogs produced railway carriages and Ford-Vairogs automobiles under the Ford licence. VEF made world's smallest Minox cameras and such experimental aircraft as VEF JDA-10M, VEF I-12 and others. Between 1936 and 1939 the \u0136egums Hydroelectric Power Station, with 70,000 kWh capacity largest in the Baltics, was built by Swedish companies.\nAfter Western countries abandoned the gold standard, the Latvian lats was pegged to the British pound in September 1936. It was a devaluation that further strengthened Latvian exports. By 1939, following an export boom propelled primarily by agricultural goods, Latvia was the richest of the Baltic countries, and had a GDP per capita higher than Finland or Austria.\nHowever, the recovery from the Great Depression took almost ten years. National income was 444 lats per capita in 1933 and reached 637 lats per capita in 1938, thus finally overtaking the 1929 levels.\nAfter the start of World War II Latvia declared complete neutrality, but it was now completely cut off from the market of United Kingdom, as Germany had sealed off the Baltic sea. Austerity was introduced on September 3, 1939. The politically disastrous October 5, 1939 Soviet\u2013Latvian Mutual Assistance Treaty provided new export and import opportunities. On October 18, 1939, a new trade agreement was signed with the Soviet Union. Latvia exported its food products in return receiving oil, fuel and chemicals. On December 15, 1939, a new trade agreement was also signed with the Nazi Germany.\nLatvian farmers had traditionally relied on seasonal farmworkers from Poland, this was now cut off by the war, and in spring 1940 new regulations introduced compulsory work service for state employees, students and school pupils.\nForeign relations.\nIn October 1936 Latvia was elected as non-permanent member of the Council of the League of Nations and retained this place for three years. In 1935 embassy in Washington was re-opened, which later served as important center for Latvian Diplomatic Service during 50 years of Soviet occupation.\nAfter the Munich Agreement demonstrated the failure of collective security system, Latvia on December 13, 1938, proclaimed absolute neutrality. On March 28, 1939, Soviet Union without any discussions announced that it is interested in maintaining and defending Latvia's independence. On June 7, 1939, Latvia and Germany signed non-aggression treaty.\nWorld War II.\nSoviet occupation under the Molotov\u2013von Ribbentrop Pact.\nThe Soviet Union prepared for Soviet annexation of Baltic countries with the signing of the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany on August 23, 1939. Under threat of invasion, Latvia (along with Estonia and Lithuania) signed the Soviet\u2013Latvian Mutual Assistance Treaty with Soviet Union, providing for the stationing of up to 25,000 Soviet troops on Latvian soil. Following the initiative from Nazi Germany, Latvia on October 30, 1939, concluded an agreement to \"repatriate\" ethnic Germans, most of whom had lived in the region for generations, in the wake of the impending Soviet takeover.\nSeven months later, the Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov accused the Baltic states of conspiracy against the Soviet Union. On June 16, 1940, threatening an invasion, Soviet Union issued an ultimatum demanding that the government be replaced and that an unlimited number of Soviet troops be admitted. Knowing that the Red Army had entered Lithuania a day before, that its troops were massed along the eastern border and mindful of the Soviet military bases in Western Latvia, the government acceded to the demands, and Soviet troops occupied the country on June 17. Staged elections were held July 14\u201315, 1940, and the results were announced in Moscow 12 hours before the polls closed; Soviet documents show the election results were forged. The newly elected \"People's Assembly\" declared Latvia a Socialist Soviet Republic and applied for admission into the Soviet Union on July 21. Latvia was incorporated into the Soviet Union on August 5, 1940. Latvian diplomatic service continued to function in exile while the republic was under the Soviet control.\nIn the spring of 1941, the Soviet central government began planning the mass deportation of anti-Soviet elements from the occupied Baltic states. In preparation, General Ivan Serov, Deputy People's Commissar of Public Security of the Soviet Union, signed the Serov Instructions, \"Regarding the Procedure for Carrying out the Deportation of Anti-Soviet Elements from Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia.\" During the night of June 13\u201314, 1941, 15,424 inhabitants of Latvia \u2014 including 1,771 Jews and 742 ethnic Russians \u2014 were deported to camps and special settlements, mostly in Siberia. 35,000 people were deported in the first year of Soviet occupation (131,500 across the Baltics).\nOccupation of Latvia by Nazi Germany (1941\u20131944).\nThe Nazi invasion, launched a week later, cut short immediate plans to deport several hundred thousand more from the Baltics. Nazi troops occupied Riga on July 1, 1941. Immediately after the installation of German authority, a process of eliminating the Jewish and Gypsy population began, with many killings taking place in Rumbula. The killings were committed by the Einsatzgruppe A, the Wehrmacht and Marines (in Liep\u0101ja), as well as by Latvian collaborators, including the 500\u20131500 members of the infamous Arajs Commando (which alone killed around 26,000 Jews) and the 2000 or more Latvian members of the SD. By the end of 1941 almost the entire Jewish population was killed or placed in the concentration camps. In addition, some 25,000 Jews were brought from Germany, Austria and the present-day Czech Republic, of whom around 20,000 were killed. The Holocaust claimed approximately 85,000 lives in Latvia, the vast majority of whom were Jews.\nA large number of Latvians resisted the German occupation. The resistance movement was divided between the pro-independence units under the Latvian Central Council and the pro-Soviet units under the Latvian Partisan Movement Headquarters (\u041b\u0430\u0442\u0432\u0438\u0439\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0448\u0442\u0430\u0431 \u043f\u0430\u0440\u0442\u0438\u0437\u0430\u043d\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0433\u043e \u0434\u0432\u0438\u0436\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f) in Moscow. Their Latvian commander was Arturs Spro\u0123is. The Nazis planned to Germanise the Baltics after the war. In 1943 and 1944 two divisions of Waffen-SS were formed from Latvian conscripts and volunteers to help Germany against the Red Army.\nSoviet era, 1944\u20131990.\nIn 1944, when Soviet military advances reached the area, heavy fighting took place in Latvia between German and Soviet troops, which ended with another German defeat. Riga was re-captured by the Soviet Red Army on October 13, 1944, while the Courland Pocket held out until May 9, 1945. During the course of the war, both occupying forces conscripted Latvians into their armies, in this way increasing the loss of the nation's \"live resources\". In 1944, part of the Latvian territory once more came under Soviet control and Latvian national partisans began their fight against another occupier \u2013 the Soviet Union. 160,000 Latvian inhabitants took refuge from the Soviet army by fleeing to Germany and Sweden.On the other side, many Latvians who had previously supported Bolshevism had chosen to remain in Soviet Russia, where they wielded disproportionate influence in the party. \nPurge of national communists.\nOn March 5, 1953 Joseph Stalin died and was succeeded by Nikita Khrushchev. The period known as the Khrushchev Thaw began, but attempts by the national communists led by Eduards Berklavs to gain a degree of autonomy for the republic and protect the rapidly deteriorating position of the Latvian language were not successful. In 1959, after Khrushchev's visit to Latvia, national communists were stripped of their posts and Berklavs was deported to Russia.\nInflux of Soviet immigrants.\nBecause Latvia had still maintained a well-developed infrastructure and educated specialists it was decided in Moscow that some of the Soviet Union's most advanced manufacturing factories were to be based in Latvia. New industry was created in Latvia, including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava, electrotechnical factories in Riga, chemical factories in Daugavpils, Valmiera and Olaine, as well as food and oil processing plants. However, there were not enough people to operate the newly built factories. In order to expand industrial production, more immigrants from other Soviet republics were transferred into the country, noticeably decreasing the proportion of ethnic Latvians.\nBy 1989, the ethnic Latvians comprised about 52% of the population (1,387,757), compared to a pre-war proportion of 77% (1,467,035). In 2005 there were 1,357,099 ethnic Latvians, showing a real decrease in the titular population. Proportionately, however, the titular nation already comprises approximately 60% of the total population of Latvia (2,375,000).\nRestoration of independence.\nLiberalization in the communist regime began in the mid-1980s in the USSR with the perestroika and glasnost instituted by Mikhail Gorbachev. In Latvia, several mass political organizations were constituted that made use of this opportunity \u2013 Popular Front of Latvia (\"Tautas Fronte\"), Latvian National Independence Movement (\"Latvijas Nacion\u0101l\u0101s Neatkar\u012bbas Kust\u012bba\") and Citizens' Congress (\"Pilso\u0146u kongress\"). These groups began to agitate for the restoration of national independence.\nOn the 50th anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact (August 23, 1989) to the fate of the Baltic nations, Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians joined hands in a human chain, the Baltic Way, that stretched 600 kilometers from Tallinn, to Riga, to Vilnius. It symbolically represented the united wish of the Baltic States for independence.\nSubsequent steps toward full independence were taken on May 4, 1990. The Latvian SSR Supreme Council, elected in the first democratic elections since the 1930s, adopted a declaration restoring independence that included a transition period between autonomy within the Soviet Union and full independence. In January 1991, however, pro-communist political forces attempted to restore Soviet power with the use of force. Latvian demonstrators managed to stop the Soviet troops from re-occupying strategic positions (January 1991 events in Latvia). On August 21, after the unsuccessful attempt at a coup d'\u00e9tat in Moscow, parliament voted for an end to the transition period, thus restoring Latvia's pre-war independence. On September 6, 1991, Latvian independence was once again recognized by the Soviet Union.\nModern history.\nSoon after reinstating independence, Latvia, which had been a member of the League of Nations prior to World War II, became a member of the United Nations. In 1992, Latvia became eligible for the International Monetary Fund and in 1994 took part in the NATO \"Partnership for Peace\" program in addition to signing the free trade agreement with the European Union. Latvia became a member of the European Council as well as a candidate for the membership in the European Union and NATO. Latvia was the first of the three Baltic nations to be accepted into the World Trade Organization.\nAt the end of 1999 in Helsinki, the heads of the European Union governments invited Latvia to begin negotiations regarding accession to the European Union. In 2004, Latvia's most important foreign policy goals, membership of the European Union and NATO, were fulfilled. On April 2, Latvia became a member of NATO and on May 1, Latvia, along with the other two Baltic States, became a member of the European Union. Around 67% had voted in favor of EU membership in a September 2003 referendum with turnout at 72.5%. Latvia signed the Schengen agreement on 16 April 2003 and started its implementation on 21 December 2007. In November 2013, roof collapsed at a shopping center in Riga, causing Latvia's worst post-independence disaster with the deaths of 54 rush hour shoppers and rescue personnel. On 1 January 2014, Latvia joined the eurozone, becoming a member of the group of EU states which uses the euro as its currency.\nIn May 2023, the parliament elected Edgars Rinkevics as new President of Latvia, making him the Baltic States\u2019 first openly gay head of state.\nRegional timeline.\nAffiliations of the areas that comprise modern Latvia in historical and regional context:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "17763", "revid": "50533549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17763", "title": "Geography of Latvia", "text": " \nLatvia lies on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea on the level northwestern part of the rising East European platform, between Estonia and Lithuania. About 98% of the country lies under elevation. With the exception of the coastal plains, the ice age divided Latvia into three main regions: the morainic Western and Eastern uplands and the Middle lowlands. Latvia holds over 12 rivers, only 17 of which are longer than , and over 3,000 small lakes, most of which are eutrophic. The major rivers include the Daugava, the Lielupe, the Gauja, the Venta and the Salaca. Woodlands cover around 52% of the country (Pine \u2013 34%, Spruce \u2013 18%, Birch \u2013 30%). Other than peat, dolomite, and limestone, natural resources are scarce. Latvia has of sandy coastline, and the ports of Liep\u0101ja and Ventspils provide important warm-water harbors for the Baltic coast.\nLatvia is a small country with a land size of . However, it is larger than many other European countries (Albania, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Luxembourg, North Macedonia, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia or Switzerland). Its strategic location has instigated many wars between rival powers on its territory. As recently as 1944, the USSR granted Russia the Abrene region, which Latvia contested after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.\nPhysical environment.\nLatvia encompasses 64,589 square kilometers and is an extension of the East European Plain. Its flat terrain differs little from that of its surrounding neighbors. Latvia's only distinct border is the Baltic Sea coast, which extends for 496 kilometers. Its neighbors include Lithuania on the south (453 kilometers of common border), Estonia on the north (267 kilometers), Russia on the east (217 kilometers), and Belarus on the southeast (141 kilometers). Prior to World War II, Latvia bordered eastern Poland, but as a result of boundary changes by the Soviet Union, this territory was attached to Belarus.\nGeographic features.\nThe physiography of Latvia and its neighboring areas was formed, to a large degree, during the Quaternary period and the Pleistocene ice age, when soil and debris were pushed by glaciers into mounds and hills. Undulating plains cover 75% of Latvia's territory and provide the main areas for farming; 25% of the territory lies in uplands of moderate-sized hills. About 27% of the total territory is cultivable, with the central Zemgale Plain south of Riga being the most fertile and profitable. The three main upland areas, in the provinces of Kurzeme (western Latvia), Vidzeme (central Latvia, Vidzeme Upland and Aluksne Upland), and Latgale (eastern Latvia), provide a picturesque pattern of fields interspersed with forests and numerous lakes and rivers. In this area, the extensive glacial moraines, eskers, and drumlins have limited the profitability of agriculture by fragmenting fields and presenting serious erosion problems.\nAbout 10% of Latvian territory consists of peat bogs, swamps, and marshes, some of which are covered by stunted forest growth. Forests are the outstanding feature of Latvia, claiming 42% of the territory. Over the past 100 years the amount of forest territories in Latvia has doubled, and the process is still ongoing. Forest territories are expanding naturally, as well as due to intentional afforestation of barren land and land that cannot be used for agricultural purposes. More than half of the forests consist of Scots pine or Norway spruce.\nNearly all forests in Latvia are publicly accessible, and therefore one of the most widespread pastimes of the population is picking bilberries, cranberries, mushrooms, and other bounties of the natural environment.\nLatvia's legislation on forestry is among the strictest in Europe firmly regulating wood harvesting. Each year the forests produce 25 million cubic meters of timber, while only about 12\u201313 million cubic meters are felled, therefore the amount of mature and old forests continue to increase.\nThanks to the significant amount of forest resources, Latvia has a well-developed wood processing industry, therefore timber and wood products are among the country's most important exports. Latvian wood processing companies are important players in many European markets.\nThe traditional Latvian approach to forestry with its small system of clear-cut areas combined with the network of forest territories that have seen little human influence, as well as the outflow of people from rural areas to urban ones have facilitated the emergence of a unique biological diversity in forests which home animal and bird species, that have died out or are very rare elsewhere in Europe.\nAccording to a World Wildlife Fund study in 1992, Latvia has sizable populations of black stork, lesser spotted eagle, Eurasian otter, European beaver, Eurasian lynx, and grey wolf. Also in great numbers are red deer and roe deer (total 86,000), wild boar (32,000), elk (25,000) and red fox (13,000).\nThe variegated and rapidly changing physiography of glacial moraines and lowlands has also allowed temperate flora, such as oaks, to grow within a few hundred meters of northern flora, such as bog cotton and cloudberries. This variety and the rapid change in natural ecosystems are among the unique features of the republic.\nThe Soviet system left behind another windfall for naturalists. The Latvian western seacoast was a carefully guarded border region. Almost all houses near the sea were razed or evacuated. As a result, about 300 kilometers of undeveloped seashore are graced only by forests of pine and spruce and ecologically unique sand dunes. The temptation for fast profit, however, may foster violation of laws that clearly forbid any construction within one kilometer of the sea. This could lead to one of the last remaining wild shorelines in Europe becoming non-existent.\nThe seashore adjoining the population centers around Riga was a major focus of tourism during the Soviet era. J\u016brmala has many sanitoriums and tourist accommodations, tall pines, sandy beaches, and antique architecture.\nLatvia has an abundant network of rivers, contributing to the visual beauty and the economy of the country. The largest river is the Daugava, which has been an important route for several thousand years. It has been used by local tribes as well as by Vikings, Russians, and other Europeans for trade, war, and conquest. With a total length of 1,020 kilometers, the Daugava (or Zapadnaya Dvina in its upper reaches) originates in the Valday Hills in Russia's Tver' Oblast, meanders through northern Belarus, and then winds through Latvia for before emptying into the Gulf of Riga. It is about 180 meters wide when it enters Latvia, increasing to between 650 and 750 meters at Riga and its opening in Baltic sea.\nThe river carries an average annual flow of 21 cubic kilometers. Its total descent within Latvia of ninety-eight meters has made it an attractive source of hydroelectric power production. The first hydroelectric station\u2014\u0136egums Hydro Power Plant\u2014was built during Latvia's independence period. The second dam\u2014P\u013cavi\u0146as Hydro Power Plant\u2014aroused an unusual wave of protest in 1958. Most Latvians opposed the flooding of historical sites and a particularly scenic gorge with rare plants and natural features, such as the Staburags, a cliff comparable in cultural significance to the Lorelei in Germany. The construction of the dam was endorsed in 1959, however, after the purge of relatively liberal and nationally oriented leaders under Eduards Berklavs and their replacement by Moscow-oriented, ideologically conservative cadres led by Arv\u012bds Pel\u0161e. The third dam\u2014Riga Hydroelectric Power Plant\u2014just above Riga, did not provoke much protest because of the seeming hopelessness of the cause. The proposed fourth dam, at the town of Daugavpils on the Daugava River, became the rallying point for protest in 1986-87 by hundreds of thousands of Latvians. This dam was not constructed, in spite of the vast expenditures already poured into the project.\nSmaller rivers include the Lielupe, in central Latvia, with an average annual flow of 3.6 cubic kilometers; the Venta, in the west, with 2.9 cubic kilometers; the Gauja, in the northeast, with 2.5 cubic kilometers; and the Aiviekste, in the east, with 2.1 cubic kilometers. Very little hydroelectric power is generated by their waters, although planners are now thinking of reactivating some of the abandoned older dams and turbines. The Gauja is one of Latvia's most attractive, relatively clean rivers and has an adjoining large Gauja National Park along both of its banks as one of its notable features. Its cold waters attract trout and salmon, and its sandstone cliff and forest setting are increasingly a magnet for tourists interested in the environment.\nMore than 60% of the annual water volume of Latvia's six largest rivers comes from neighboring countries, mainly from Belarus and Lithuania. These adjoining resources create obvious needs for cooperation, especially in pollution control. The dangers from a lack of cooperation were brought home to Latvians in November 1990, when a polymer complex in Navapolatsk, Belarus, accidentally spilled 128 tons of cyanide derivatives into the Daugava River with no warning to downstream users in Latvia. Only the presence of numerous dead fish alerted Latvian inhabitants to the danger.\nClimate.\nIn the summer, daylight hours are long and in the winter short. In December it is still pitch dark at 9:00 A.M., and daylight disappears before 4:00 P.M. The climate is tempered by the Gulf Stream flowing across the Atlantic Ocean from Mexico. Average temperatures in winter are reasonably mild, ranging in January from in Liep\u0101ja, on the western coast, to in the southeastern town of Daugavpils. July temperatures range from in Liep\u0101ja to in Daugavpils. Latvia's proximity to the sea brings high levels of humidity and precipitation, with average annual precipitation of in Riga. There, an average of 180 days per year have precipitation, forty-four days have fog, and only seventy-two days are sunny. Continuous snow cover lasts eighty-two days, and the frost-free period lasts 177 days.\nThis precipitation has helped provide the abundant water for Latvia's many rivers and lakes, but it has created many problems as well. A large part of agricultural land requires drainage. Much money has been spent for land amelioration projects involving the installation of drainage pipes, the straightening and deepening of natural streams, the digging of drainage ditches, and the construction of polder dams. During the 1960s and 1970s, drainage work absorbed about one-third of all agricultural investments in Latvia. Although accounting for only one-third of 1% of the territory, Latvia was responsible for 11% of all artificially drained land in the former Soviet Union.\nAn additional problem associated with precipitation is the difficulty of early mechanized sowing and harvesting because of waterlogged fields. Heavy precipitation occurs, especially during harvest time in August and September, requiring heavy investment outlays in grain-drying structures and ventilation systems. In 1992 Latvia experienced the driest summer in recorded weather history, but unusually heavy rains in the preceding spring kept crop damage below the extent expected. The moist climate has been a major factor orienting Latvian agriculture toward animal husbandry and dairying. Even most of the field crops, such as barley, oats, and potatoes, are grown for animal feed.\nNatural resources.\nLatvia cannot claim valuable natural resources. Nevertheless, the abundant presence of such materials as limestone for cement (6 billion cubic meters or 8 billion cubic yards), gypsum (165 million cubic meters or 216 million cubic yards), high-quality clay (375 million cubic meters or 490 million cubic yards), dolomite (615 million cubic meters or 804 million cubic yards), peat (), and construction materials, including gravel and sand, satisfy local needs. Fish from the Baltic Sea is another potential export resource. Amber, million-year-old chunks of petrified pine pitch, is often found on the beaches of the Baltic Sea and is in high demand for jewelry. It has also had a symbolic impact on the country, which is often called Dzintarzeme, or Amberland. The future may hold potentially more valuable resources if oil fields are discovered in Latvian territorial waters, as some geologists have predicted. Latvia has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nArea and boundaries.\nArea:\n\"total:\"\n\"land:\"\n\"water:\"\nLand boundaries:\n\"total:\"\n\"border countries:\"\nBelarus , Estonia , Lithuania , Russia \nCoastline:\nMaritime claims:\n\"territorial sea:\"\n\"exclusive economic zone:\"\n with \n\"continental shelf:\"\n depth or to the depth of exploitation\nExtreme points:\nElevation extremes:\n\"lowest point:\"\nBaltic Sea 0 m\n\"highest point:\"\nGaizinkalns \nResources and land use.\nNatural resources:\npeat, limestone, dolomite, amber, hydropower, timber, arable land\nLand use:\n\"arable land:\"\n17.96%\n\"permanent crops:\"\n0.11%\n\"other:\"\n81.93% (2011)\nIrrigated land:\n\"note:\" land in Latvia is often too wet and in need of drainage not irrigation; approximately or 85% of agricultural land has been improved by drainage (2007)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n35.45\u00a0km3 (2011)\nEnvironmental concerns.\nNatural hazards:\nnone\nEnvironment - current issues:\nLatvia's environment has benefited from a shift to service industries after the country regained independence; the main environmental priorities are improvement of drinking water quality and sewage system, household, and hazardous waste management, as well as reduction of air pollution; in 2001, Latvia closed the EU accession negotiation chapter on environment committing to full enforcement of EU environmental directives by 2010\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n\"party to:\"\nAir Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\n\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nnone of the selected agreements\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
