{"id": "19766", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19766", "title": "Marshall Plan", "text": "American initiative for foreign aid to Western Europe following World War II\nThe Marshall Plan (officially the European Recovery Program, ERP) was an American initiative enacted in 1948 to provide foreign aid to Western Europe. The United States transferred $13.3 billion (equivalent to $ in 2024) in economic recovery programs to Western European economies after the end of World War II in Europe. Replacing an earlier proposal for a Morgenthau Plan, it operated for four years beginning on April 3, 1948, though in 1951, the Marshall Plan was largely replaced by the Mutual Security Act. The goals of the United States were to rebuild war-torn regions, remove trade barriers, modernize industry, improve European prosperity and prevent the spread of communism. The Marshall Plan proposed the reduction of interstate barriers and the economic integration of the European continent while also encouraging an increase in productivity as well as the adoption of modern business procedures.\nThe Marshall Plan aid was divided among the participant states roughly on a per capita basis. A larger amount was given to the major industrial powers, as the prevailing opinion was that their resuscitation was essential for the general European revival. Somewhat more aid per capita was also directed toward the Allied nations, with less for those that had been part of the Axis or remained neutral. The largest recipient of Marshall Plan money was the United Kingdom (receiving about 26% of the total). The next highest contributions went to France (18%) and West Germany (11%). Some eighteen European countries received Plan benefits. Although offered participation, the Soviet Union refused Plan benefits and also blocked benefits to Eastern Bloc countries, such as Romania and Poland. The United States provided similar aid programs in Asia, but they were not part of the Marshall Plan.\nIts role in rapid recovery has been debated. The Marshall Plan's accounting reflects that aid accounted for about 3% of the combined national income of the recipient countries between 1948 and 1951, which means an increase in GDP growth of less than half a percent.\nGraham T. Allison states that \"the Marshall Plan has become a favorite analogy for policy-makers. Yet few know much about it.\" Some new studies highlight not only the role of economic cooperation but approach the Marshall Plan as a case concerning strategic thinking to face some typical challenges in policy, as problem definition, risk analysis, decision support to policy formulation, and program implementation.\nIn 1947, two years after the end of the war, industrialist Lewis H. Brown wrote, at the request of General Lucius D. Clay, \"A Report on Germany\", which served as a detailed recommendation for the reconstruction of post-war Germany and served as a basis for the Marshall Plan. The initiative was named after United States secretary of state George C. Marshall. The plan had bipartisan support in Washington, where the Republicans controlled Congress and the Democrats controlled the White House with Harry S. Truman as president. Some businessmen feared the Marshall Plan, unsure whether reconstructing European economies and encouraging foreign competition was in the US' best interests. The plan was largely the creation of State Department officials, especially William L. Clayton and George F. Kennan, with help from the Brookings Institution, as requested by Senator Arthur Vandenberg, chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. Marshall spoke of an urgent need to help the European recovery in his address at Harvard University in June 1947. The purpose of the Marshall Plan was to aid in the economic recovery of nations after World War II and secure US geopolitical influence over Western Europe. To combat the effects of the Marshall Plan, the USSR developed its own economic recovery program, known as the Molotov Plan.\nThe phrase \"equivalent of the Marshall Plan\" is often used to describe a proposed large-scale economic rescue program.\nDevelopment and deployment.\nThe reconstruction plan, developed at a meeting of the participating European states, was drafted on June 5, 1947. It offered the same aid to the Soviet Union and its allies, but they refused to accept it, under Soviet pressure (as was the case for Finland's rejection) as doing so would allow a degree of US control over the communist economies. Secretary Marshall became convinced Stalin had no interest in helping restore economic health in Western Europe.\nPresident Harry Truman signed the Marshall Plan on April 3, 1948, granting $5 billion in aid to 16 European nations. During the four years that the plan was in effect, the United States donated $17 billion (equivalent to $ billion in 2024) in economic and technical assistance to help the recovery of the European countries that joined the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation. The $17 billion was in the context of a US GDP of $258 billion in 1948, and on top of $17 billion in American aid to Europe between the end of the war and the start of the plan that is counted separately from the Marshall Plan. The Marshall Plan was replaced by the Mutual Security Plan at the end of 1951; that new plan gave away about $7.5 billion annually until 1961 when it was replaced by another program.\nThe ERP addressed each of the obstacles to postwar recovery. The plan looked to the future and did not focus on the destruction caused by the war. Much more important were efforts to modernize European industrial and business practices using high-efficiency American models, reducing artificial trade barriers, and instilling a sense of hope and self-reliance.\nBy 1952, as the funding ended, the economy of every participant state had surpassed pre-war levels; for all Marshall Plan recipients, output in 1951 was at least 35% higher than in 1938. Over the next two decades, Western Europe enjoyed unprecedented growth and prosperity, but economists are not sure what proportion was due directly to the ERP, what proportion indirectly, and how much would have happened without it.\nA common American interpretation of the program's role in European recovery was expressed by Paul Hoffman, head of the Economic Cooperation Administration, in 1949 when he told Congress Marshall aid had provided the \"critical margin\" on which other investment needed for European recovery depended. The Marshall Plan was one of the first elements of European integration, as it erased trade barriers and set up institutions to coordinate the economy on a continental level\u2014that is, it stimulated the total political reconstruction of Western Europe.\nBelgian economic historian Herman Van der Wee concludes the Marshall Plan was a \"great success\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It gave a new impetus to reconstruction in Western Europe and made a decisive contribution to the renewal of the transport system, the modernization of industrial and agricultural equipment, the resumption of normal production, the raising of productivity, and the facilitating of intra-European trade.\nWartime destruction.\nBy the end of World War II, much of Europe was devastated. Sustained aerial bombardment during the war had badly damaged most major cities, and industrial facilities were especially hard-hit. Millions of refugees were in temporary camps. The region's trade flows had been thoroughly disrupted; millions were in refugee camps living on aid from the United States, which was provided by the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration and other agencies. Food shortages were severe, especially in the harsh winter of 1946\u201347. From July 1945 through June 1946, the United States shipped 16.5 million tons of food, primarily wheat, to Europe and Japan. It amounted to one-sixth of the American food supply and provided 35 trillion calories, enough to provide 400 calories a day for one year to 300 million people.\nEspecially damaged was transportation infrastructure, as railways, bridges, and docks had been specifically targeted by airstrikes, while much merchant shipping had been sunk. Although most small towns and villages had not suffered as much damage, the destruction of transportation left them economically isolated. None of these problems could be easily remedied, as most nations engaged in the war had exhausted their treasuries in the process.\nThe only major powers whose infrastructure had not been significantly harmed in World War II were the United States and Canada. They were much more prosperous than before the war, but exports were a small factor in their economy. Much of the Marshall Plan aid would be used by the Europeans to buy manufactured goods and raw materials from the United States and Canada.\nInitial post-war events.\nSlow recovery.\nMost of Europe's economies were recovering slowly, as unemployment and food shortages led to strikes and unrest in several nations. Agricultural production was 83% of 1938 levels, industrial production was 88%, and exports 59%. Exceptions were the United Kingdom, the Netherlands and France, where by the end of 1947 production had already been restored to pre-war levels before the Marshall Plan. Italy and Belgium would follow by the end of 1948.\nIn Germany in 1945\u201346 housing and food conditions were bad, as the disruption of transport, markets, and finances slowed a return to normality. In the West, the bombing had destroyed 5,000,000 houses and apartments, and 12,000,000 refugees from the east had crowded in.\nThe split of Germany into zones also interrupted food supplies within the country, leading to a drop from 80% self-sufficiency in food production for all of pre-war Germany to 50% in the western zones at pre-war production levels.\nOn top of that reduction, the food production in the western zones was 30% below pre-war levels in 1946\u201348.\nThe drop in food production across Europe can also be attributed to a drought that killed a major portion of the wheat crop while a severe winter destroyed most of the wheat crop the following year (see also Soviet famine of 1946\u20131947, Winter of 1946\u201347 in the United Kingdom). This caused most Europeans to rely on a 1,500-calorie-per-day diet or less.\nIndustrial production fell more than half and reached pre-war levels at the end of 1949. While Germany struggled to recover from the destruction of the War, the recovery effort began in June 1948, moving on from emergency relief. The currency reform in 1948 was headed by the military government and helped Germany to restore stability by encouraging production. The reform revalued old currency and deposits and introduced a new currency. Taxes were also reduced and Germany prepared to remove economic barriers.\nDuring the first three years of occupation of Germany, the Allied occupational authorities vigorously pursued a military disarmament program in Germany, partly by removal of equipment but mainly through an import embargo on raw materials, part of the Morgenthau Plan approved by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Historian Nicholas Balabkins concluded that \"as long as German industrial capacity was kept idle the economic recovery of Europe was delayed.\" By July 1947, Washington realized that economic recovery in Europe could not go forward without the reconstruction of the German industrial base, deciding that an \"orderly, prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany.\" In addition, the strength of Moscow-controlled communist parties in France and Italy worried Washington.\nIn the view of the State Department under President Harry S Truman, the United States needed to adopt a definite position on the world scene or fear losing credibility. The emerging doctrine of containment (as opposed to rollback) argued that the United States needed to substantially aid non-communist countries to stop the spread of Soviet influence. There was also some hope that the Eastern Bloc nations would join the plan, and thus be pulled out of the emerging Soviet bloc, but that did not happen.\nNeed to rebuild Germany.\nIn January 1947, Truman appointed retired General George Marshall as Secretary of State. In July 1947 Marshall scrapped Joint Chiefs of Staff Directive 1067, which was based on the Morgenthau Plan which had decreed \"take no steps looking toward the economic rehabilitation of Germany [or] designed to maintain or strengthen the German economy.\" The new plan JCS 1779 stated that \"an orderly and prosperous Europe requires the economic contributions of a stable and productive Germany.\" The restrictions placed on German heavy industry production were partly ameliorated; permitted steel production levels were raised from 25% of pre-war capacity to a new limit placed at 50% of pre-war capacity.\nWith a threatening Greece, and Britain financially unable to continue its aid, the President announced his Truman Doctrine on March 12, 1947, \"to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures\", with an aid request for consideration and decision, concerning Greece and Turkey. Herbert Hoover noted that \"The whole economy of Europe is interlinked with the German economy through the exchange of raw materials and manufactured goods. The productivity of Europe cannot be restored without the restoration of Germany as a contributor to that productivity.\" Hoover's report led to a realization in Washington that a new policy was needed; \"almost any action would be an improvement on current policy.\" In Washington, the Joint Chiefs declared that the \"complete revival of German industry, particularly coal mining\" was now of \"primary importance\" to American security.\nThe United States was already spending a great deal to help Europe recover. Over $14 billion was spent or loaned during the postwar period through the end of 1947 and is not counted as part of the Marshall Plan. Much of this aid was designed to restore infrastructure and help refugees. Britain, for example, received an emergency loan of $3.75 billion.\nThe United Nations also launched a series of humanitarian and relief efforts almost wholly funded by the United States. These efforts had important effects, but they lacked any central organization and planning, and failed to meet many of Europe's more fundamental needs. Already in 1943, the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration (UNRRA) was founded to provide relief to areas liberated from Germany. UNRRA provided billions of dollars of rehabilitation aid and helped about 8 million refugees. It ceased the operation of displaced persons camps in Europe in 1947; many of its functions were transferred to several UN agencies.\nSoviet negotiations.\nAfter Marshall's appointment in January 1947, administration officials met with Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov and others to press for an economically self-sufficient Germany, including a detailed accounting of the industrial plants, goods and infrastructure already removed by the Soviets in their occupied zone. Molotov refrained from supplying accounts of Soviet assets. The Soviets took a punitive approach, pressing for a delay rather than an acceleration in economic rehabilitation, demanding unconditional fulfillment of all prior reparation claims, and pressing for progress toward nationwide socioeconomic transformation.\nAfter six weeks of negotiations, Molotov rejected all of the American and British proposals. During negotiations with the French and the British, Molotov received a ciphered telegram from Vyshinsky, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs. The official position of the Soviet Union, on Stalin's orders, had changed dramatically, and now Moscow's representatives in Paris were forcefully rejecting the Marshall Plan. Due to this change, Molotov rejected the counteroffer to scrap the British-American \"Bizonia\" and to include the Soviet zone within the newly constructed Germany. Marshall was particularly discouraged after personally meeting with Stalin to explain that the United States could not possibly abandon its position on Germany, while Stalin expressed little interest in a solution to German economic problems.\nMarshall's speech.\nAfter the adjournment of the Moscow conference following six weeks of failed discussions with the Soviets regarding a potential German reconstruction, the United States concluded that a solution could not wait any longer. To clarify the American position, a major address by Secretary of State George Marshall was planned. Marshall gave the address at Harvard University on June 5, 1947. He offered American aid to promote European recovery and reconstruction. The speech described the dysfunction of the European economy and presented a rationale for US aid:\nThe modern system of the division of labor upon which the exchange of products is based is in danger of breaking down.\u00a0... Aside from the demoralizing effect on the world at large and the possibilities of disturbances arising as a result of the desperation of the people concerned, the consequences to the economy of the United States should be apparent to all. It is logical that the United States should do whatever it is able to do to assist in the return of normal economic health to the world, without which there can be no political stability and no assured peace. Our policy is not directed against any country, but against hunger, poverty, desperation and chaos. Any government that is willing to assist in recovery will find full co-operation on the part of the United States. Its purpose should be the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist.\nMarshall was convinced that economic stability would provide political stability in Europe. He offered aid, but the European countries had to organize the program themselves.\nThe speech, written at Marshall's request and guidance by Charles Bohlen contained virtually no details and no numbers. More a proposal than a plan, it was a challenge to European leaders to cooperate and coordinate. It asked Europeans to create their own plan for rebuilding Europe, indicating the United States would then fund this plan. The administration felt that the plan would likely be unpopular among many Americans, and the speech was mainly directed at a European audience. In an attempt to keep the speech out of American papers, journalists were not contacted, and on the same day, Truman called a press conference to take away headlines. In contrast, Dean Acheson, an Under Secretary of State, was dispatched to contact the European media, especially the British media, and the speech was read in its entirety on the BBC.\nIn the audience at Harvard was International Law and Diplomacy graduate student Malcolm Crawford, who had just written his Master's thesis entitled \"A Blueprint for the Financing of Post-War Business and Industry in the United Kingdom and Republic of France.\" Crawford's thesis was read by future Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas and presented to President Truman as the solution for Marshall's proposal. It was Crawford's thesis which provided the key to selling the Marshall Plan to Congress by laying out the idea of \"strategic partnerships.\" Instead of the Federal government granting money directly to Europe, American businesses would provide technology, expertise, and materials to Europe as a strategic partner, and in exchange, the Federal government would purchase stock in the US businesses to reimburse them. In this way, Europe would receive the aid it needed, American businesses would receive capital investment, and the federal government would make a profit when the stock was sold.\nRejection by Stalin.\nBritish Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin heard Marshall's radio broadcast speech and immediately contacted French Foreign Minister Georges Bidault to begin preparing a quick European response to (and acceptance of) the offer, which led to the creation of the Committee of European Economic Co-operation. The two agreed that it would be necessary to invite the Soviets as the other major allied power. Marshall's speech had explicitly included an invitation to the Soviets, feeling that excluding them would have been a sign of distrust. State Department officials, however, knew that Stalin would almost certainly not participate and that any plan that would send large amounts of aid to the Soviets was unlikely to get Congressional approval.\nInitial reactions.\nSpeaking at the Paris Peace Conference on October 10, 1946, Molotov had already stated Soviet fears: \"If American capital was given a free hand in the small states ruined and enfeebled by the war [it] would buy up the local industries, appropriate the more attractive Romanian, Yugoslav ... enterprises and would become the master in these small states.\" While the Soviet ambassador in Washington suspected that the Marshall Plan could lead to the creation of an anti-Soviet bloc, Stalin was open to the offer. He directed that\u2014in negotiations to be held in Paris regarding the aid\u2014countries in the Eastern Bloc should not reject economic conditions being placed upon them. Stalin only changed his outlook when he learned that (a) credit would only be extended under conditions of economic cooperation, and (b) aid would also be extended to Germany in total, an eventuality which Stalin thought would hamper the Soviets' ability to exercise influence in western Germany.\nInitially, Stalin maneuvered to kill the plan, or at least hamper it using destructive participation in the Paris talks regarding conditions. He quickly realized, however, that this would be impossible after Molotov reported\u2014following his arrival in Paris in July 1947\u2014that conditions for the credit were non-negotiable. Looming as just as large a concern was the Czechoslovak eagerness to accept the aid, as well as indications of a similar Polish attitude.\nCompulsory Eastern Bloc rejection.\nSoviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov left Paris, rejecting the plan. After that, statements were made suggesting a future confrontation with the West, calling the United States both a \"fascizing\" power and the \"center of worldwide reaction and anti-Soviet activity\", with all U.S.-aligned countries branded as enemies. The Soviets blamed the United States for communist losses in elections in Belgium, France, and Italy months earlier, in the spring of 1947. It claimed that \"marshallization\" must be resisted and prevented by any means and that French and Italian communist parties were to make maximum efforts to sabotage the implementation of the plan. In addition, Western embassies in Moscow were isolated, with their personnel being denied contact with Soviet officials.\nOn July 12, a larger meeting was convened in Paris. Every country in Europe was invited, with the exceptions of Spain (a World War II neutral that had sympathized with the Axis powers) and the small states of Andorra, San Marino, Monaco, and Liechtenstein. The Soviet Union was invited with the understanding that it would likely refuse. The states of the future Eastern Bloc were also approached, and Czechoslovakia and Poland agreed to attend. In one of the most evident signs and reflections of tight Soviet control and domination over the region, Jan Masaryk, the foreign minister of Czechoslovakia, was summoned to Moscow and berated by Stalin for considering Czechoslovakia's possible involvement with and joining of the Marshall Plan. The prime minister of Poland, J\u00f3zef Cyrankiewicz, was rewarded by Stalin for his country's rejection of the plan which came in the form of the Soviet Union's offer of a lucrative trade agreement lasting for five years, a grant amounting to the approximate equivalent of $450 million (in 1948; the sum would have been $4.4 billion in 2014) in the form of long-term credit and loans and the provision of 200,000 tonnes of grain, heavy and manufacturing machinery and factories and heavy industries to Poland.\nThe Marshall Plan participants were not surprised when the Czechoslovakian and Polish delegations were prevented from attending the Paris meeting. The other Eastern Bloc states immediately rejected the offer. Finland also declined, to avoid antagonizing the Soviets (see also Finlandization). The Soviet Union's \"alternative\" to the Marshall plan which was purported to involve Soviet subsidies and trade with western Europe, became known as the Molotov Plan, and later, the Comecon. In a 1947 speech to the United Nations, Soviet deputy foreign minister Andrei Vyshinsky said that the Marshall Plan violated the principles of the United Nations. He accused the United States of attempting to impose its will on other independent states while at the same time using economic resources distributed as a relief to needy nations as an instrument of political pressure.\nYugoslavia.\nYugoslavia, led by Josip Broz (Tito), initially went along with all the other communist European countries in rejecting the Marshall Plan. However, in 1948 Tito broke decisively with Stalin on other issues. Yugoslavia requested American aid. American leaders were internally divided, but finally agreed and began sending money on a small scale in 1949 and on a much larger scale in 1950\u201353. The American aid was not part of the Marshall Plan.\nSzklarska Por\u0119ba meeting.\nIn late September, the Soviet Union called a meeting of nine European communist parties at the resort town of Szklarska Por\u0119ba in southwest Poland. A Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) report was read at the outset to set the heavily anti-Western tone, stating now that \"international politics is dominated by the ruling clique of the American imperialists\" which have embarked upon the \"enslavement of the weakened capitalist countries of Europe\".Communist parties were to struggle against the US presence in Europe by any means necessary, including sabotage. The report further claimed that \"reactionary imperialist elements throughout the world, particularly in the United States, in Britain and France, had put particular hope on Germany and Japan, primarily on Hitlerite Germany\u2014first as a force most capable of striking a blow at the Soviet Union\".\nReferring to the Eastern Bloc, the report stated that \"the Red Army's liberating role was complemented by an upsurge of the freedom-loving peoples' liberation struggle against the fascist predators and their hirelings.\"It argued that \"the bosses of Wall Street\" were \"tak[ing] the place of Germany, Japan, and Italy\". The Marshall Plan was described as \"the American plan for the enslavement of Europe\". It described the world now breaking down \"into basically two camps\u2014the imperialist and antidemocratic camp on the one hand, and the anti-imperialist and democratic camp on the other\".\nAlthough the Eastern Bloc countries, except Czechoslovakia, had immediately rejected Marshall Plan aid, Eastern Bloc communist parties were blamed for permitting even minor influence by non-communists in their respective countries during the run-up to the Marshall Plan. The meeting's chair, Andrei Zhdanov, who was in permanent radio contact with the Kremlin from whom he received instructions, also castigated communist parties in France and Italy for collaboration with those countries' domestic agendas. Zhdanov warned that if they continued to fail to maintain international contact with Moscow to consult on all matters, \"extremely harmful consequences for the development of the brother parties' work\" would result.\nParty rules prevented Italian and French communist leaders from pointing out that it was Stalin who had directed them not to take opposition stances in 1944. The French communist party, like others, was then to redirect its mission to \"destroy capitalist economy\" and that the Soviet Communist Information Bureau (Cominform) would take control of the French Communist Party's activities to oppose the Marshall Plan. When they asked Zhdanov if they should prepare for armed revolt when they returned home, he did not answer. In a follow-up conversation with Stalin, he explained that an armed struggle would be impossible and that the struggle against the Marshall Plan was to be waged under the slogan of national independence.\nPassage in Congress.\nCongress, under the control of conservative Republicans, agreed to the program for multiple reasons. The 20-member conservative isolationist Senate wing of the party, based in the rural Midwest and led by Senator Kenneth S. Wherry (R-Nebraska), was outmaneuvered by the emerging internationalist wing, led by Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg (R-Michigan). The opposition argued that it made no sense to oppose communism by supporting the socialist governments in Western Europe; and that American goods would reach Russia and increase its war potential. They called it \"a wasteful 'operation rat-hole'\" Vandenberg, assisted by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. (R-Massachusetts) admitted there was no certainty that the plan would succeed, but said it would halt economic chaos, sustain Western civilization, and stop further Soviet expansion. Senator Robert A. Taft (R-Ohio) hedged on the issue. He said it was without economic justification; however, it was \"absolutely necessary\" in \"the world battle against communism.\" In the end, only 17 senators voted against it on March 13, 1948. A bill granting an initial $5 billion passed Congress with strong bipartisan support. Congress eventually allocated $12.4 billion in aid over the four years of the plan.\nCongress reflected public opinion, which resonated with the ideological argument that communism flourishes in poverty. Across America, multiple interest groups, including business, labor, farming, philanthropy, ethnic groups, and religious groups, saw the Marshall Plan as an inexpensive solution to a massive problem, noting it would also help American exports and stimulate the American economy as well. Major newspapers were highly supportive, including such conservative outlets as \"Time\" magazine. Vandenberg made sure of bipartisan support on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. The Solid Democratic South was highly supportive, the upper Midwest was dubious, but heavily outnumbered. The plan was opposed by conservatives in the rural Midwest, who opposed any major government spending program and were highly suspicious of Europeans. The plan also had some opponents on the left, led by Henry A. Wallace, the former vice president. He said the plan was hostile to the Soviet Union, a subsidy for American exporters, and sure to polarize the world between East and West. However, opposition against the Marshall Plan was greatly reduced by the shock of the communist coup in Czechoslovakia in February 1948. The appointment of the prominent businessman Paul G. Hoffman as director reassured conservative businessmen that the gigantic sums of money would be handled efficiently.\nNegotiations.\nTurning the plan into reality required negotiations among the participating nations. Sixteen nations met in Paris to determine what form the American aid would take, and how it would be divided. The negotiations were long and complex, with each nation having its own interests. France's major concern was that Germany not be rebuilt to its previous level of might. The Benelux countries (Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg), despite also suffering under the Nazis, had long been closely linked to the German economy and felt their prosperity depended on its revival. The Scandinavian nations, especially Sweden, insisted that their long-standing trading relationships with the Eastern Bloc nations not be disrupted and that their neutrality not be infringed.\nThe United Kingdom insisted on special status as a longstanding belligerent during the war, concerned that if it were treated equally with the devastated continental powers, it would receive virtually no aid. The Americans were pushing the importance of free trade and European unity to form a bulwark against communism. The Truman administration, represented by William L. Clayton, promised the Europeans that they would be free to structure the plan themselves, but the administration also reminded the Europeans that implementation depended on the plan's passage through Congress. A majority of Congress members were committed to free trade and European integration and were hesitant to spend too much of the money on Germany. However, before the Marshall Plan was in effect, France, Austria, and Italy needed immediate aid. On December 17, 1947, the United States agreed to give $40 million to France, Austria, China, and Italy.\nAgreement was eventually reached, and the Europeans sent a reconstruction plan to Washington, which was formulated and agreed upon by the Committee of European Economic Co-operation in 1947. In the document, the Europeans asked for $22 billion in aid. Truman cut this to $17 billion in the bill he put to Congress.\nOn March 17, 1948, Truman addressed European security and condemned the Soviet Union before a hastily convened Joint Session of Congress. Attempting to contain spreading Soviet influence in the Eastern Bloc, Truman asked Congress to restore a peacetime military draft and to swiftly pass the Economic Cooperation Act, the name given to the Marshall Plan. Of the Soviet Union Truman said, \"The situation in the world today is not primarily the result of the natural difficulties which follow a great war. It is chiefly due to the fact that one nation has not only refused to cooperate in the establishment of a just and honorable peace but\u2014even worse\u2014has actively sought to prevent it.\nMembers of the Republican-controlled 80th Congress (1947\u20131949) were skeptical. \"In effect, he told the Nation that we have lost the peace, that our whole war effort was in vain.\", noted Representative Frederick Smith of Ohio. Others thought he had not been forceful enough to contain the USSR. \"What [Truman] said fell short of being tough\", noted Representative Eugene Cox, a Democrat from Georgia, \"there is no prospect of ever winning Russian cooperation.\" Despite its reservations, the 80th Congress implemented Truman's requests, further escalating the Cold War with the USSR.\nTruman signed the Economic Cooperation Act into law on April 3, 1948; the Act established the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) to administer the program. ECA was headed by economic cooperation administrator Paul G. Hoffman. In the same year, the participating countries (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, the United Kingdom, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United States) signed an accord establishing a master financial-aid-coordinating agency, the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (later called the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development or OECD), which was headed by Frenchman Robert Marjolin.\nImplementation.\nAccording to Armin Gr\u00fcnbacher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The U.S. government did not give money directly to the participating countries so that they could buy whatever they thought they needed. Instead the U.S. delivered the goods and provided services, mainly transatlantic shipping, to the participating governments, which then sold the commodities to businesses and individuals who had to pay the dollar value of the goods in local currency (\"counterparts\") into so-called ERP Special Accounts that were set up at the country's central bank. This way of operation held three advantages: the provision of U.S. goods to Europe without European dollar payments helped to narrow the dollar gap that strangled European reconstruction; the accumulated funds could be used for investments in long-term reconstruction (as happened in France and Germany) or for paying off a government's war debts (as in Great Britain); and the payments of the goods in local currencies helped to limit inflation by taking these funds temporarily out of circulation while they were held in the Special Accounts.\nThe ECA's official mission statement was to give a boost to the European economy: to promote European production, to bolster European currency, and to facilitate international trade, especially with the United States, whose economic interest required Europe to become wealthy enough to import US goods. Another unofficial goal of ECA (and of the Marshall Plan) was the containment of growing Soviet influence in Europe, evident especially in the growing strength of communist parties in France, and Italy.\nThe Marshall Plan money was transferred to the governments of the European nations. The funds were jointly administered by the local governments and the ECA. Each European capital had an ECA envoy, generally a prominent American businessman who would advise on the process. The cooperative allocation of funds was encouraged, and panels of government, business and labor leaders were convened to examine the economy and see where aid was needed. The recipient nations were represented collectively by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), headed by British statesman Oliver Franks.\nThe Marshall Plan aid was mostly used for goods from the United States. The European nations had all but exhausted their foreign-exchange reserves during the war, and the Marshall Plan aid represented almost their sole means of importing goods from abroad. At the start of the plan, these imports were mainly much-needed staples such as food and fuel, but later the purchases turned toward reconstruction needs as was originally intended. In the latter years, under pressure from the United States Congress and with the outbreak of the Korean War, an increasing amount of the aid was spent on rebuilding the militaries of Western Europe. Of the some $13 billion allotted by mid-1951, $3.4 billion had been spent on imports of raw materials and semi-manufactured products; $3.2 billion on food, feed, and fertilizer; $1.9 billion on machines, vehicles and equipment; and $1.6 billion on fuel.\nAlso established were counterpart funds, which used Marshall Plan aid to establish funds in the local currency. According to ECA rules, recipients had to invest 60% of these funds in industry. This was prominent in Germany where these government-administered funds played a crucial role in lending money to private enterprises which would spend the money rebuilding. These funds played a central role in the reindustrialization of Germany. In 1949\u201350, for instance, 40% of the investment in the German coal industry was by these funds.\nThe companies were obligated to repay the loans to the government, and the money would then be lent out to another group of businesses. This process has continued to this day in the guise of the state-owned KfW bank, (Kreditanstalt f\u00fcr Wiederaufbau, meaning Reconstruction Credit Institute). The Special Fund, then supervised by the Federal Economics Ministry, was worth over DM 10 billion in 1971. In 1997 it was worth DM 23 billion. Through the revolving loan system, the Fund had by the end of 1995 made low-interest loans to German citizens amounting to around DM 140 billion. The other 40% of the counterpart funds were used to pay down the debt, stabilize the currency, or invest in non-industrial projects. France made the most extensive use of counterpart funds, using them to reduce the budget deficit. In France, and most other countries, the counterpart fund money was absorbed into general government revenues, and not recycled as in Germany.\nThe Netherlands received US aid for economic recovery in the Netherlands Indies. However, in January 1949, the American government suspended this aid in response to the Dutch efforts to restore colonial rule in Indonesia during the Indonesian National Revolution, and it implicitly threatened to suspend Marshall aid to the Netherlands if the Dutch government continued to oppose the independence of Indonesia.\nAt the time, the United States was a significant oil producing nation\u2014one of the goals of the Marshall Plan was for Europe to use oil in place of coal, but the Europeans wanted to buy crude oil and use the Marshall Plan funds to build refineries instead. However, when independent American oil companies complained, the ECA denied funds for European refinery construction.\nTechnical Assistance Program.\nA high priority was increasing industrial productivity in Europe, which proved one of the more successful aspects of the Marshall Plan. The United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) contributed heavily to the success of the Technical Assistance Program. The United States Congress passed a law on June 7, 1940, that allowed the BLS to \"make continuing studies of labor productivity\" and appropriated funds for the creation of a Productivity and Technological Development Division. The BLS could then use its expertise in the field of productive efficiency to implement a productivity drive in each Western European country receiving Marshall Plan aid. Counterpart funds were used to finance large-scale tours of American industry. France, for example, sent 500 missions with 4700 businessmen and experts to tour American factories, farms, stores, and offices. They were especially impressed with the prosperity of American workers, and how they could purchase an inexpensive new automobile for nine months work, compared to 30 months in France.\nBy implementing technological literature surveys and organized plant visits, American economists, statisticians, and engineers were able to educate European manufacturers in statistical measurement. The goal of the statistical and technical assistance from the Americans was to increase productive efficiency of European manufacturers in all industries.\nTo conduct this analysis, the BLS performed two types of productivity calculations. First, they used existing data to calculate how much a worker produces per hour of work\u2014the average output rate. Second, they compared the existing output rates in a particular country to output rates in other nations. By performing these calculations across all industries, the BLS was able to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each country's manufacturing and industrial production. From that, the BLS could recommend technologies (especially statistical) that each individual nation could implement. Often, these technologies came from the United States; by the time the Technical Assistance Program began, the United States used statistical technologies \"more than a generation ahead of what [the Europeans] were using\".\nThe BLS used these statistical technologies to create Factory Performance Reports for Western European nations. The American government sent hundreds of technical advisers to Europe to observe workers in the field. This on-site analysis made the Factory Performance Reports especially helpful to the manufacturers. In addition, the Technical Assistance Program funded 24,000 European engineers, leaders, and industrialists to visit America and tour America's factories, mines, and manufacturing plants. This way, the European visitors would be able to return to their home countries and implement the technologies used in the United States. The analyses in the Factory Performance Reports and the \"hands-on\" experience had by the European productivity teams effectively identified productivity deficiencies in European industries; from there, it became clearer how to make European production more effective.\nBefore the Technical Assistance Program even went into effect, United States Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin expressed his confidence in American productivity and technology to both American and European economic leaders. He urged that the United States play a large role in improving European productive efficiency by providing four recommendations for the program's administrators:\nThe effects of the Technical Assistance Program were not limited to improvements in productive efficiency. While the thousands of European leaders took their work/study trips to the United States, they were able to observe a number of aspects of American society as well. The Europeans could watch local, state, and federal governments work together with citizens in a pluralist society. They observed a democratic society with open universities and civic societies in addition to more advanced factories and manufacturing plants. The Technical Assistance Program allowed Europeans to bring home many types of American ideas.\nAnother important aspect of the Technical Assistance Program was its low cost. While $19.4 billion was allocated for capital costs in the Marshall Plan, the Technical Assistance Program only required $300 million. Only one-third of that $300 million cost was paid by the United States.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe economy was precarious during the age of austerity, as wartime restrictions and rationing continued, and the wartime bombing damage was slowly being rebuilt at great cost. The Treasury depended heavily on American money, especially the 1946 loan of $3.75 billion at a low 2% interest rate. Even more helpful was the gift of $2.694 billion in Marshall Plan funds in 1948-1951. Canada also provided gifts and $1.25 billion in loans. The Marshall money was a gift but carried requirements that Britain balance its budget, control tariffs, improve management, and maintain adequate currency reserves. The British Labour government under Prime Minister Clement Attlee was an enthusiastic participant.\nThe American goals for the Marshall plan were to help rebuild the postwar British economy, help modernize the economy, and minimize trade barriers. When the Soviet Union refused to participate or allow its satellites to participate, the Marshall plan became an element of the emerging Cold War.\nThere were political tensions between the two nations regarding Marshall plan requirements. London was dubious about Washington's emphasis on European economic integration as the solution to postwar recovery. Integration with Europe at this point would mean cutting close ties to the emerging Commonwealth. London tried to convince Washington that American economic aid, especially to the sterling currency area, was necessary to solve the dollar shortage. British economists argued that their position was validated by 1950 as European industrial production exceeded prewar levels. Washington demanded convertibility of sterling currency on 15 July 1947, which produced a severe financial crisis for Britain. Convertibility was suspended on 20 August 1947. However, by 1950, American rearmament and heavy spending on the Korean War and Cold War finally ended the dollar shortage. The balance of payment problems that troubled the postwar government was caused less by economic decline and more by political overreach, according to Jim Tomlinson.\nAccording to economic historians N.F.R. Crafts and Nicholas Woodward, the Marshall Plan money had a powerful multiplier effect. In 1948-1949 free imports from the United States amounted to 2.4 percent of British GNP. However, they calculate that the multiplier effects increased the 1949 GNP by 10% to 20%.\nWest Germany and Austria.\nThe Marshall Plan was implemented in West Germany (1948\u20131950), as a way to modernize business procedures and utilize the best practices. As a major prerequisite for delivery of aid, the Currency Reform of 1948 was implemented on June 20. The Marshall Plan made it possible for West Germany to return quickly to its traditional pattern of industrial production with a strong export sector. Without the plan, agriculture would have played a larger role in the recovery period, which itself would have been longer. With respect to Austria, G\u00fcnter Bischof has noted that \"the Austrian economy, injected with an overabundance of European Recovery Program funds, produced \"miracle\" growth figures that matched and at times surpassed the German ones.\"\nMarshall aid in general and the counterpart funds in particular had a significant impact in Cold-War propaganda and economic matters in Western Europe, which most likely contributed to the declining appeal of domestic communist parties.\nExpenditures.\nThe Marshall Plan aid was divided among the participant states on a roughly per capita basis. A larger amount was given to the major industrial powers, as the prevailing opinion was that their resuscitation was essential for general European revival. Somewhat more aid per capita was also directed toward the Allied nations, with less for those that had been part of the Axis or remained neutral. The exception was Iceland, which had been neutral during the war, but received far more on a per capita basis than the second highest recipient.\nThe table below shows Marshall Plan aid by country and year (in millions of dollars) from \"The Marshall Plan Fifty Years Later.\" There is no clear consensus on exact amounts, as different scholars differ on exactly what elements of American aid during this period were part of the Marshall Plan.\nLoans and grants.\nThe Marshall Plan, just as GARIOA, consisted of aid both in the form of grants and in the form of loans. Out of the total, US$1.2 billion were loan-aid.\nIreland which received US$146.2 million through the Marshall Plan, received US$128.2 million as loans, and the remaining US$18 million as grants. By 1969 the Irish Marshall Plan debt, which was still being repaid, amounted to 31 million pounds, out of a total Irish foreign debt of 50 million pounds. The UK received US$385 million of its Marshall Plan aid in the form of loans. Unconnected to the Marshall Plan the UK also received direct loans from the US amounting to US$4.6 billion. The proportion of Marshall Plan loans versus Marshall Plan grants was roughly 15% to 85% for both the UK and France.\nGermany, which up until the 1953 debt agreement had to work on the assumption that all the Marshall Plan aid was to be repaid, spent its funds very carefully. Payment for Marshall Plan goods, \"counterpart funds\", were administered by the Reconstruction Credit Institute, which used the funds for loans inside Germany. In the 1953 debt agreement, the amount of Marshall Plan aid that Germany was to repay was reduced to less than US$1 billion. This made the proportion of loans versus grants to Germany similar to that of France and the UK. The final German loan repayment was made in 1971. Since Germany chose to repay the aid debt out of the German Federal budget, leaving the German ERP fund intact, the fund was able to continue its reconstruction work. By 1996 it had accumulated a value of 23 billion Deutsche Mark.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFunding for CIA fronts.\nThe Central Intelligence Agency received 5% of the Marshall Plan funds (about $685 million spread over six years), which it used to finance secret operations abroad. Through the Office of Policy Coordination money was directed toward support for labor unions, newspapers, student groups, artists and intellectuals, who were countering the anti-American counterparts subsidized by the communists. The largest sum went to the Congress for Cultural Freedom. There were no agents working among the Soviets or their satellite states. The founding conference of the Congress for Cultural Freedom was held in Berlin in June 1950. Among the leading intellectuals from the US and Western Europe were writers, philosophers, critics and historians: Raymond Aron, Alfred Ayer, Franz Borkenau, Irving Brown, James Burnham, Benedetto Croce, John Dewey, Sidney Hook, Karl Jaspers, Arthur Koestler, Melvin J. Lasky, Richard L\u00f6wenthal, Ernst Reuter, Bertrand Russell, Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., Ignazio Silone, Hugh Trevor-Roper, and Tennessee Williams. There were conservatives among the participants, but non-communist (or former communist) leftists were more numerous.\nEffects and legacy.\nThe Marshall Plan was originally scheduled to end in 1953. Any effort to extend it was halted by the growing cost of the Korean War and rearmament. American Republicans hostile to the plan had also gained seats in the 1950 Congressional elections, and conservative opposition to the plan was revived. Thus the plan ended in 1951, though various other forms of American aid to Europe continued afterward.\nThe years 1948 to 1952 saw the fastest period of growth in European history. Industrial production increased by 35%. Agricultural production substantially surpassed pre-war levels. The poverty and starvation of the immediate postwar years disappeared, and Western Europe embarked upon an unprecedented two decades of growth that saw standards of living increase dramatically. Additionally, the long-term effect of economic integration raised European income levels substantially, by nearly 20 percent by the mid-1970s. There is some debate among historians over how much this should be credited to the Marshall Plan. Most reject the idea that it alone miraculously revived Europe, as evidence shows that a general recovery was already underway. Most believe that the Marshall Plan sped this recovery, but did not initiate it. Many argue that the structural adjustments that it forced were of great importance. Economic historians J. Bradford DeLong and Barry Eichengreen call it \"history's most successful structural adjustment program.\" One effect of the plan was that it subtly \"Americanized\" European countries, especially Austria, through new exposure to American popular culture, including the growth in influence of Hollywood movies and rock n' roll.\nThe political effects of the Marshall Plan may have been just as important as the economic ones. Marshall Plan aid allowed the nations of Western Europe to relax austerity measures and rationing, reducing discontent and bringing political stability. The communist influence on Western Europe was greatly reduced, and throughout the region, communist parties faded in popularity in the years after the Marshall Plan. The trade relations fostered by the Marshall Plan helped forge the North Atlantic alliance that would persist throughout the Cold War in the form of NATO. At the same time, the nonparticipation of the states of the Eastern Bloc was one of the first clear signs that the continent was now divided.\nThe Marshall Plan also played an important role in European integration. Both the Americans and many of the European leaders felt that European integration was necessary to secure the peace and prosperity of Europe, and thus used Marshall Plan guidelines to foster integration. In some ways, this effort failed, as the OEEC never grew to be more than an agent of economic cooperation. Rather, it was the separate European Coal and Steel Community, which did not include Britain, that would eventually grow into the European Union. However, the OEEC served as both a testing and training ground for the structures that would later be used by the European Economic Community. The Marshall Plan, linked into the Bretton Woods system, also mandated free trade throughout the region.\nWhile some historians today feel some of the praise for the Marshall Plan is exaggerated, it is still viewed favorably and many thus feel that a similar project would help other areas of the world. The events of 1947 are thus part and parcel of the larger story of the Cold War. These events played a major role, but it would be a mistake to exaggerate their significance. The bloc system in Europe took years to develop, and the Marshall Plan was just one part of the story. After the fall of communism, several proposed a \"Marshall Plan for Eastern Europe\" that would help revive that region. Others have proposed a Marshall Plan for Africa to help that continent, and US Vice President Al Gore suggested a Global Marshall Plan. \"Marshall Plan\" has become a metaphor for any very large-scale government program that is designed to solve a specific social problem. It is usually used when calling for federal spending to correct a perceived failure of the private sector.\nRepayment.\nThe Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC) took the leading role in allocating funds, and the OEEC arranged for the transfer of the goods. The American supplier was paid in dollars, which were credited against the appropriate European Recovery Program funds. The European recipient, however, was not given the goods as a gift but had to pay for them (usually on credit) in local currency. These payments were kept by the European government involved in a special counterpart fund. This counterpart money, in turn, could be used by the government for further investment projects. Five percent of the counterpart money was paid to the US to cover the administrative costs of the ERP. In addition to ERP grants, the Export-Import Bank (an agency of the US government) at the same time made long-term loans at low interest rates to finance major purchases in the US, all of which were repaid.\nIn the case of Germany, there also were 16 billion marks of debts from the 1920s which had defaulted in the 1930s, but which Germany decided to repay to restore its reputation. This money was owed to government and private banks in the US, France, and Britain. Another 16 billion marks represented postwar loans by the US. Under the London Debts Agreement of 1953, the repayable amount was reduced by 50% to about 15 billion marks and stretched out over 30 years, and compared to the fast-growing German economy were of minor impact.\nAreas excluded.\nLarge parts of the world devastated by World War II did not benefit from the Marshall Plan. The only major Western European nation excluded was Spain, whose regime under Francisco Franco was highly unpopular in Washington. With the escalation of the Cold War, the United States reconsidered its position and in 1951 embraced Spain as an ally since it was encouraged by Franco's aggressive anti-communist policies. Over the next decade, a considerable amount of American aid would go to Spain but less than its neighbors had received under the Marshall Plan.\nThe Soviet Union had been as badly affected as any other part of the world by the war. The Soviets imposed large reparations payments on the Axis allies that were in its sphere of influence. Austria, Finland, Hungary, Romania, and especially East Germany were forced to pay vast sums and ship large amounts of supplies to the Soviet Union. Those reparation payments meant the Soviet Union itself received about the same as 16 European countries received in total from Marshall Plan aid.\nIn accordance with the agreements with the Soviet Union, shipment of dismantled German industrial installations from the west began on March 31, 1946. Under the terms of the agreement, the Soviet Union would in return ship raw materials such as food and timber to the western zones. In view of the Soviet failure to do so, the western zones halted the shipments east, ostensibly on a temporary basis, although they were never resumed. It was later shown that the main reason for halting shipments east was not the behavior of the Soviet Union but rather the recalcitrant behavior of France. Examples of material received by the Soviets were equipment from the Kugel-Fischer ballbearing plant at Schweinfurt, the Daimler-Benz underground aircraft-engine plant at Obrigheim, the Deschimag shipyards at Bremen-Weser, and the Gendorf powerplant.\nThe Soviets established COMECON as a riposte to the Marshall Plan to deliver aid for Eastern Bloc countries, but that was complicated by the Soviet efforts to manage their own recovery from the war. The members of Comecon looked to the Soviet Union for oil and in turn provided machinery, equipment, agricultural goods, industrial goods, and consumer goods to the Soviet Union. Economic recovery in the East was much slower than in the West, resulting in the formation of the shortage economies and a gap in wealth between East and West. Finland, which the Soviets forbade from joining the Marshall Plan and was required to give large reparations to the Soviets, saw its economy recover to pre-war levels in 1947. France, which received billions of dollars through the Marshall Plan, similarly saw its average income per person return to almost pre-war level by 1949. By mid-1948 industrial production in Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Czechoslovakia had recovered to a level somewhat above pre-war level.\nAid to Asia.\nFrom the end of the war to the end of 1953, the US provided grants and credits amounting to $5.9 billion to Asian countries, especially the Republic of China (Taiwan) ($1.051 billion), India ($255 million), Indonesia ($215 million), Japan ($2.444 billion), South Korea ($894 million), Pakistan ($98 million) and the Philippines ($803 million). In addition, another $282 million went to Israel and $196 million to the rest of the Middle East. While much of this aid was given during Marshall's tenure as Secretary of State, it was separate from the Marshall Plan itself.\nCanada.\nCanada's infrastructure was damaged little by the war, as most of the war was fought in Europe, Asia, and the Pacific. In 1948, the US allowed ERP aid to be used to buy goods from Canada. In its first two years of operation, ERP funded over one billion dollars' worth of trade with Canada.\nWorld total.\nThe total of American grants and loans to the world from 1945 to 1953 came to $44.3 billion.\nOpinion.\nBradford DeLong and Barry Eichengreen conclude it was \"History's Most Successful Structural Adjustment Program.\" They state:\nIt was not large enough to have significantly accelerated recovery by financing investment, aiding the reconstruction of damaged infrastructure, or easing commodity bottlenecks. We argue, however, that the Marshall Plan did play a major role in setting the stage for post-World War II Western Europe's rapid growth. The conditions attached to Marshall Plan aid pushed European political economy in a direction that left its post World War II \"mixed economies\" with more \"market\" and less \"controls\" in the mix.\nDomestic campaign for support.\nPrior to passing and enacting the Marshall Plan, President Truman and George Marshall started a domestic overhaul of public opinion from coast to coast. The purpose of this campaign was to sway public opinion in their direction and to inform the common person of what the Marshall Plan was and what the plan would ultimately do. They spent months attempting to convince Americans that their cause was just and that they should embrace the higher taxes that would come in the foreseeable future. The Great Depression left Americans acutely aware of the psychological and political effects of poverty. Though the Marshall Plan is seen as an act of compassion or sympathy for countries struggling after WWII, it is likely fear of slipping into another depression at home caused the United States to invest in diplomacy and pivot away from another economic calamity.\nA copious amount of propaganda ended up being highly effective in swaying public opinion toward supporting the Marshall Plan. During the nationwide campaign for support, \"more than a million pieces of pro-Marshall Plan publications-booklets, leaflets, reprints, and fact sheets\", were disseminated. Truman's and Marshall's efforts proved to be effective. A Gallup Poll taken between the months of July and December 1947 shows the percentage of Americans unaware of the Marshall Plan fell from 51% to 36% nationwide. By the time the Marshall Plan was ready to be implemented, there was a general consensus throughout the American public that this was the right policy for both America, and the countries who would be receiving aid.\nChange in American ideology.\nDuring the period leading up to World War II, Americans were highly isolationist, and many called The Marshall Plan a \"milestone\" for American ideology. By looking at polling data over time from pre-World War II to post-World War II, one would find that there was a change in public opinion in regards to ideology. Americans swapped their isolationist ideals for a much more global internationalist ideology after World War II.\nPolling data.\nIn a National Opinion Research Center (NORC) poll taken in April 1945, a cross-section of Americans were asked, \"If our government keeps on sending lendlease materials, which we may not get paid for, to friendly countries for about three years after the war, do you think this will mean more jobs or fewer jobs for most Americans, or won't it make any difference?\" 57% said more jobs, 18% no-change in jobs; 10% said fewer.\nBefore proposing anything to Congress in 1947, the Truman administration made an elaborate effort to organize public opinion in favor of the Marshall Plan spending, reaching out to numerous national organizations representing business, labor, farmers, women, and other interest groups. Political scientist Ralph Levering points out that:\nMounting large public relations campaigns and supporting private groups such as the Citizens Committee for the Marshall Plan, the administration carefully built public and bipartisan Congressional support before bringing these measures to a vote.\nPublic opinion polls in 1947 consistently showed strong support for the Marshall plan among Americans. Furthermore, Gallup polls in England, France, and Italy showed favorable majorities over 60%.\nCriticism.\nLaissez-faire criticism.\nLaissez-faire criticism of the Marshall Plan came from a number of economists. Wilhelm R\u00f6pke, who influenced German Minister for Economy Ludwig Erhard in his economic recovery program, believed recovery would be found in eliminating central planning and restoring a market economy in Europe, especially in those countries which had adopted more fascist and corporatist economic policies. R\u00f6pke criticized the Marshall Plan for forestalling the transition to the free market by subsidizing the current, failing systems. Erhard put R\u00f6pke's theory into practice and would later credit R\u00f6pke's influence for West Germany's preeminent success.\nHenry Hazlitt criticized the Marshall Plan in his 1947 book \"Will Dollars Save the World?\", arguing that economic recovery comes through savings, capital accumulation, and private enterprise, and not through large cash subsidies. Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises criticized the Marshall Plan in 1951, believing that \"the American subsidies make it possible for [Europe's] governments to conceal partially the disastrous effects of the various socialist measures they have adopted\".\nModern criticism.\nThe Marshall Plan's role in the rapid recovery of Western Europe has been debated. Most reject the idea that it alone miraculously revived Europe since the evidence shows that a general recovery was already underway. The Marshall Plan grants were provided at a rate that was not much higher in terms of flow than the previous UNRRA aid and represented less than 3% of the combined national income of the recipient countries between 1948 and 1951, which would mean an increase in GDP growth of only 0.3%. In addition, there is no correlation between the amount of aid received and the speed of recovery: both France and the United Kingdom received more aid, but West Germany recovered significantly faster.\nCriticism of the Marshall Plan became prominent among historians of the revisionist school, such as Walter LaFeber, during the 1960s and 1970s. They argued that the plan was American economic imperialism and that it was an attempt to gain control over Western Europe just as the Soviets controlled Eastern Europe economically through the Comecon. In a review of West Germany's economy from 1945 to 1951, German analyst Werner Abelshauser concluded that \"foreign aid was not crucial in starting the recovery or in keeping it going\". The economic recoveries of France, Italy, and Belgium, Cowen argues, began a few months before the flow of US money. Belgium, the country that relied earliest and most heavily on free-market economic policies after its liberation in 1944, experienced swift recovery and avoided the severe housing and food shortages seen in the rest of continental Europe.\nFormer US Chairman of the Federal Reserve Bank Alan Greenspan gives most credit to German Chancellor Ludwig Erhard for Europe's economic recovery. Greenspan writes in his memoir \"The Age of Turbulence\" that Erhard's economic policies were the most important aspect of postwar Western European recovery, even outweighing the contributions of the Marshall Plan. He states that it was Erhard's reductions in economic regulations that permitted Germany's miraculous recovery, and that these policies also contributed to the recoveries of many other European countries. Its recovery is attributed to traditional economic stimuli, such as increases in investment, fueled by a high savings rate and low taxes. Japan saw a large infusion of US investment during the Korean War.\nThe Marshall Plan has been recently reinterpreted as a public policy approach to complex and multi-causal problems in search of building integrated solutions with multilevel governance.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 1953 Spanish comedy film \"Welcome Mr. Marshall!\" depicts Castilian villagers preparing for a visit of the American authorities and hoping they will fulfill their desires.\nWhen the American motorcade arrives, it speeds through the village and the villagers themselves have to pay for the preparations.\nUnderneath the surface, the film is an anti-Francoist satire despite receiving approval because the censorship board understood it to be an anti-American satire.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19769", "revid": "50965503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19769", "title": "Mariculture", "text": "Marine System\nMariculture, sometimes called marine farming or marine aquaculture, is a branch of aquaculture involving the cultivation of marine organisms for food and other animal products, in seawater. Subsets of it include (offshore mariculture), fish farms built on littoral waters (inshore mariculture), or in artificial tanks, ponds or raceways which are filled with seawater (onshore mariculture). An example of the latter is the farming of plankton and seaweed, shellfish like shrimp or oysters, and marine finfish, in saltwater ponds. Non-food products produced by mariculture include: fish meal, nutrient agar, jewellery (e.g. cultured pearls, and cosmetics.\nTypes.\nOnshore.\nAlthough it sounds like a paradox, mariculture is practiced onshore variously in tanks, ponds or raceways which are supplied with seawater. The distinguishing traits of onshore mariculture are the use of seawater rather than fresh, and that food and nutrients are provided by the water column, not added artificially, a great savings in cost and preservation of the species' natural diet. Examples of onshore mariculture include the farming of algae (including plankton and seaweed), marine finfish, and shellfish (like shrimp and oysters), in manmade saltwater ponds.\nInshore.\nInshore mariculture is farming marine species such as algae, fish, and shellfish in waters affected by the tide, which include both littoral waters and their estuarine environments, such as bays, brackish rivers, and naturally fed and flushing saltwater ponds.\nPopular cultivation techniques for inshore mariculture include creating or utilizing artificial reefs, pens, nets, and long-line arrays of floating cages moored to the bottom.\nAs a result of simultaneous global development and evolution over time, the term \"ranch\" being associated typically with inshore mariculture techniques has proved problematical. It is applied without any standardized basis to everything from marine species being raised in floating pens, nested within artificial reefs, tended in cages (by the hundreds and even thousands) in long-lined groups, and even operant conditioning migratory species to return to the waters where they were born for harvesting (also known as \"enhanced stocking\").\nOpen ocean.\nRaising marine organisms under controlled offshore in \"open ocean\" in exposed, high-energy marine environments beyond , is a relatively new approach to mariculture. Open ocean aquaculture (OOA) uses cages, nets, or long-line arrays that are moored or towed. Open ocean mariculture has the potential to be combined with offshore energy installation systems, such as wind-farms, to enable a more effective use of ocean space.\nResearch and commercial open ocean aquaculture facilities are in operation or under development in Panama, Australia, Chile, China, France, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, and Norway. As of 2004[ [update]], two commercial open ocean facilities were operating in U.S. waters, raising threadfin near Hawaii and cobia near Puerto Rico. An operation targeting bigeye tuna recently received final approval. All U.S. commercial facilities are currently sited in waters under state or territorial jurisdiction. The largest deep water open ocean farm in the world is raising cobia 12\u00a0km off the northern coast of Panama in highly exposed sites.\nSpecies.\nAlgae.\nAlgaculture involves the farming of species of algae, including microalgae (such as phytoplankton) and macroalgae (such as seaweed).\nUses of commercial and industrial algae cultivation include production of nutraceuticals such as omega-3 fatty acids (as algal oil) or natural food colorants and dyes, food, fertilizers, bioplastics, chemical feedstock (raw material), protein-rich animal/aquaculture feed, pharmaceuticals, and algal fuel,&lt;ref name=\"10.1007/s43615-021-00084-3\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and can also be used as a means of pollution control and natural carbon sequestration.&lt;ref name=\"10.3389/fnut.2022.1029841\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nMariculture of seaweeds can be conducted in the open ocean to regenerate decimated fish populations by providing both habitat and the basis of a trophic pyramid for marine life. Natural seaweed ecosystems can possibly be replicated in the open ocean by creating growth conditions. Von Hertzen, Gamble, and others propose that this practice could be considered to be permaculture and thereby constitute marine permaculture. The concept envisions using artificial upwelling and floating, submerged platforms as substrate to replicate natural seaweed ecosystems. Following the principles of permaculture, seaweeds and fish from marine permaculture arrays can be sustainably harvested with the potential of sequestering atmospheric carbon, should seaweeds sink below a depth of one kilometer. As of 2020, successful trials had taken place in Hawaii, the Philippines, Puerto Rico and Tasmania. The idea received substantial public attention, notably featuring as a key solution covered by Damon Gameau\u2019s documentary \"2040\" and in the book \"Drawdown: The Most Comprehensive Plan Ever Proposed to Reverse Global Warming\".\nShellfish.\nSimilarly to algae cultivation, shellfish can be farmed in multiple ways in both onshore and inshore mariculture: on ropes, in bags or cages, or directly on (or within) the bottom. Shellfish mariculture does not require feed or fertilizer inputs, nor insecticides or antibiotics, making shellfish mariculture a self-supporting system. Seed for shellfish cultivation is typically produced in commercial hatcheries, or by the farmers themselves. Among shellfish types raised by mariculture are shrimp, oysters (including artificial pearl cultivation), clams, mussels, abalone. Shellfish can also be used in integrated multi-species cultivation techniques, where shellfish can utilize waste generated by higher trophic-level organisms.\nThe M\u0101ori people of New Zealand retain traditions of farming shellfish.\nFinfish.\nFinfish species raised in mariculture include salmon, cod, scallops, certain species of prawn, European lobsters, abalone and sea cucumbers. The most common method used to raise these species in the marine environment involves net pens or cages suspended in the ocean or large coastal embayments. These structures are anchored to the seabed or moored to floats, allowing high volumes of clean, naturally circulating seawater to flow through and supply the fish with oxygen while flushing away waste. \nFish species selected to be raised in saltwater pens do not have any additional artificial feed requirements, as they live off of the naturally occurring nutrients within the water column. Typical practice calls for the juveniles to be planted on the bottom of the body of water within the pen, which utilize more of the water column within their sea pen as they grow and develop.However, in intensive farming systems used for high-value finfish like salmon, the fish are typically fed manufactured, nutritionally complete pelleted feed, which is often delivered automatically to maintain efficient growth rates. The strategic site selection of these marine farms is crucial, requiring careful assessment of water depth, current speeds, shelter from storms, and proximity to shore to ensure optimal fish health and minimal environmental impact.\nEnvironmental effects.\nMariculture has rapidly expanded over the last two decades due to new technology, improvements in formulated feeds, greater biological understanding of farmed species, increased water quality within closed farm systems, greater demand for seafood products, site expansion and government interest. As a consequence, mariculture has been subject to some controversy regarding its social and environmental impacts. Commonly identified environmental impacts from marine farms are:\nAs with most farming practices, the degree of environmental impact depends on the size of the farm, the cultured species, stock density, type of feed, hydrography of the site, and husbandry methods. The adjacent diagram connects these causes and effects.\nWastes from cage cultures.\nMariculture of finfish can require a significant amount of fishmeal or other high protein food sources. Originally, a lot of fishmeal went to waste due to inefficient feeding regimes and poor digestibility of formulated feeds which resulted in poor feed conversion ratios.\nIn cage culture, several different methods are used for feeding farmed fish \u2013 from simple hand feeding to sophisticated computer-controlled systems with automated food dispensers coupled with \"in situ\" uptake sensors that detect consumption rates. In coastal fish farms, overfeeding primarily leads to increased disposition of detritus on the seafloor (potentially smothering seafloor dwelling invertebrates and altering the physical environment), while in hatcheries and land-based farms, excess food goes to waste and can potentially impact the surrounding catchment and local coastal environment. This impact is usually highly local, and depends significantly on the settling velocity of waste feed and the current velocity (which varies both spatially and temporally) and depth.\nFarm escapees and invasives.\nThe impact of escapees from aquaculture operations depends on whether or not there are wild conspecifics or close relatives in the receiving environment, and whether or not the escapee is reproductively capable. Several different mitigation/prevention strategies are currently employed, from the development of infertile triploids to land-based farms which are completely isolated from any marine environment. Escapees can adversely impact local ecosystems through hybridization and loss of genetic diversity in native stocks, increase negative interactions within an ecosystem (such as predation and competition), disease transmission and habitat changes (from trophic cascades and ecosystem shifts to varying sediment regimes and thus turbidity).\nThe accidental introduction of invasive species is also of concern. Aquaculture is one of the main vectors for invasives following accidental releases of farmed stocks into the wild. One example is the Siberian sturgeon (\"Acipenser baerii\") which accidentally escaped from a fish farm into the Gironde Estuary (Southwest France) following a severe storm in December 1999 (5,000 individual fish escaped into the estuary which had never hosted this species before). Molluscan farming is another example whereby species can be introduced to new environments by \u2018hitchhiking\u2019 on farmed molluscs. Also, farmed molluscs themselves can become dominate predators and/or competitors, as well as potentially spread pathogens and parasites.\nGenetic pollution, disease, and parasite transfer.\nOne of the primary concerns with mariculture is the potential for disease and parasite transfer. Farmed stocks are often selectively bred to increase disease and parasite resistance, as well as improving growth rates and quality of products. As a consequence, the genetic diversity within reared stocks decreases with every generation \u2013 meaning they can potentially reduce the genetic diversity within wild populations if they escape into those wild populations. Such genetic pollution from escaped aquaculture stock can reduce the wild population's ability to adjust to the changing natural environment. Species grown by mariculture can also harbour diseases and parasites (e.g., lice) which can be introduced to wild populations upon their escape. An example of this is the parasitic sea lice on wild and farmed Atlantic salmon in Canada. Also, non-indigenous species which are farmed may have resistance to, or carry, particular diseases (which they picked up in their native habitats) which could be spread through wild populations if they escape into those wild populations. Such \u2018new\u2019 diseases would be devastating for those wild populations because they would have no immunity to them.\nHabitat modification.\nWith the exception of benthic habitats directly beneath marine farms, most mariculture causes minimal destruction to habitats. However, the destruction of mangrove forests from the farming of shrimps is of concern. Globally, shrimp farming activity is a small contributor to the destruction of mangrove forests; however, locally it can be devastating. Mangrove forests provide rich matrices which support a great deal of biodiversity \u2013 predominately juvenile fish and crustaceans. Furthermore, they act as buffering systems whereby they reduce coastal erosion, and improve water quality for in situ animals by processing material and \u2018filtering\u2019 sediments.\nOthers.\nIn addition, nitrogen and phosphorus compounds from food and waste may lead to blooms of phytoplankton, whose subsequent degradation can drastically reduce oxygen levels. If the algae are toxic, fish are killed and shellfish contaminated. These algal blooms are sometimes referred to as harmful algal blooms, which are caused by a high influx of nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, into the water due to run-off from land based human operations.\nOver the course of rearing various species, the sediment on bottom of the specific body of water becomes highly metallic with influx of copper, zinc and lead that is being introduced to the area. This influx of these heavy metals is likely due to the buildup of fish waste, uneaten fish feed, and the paint that comes off the boats and floats that are used in the mariculture operations.\nSustainability.\nMariculture development may be sustained by basic and applied research and development in major fields such as nutrition, genetics, system management, product handling, and socioeconomics. One approach uses closed systems that have no direct interaction with the local environment.\nHowever, investment and operational cost are currently significantly higher than with open cages, limiting closed systems to their current role as hatcheries. Many studies have estimated that seafood will run out by 2048. Farmed fish will also become crucial to feeding the growing human population that will potentially reach 9.8 billion by 2050. \nBenefits.\nSustainable mariculture promises economic and environmental benefits. Economies of scale imply that ranching can produce fish at lower cost than industrial fishing, leading to better human diets and the gradual elimination of unsustainable fisheries. Consistent supply and quality control has enabled integration in food market channels.\nList of species farmed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScientific literature.\nScientific literature on mariculture can be found in the following journals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19770", "revid": "50636221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19770", "title": "Memetics", "text": "Study of self-replicating units of culture\nMemetics is a theory of the evolution of culture based on Darwinian principles with the meme as the unit of culture. The term \"meme\" was coined by biologist Richard Dawkins in his 1976 book \"The Selfish Gene\", to illustrate the principle that he later called \"Universal Darwinism\". All evolutionary processes depend on information being copied, varied, and selected, a process also known as variation with selective retention. The conveyor of the information being copied is known as the replicator, with the gene functioning as the replicator in biological evolution. Dawkins proposed that the same process drives cultural evolution, and he called this second replicator the \"meme,\" citing examples such as musical tunes, catchphrases, fashions, and technologies. Like genes, memes are selfish replicators and have causal efficacy; in other words, their properties influence their chances of being copied and passed on. Some succeed because they are valuable or useful to their human hosts while others are more like viruses.\nJust as genes can work together to form co-adapted gene complexes, so form groups of memes acting together co-adapted meme complexes or memeplexes. Memeplexes include (among many other things) languages, traditions, scientific theories, financial institutions, and religions. Dawkins famously referred to religions as \"viruses of the mind\".\nAmong proponents of memetics are psychologist Susan Blackmore, author of \"The Meme Machine\", who argues that when our ancestors began imitating behaviours, they let loose a second replicator and co-evolved to become the \"meme machines\" that copy, vary, and select memes in culture. Philosopher Daniel Dennett develops memetics extensively, notably in his books \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", and \"From Bacteria to Bach and Back\". He describes the units of memes as \"the smallest elements that replicate themselves with reliability and fecundity,\" and claims that \"Human consciousness is itself a huge complex of memes.\" In \"The Beginning of Infinity\", physicist David Deutsch contrasts static societies that depend on anti-rational memes suppressing innovation and creativity, with dynamic societies based on rational memes that encourage enlightenment values, scientific curiosity, and progress.\nCriticisms of memetics include claims that memes do not exist, that the analogy with genes is false, that the units cannot be specified, that culture does not evolve through imitation, and that the sources of variation are intelligently designed rather than random. Critics of memetics include biologist Stephen Jay Gould who calls memetics a \"meaningless metaphor\". Philosopher Dan Sperber argues against memetics as a viable approach to cultural evolution because cultural items are not directly copied or imitated but are reproduced. Anthropologist Robert Boyd and biologist Peter Richerson work within the alternative, and more mainstream, field of cultural evolution theory and gene-culture coevolution. Dual inheritance theory has much in common with memetics but rejects the idea that memes are replicators. From this perspective, memetics is seen as just one of several approaches to cultural evolution and one that is generally considered less useful than the alternatives of gene-culture coevolution or dual inheritance theory. The main difference is that dual inheritance theory ultimately depends on biological advantage to genes, whereas memetics treats memes as a second replicator in its own right. Memetics also extends to the analysis of Internet culture and Internet memes.\nHistory.\nIn his book \"The Selfish Gene\" (1976), the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins used the term \"meme\" to describe a unit of human cultural transmission analogous to the gene, arguing that replication also happens in culture, albeit in a different sense. While cultural evolution itself is a much older topic, with a history that dates back at least as far as Darwin's era, Dawkins (1976) proposed that the meme is a unit of culture residing in the brain and is the mutating replicator in human cultural evolution. After Dawkins, many discussed this unit of culture as evolutionary \"information\" which replicates with rules analogous to Darwinian selection. A replicator is a pattern that can influence its surroundings \u2013 that is, it has causal agency \u2013 and can propagate. This proposal resulted in debate among anthropologists, sociologists, biologists, and scientists of other disciplines. Dawkins did not provide a comprehensive explanation of how replication of units of information in the brain controls human behaviour and culture, as the main focus of the book was on gene expression. Dawkins apparently did not intend to present a comprehensive theory of \"memetics\" in \"The Selfish Gene\", but rather coined the term \"meme\" in a speculative spirit. Accordingly, different researchers came to define the term \"unit of information\" in different ways.\nThe evolutionary model of cultural information transfer is based on the concept that memes\u2014units of information\u2014have an independent existence, are self-replicating, and are subject to selective evolution through environmental forces. Starting from a proposition put forward in the writings of Dawkins, this model has formed the basis of a new area of study, one that looks at the self-replicating units of culture. It has been proposed that just as memes are analogous to genes, memetics is analogous to genetics.\nThe modern memetics movement dates from the mid-1980s. A January 1983 \"Metamagical Themas\" column by Douglas Hofstadter, in \"Scientific American\", was influential \u2013 as was his 1985 book of the same name. \"Memeticist\" was coined as analogous to \"geneticist\" \u2013 originally in \"The Selfish Gene.\" Later Arel Lucas suggested that the discipline that studies memes and their connections to human and other carriers of them be known as \"memetics\" by analogy with \"genetics\". Dawkins' \"The Selfish Gene\" has been a factor in attracting the attention of people of disparate intellectual backgrounds. Another stimulus was the publication in 1991 of \"Consciousness Explained\" by Tufts University philosopher Daniel Dennett, which incorporated the meme concept into a theory of the mind. In his 1991 essay \"Viruses of the Mind\", Richard Dawkins used memetics to explain the phenomenon of religious belief and the various characteristics of organised religions. By then, memetics had also become a theme appearing in fiction (e.g. Neal Stephenson's \"Snow Crash\").\nThe idea of \"language as a virus\" had already been introduced by William S. Burroughs as early as 1962 in his novel \"The Ticket That Exploded\", and continued in \"The Electronic Revolution\", published in 1970 in \"\".\nThe foundation of memetics in its full modern incarnation was launched by Douglas Rushkoff's \"Media Virus: Hidden Agendas in Popular Culture\" in 1995, and was accelerated with the publication in 1996 of two more books by authors outside the academic mainstream: \"Virus of the Mind: The New Science of the Meme\" by former Microsoft executive turned motivational speaker and professional poker-player Richard Brodie, and \"Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads Through Society\" by Aaron Lynch, a mathematician and philosopher who worked for many years as an engineer at Fermilab. Lynch claimed to have conceived his theory totally independently of any contact with academics in the cultural evolutionary sphere, and apparently was not aware of \"The Selfish Gene\" until his book was very close to publication.\nAround the same time as the publication of the books by Lynch and Brodie the e-journal \"Journal of Memetics \u2013 Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission\" (published electronically from 1997 to 2005) first appeared. It was first hosted by the Centre for Policy Modelling at Manchester Metropolitan University. The e-journal soon became the central point for publication and debate within the nascent memeticist community. (There had been a short-lived paper-based memetics publication starting in 1990, the \"Journal of Ideas\" edited by Elan Moritz.) In 1999, Susan Blackmore, a psychologist at the University of the West of England, published \"The Meme Machine\", which more fully worked out the ideas of Dennett, Lynch, and Brodie and attempted to compare and contrast them with various approaches from the cultural evolutionary mainstream, as well as providing novel (and controversial) memetics-based theories for the evolution of language and the human sense of individual selfhood.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"meme\" derives from the Ancient Greek \u03bc\u03b9\u03bc\u03b7\u03c4\u03ae\u03c2 (\"mim\u0113t\u1e17s\"), meaning \"imitator, pretender\". The similar term \"mneme\" was used in 1904, by the German evolutionary biologist Richard Semon, best known for his development of the engram theory of memory, in his work \"Die mnemischen Empfindungen in ihren Beziehungen zu den Originalempfindungen\", translated into English in 1921 as \"The Mneme\". Until Daniel Schacter published \"Forgotten Ideas, Neglected Pioneers: Richard Semon and the Story of Memory\" in 2000, Semon's work had little influence, though it was quoted extensively in Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger\u2019s 1956 Tarner Lecture \u201cMind and Matter\u201d. Richard Dawkins (1976) apparently coined the word \"meme\" independently of Semon, writing this:\n\"'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the French word m\u00eame.\"David Hull (2001) pointed out Dawkins's oversight of Semon's work. Hull suggests this early work as an alternative origin to memetics by which Dawkins's memetic theory and classicist connection to the concept can be negotiated.\"Why not date the beginnings of memetics (or mnemetics) as 1904 or at the very least 1914? If [Semon's] two publications are taken as the beginnings of memetics, then the development of memetics [...] has been around for almost a hundred years without much in the way of conceptual or empirical advance!\"Despite this, Semon's work remains mostly understood as distinct to memetic origins even with the overt similarities accounted for by Hull.\nInternalists and externalists.\nThe memetics movement split almost immediately into two. The first group were those who wanted to stick to Dawkins' definition of a meme as \"a unit of cultural transmission\". Gibron Burchett, a memeticist responsible for helping to research and co-coin the term memetic engineering, along with Leveious Rolando and Larry Lottman, has stated that a meme can be defined, more precisely, as \"a unit of cultural information that can be copied, located in the brain\". This thinking is more in line with Dawkins' second definition of the meme in his book \"The Extended Phenotype\". The second group wants to redefine memes as observable cultural artifacts and behaviors. However, in contrast to those two positions, the article \"Consciousness in meme machines\" by Susan Blackmore rejects neither movement. Andrej Drapal tried to bridge the gap with his differentiation of memes as quantum entities existing per se in quantum superposition and collapsing when detected by brains from cultural artifacts. Memes are to artifacts as genotypes are to phenotypes.\nThese two schools became known as the \"internalists\" and the \"externalists.\" Prominent internalists included both Lynch and Brodie; the most vocal externalists included Derek Gatherer, a geneticist from Liverpool John Moores University, and William Benzon, a writer on cultural evolution and music. The main rationale for externalism was that internal brain entities are not observable, and memetics cannot advance as a science, especially a quantitative science, unless it moves its emphasis onto the directly quantifiable aspects of culture. Internalists countered with various arguments: that brain states will eventually be directly observable with advanced technology, that most cultural anthropologists agree that culture is about beliefs and not artifacts, or that artifacts cannot be replicators in the same sense as mental entities (or DNA) are replicators. The debate became so heated that a 1998 Symposium on Memetics, organised as part of the 15th International Conference on Cybernetics, passed a motion calling for an end to definitional debates. McNamara demonstrated in 2011 that functional connectivity profiling using neuroimaging tools enables the observation of the processing of internal memes, \"i-memes\", in response to external \"e-memes\".\nThis was developed further in a paper \"Memetics and Neural Models of Conspiracy Theories\" by Duch, where a model of memes as a quasi-stable neural associative memory attractor network is proposed, and a formation of Memeplex leading to conspiracy theories illustrated with the simulation of a self-organizing network.\nAn advanced statement of the internalist school came in 2002 with the publication of \"The Electric Meme\", by Robert Aunger, an anthropologist from the University of Cambridge. Aunger also organised a conference in Cambridge in 1999, at which prominent sociologists and anthropologists were able to give their assessment of the progress made in memetics to that date. This resulted in the publication of \"Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science\", edited by Aunger and with a foreword by Dennett, in 2001.\nDecline.\nIn 2005, the \"Journal of Memetics\" ceased publication and published a set of articles on the future of memetics. The website states that although \"there was to be a relaunch... after several years nothing has happened\". Susan Blackmore left the University of the West of England to become a freelance science-writer and now concentrates more on the field of consciousness and cognitive science. Derek Gatherer moved to work as a computer programmer in the pharmaceutical industry, although he still occasionally publishes on memetics-related matters. Richard Brodie is now climbing the world professional poker rankings. Aaron Lynch disowned the memetics community and the words \"meme\" and \"memetics\" (without disowning the ideas in his book), adopting the self-description \"thought contagionist\". He died in 2005.\nSusan Blackmore (2002) re-stated the definition of meme as: whatever is copied from one person to another person, whether habits, skills, songs, stories, or any other kind of information. Further she said that memes, like genes, are replicators in the sense as defined by Dawkins.\nThat is, they are information that is copied. Memes are copied by imitation, teaching and other methods. The copies are not perfect: memes are copied with variation; moreover, they compete for space in our memories and for the chance to be copied again. Only some of the variants can survive. The combination of these three elements (copies; variation; competition for survival) forms precisely the condition for Darwinian evolution, and so memes (and hence human cultures) evolve. Large groups of memes that are copied and passed on together are called co-adapted meme complexes, or \"memeplexes\". In Blackmore's definition, the way that a meme replicates is through imitation. This requires brain capacity to generally imitate a model or selectively imitate the model. Since the process of social learning varies from one person to another, the imitation process cannot be said to be completely imitated. The sameness of an idea may be expressed with different memes supporting it. This is to say that the mutation rate in memetic evolution is extremely high, and mutations are even possible within each and every iteration of the imitation process. It becomes very interesting when we see that a social system composed of a complex network of microinteractions exists, but at the macro level an order emerges to create culture.\nMany researchers of cultural evolution regard memetic theory of this time a failed paradigm superseded by dual inheritance theory. Others instead suggest it is not superseded but rather holds a small but distinct intellectual space in cultural evolutionary theory.\n\"Internet Memetics\".\nA new framework of \"Internet Memetics\" initially borrowed Blackmore's conceptual developments but is effectively a data-driven approach, focusing on digital artifacts. This was led primarily by conceptual developments Colin Lankshear and Michele Knobel (2006) and Limor Shifman and Mike Thelwall (2009). Shifman, in particular, followed Susan Blackmore in rejecting the internalist and externalist debate, however did not offer a clear connection to prior evolutionary frameworks. Later in 2014, she rejected the historical relevance of \"information\" to memetics. Instead of memes being \"units of cultural information\", she argued information is exclusively delegated to be \"the ways in which addressers position themselves in relation to [a meme instance's] text, its linguistic codes, the addressees, and other potential speakers.\" This is what she called \"stance,\" which is analytically distinguished from the \"content\" and \"form\" of her meme. As such, Shifman's developments can be seen as critical to Dawkins's meme, but also as a somewhat distinct conceptualization of the meme as a communicative system dependent on the internet and social media platforms. By introducing memetics as an internet study there has been a rise in empirical research. That is, memetics in this conceptualization has been notably testable by the application of social science methodologies. It has been popular enough that following Lankshear and Knobel's (2019) review of empirical trends, they warn those interested in memetics that theoretical development should not be ignored, concluding that, \"[R]ight now would be a good time for anyone seriously interested in memes to revisit Dawkins\u2019 work in light of how internet memes have evolved over the past three decades and reflect on what most merits careful and conscientious research attention.\"As Lankshear and Knobel show, the Internet Memetic reconceptualization is limited in addressing long-standing memetic theory concerns. It is not clear that existing Internet Memetic theory's departure from conceptual dichotomies between internalist and externalist debate are compatible with most earlier concerns of memetics. Internet Memetics might be understood as a study without an agreed upon theory, as present research tends to focus on empirical developments answering theories of other areas of cultural research. It exists more as a set of distributed studies than a methodology, theory, field, or discipline, with a few exceptions such as Shifman and those closely following her motivating framework.\nCriticisms.\nCritics contend that some of the proponents' assertions are \"untested, unsupported or incorrect.\" Most of the history of memetic criticism has been directed at Dawkins' earlier theory of memetics framed in \"The Selfish Gene.\" There have been some serious criticisms of memetics. Namely, there are a few key points on which most criticisms focus: mentalism, cultural determinism, Darwinian reduction, a lack of academic novelty, and a lack of empirical evidence of memetic mechanisms.\nLuis Benitez-Bribiesca points to the lack of memetic mechanisms. He refers to the lack of a \"code script\" for memes which would suggest a genuine analogy to DNA in genes. He also suggests the meme mutation mechanism is too unstable which would render the evolutionary process chaotic. That is to say that the \"unit of information\" which traverses across minds is perhaps too flexible in meaning to be a realistic unit. As such, he calls memetics \"a pseudoscientific dogma\" and \"a dangerous idea that poses a threat to the serious study of consciousness and cultural evolution\" among other things.\nAnother criticism points to memetic triviality. That is, some have argued memetics is derivative of more rich areas of study. One of these cases comes from Peircian semiotics, (e.g., Deacon, Kull) stating that the concept of meme is a less developed Sign. Meme is thus described in memetics as a sign without its triadic nature. Charles Sanders Peirce's semiotic theory involves a triadic structure: a sign (a reference to an object), an object (the thing being referred to), and an interpretant (the interpreting actor of a sign). For Deacon and Kull, the meme is a degenerate sign, which includes only its ability of being copied. Accordingly, in the broadest sense, the objects of copying are memes, whereas the objects of translation and interpretation are signs.\nOthers have pointed to the fact that memetics reduces genuine social and communicative activity to genetic arguments, and this cannot adequately describe cultural interactions between people. For example, Henry Jenkins, Joshua Green, and Sam Ford, in their book \"Spreadable Media\" (2013), criticize Dawkins' idea of the meme, writing that \"while the idea of the meme is a compelling one, it may not adequately account for how content circulates through participatory culture.\" The three authors also criticize other interpretations of memetics, especially those which describe memes as \"self-replicating\", because they ignore the fact that \"culture is a human product and replicates through human agency.\" In doing so, they align more closely with Shifman's notion of Internet Memetics and her addition of the human agency of \"stance\" to describe participatory structure.\nMary Midgley criticizes memetics for at least two reasons: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"One, culture is not best understood by examining its smallest parts, as culture is pattern-like, comparable to an ocean current. Many more factors, historical and others, should be taken into account than only whatever particle culture is built from. Two, if memes are not thoughts (and thus not cognitive phenomena), as Daniel C. Dennett insists in \"Darwin's Dangerous Idea\", then their ontological status is open to question, and memeticists (who are also reductionists) may be challenged whether memes even exist. Questions can extend to whether the idea of \"meme\" is itself a meme or is a true concept. Fundamentally, memetics is an attempt to produce knowledge through organic metaphors, which as such is a questionable research approach, as the application of metaphors has the effect of hiding that which does not fit within the realm of the metaphor. Rather than study actual reality, without preconceptions, memetics, as so many of the socio-biological explanations of society, believe that saying that the apple is like an orange is a valid analysis of the apple.\"\nLike other critics, Maria Kronfeldner has criticized memetics for being based on an allegedly inaccurate analogy with the gene; alternately, she claims it is \"heuristically trivial\", being a mere redescription of what is already known without offering any useful novelty.\nApplications.\nResearch methodologies that apply memetics go by many names: Viral marketing, cultural evolution, the history of ideas, social analytics, and more. Many of these applications do not make reference to the literature on memes directly but are built upon the evolutionary lens of idea propagation that treats semantic units of culture as self-replicating and mutating patterns of information that are assumed to be relevant for scientific study. For example, the field of public relations is filled with attempts to introduce new ideas and alter social discourse. One means of doing this is to design a meme and deploy it through various media channels. One historic example of applied memetics is the PR campaign conducted in 1991 as part of the build-up to the first Gulf War in the United States.\nThe application of memetics to a difficult complex social system problem, environmental sustainability, has recently been attempted at thwink.org Using meme types and memetic infection in several stock and flow simulation models, Jack Harich has demonstrated several interesting phenomena that are best, and perhaps only, explained by memes. One model, The Dueling Loops of the Political Powerplace, argues that the fundamental reason corruption is the norm in politics is due to an inherent structural advantage of one feedback loop pitted against another. Another model, The Memetic Evolution of Solutions to Difficult Problems, uses memes, the evolutionary algorithm, and the scientific method to show how complex solutions evolve over time and how that process can be improved. The insights gained from these models are being used to engineer memetic solution elements to the sustainability problem.\nAnother application of memetics in the sustainability space is the crowdfunded Climate Meme Project conducted by Joe Brewer and Balazs Laszlo Karafiath in the spring of 2013. This study was based on a collection of 1000 unique text-based expressions gathered from Twitter, Facebook, and structured interviews with climate activists. The major finding was that the global warming meme is not effective at spreading because it causes emotional duress in the minds of people who learn about it. Five central tensions were revealed in the discourse about [climate change], each of which represents a resonance point through which dialogue can be engaged. The tensions were Harmony/Disharmony (whether or not humans are part of the natural world), Survival/Extinction (envisioning the future as either apocalyptic collapse of civilization or total extinction of the human race), Cooperation/Conflict (regarding whether or not humanity can come together to solve global problems), Momentum/Hesitation (about whether or not we are making progress at the collective scale to address climate change), and Elitism/Heretic (a general sentiment that each side of the debate considers the experts of its opposition to be untrustworthy).\nBen Cullen, in his book \"Contagious Ideas\", brought the idea of the meme into the discipline of archaeology. He coined the term \"Cultural Virus Theory\", and used it to try to anchor archaeological theory in a neo-Darwinian paradigm. Archaeological memetics could assist the application of the meme concept to material culture in particular.\nFrancis Heylighen of the Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies has postulated what he calls \"memetic selection criteria\". These criteria opened the way to a specialized field of \"applied memetics\" to find out if these selection criteria could stand the test of quantitative analyses. In 2003 Klaas Chielens carried out these tests in a Masters thesis project on the testability of the selection criteria.\nIn \"Selfish Sounds and Linguistic Evolution\", Austrian linguist Nikolaus Ritt has attempted to operationalise memetic concepts and use them for the explanation of long term sound changes and change conspiracies in early English. It is argued that a generalised Darwinian framework for handling cultural change can provide explanations where established, speaker centred approaches fail to do so. The book makes comparatively concrete suggestions about the possible material structure of memes, and provides two empirically rich case studies.\nAustralian academic S.J. Whitty has argued that project management is a memeplex with the language and stories of its practitioners at its core. This radical approach sees a project and its management as an illusion; a human construct about a collection of feelings, expectations, and sensations, which are created, fashioned, and labeled by the human brain. Whitty's approach requires project managers to consider that the reasons for using project management are not consciously driven to maximize profit, and are encouraged to consider project management as naturally occurring, self-serving, evolving process which shapes organizations for its own purpose.\nSwedish political scientist Mikael Sandberg argues against \"Lamarckian\" interpretations of institutional and technological evolution and studies creative innovation of information technologies in governmental and private organizations in Sweden in the 1990s from a memetic perspective. Comparing the effects of active (\"Lamarckian\") IT strategy versus user\u2013producer interactivity (Darwinian co-evolution), evidence from Swedish organizations shows that co-evolutionary interactivity is almost four times as strong a factor behind IT creativity as the \"Lamarckian\" IT strategy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "19773", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19773", "title": "March 25", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 25 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nUntil 1752 it was the official date of the beginning of the year in England and its dominions (in the Julian calendar).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19774", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19774", "title": "Microsoft Windows/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "19777", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19777", "title": "Michigan/Cities", "text": ""}
{"id": "19780", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19780", "title": "List of islands of Michigan", "text": "The following is a list of islands of Michigan. Michigan has the second longest coastline of any state after Alaska. Being bordered by four of the five Great Lakes\u2014Erie, Huron, Michigan, and Superior\u2014Michigan also has 64,980 inland lakes and ponds, as well as innumerable rivers, that may contain their own islands included in this list. The majority of the islands are within the Great Lakes. Other islands can also be found within other waterways of the Great Lake system, including Lake St. Clair, St. Clair River, Detroit River, and St. Marys River.\nThe largest of all the islands is Isle Royale in Lake Superior, which, in addition to its waters and other surrounding islands, is organized as Isle Royale National Park. Isle Royale itself is . The most populated island is Grosse Ile with approximately 10,000 residents, located in the Detroit River about south of Detroit. The majority of Michigan's islands are uninhabited and very small. Some of these otherwise unusable islands have been used for the large number of Michigan's lighthouses to aid in shipping throughout the Great Lakes, while others have been set aside as nature reserves. Many islands in Michigan have the same name, even some that are in the same municipality and body of water, such as Gull, Long, or Round islands.\nLake Erie.\nOnly Monroe County and a very small portion of Wayne County have boundaries within the westernmost portion of Lake Erie. The lake has a mean surface elevation of . The islands in the southern portion of the county are part of the North Maumee Bay Archeological District of the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge, while northern islands are part of Pointe Mouillee State Game Area at the mouth of the Huron River and Detroit River. Turtle Island is the only island in the state of Michigan that is shared by another state, as it is divided with the state of Ohio.\nLake Huron.\nLake Huron is the second largest of the Great Lakes (after Lake Superior) with a surface area of . Michigan is the only state to border Lake Huron, while the portion of the lake on the other side of the international border belongs to the province of Ontario. The vast majority of Michigan's islands in Lake Huron are centered around Drummond Island in the northernmost portion of the state's lake territory. Another large group of islands is the Les Cheneaux Islands archipelago, which itself contains dozens of small islands. Many of the lake's islands are very small and uninhabited.\nAs the most popular tourist destination in the state, Mackinac Island is the most well known of Lake Huron's islands. Drummond Island is the state's second-largest island (after Isle Royale) and is the most populous of Michigan's islands in Lake Huron, with a population of 1,058 at the 2010 census. While Mackinac Island had a population of 492, there are thousands more seasonal workers and tourists during the summer months.\nLake Michigan.\nMichigan only has islands in Lake Michigan in the northern portion of the lake. There are no islands in the southern half of Lake Michigan. The largest and most populated of Michigan's islands in Lake Michigan is Beaver Island at and 551 residents. Some of the smaller islands surrounding Beaver Island are part of the larger Michigan Islands National Wildlife Refuge.\nLake Superior.\n \nLake Superior is the largest of the Great Lakes, and the coastline is sparsely populated. At , Isle Royale is the largest Michigan island and is the center of Isle Royale National Park, which itself contains over 450 islands. The following is a list of islands in Lake Superior that are \"not\" part of Isle Royale National Park. For those islands, see the list of islands in Isle Royale National Park.\nLake St. Clair.\nLake St. Clair connects Lake Huron and Lake Erie through the St. Clair River in the north and the Detroit River in the south. At , it is one of the largest non-Great Lakes in the United States, but it only contains a small number of islands near the mouth of the St. Clair River, where all of the following islands are located. The largest of these islands is Harsens Island, and all the islands are in Clay Township in St. Clair County.\nDetroit River.\nThe Detroit River runs for and connects Lake St. Clair to Lake Erie. For its entire length, it carries the international border between the United States and Canada. Some islands belong to Ontario in Canada and are not included in the list below. All islands on the American side belong to Wayne County. Portions of the southern portion of the river serve as wildlife refuges as part of the Detroit River International Wildlife Refuge. The largest and most populous island is Grosse Ile. Most of the islands are around and closely connected to Grosse Ile.\nSt. Marys River.\nThe St. Marys River connects Lake Superior and Lake Huron at the easternmost point of the Upper Peninsula. It carries the international border throughout its length, and some of the islands belong to neighboring Ontario. The largest of Michigan's islands in the river are Sugar Island and Neebish Island. Wider portions of the river are designated as Lake George, Lake Nicolet, and the Munuscong Lake. The whole length of the Michigan portion of the river is part of Chippewa County.\nInland islands.\nMichigan has numerous inland lakes and rivers that also contain their own islands. The following also lists the body of water in which these islands are located. Five islands below (* and highlighted in green) are actually islands within an island; they are contained within inland lakes in Isle Royale.\nGrand Lake.\nGrand Lake is a large lake in Presque Isle County. While it is not the largest inland lake in Michigan, it does contain the most inland islands that are officially named. At its shortest distance, it is located less than from Lake Huron, but the two are not connected. Grand Lake contains 14 islands, of which Grand Island is by far the largest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19782", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19782", "title": "Michigan/Cities A", "text": ""}
{"id": "19783", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19783", "title": "Michigan/Cities B", "text": ""}
{"id": "19784", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19784", "title": "Michigan/Cities C", "text": ""}
{"id": "19785", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19785", "title": "Michigan/Cities D", "text": ""}
{"id": "19786", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19786", "title": "Michigan/Cities E", "text": ""}
{"id": "19787", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19787", "title": "Michigan/Cities F", "text": ""}
{"id": "19788", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19788", "title": "Michigan/Cities G", "text": ""}
{"id": "19789", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19789", "title": "Michigan/Cities H", "text": ""}
{"id": "19790", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19790", "title": "Michigan/Cities I", "text": ""}
{"id": "19791", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19791", "title": "Michigan/Cities J", "text": ""}
{"id": "19792", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19792", "title": "Michigan/Cities K", "text": ""}
{"id": "19793", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19793", "title": "Michigan/Cities L", "text": ""}
{"id": "19794", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19794", "title": "Michigan/Cities M", "text": ""}
{"id": "19795", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19795", "title": "Michigan/Cities N", "text": ""}
{"id": "19796", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19796", "title": "Michigan/Cities O", "text": ""}
{"id": "19797", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19797", "title": "Michigan/Cities P", "text": ""}
{"id": "19798", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19798", "title": "Michigan/Cities Q", "text": ""}
{"id": "19799", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19799", "title": "Michigan/Cities R", "text": ""}
{"id": "19800", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19800", "title": "Michigan/Cities S", "text": ""}
{"id": "19801", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19801", "title": "Michigan/Cities T", "text": ""}
{"id": "19802", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19802", "title": "Michigan/Cities U", "text": ""}
{"id": "19803", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19803", "title": "Michigan/Cities V", "text": ""}
{"id": "19804", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19804", "title": "Michigan/Cities W", "text": ""}
{"id": "19806", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19806", "title": "Michigan/Cities Y", "text": ""}
{"id": "19807", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19807", "title": "Michigan/Cities Z", "text": ""}
{"id": "19808", "revid": "51464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19808", "title": "List of governors of Michigan", "text": "The governor of Michigan, is the head of government of the U.S. state of Michigan as well as the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws; the power to either approve or veto appropriation bills passed by the Michigan Legislature; the power to convene the legislature; and the power to grant pardons, except in cases of impeachment. The governor is also empowered to reorganize the executive branch of the state government.\nIn the 17th and 18th century, Michigan was part of French and then British holdings, and administered by their colonial governors. After becoming part of the United States, areas of what is today Michigan were part of the Northwest Territory, Indiana Territory and Illinois Territory, and administered by territorial governors. In 1805, the Michigan Territory was created, and five men served as territorial governors, until Michigan was granted statehood in 1837. Forty-seven individuals have held the position of state governor. The first female governor, Jennifer Granholm, served from 2003 to 2011.\nAfter Michigan gained statehood, governors held the office for a 2-year term, until the 1963 Michigan Constitution changed the term to 4 years. The number of times an individual could hold the office was unlimited until a 1992 constitutional amendment imposed a lifetime term limit of two 4-year governorships. The longest-serving governor in Michigan's history was William Milliken, who was promoted from lieutenant governor after Governor George W. Romney resigned to become Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, then was elected to three further successive terms. The only governors to serve non-consecutive terms were John S. Barry and Frank Fitzgerald.\nList of governors.\nTerritory of Michigan.\nMichigan Territory was organized on June 30, 1805, from the north half of Indiana Territory. It had three governors appointed by the president of the United States, including the longest-serving governor of any territory, Lewis Cass, who served for 18 years.\nState of Michigan.\nMichigan was admitted to the Union on January 26, 1837. The original 1835 Constitution of Michigan provided for the election of a governor and a lieutenant governor every 2 years. The current constitution of 1963 increased this term to four years. There was no term limit on governors until a 1993 constitutional amendment limited governors to two terms.\nShould the office of governor become vacant, the lieutenant governor becomes governor, followed in order of succession by the secretary of state and the attorney general. Prior to the current constitution, the duties of the office would devolve upon the lieutenant governor, without that person actually becoming governor. Beginning in 1850, the term begins at noon on January 1 of the year following the election; before, it had no set start date, and terms would last until when their successor was inaugurated, which would be at least the first Monday in January following their election. Prior to the modern 1963 constitution, the governor and lieutenant governor were elected through separate votes, allowing them to be from different political parties. In 1963, this was changed, so that votes are cast jointly for a governor and lieutenant governor of the same political party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19809", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19809", "title": "Moses Amyraut", "text": "French Protestant theologian and metaphysician (1596\u20131664)\nMo\u00efse Amyraut (Latin: Moyses Amyraldus; September 1596 \u2013 8 January 1664), in English texts often Moses Amyraut, was a French Huguenot, Reformed theologian and metaphysician. He was the architect of Amyraldism, a Calvinist doctrine that made modifications to Calvinist theology regarding the nature of Christ's atonement and covenant theology.\nLife.\nAmyraut was born in Bourgueil, in the valley of the Changeon in the province of Anjou. His father was a lawyer, and, preparing Moses for the same profession, sent him, on the completion of his study of the humanities at Orl\u00e9ans, to the university of Poitiers.\nAt the university he took the degree of licentiate (BA) of laws. On his way home from the university he passed through Saumur, and, having visited the pastor of the Protestant church there, was introduced by him to Philippe de Mornay, governor of the city. Struck with young Amyraut's ability and culture, they both urged him to change from law to theology. His father advised him to revise his philological and philosophical studies, and read over Calvin's \"Institutions,\" before finally determining a course. He did so, and decided on theology.\nHe moved to the Academy of Saumur and studied under John Cameron, who ultimately regarded him as his greatest scholar. He had a brilliant course, and was in due time licensed as a minister of the French Protestant Church. The contemporary civil wars and excitements hindered his advancement. His first church was in Saint-Aignan, in the province of Maine. There he remained two years. Jean Daill\u00e9, who moved to Paris, advised the church at Saumur to secure Amyraut as his successor, praising him \"as above himself.\" The university of Saumur at the same time had fixed its eyes on him as professor of theology. The great churches of Paris and Rouen also contended for him, and to win him sent their deputies to the provincial synod of Anjou.\nAmyraut had left the choice to the synod. He was appointed to Saumur in 1633, and to the professor's chair along with the pastorate. On the occasion of his inauguration he maintained for thesis \"De Sacerdotio Christi\". His co-professors were Louis Cappel and Josu\u00e9 de la Place, who also were Cameron's pupils and lifelong friends, who collaborated in the \"Theses Salmurienses\", a collection of theses propounded by candidates in theology prefaced by the inaugural addresses of the three professors. Amyraut soon gave to French Protestantism a new direction.\nIn 1631 he published his \"Trait\u00e9 des religions\"; and from this year onward he was a foremost man in the church. Chosen to represent the provincial synod of Anjou, Touraine and Maine at the 1631 National Synod of Charenton, he was appointed as orator to present to the king \"The Copy of their Complaints and Grievances for the Infractions and Violations of the Edict of Nantes\".\nPrevious deputies had addressed the king on their bent knees, whereas the representatives of the Catholics had been permitted to stand. Amyraut consented to be orator only if the assembly authorized him to stand. There was intense resistance. Cardinal Richelieu himself, preceded by lesser dignitaries, condescended to visit Amyraut privately, to persuade him to kneel; but Amyraut held resolutely to his point and carried it. His \"oration\" on this occasion, which was immediately published in the French \"Mercure\", remains a striking landmark in the history of French Protestantism. During his absence on this matter the assembly debated \"whether the Lutherans who desired it, might be admitted into communion with the Reformed Churches of France at the Lord's Table.\" It was decided in the affirmative previous to his return; but he approved with astonishing eloquence, and thereafter was ever in the front rank in maintaining intercommunion between all churches holding the main doctrines of the Reformation.\nPierre Bayle recounts the title-pages of no fewer than thirty-two books of which Amyraut was the author. These show that he took part in all the great controversies on predestination and Arminianism which then so agitated and harassed all Europe. Substantially he held fast the Calvinism of his preceptor Cameron; but, like Richard Baxter in England, by his breadth and charity he exposed himself to all manner of misconstruction. In 1634 he published his \"Trait\u00e9 de la predestination\", in which he tried to mitigate the harsh features of predestination by his \"Universalismus hypotheticus\". God, he taught, predestines all men to happiness on condition of their having faith. This gave rise to a charge of heresy, of which he was acquitted at the national synod held at Alen\u00e7on in 1637, and presided over by Benjamin Basnage (1580\u20131652). The charge was brought up again at the national synod of Charenton in 1644, when he was again acquitted. A third attack at the synod of Loudun in 1659 met with no better success. The university of Saumur became the university of French Protestantism.\nAmyraut had as many as a hundred students in attendance upon his lectures. One of these was William Penn, who would later go on to found the Province of Pennsylvania in America based in part on Amyraut's notions of religious freedom http://. Another historic part filled by Amyraut was in the negotiations originated by Pierre le Gouz de la Berch\u00e8re (1600\u20131653), first president of the \"parlement\" of Grenoble, when exiled to Saumur, for a reconciliation and reunion of the Catholics of France with the French Protestants. Very large were the concessions made by Richelieu in his personal interviews with Amyraut; but, as with the Worcester House negotiations in England between the Church of England and nonconformists, they inevitably fell through. On all sides the statesmanship and eloquence of Amyraut were conceded. His \"De l'elevation de la foy et de l'abaissement de la raison en la creance des mysteres de la religion\" (1641) gave him early a high place as a metaphysician. Exclusive of his controversial writings, he left behind him a very voluminous series of practical evangelical books, which have long remained the \"fireside\" favourites of the peasantry of French Protestantism. Amongst these are \"Estat des fideles apres la mort\"; \"Sur l'oraison dominicale\"; \"Du merite des oeuvres\"; \"Trait\u00e9 de la justification\"; and paraphrases of books of the Old and New Testament. His closing years were weakened by a severe fall he met with in 1657. He died on 18 January 1664 in Saumur.\nSeventeenth century opponents.\nThere were a number of theologians who defended Calvinistic orthodoxy against Amyraut and Saumur, including Friedrich Spanheim (1600\u20131649) and Francis Turretin (1623\u20131687). Ultimately, the Helvetic Consensus was drafted to counteract the theology of Saumur and Amyraldism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19811", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19811", "title": "Murray River", "text": "Longest river in Australia\nThe Murray River (in South Australia: River Murray; , or ) is a river in Southeastern Australia. It is Australia's longest river at extent. Its tributaries include five of the next six longest rivers of Australia (the Murrumbidgee, Darling, Lachlan, Warrego and Paroo Rivers). Together with that of the Murray, the catchments of these rivers form the Murray\u2013Darling basin, which covers about one-seventh the area of Australia. It is widely considered Australia's most important irrigated region.\nThe Murray rises in the Australian Alps, draining the western side of Australia's highest mountains, then meanders northwest across Australia's inland plains, forming the border between the states of New South Wales and Victoria as it flows into South Australia. From an east\u2013west direction it turns south at Morgan for its final , reaching the eastern edge of Lake Alexandrina, which fluctuates in salinity. The water then flows through several channels around Hindmarsh Island and Mundoo Island. There it is joined by lagoon water from The Coorong to the south-east before emptying into Encounter Bay (a bay of the Southern Ocean) through the Murray Mouth, east of Goolwa South. Despite discharging considerable volumes of water at times, particularly before the advent of large-scale river regulation, the waters at the Murray Mouth are almost invariably slow and shallow.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], the Murray River system received 58\u00a0per\u00a0cent of its natural flow; the figure varies considerably.\nThe border between Victoria and New South Wales (NSW) lies along the top of the southern or left bank of\nthe Murray River.\nGeography.\nThe Murray forms part of the long combined Murray\u2013Darling river system that drains most of the inland of Victoria, New South Wales and the southern part of Queensland. The Murray carries only a small fraction of the water of comparably sized rivers in other parts of the world, and with great annual variability of its flow. It has dried up completely during extreme droughts on three occasions since official record-keeping began. More often, a sandbar formed at the mouth and stopped the flow.\nThe Murray is the border between New South Wales and Victoria \u2013 specifically at the top of the left bank (i.e. the Victorian side of the river). In a 1980 judgement, the High Court of Australia ruled on the question as to which state had jurisdiction in the unlawful death of a man who was fishing by the river's edge on the Victorian side of the river. This boundary definition can be ambiguous, since the river changes its course over time, and some of the river banks have been modified.\nFor west of the line of longitude 141\u00b0E, the border is between Victoria and South Australia, in the middle of the river. The discrepancy was caused during the 1840s, when the border was originally surveyed, by an east\u2013west miscalculation of 3.72\u00a0kilometres (2.31\u00a0miles), and led to a long-running boundary dispute. West of this sector, the Murray is entirely within the state of South Australia.\nMajor settlements.\nMajor settlements along the course of the river, from its source to the Southern Ocean, and their populations from the 2016 Australian census are as follows.\nRiver life.\nThe Murray and its tributaries support a variety of river life adapted to its vagaries. This includes native fish such as the famous Murray cod, trout cod, golden perch, Macquarie perch, silver perch, eel-tailed catfish, Australian smelt and western carp gudgeon, as well as other aquatic species such as the Murray short-necked turtle, broad-clawed yabbies and the large-clawed \"Macrobrachium\" shrimp, in addition to aquatic species more widely distributed through Southeastern Australia such as common long-necked turtles, common yabbies, the small claw-less \"paratya\" shrimp, water rats and platypus. The Murray crayfish, an endangered species, was able to increase its numbers thanks to scientists. The Murray also supports fringeing corridors and forests of the river red gum.\nThe health of the Murray has declined significantly since European settlement, particularly through regulation of its flows. Extreme droughts between 2000 and 2007 put significant stress on river red gum forests, leading to mounting concern over their long-term survival. The Murray has also flooded on occasion. The most significant was the flood of 1956: lasting for up to six months, it inundated many towns on its lower reaches in South Australia.\nAncient history.\nLake Bungunnia.\nBetween 2.5 and 0.5 million years ago, the Murray terminated in a vast freshwater lake \u2013 Lake Bungunnia \u2013 formed by earth movements that blocked the river near Swan Reach. At its maximum extent, Lake Bungunnia covered , extending to near the Menindee Lakes in the north and to near Boundary Bend in the south. The draining of Lake Bungunnia occurred approximately 600,000 years ago.\nDeep clays deposited by the lake are evident in cliffs around Chowilla in South Australia. Considerably higher rainfall would have been required to keep such a lake full; the draining of Lake Bungunnia appears to have marked the end of a wet phase in the history of the Murray\u2013Darling Basin and the onset of widespread arid conditions similar to today. A species of \"Neoceratodus\" lungfish existed in Lake Bungunnia; today \"Neoceratodus\" lungfish are only found in several Queensland rivers.\nCadell Fault and formation of the Barmah red gum forests.\nThe noted Barmah River red gum forests owe their existence to the Cadell Fault. About 25,000 years ago, displacement occurred along this fault, raising its eastern edge, which runs north\u2013south, above the floodplain. This created a complex series of events. A section of the original Murray River channel immediately behind the fault was rendered abandoned (it exists today as an empty channel known as Green Gully). The Goulburn River was dammed by the southern end of the fault to create a natural lake.\nThe Murray River flowed to the north around the Cadell Fault, creating the channel of the Edward River which exists today and through which much of the Murray's waters still flow. Then the natural dam on the Goulburn River failed, the lake drained, and the Murray changed its course to the south and started to flow through the smaller Goulburn River channel, creating \"The Barmah Choke\" and \"The Narrows\" (where the river channel is unusually narrow), before entering into the proper Murray River channel again.\nThe primary result of the Cadell Fault \u2013 that the west-flowing water of the Murray River strikes the north\u2013south fault and diverts both north and south around the fault in the two main channels (Edward and ancestral Goulburn) in addition to a fan of small streams, and regularly floods a large amount of low-lying country in the area. These conditions are perfect for river red gums, which rapidly formed forests in the area. Thus the displacement of the Cadell Fault 25,000 BP led directly to the formation of the famous Barmah river red gum forests.\nThe Barmah Choke and The Narrows restrict the amount of water that can travel down this part of the Murray. In times of flood and high irrigation flows the majority of the water, in addition to flooding the red gum forests, actually travels through the Edward River channel. The Murray has not had enough flow power to naturally enlarge The Barmah Choke and The Narrows to increase the amount of water they can carry.\nThe Cadell Fault is quite noticeable as a continuous, low, earthen embankment as one drives into Barmah from the west, although to the untrained eye it may appear man-made.\nMurray mouth.\nThe Murray Mouth is the point at which the Murray River empties into the sea, and the interaction between its shallow, shifting and variable currents and the open sea can be complex and unpredictable. During the peak period of Murray River commerce (roughly 1855 to 1920), it presented a major impediment to the passage of goods and produce between Adelaide and the Murray settlements, and many vessels foundered or were wrecked there.\nSince the early 2000s, dredging machines have operated at the Murray Mouth for 24 hours a day, moving sand from the channel to maintain a minimal flow from the sea and into the Coorong's lagoon system. Without the dredging, the mouth would silt up and close, cutting the supply of fresh sea-water into the Coorong National Park, which would then warm up, stagnate and die.\nMythology.\nBeing one of the major river systems on one of the driest continents on Earth, the Murray has significant cultural relevance to Aboriginal Australians. According to the people of Lake Alexandrina, the Murray was created by the tracks of the Great Ancestor, Ngurunderi, as he pursued Pondi, the Murray Cod. The chase originated in the interior of New South Wales. Ngurunderi pursued the fish (who, like many totem animals in Aboriginal myths, is often portrayed as a man) on rafts (or \"lala\") made from red gums and continually launched spears at his target. But Pondi was a wily prey and carved a weaving path, carving out the river's various tributaries. Ngurunderi was forced to beach his rafts, and often create new ones as he changed from reach to reach of the river.\nAt Kobathatang, Ngurunderi finally got lucky and struck Pondi in the tail with a spear. However, the shock to the fish was so great it launched him forward in a straight line to a place called Peindjalang, near Tailem Bend. Eager to rectify his failure to catch his prey, the hunter and his two wives (sometimes the escaped sibling wives of Waku and Kanu) hurried on, and took positions high on the cliff on which Tailem Bend now stands. They sprung an ambush on Pondi only to fail again. Ngurunderi set off in pursuit again but lost his prey as Pondi dived into Lake Alexandrina. Ngurunderi and the women settled on the shore, only to suffer bad luck with fishing, being plagued by a water fiend known as Muldjewangk. They later moved to a more suitable spot at the site of present-day Ashville. The twin summits of Mount Misery are said to be the remnants of his rafts; they are known as \"Lalangengall\" or \"the two watercraft\".\nThis story of a hunter pursuing a Murray cod that carved out the Murray persists in numerous forms in various language groups that inhabit the enormous area spanned by the Murray system. The Wotojobaluk people of Victoria tell of Totyerguil from the area now known as Swan Hill, who ran out of spears while chasing Otchtout the cod.\nHistory.\nRoonka Flat, near Blanchetown, was a site of occupation since at least 7000BC.\nEuropean exploration.\nThe first Europeans to encounter the river were Hamilton Hume and William Hovell, who crossed the river where Albury now stands in 1824: Hume named it the \"Hume River\" after his father. In 1830, Captain Charles Sturt reached the river after travelling down its tributary the Murrumbidgee River and named it the \"Murray River\" in honour of the then British Secretary of State for War and the Colonies, Sir George Murray, not realising it was the same river that Hume and Hovell had encountered further upstream.\nSturt continued down the remaining length of the Murray to finally reach Lake Alexandrina and the river's mouth. The vicinity of the Murray Mouth was explored more thoroughly by Captain Collet Barker in 1831.\nThe first three settlers on the Murray River are known to have been James Collins Hawker (explorer and surveyor) along with Edward John Eyre (explorer and later Governor of Jamaica) plus E.B. Scott (onetime superintendent of Yatala Labour Prison). Hawker is known to have sold his share in the Bungaree Station, which he founded with his brothers, and relocated alongside the Murray at a site near Moorundie.\nIn 1852, Francis Cadell, in preparation for the launch of his steamer service, explored the river in a canvas boat, travelling downstream from Swan Hill.\nIn 1858, while acting as Minister of Land and Works for New South Wales, Irish nationalist and founder of Young Ireland, Charles Gavan Duffy, founded Carlyle Township on the Murray River, after his close friend, Scottish historian and essayist Thomas Carlyle. Included in the township were \"Jane Street\", named in honour of Carlyle's wife Jane Carlyle and \"Stuart-Mill Street\" in honour of political philosopher John Stuart Mill\nIn 1858, the Government Zoologist, William Blandowski, together with Gerard Krefft, explored the lower reaches of the Murray and Darling rivers, compiling a list of birds and mammals.\nGeorge \"Chinese\" Morrison, then aged 18, navigated the river by canoe from Wodonga to its mouth, in 65 days, completing the 1,555-mile (2,503\u00a0km) journey in January 1881.\nRiver transport.\nShipping cannot enter the Murray from the sea because it does not have an estuary. However, in the 19th century the river supported a substantial commercial trade using shallow-draft paddle steamers, the first trips being made by two boats from South Australia on the spring flood of 1853. The \"Lady Augusta\", captained by Francis Cadell, reached Swan Hill while another, \"Mary Ann\", captained by William Randell, reached Moama (near Echuca). In 1855 a steamer carrying gold-mining supplies reached Albury but Echuca was the usual turn-around point, though small boats continued to link with up-river ports such as Tocumwal, Wahgunyah and Albury.\nThe arrival of steamboat transport was welcomed by pastoralists who had been suffering from a shortage of transport due to the demands of the gold fields. By 1860 a dozen steamers were operating in the high water season along the Murray and its tributaries. Once the railway reached Echuca in 1864, the bulk of the woolclip from the Riverina was transported via river to Echuca and then south to Melbourne.\nThe steam paddleship \"Etona\" was launched as a mission steamer, replacing an earlier steam launch, also named \"Etona\", which had been operating on the Murray since 1891. The vessel was based at Murray Bridge, and operated between Goolwa and the Victorian border, stopping at towns such as Mannum, Morgan and Renmark as well as isolated settlements and workcamps. The forepart of the vessel was used a chapel fitted with an altar and organ, with a capacity of 20 people. There was also a cabin. The minister on board, Rev. William Bussell, doubled as captain. On 16 August 1898, \"Etona\" arrived at Renmark, where the Bishop of Adelaide, Rev. Dr. John Harmer, held services the following Sunday with the assistance of Rev H M Wylie. In September of the same year, the service due in Holder on the 18th was suspended due to the vessel grounding on a sandbank. During its year of launch, the boiler of \"Etona\" gave way, being replaced at a cost of \u00a387.\nThe Murray was plagued by \"snags\", fallen trees submerged in the water, and considerable efforts were made to clear the river of these threats to shipping by using barges equipped with steam-driven winches. In recent times, efforts have been made to restore many of these snags by placing dead gum trees back into the river. The primary purpose of this is to provide habitat for fish species whose breeding grounds and shelter were eradicated by the removal of the snags.\nAuthor E.J. Brady chronicled an eventful journey downriver in a small motor boat from Albury to the coast in 1911 in \"River Rovers.\"\nThe volume and value of river trade made Echuca Victoria's second port and in the decade from 1874 it underwent considerable expansion. By this time up to thirty steamers and a similar number of barges were working the river in season. River transport began to decline once the railways touched the Murray at numerous points. The unreliable levels made it impossible for boats to compete with the rail and later road transport. However, the river still carries pleasure boats along its entire length.\nToday, most traffic on the river is recreational. Small private boats are used for water skiing and fishing. Houseboats are common, both commercial for hire and privately owned. There are a number of both historic paddle steamers and newer boats offering cruises ranging from half an hour to five days.\nRiver crossings.\nThe Murray River has been a significant barrier to land-based travel and trade. Many of the ports for transport of goods along the Murray have also developed as places to cross the river, either by bridge or ferry. The first bridge to cross the Murray, which was built in 1869, is in the town of Murray Bridge, formerly called Edwards Crossing. To distinguish this bridge from the many others that span the Murray River, this bridge is known as Murray River road bridge, Murray Bridge Tolls applied on South Australian ferries until abolished in November 1961.\nWater storage and irrigation.\nSmall-scale pumping plants began drawing water from the Murray in the 1850s and the first high-volume plant was constructed at Mildura in 1887. The introduction of pumping stations along the river promoted an expansion of farming and led ultimately to the development of irrigation areas (including the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area).\nIn 1915, the three Murray states \u2013 New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia \u2013 signed the River Murray Agreement which proposed the construction of storage reservoirs in the river's headwaters as well as at Lake Victoria near the South Australian border. Along the intervening stretch of the river a series of locks and weirs were built. These were originally proposed to support navigation even in times of low water, but riverborne transport was already declining due to improved highway and railway systems.\nThe disruption of the river's natural flow, run-off from agriculture, and the introduction of pest species such as the European carp has led to serious environmental damage along the river's length. There are widespread concerns that the river will be unusably salty in the medium to long term \u2013 a serious problem given that the Murray supplies 40\u00a0per cent of the water supply for Adelaide. Efforts to alleviate the problems have proceeded but disagreement between various groups has hampered progress.\nIntroduced fish species such as carp, \"gambusia\", weather loach, redfin perch, brown trout, and rainbow trout have also had serious negative effects on native fish. The most pernicious are carp, which have contributed to environmental degradation of the Murray and its tributaries by destroying aquatic plants and permanently raising turbidity. Carp is the most common species, and can be found in all segments of the river.\nReservoirs.\nFour large reservoirs were built along the Murray. In addition to Lake Victoria (completed late 1920s), these are Lake Hume near Albury-Wodonga (completed 1936), Lake Mulwala at Yarrawonga (completed 1939), and Lake Dartmouth, which is actually on the Mitta Mitta River upstream of Lake Hume (completed 1979). The Murray also receives water from the complex dam and pipeline system of the Snowy Mountains Scheme. An additional reservoir was proposed in the 1960s at Chowilla Dam, which was to have been built in South Australia and would have flooded land mostly in Victoria and New South Wales. It was cancelled in favour of building Dartmouth Dam due to costs and concerns relating to increased salinity.\nBarrages.\nFrom 1935 to 1940 a series of barrages was built near the Murray Mouth to stop seawater entering the lower part of the river during low flow periods. They are the Goolwa Barrage, with a length of ; Mundoo Channel Barragel ; Boundary Creek Barragel ; Ewe Island Barrage, ; and Tauwitchere Barrage, .\nThese dams inverted the patterns of the river's natural flow from the original winter-spring flood and summer-autumn dry to the present low level through winter and higher during summer. These changes ensured the availability of water for irrigation and made the Murray Valley Australia's most productive agricultural region, but have seriously disrupted the life cycles of many ecosystems both inside and outside the river, and the irrigation has led to dryland salinity that now threatens the agricultural industries.\nIn 2006, the Government of South Australia released a plan to investigate the construction of controversial Wellington Weir.\nLocks.\nLock 1 was completed near Blanchetown in 1922. Torrumbarry weir downstream of Echuca began operating in December 1923. Of the several locks that were proposed, only thirteen were completed; Locks 1 to 11 on the stretch downstream of Mildura, Lock 15 at Euston and Lock 26 at Torrumbarry. Construction of the remaining weirs purely for navigation purposes was abandoned in 1934. The last lock to be completed was Lock 15, in 1937. Lock 11, just downstream of Mildura, creates a long lock pool that aided irrigation pumping from Mildura and Red Cliffs.\nEach lock has a navigable passage next to it through the weir, which is opened during periods of high river flow, when there is too much water for the lock. The weirs can be completely removed, and the locks completely covered by water during flood conditions. Lock 11 is unique in that the lock was built inside a bend of the river, with the weir in the bend itself. A channel was dug to the lock, creating an island between it and the weir. The weir is also of a different design, being dragged out of the river during high flow, rather than lifted out.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor tributaries\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPopulation centres\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nOnline audio and other"}
{"id": "19812", "revid": "1130897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19812", "title": "Project Mercury", "text": "Initial American crewed spaceflight program (1958\u20131963)\nProject Mercury was the first human spaceflight program of the United States, running from 1958 through 1963. An early highlight of the Space Race, its goal was to put a man into Earth orbit and return him safely, ideally before the Soviet Union. Taken over from the US Air Force by the newly created civilian space agency NASA, it conducted 20 uncrewed developmental flights (some using animals), and six successful flights by astronauts. The program, which took its name from Roman mythology, cost $ (adjusted for inflation). The astronauts were collectively known as the \"Mercury Seven\", and each spacecraft was given a name ending with a \"7\" by its pilot.\nThe Space Race began with the 1957 launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik 1. This came as a shock to the American public, and led to the creation of NASA to expedite existing US space exploration efforts, and place most of them under civilian control. After the successful launch of the Explorer 1 satellite in 1958, crewed spaceflight became the next goal. The Soviet Union put the first human, cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, into a single orbit aboard Vostok 1 on April 12, 1961. Shortly after this, on May 5, the US launched its first astronaut, Alan Shepard, on a suborbital flight. Soviet Gherman Titov followed with a day-long orbital flight in August 1961. The US reached its orbital goal on February 20, 1962, when John Glenn made three orbits around the Earth. When Mercury ended in May 1963, both nations had sent six people into space, but the Soviets led the US in total time spent in space.\nThe Mercury space capsule was produced by McDonnell Aircraft, and carried supplies of water, food and oxygen for about one day in a pressurized cabin. Mercury flights were launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, on launch vehicles modified from the Redstone and Atlas D missiles. The capsule was fitted with a launch escape rocket to carry it safely away from the launch vehicle in case of a failure. The flight was designed to be controlled from the ground via the Manned Space Flight Network, a system of tracking and communications stations; back-up controls were outfitted on board. Small retrorockets were used to bring the spacecraft out of its orbit, after which an ablative heat shield protected it from the heat of atmospheric reentry. Finally, a parachute slowed the craft for a water landing. Both astronaut and capsule were recovered by helicopters deployed from a US Navy ship.\nThe Mercury project gained popularity, and its missions were followed by millions on radio and TV around the world. Its success laid the groundwork for Project Gemini, which carried two astronauts in each capsule and perfected space docking maneuvers essential for crewed lunar landings in the subsequent Apollo program announced a few weeks after the first crewed Mercury flight.\nCreation.\nProject Mercury was officially approved on October 7, 1958, and publicly announced on December 17. Originally called Project Astronaut, President Dwight Eisenhower felt that gave too much attention to the pilot. Instead, the name \"Mercury\" was chosen from classical mythology, which had already lent names to rockets like the Greek \"Atlas\" and Roman \"Jupiter\" for the SM-65 and PGM-19 missiles. It absorbed military projects with the same aim, such as the Air Force Man in Space Soonest.\nBackground.\nFollowing the end of World War II, a nuclear arms race evolved between the US and the Soviet Union (USSR). Since the USSR did not have bases in the western hemisphere from which to deploy bomber planes, Joseph Stalin decided to develop intercontinental ballistic missiles, which drove a missile race. The rocket technology in turn enabled both sides to develop Earth-orbiting satellites for communications, and gathering weather data and intelligence. Americans were shocked when the Soviet Union placed the first satellite into orbit in October 1957, leading to a growing fear that the US was falling into a \"missile gap\". A month later, the Soviets launched Sputnik 2, carrying a dog into orbit. Though the animal was not recovered alive, it was obvious their goal was human spaceflight. Unable to disclose details of military space projects, President Eisenhower ordered the creation of a civilian space agency in charge of civilian and scientific space exploration. Based on the federal research agency National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), it was named the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The agency achieved its first goal of launching a satellite into space, the Pioneer 1, in 1958. The next goal was to put a man there.\nThe limit of space (also known as the K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line) was defined at the time as a minimum altitude of , and the only way to reach it was by using rocket-powered boosters. This created risks for the pilot, including explosion, high g-forces and vibrations during lift off through a dense atmosphere, and temperatures of more than from air compression during reentry.\nIn space, pilots would require pressurized chambers or space suits to supply fresh air. While there, they would experience weightlessness, which could potentially cause disorientation. Further potential risks included radiation and micrometeoroid strikes, both of which would normally be absorbed in the atmosphere. All seemed possible to overcome: experience from satellites suggested micrometeoroid risk was negligible, and experiments in the early 1950s with simulated weightlessness, high g-forces on humans, and sending animals to the limit of space, all suggested potential problems could be overcome by known technologies. Finally, reentry was studied using the nuclear warheads of ballistic missiles, which demonstrated a blunt, forward-facing heat shield could solve the problem of heating.\nOrganization.\nT. Keith Glennan had been appointed the first Administrator of NASA, with Hugh L. Dryden (last Director of NACA) as his Deputy, at the creation of the agency on October 1, 1958. Glennan would report to the president through the National Aeronautics and Space Council. The group responsible for Project Mercury was NASA's Space Task Group, and the goals of the program were to orbit a crewed spacecraft around Earth, investigate the pilot's ability to function in space, and to recover both pilot and spacecraft safely. Existing technology and off-the-shelf equipment would be used wherever practical, the simplest and most reliable approach to system design would be followed, and an existing launch vehicle would be employed, together with a progressive test program. Spacecraft requirements included: a launch escape system to separate the spacecraft and its occupant from the launch vehicle in case of impending failure; attitude control for orientation of the spacecraft in orbit; a retrorocket system to bring the spacecraft out of orbit; drag braking blunt body for atmospheric reentry; and landing on water. To communicate with the spacecraft during an orbital mission, an extensive communications network had to be built. In keeping with his desire to keep from giving the US space program an overtly military flavor, President Eisenhower at first hesitated to give the project top national priority (DX rating under the Defense Production Act), which meant that Mercury had to wait in line behind military projects for materials; however, this rating was granted in May 1959, a little more than a year and a half after Sputnik was launched.\nContractors and facilities.\nTwelve companies bid to build the Mercury spacecraft on a $20\u00a0million ($ adjusted for inflation) contract. In January 1959, McDonnell Aircraft Corporation was chosen to be prime contractor for the spacecraft. Two weeks earlier, North American Aviation, based in Los Angeles, was awarded a contract for Little Joe, a small rocket to be used for development of the launch escape system. The World Wide Tracking Network for communication between the ground and spacecraft during a flight was awarded to the Western Electric Company. Redstone rockets for suborbital launches were manufactured in Huntsville, Alabama, by the Chrysler Corporation and Atlas rockets by Convair in San Diego, California. For crewed launches, the Atlantic Missile Range at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida was made available by the USAF. This was also the site of the Mercury Control Center while the computing center of the communication network was in Goddard Space Center, Maryland. Little Joe rockets were launched from Wallops Island, Virginia. Astronaut training took place at Langley Research Center in Virginia, Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory in Cleveland, Ohio, and Naval Air Development Center Johnsville in Warminster, PA. Langley wind tunnels together with a rocket sled track at Holloman Air Force Base at Alamogordo, New Mexico were used for aerodynamic studies. Both Navy and Air Force aircraft were made available for the development of the spacecraft's landing system, and Navy ships and Navy and Marine Corps helicopters were made available for recovery. South of Cape Canaveral the town of Cocoa Beach boomed. From here, 75,000 people watched the first American orbital flight being launched in 1962.\nSpacecraft.\nThe Mercury spacecraft's principal designer was Maxime Faget, who started research for human spaceflight during the time of the NACA. It was long and wide; with the launch escape system added, the overall length was . With of habitable volume, the capsule was just large enough for a single crew member. Inside were 120 controls: 55 electrical switches, 30 fuses and 35 mechanical levers. The heaviest spacecraft, Mercury-Atlas 9, weighed fully loaded. Its outer skin was made of Ren\u00e9 41, a nickel alloy able to withstand high temperatures.\nThe spacecraft was cone shaped, with a neck at the narrow end. It had a convex base, which carried a heat shield (Item 2 in the diagram below) consisting of an aluminum honeycomb covered with multiple layers of fiberglass. Strapped to it was a retropack (1) consisting of three rockets deployed to brake the spacecraft during reentry. Between these were three posigrade rockets: minor rockets for separating the spacecraft from the launch vehicle at orbital insertion. The straps that held the package could be severed when it was no longer needed. Next to the heat shield was the pressurized crew compartment (3). Inside, an astronaut would be strapped to a form-fitting seat with instruments in front of him and with his back to the heat shield. Underneath the seat was the environmental control system supplying oxygen and heat, scrubbing the air of CO2, vapor and odors, and (on orbital flights) collecting urine. The recovery compartment (4) at the narrow end of the spacecraft contained three parachutes: a drogue to stabilize free fall and two main chutes, a primary and reserve. Between the heat shield and inner wall of the crew compartment was a landing skirt, deployed by letting down the heat shield before landing. On top of the recovery compartment was the antenna section (5) containing both antennas for communication and scanners for guiding spacecraft orientation. Attached was a flap used to ensure the spacecraft was faced heat shield first during reentry. A launch escape system (6) was mounted to the narrow end of the spacecraft containing three small solid-fueled rockets which could be fired briefly in a launch failure to separate the capsule safely from its booster. It would deploy the capsule's parachute for a landing nearby at sea. (See also Mission profile for details.)\nThe Mercury spacecraft did not have an on-board computer, instead relying on all computation for reentry to be calculated by computers on the ground, with their results (retrofire times and firing attitude) then transmitted to the spacecraft by radio while in flight. All computer systems used in the Mercury space program were housed in NASA facilities on Earth. (See ground control for details.)\nPilot accommodations.\nThe astronaut lay in a sitting position with his back to the heat shield, which was found to be the position that best enabled a human to withstand the high g-forces of launch and reentry. A fiberglass seat was custom-molded from each astronaut's space-suited body for maximum support. Near his left hand was a manual abort handle to activate the launch escape system if necessary prior to or during liftoff, in case the automatic trigger failed.\nTo supplement the onboard environmental control system, he wore a pressure suit with its own oxygen supply, which would also cool him. A cabin atmosphere of pure oxygen at a low pressure of (equivalent to the partial pressure of oxygen at sea level or the pressure of atmospheric air at an altitude of ) was chosen, rather than the atmosphere at sea level. This was easier to control, avoided the risk of decompression sickness (\"the bends\"), and also saved on spacecraft weight. Fires (which never occurred during the course of Project Mercury) would have to be extinguished by emptying the cabin of oxygen. In such case, or failure of the cabin pressure for any reason, the astronaut could make an emergency return to Earth, relying on his suit for survival. The astronauts normally flew with their visor up, which meant that the suit was not inflated. With the visor down and the suit inflated, the astronaut could only reach the side and bottom panels, where vital buttons and handles were placed.\nThe astronaut also wore electrodes on his chest to record his heart rhythm, a cuff that could take his blood pressure, and a rectal thermometer to record his temperature (this was replaced by an oral thermometer on the last flight). Data from these was sent to the ground during the flight. The astronaut normally drank water and ate food pellets.\nDespite the lessons learnt from the U2 program, which also utilized a pressure suit, initially no urine collection device was included for the Mercury astronauts. An inquiry on the subject was made in February 1961 by a student, but NASA responded by stating that \"the first space man is not expected to have 'to go\". The expected short flight times meant that this was overlooked, although after Alan Shepard had a launch delay of four hours, he was forced to urinate in his suit, short-circuiting some of the electrodes monitoring his vital signs. Gus Grissom wore two rubber pants on the second Mercury flight as a crude workaround. It would take until the third flight in February 1962 before a dedicated urine collection device was installed.\nOnce in orbit, the spacecraft could be rotated in yaw, pitch, and roll: along its longitudinal axis (roll), left to right from the astronaut's point of view (yaw), and up or down (pitch). Movement was created by rocket-propelled thrusters which used hydrogen peroxide as a fuel. For orientation, the pilot could look through the window in front of him or he could look at a screen connected to a periscope with a camera which could be turned 360\u00b0.\nThe Mercury astronauts had taken part in the development of their spacecraft, and insisted that manual control, and a window, be elements of its design. As a result, spacecraft movement and other functions could be controlled three ways: remotely from the ground when passing over a ground station, automatically guided by onboard instruments, or manually by the astronaut, who could replace or override the two other methods. Experience validated the astronauts' insistence on manual controls. Without them, Gordon Cooper's manual reentry during the last flight would not have been possible.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Cutaways and interior of spacecraft\nDevelopment and production.\nThe Mercury spacecraft design was modified three times by NASA between 1958 and 1959. After bidding by potential contractors had been completed, NASA selected the design submitted as \"C\" in November 1958. After it failed a test flight in July 1959, a final configuration, \"D\", emerged. The heat shield shape had been developed earlier in the 1950s through experiments with ballistic missiles, which had shown a blunt profile would create a shock wave that would lead most of the heat around the spacecraft. To further protect against heat, either a heat sink, or an ablative material, could be added to the shield. The heat sink would remove heat by the flow of the air inside the shock wave, whereas the ablative heat shield would remove heat by a controlled evaporation of the ablative material. After uncrewed tests, the latter was chosen for crewed flights. Apart from the capsule design, a rocket plane similar to the existing X-15 was considered. This approach was still too far from being able to make a spaceflight, and was consequently dropped. The heat shield and the stability of the spacecraft were tested in wind tunnels, and later in flight. The launch escape system was developed through uncrewed flights. During a period of problems with development of the landing parachutes, alternative landing systems such as the Rogallo glider wing were considered, but ultimately scrapped.\nThe spacecraft were produced at McDonnell Aircraft, St. Louis, Missouri, in clean rooms and tested in vacuum chambers at the McDonnell plant. The spacecraft had close to 600 subcontractors, such as Garrett AiResearch which built the spacecraft's environmental control system. Final quality control and preparations of the spacecraft were made at Hangar S at Cape Canaveral. NASA ordered 20 production spacecraft, numbered 1 through 20. Five of the 20, Nos. 10, 12, 15, 17, and 19, were not flown. Spacecraft No. 3 and No. 4 were destroyed during uncrewed test flights. Spacecraft No. 11 sank and was recovered from the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean after 38 years. Some spacecraft were modified after initial production (refurbished after launch abort, modified for longer missions, etc.). A number of Mercury boilerplate spacecraft (made from non-flight materials or lacking production spacecraft systems) were also made by NASA and McDonnell. They were designed and used to test spacecraft recovery systems and the escape tower. McDonnell also built the spacecraft simulators used by the astronauts during training, and adopted the motto \"First Free Man in Space\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Development of Earth landing system\nLaunch vehicles.\nLaunch escape system testing.\nA launch vehicle called Little Joe was used for uncrewed tests of the launch escape system, using a Mercury capsule with an escape tower mounted on it. Its main purpose was to test the system at max q, when aerodynamic forces against the spacecraft peaked, making separation of the launch vehicle and spacecraft most difficult. It was also the point at which the astronaut was subjected to the heaviest vibrations. The Little Joe rocket used solid-fuel propellant and was originally designed in 1958 by NACA for suborbital crewed flights, but was redesigned for Project Mercury to simulate an Atlas-D launch. It was produced by North American Aviation. It was not able to change direction; instead its flight depended on the angle from which it was launched. Its maximum altitude was fully loaded. A Scout launch vehicle was used for a single flight intended to evaluate the tracking network; however, it failed and was destroyed from the ground shortly after launch.\nSuborbital flight.\nThe Mercury-Redstone Launch Vehicle was an (with capsule and escape system) single-stage launch vehicle used for suborbital (ballistic) flights. It had a liquid-fueled engine that burned alcohol and liquid oxygen producing about of thrust, which was not enough for orbital missions. It was a descendant of the German V-2, and developed for the US Army during the early 1950s. It was modified for Project Mercury by removing the warhead and adding a collar for supporting the spacecraft together with material for damping vibrations during launch. Its rocket motor was produced by North American Aviation and its direction could be altered during flight by its fins. They worked in two ways: by directing the air around them, or by directing the thrust by their inner parts (or both at the same time). Both the Atlas-D and Redstone launch vehicles contained an automatic abort sensing system which allowed them to abort a launch by firing the launch escape system if something went wrong. The Jupiter rocket, also developed by Wernher von Braun's team at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, was considered as well for intermediate Mercury suborbital flights at a higher speed and altitude than Redstone, but this plan was dropped when it turned out that man-rating Jupiter for the Mercury program would actually cost more than flying an Atlas due to economics of scale. Beyond its IRBM function, the Jupiter missile was repurposed only for the short-lived Juno II launch vehicle, and sustaining a dedicated technical staff solely for a handful of Mercury capsule launches would have been cost-prohibitive.\nOrbital flight.\nOrbital missions required use of the Atlas LV-3B, a man-rated version of the Atlas D which was originally developed as the United States' first operational intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) by Convair for the Air Force during the mid-1950s. The Atlas was a \"one-and-one-half-stage\" rocket fueled by kerosene and liquid oxygen (LOX). The rocket by itself stood high; total height of the Atlas-Mercury space vehicle at launch was .\nThe Atlas first stage was a booster skirt with two engines burning liquid fuel. This, together with the larger sustainer second stage, gave it sufficient power to launch a Mercury spacecraft into orbit. Both stages fired from lift-off with the thrust from the second stage sustainer engine passing through an opening in the first stage. After separation from the first stage, the sustainer stage continued alone. The sustainer also steered the rocket by thrusters guided by gyroscopes. Smaller vernier rockets were added on its sides for precise control of maneuvers.\nAstronauts.\nNASA announced the following seven astronauts \u2013 known as the Mercury Seven \u2013 on April 9, 1959:\nAlan Shepard became the first American in space by making a suborbital flight on May 5, 1961. Mercury-Redstone 3, Shepard's 15 minute and 28 second flight of the \"Freedom 7\" capsule demonstrated the ability to withstand the high g-forces of launch and atmospheric re-entry. Shepard later went on to fly in the Apollo program and became the only Mercury astronaut to walk on the Moon on Apollo 14.\nGus Grissom became the second American in space on Mercury-Redstone 4 on July 21, 1961. After the splashdown of \"Liberty Bell 7\", the side hatch opened and caused the capsule to sink although Grissom was able to be safely recovered. His flight also gave NASA the confidence to move on to orbital flights. Grissom went on to participate in the Gemini and Apollo programs, but died in January 1967 during a pre-launch test for Apollo 1.\nJohn Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth on Mercury-Atlas 6 February 20, 1962. During the flight, the spacecraft \"Friendship 7\" experienced issues with its automatic control system but Glenn was able to manually control the spacecraft's attitude. He quit NASA in 1964, when he came to the conclusion that he likely would not be selected for any Apollo missions, and was later elected to the US Senate, serving from 1974 to 1999. During his tenure, he returned to space in 1998 as a Payload Specialist aboard STS-95.\nScott Carpenter was the second astronaut in orbit and flew on Mercury-Atlas 7 on May 24, 1962. The spaceflight was essentially a repeat of Mercury-Atlas 6, but a targeting error during re-entry took \"Aurora 7\" 250 miles (400\u00a0km) off-course, delaying recovery. Afterwards, he joined the Navy's \"Man in the Sea\" program and is the only American to be both an astronaut and an aquanaut. Carpenter's Mercury flight was his only trip into space.\nWally Schirra flew aboard \"Sigma 7\" on Mercury-Atlas 8 on October 3, 1962. The mission's main goal was to show development of environmental controls or life-support systems that would allow for safety in space, thus being a flight mainly focused on technical evaluation, rather than scientific experimentation. The mission lasted 9 hours and 13 minutes, setting a new US flight duration record. In December 1965, Schirra flew on Gemini 6A, achieving the first ever space rendezvous with sister spacecraft Gemini 7. Three years later, he commanded the first crewed Apollo mission, Apollo 7, becoming the first astronaut to fly three times and the only person to fly in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.\nGordon Cooper made the last flight of Project Mercury with Mercury-Atlas 9 on May 15, 1963. His flight onboard \"Faith 7\" set another US endurance record with a 34-hour and 19 minute flight duration, and 22 completed orbits. This mission marks the last time an American was launched alone to conduct an entirely solo orbital mission. Cooper later went on to participate in Project Gemini where he once again beat the endurance record during Gemini 5.\nDeke Slayton was grounded in 1962 due to a heart condition, but remained with NASA and was appointed senior manager of the Astronaut Office and later additionally assistant director of Flight Crew Operations at the beginning of Project Gemini. On March 13, 1972, after doctors confirmed he no longer had a coronary condition, Slayton returned to flight status and the next year was assigned to the Apollo\u2013Soyuz Test Project, which successfully flew in 1975 with Slayton as the docking module pilot. After the ASTP, he managed the Space Shuttle Program's Approach and Landing Tests (ALT) and Orbital Flight Tests (OFT) before retiring from NASA in 1982.\nOne of the astronauts' tasks was publicity; they gave interviews to the press and visited project manufacturing facilities to speak with those who worked on Project Mercury. The press was especially fond of John Glenn, who was considered the best speaker of the seven. They sold their personal stories to \"Life\" magazine which portrayed them as 'patriotic, God-fearing family men.' \"Life\" was also allowed to be at home with the families while the astronauts were in space. During the project, Grissom, Carpenter, Cooper, Schirra and Slayton stayed with their families at or near Langley Air Force Base; Glenn lived at the base and visited his family in Washington DC on weekends. Shepard lived with his family at Naval Air Station Oceana in Virginia.\nOther than Grissom, who was killed in the 1967 Apollo 1 fire, the other six survived past retirement and died between 1993 and 2016.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Astronauts' assignments\nSelection and training.\nPrior to Project Mercury, there was no protocol for selecting astronauts, so NASA would set a far-reaching precedent with both their selection process and initial choices for astronauts. At the end of 1958, various ideas for the selection pool were discussed privately within the national government and the civilian space program, and also among the public at large. Initially, there was the idea to issue a widespread public call to volunteers. Thrill-seekers such as rock climbers and acrobats would have been allowed to apply, but this idea was quickly shot down by NASA officials who understood that an undertaking such as space flight required individuals with professional training and education in flight engineering. By late 1958, NASA officials decided to move forward with test pilots being the heart of their selection pool. On President Eisenhower's insistence, the group was further narrowed down to active duty military test pilots, which set the number of candidates at 508. These candidates were USN or USMC naval aviation pilots (NAPs), or USAF pilots of Senior or Command rating. These aviators had long military records, which would give NASA officials more background information on which to base their decisions. Furthermore, these aviators were skilled in flying the most advanced aircraft to date, giving them the best qualifications for the new position of astronaut. During this time, women were banned from flying in the military and so could not successfully qualify as test pilots. This meant that no female candidates could earn consideration for the title of astronaut. Civilian NASA X-15 pilot Neil Armstrong was also disqualified, though he had been selected by the US Air Force in 1958 for its Man in Space Soonest program, which was replaced by Mercury. Although Armstrong had been a combat-experienced NAP during the Korean War, he left active duty in 1952. Armstrong became NASA's first civilian astronaut in 1962 when he was selected for NASA's second group, and became the first man on the Moon in 1969.\nIt was further stipulated that candidates should be between 25 and 40 years old, no taller than , and hold a college degree in a STEM subject. The college degree requirement excluded the USAF's X-1 pilot, then-Lt Col (later Brig Gen) Chuck Yeager, the first person to exceed the speed of sound. He later became a critic of the project, ridiculing the civilian space program, labeling astronauts as \"spam in a can.\" John Glenn did not have a college degree either, but used influential friends to make the selection committee accept him. USAF Capt. (later Col.) Joseph Kittinger, a USAF fighter pilot and stratosphere balloonist, met all the requirements but preferred to stay in his contemporary project. Other potential candidates declined because they did not believe that human spaceflight had a future beyond Project Mercury. From the original 508, 110 candidates were selected for an interview, and from the interviews, 32 were selected for further physical and mental testing. Their health, vision, and hearing were examined, together with their tolerance to noise, vibrations, g-forces, personal isolation, and heat. In a special chamber, they were tested to see if they could perform their tasks under confusing conditions. The candidates had to answer more than 500 questions about themselves and describe what they saw in different images. Navy Lt (later Capt) Jim Lovell, who was later an astronaut in the Gemini and Apollo programs, did not pass the physical tests. After these tests it was intended to narrow the group down to six astronauts, but in the end it was decided to keep seven.\nThe astronauts went through a training program covering some of the same exercises that were used in their selection. They simulated the g-force profiles of launch and reentry in a centrifuge at the Naval Air Development Center, and were taught special breathing techniques necessary when subjected to more than 6 g. Weightlessness training took place in aircraft, first on the rear seat of a two-seater fighter and later inside converted and padded cargo aircraft. They practiced gaining control of a spinning spacecraft in a machine at the Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory called the Multi-Axis Spin-Test Inertia Facility (MASTIF), by using an attitude controller handle simulating the one in the spacecraft. A further measure for finding the right attitude in orbit was star and Earth recognition training in planetaria and simulators. Communication and flight procedures were practiced in flight simulators, first together with a single person assisting them and later with the Mission Control Center. Recovery was practiced in pools at Langley, and later at sea with frogmen and helicopter crews.\nMission profile.\nSuborbital missions.\nA Redstone rocket was used to boost the capsule for 2 minutes and 30 seconds to an altitude of ; the capsule continued ascending on a ballistic curve after booster separation. The launch escape system was jettisoned at the same time. At the top of the curve, the spacecraft's retrorockets were fired for testing purposes; they were not necessary for reentry because orbital speed had not been attained. The spacecraft landed in the Atlantic Ocean. The suborbital mission took about 15 minutes, had an apogee altitude of , and a downrange distance of . From the time of booster-spacecraft separation until reentry where air started to slow down the spacecraft, the pilot would experience weightlessness as shown on the image. The recovery procedure would be the same as an orbital mission.[AS]\nOrbital missions.\nPreparations for a mission started a month in advance with the selection of the primary and back-up astronaut; they would practice together for the mission. For three days prior to launch, the astronaut went through a special diet to minimize his need for defecating during the flight. On the morning of the trip he typically ate a steak breakfast. After having sensors applied to his body and being dressed in the pressure suit, he started breathing pure oxygen to prepare him for the atmosphere of the spacecraft. He arrived at the launch pad, took the elevator up the launch tower and entered the spacecraft two hours before launch. Once the astronaut was secured inside, the hatch was bolted, the launch area evacuated and the mobile tower rolled back. After this, the launch vehicle was filled with liquid oxygen. The entire procedure of preparing for launch and launching the spacecraft followed a time table called the countdown. It started a day in advance with a pre-count, in which all systems of the launch vehicle and spacecraft were checked. After that followed a 15-hour hold, during which pyrotechnics were installed. Then came the main countdown which for orbital flights started 6\u00bd hours before launch (T \u2013 390 min), counted backwards to launch (T = 0) and then forward until orbital insertion (T + 5 min).\nOn an orbital mission, the Atlas' rocket engines were ignited four seconds before lift-off. The launch vehicle was held to the ground by clamps and then released when sufficient thrust was built up at lift-off (A). After 30 seconds of flight, the point of maximum dynamic pressure against the vehicle was reached, at which the astronaut felt heavy vibrations. After 2 minutes and 10 seconds, the two outboard booster engines shut down and were released with the aft skirt, leaving the center sustainer engine running (B). At this point, the launch escape system was no longer needed, and was separated from the spacecraft by its jettison rocket (C). The space vehicle moved gradually to a horizontal attitude until, at an altitude of , the sustainer engine shut down and the spacecraft was inserted into orbit (D). This happened after 5 minutes and 10 seconds in a direction pointing east, whereby the spacecraft would gain speed from the rotation of the Earth. Here the spacecraft fired the three posigrade rockets for a second to separate it from the launch vehicle. Just before orbital insertion and sustainer engine cutoff, g-loads peaked at 8 g (6 g for a suborbital flight). In orbit, the spacecraft automatically turned 180\u00b0, pointed the retropackage forward and its nose 14.5\u00b0 downward and kept this attitude for the rest of the orbital phase to facilitate communication with the ground.\nOnce in orbit, it was not possible for the spacecraft to change its trajectory except by initiating reentry. Each orbit would typically take 88 minutes to complete. The lowest point of the orbit, called perigee, was at about altitude, and the highest point, called apogee, was about altitude. When leaving orbit (E), the angle of retrofire was 34\u00b0 downward from the flight path angle. Retrorockets fired for 10 seconds each (F) in a sequence where one started 5 seconds after the other. During reentry (G), the astronaut would experience about 8 g (11\u201312 g on a suborbital mission). The temperature around the heat shield rose to and at the same time, there was a two-minute radio blackout due to ionization of the air around the spacecraft.\nAfter reentry, a small, drogue parachute (H) was deployed at for stabilizing the spacecraft's descent. The main parachute (I) was deployed at starting with a narrow opening that opened fully in a few seconds to lessen the strain on the lines. Just before hitting the water, the landing bag inflated from behind the heat shield to reduce the force of impact (J). Upon landing the parachutes were released. An antenna (K) was raised and sent out signals that could be traced by ships and helicopters. Further, a green marker dye was spread around the spacecraft to make its location more visible from the air. Frogmen brought in by helicopters inflated a collar around the craft to keep it upright in the water. The recovery helicopter hooked onto the spacecraft and the astronaut blew the escape hatch to exit the capsule. He was then hoisted aboard the helicopter that finally brought both him and the spacecraft to the ship.\nGround control.\nThe number of personnel supporting a Mercury mission was typically around 18,000, with about 15,000 people associated with recovery. Most of the others followed the spacecraft from the World Wide Tracking Network, a chain of 18 stations placed around the equator, which was based on a network used for satellites and made ready in 1960. It collected data from the spacecraft and provided two-way communication between the astronaut and the ground. Each station had a range of and a pass typically lasted 7 minutes. Mercury astronauts on the ground would take the role of Capsule Communicator, or CAPCOM, who communicated with the astronaut in orbit. Data from the spacecraft were sent to the ground, processed at the Goddard Space Center by a redundant pair of transistorized IBM 7090 computers and relayed to the Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral. In the Control Center, the data were displayed on boards on each side of a world map, which showed the position of the spacecraft, its ground track and the place it could land in an emergency within the next 30 minutes.\nOther computers associated with ground control for Mercury included a vacuum-tube-based IBM 709 system in Cape Canaveral which determined whether a mid-launch abort might be needed and where an aborting capsule would land, another IBM 709 in Bermuda which served as backup for the two IBM 7090 transistor-based machines at Goddard, and a Burroughs-GE system which provided radio guidance for the Atlas during launch.\nThe World Wide Tracking Network went on to serve subsequent space programs, until it was replaced by a satellite relay system in the 1980s. Mission Control Center was moved from Cape Canaveral to Houston in 1965.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Tracking network\nFlights.\n/\nCape Canaveral\nHawaii\n\"Freedom 7\"\n\"Liberty Bell 7\"\n\"Friendship 7\"\n\"Aurora 7\"\n\"Sigma 7\"\n\"Faith 7\"\nOn April 12, 1961, the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space on an orbital flight. Alan Shepard became the first American in space on a suborbital flight three weeks later, on May 5, 1961. John Glenn, the third Mercury astronaut to fly, became the first American to reach orbit on February 20, 1962, but only after the Soviets had launched a second cosmonaut, Gherman Titov, into a day-long flight in August 1961. Three more Mercury orbital flights were made, ending on May 16, 1963, with a day-long, 22 orbit flight. However, the Soviet Union ended its Vostok program the next month, with the human spaceflight endurance record set by the 82-orbit, almost 5-day Vostok 5 flight.\nCrewed.\nAll of the six crewed Mercury flights were successful, though some planned flights were canceled during the project (see below). The main medical problems encountered were simple personal hygiene, and post-flight symptoms of low blood pressure. The launch vehicles had been tested through uncrewed flights, therefore the numbering of crewed missions did not start with 1. Also, there were two separately numbered series: MR for \"Mercury-Redstone\" (suborbital flights), and MA for \"Mercury-Atlas\" (orbital flights). These names were not popularly used, since the astronauts followed a pilot tradition, each giving their spacecraft a name. They selected names ending with a \"7\" to commemorate the seven astronauts. Spacecraft production numbers don't match the mission order, with some capsules being reserved as backup or used in tests. Times given are Coordinated Universal Time, local time + 5 hours. MA = Mercury-Atlas, MR = Mercury-Redstone, LC = Launch Complex.\nUncrewed and chimpanzee flights.\nThe 20 uncrewed flights used Little Joe, Redstone, and Atlas launch vehicles. They were used to develop the launch vehicles, launch escape system, spacecraft and tracking network. One flight of a Scout rocket attempted to launch a specialized satellite equipped with Mercury communications components for testing the ground tracking network, but the booster failed soon after liftoff. The Little Joe program used seven airframes for eight flights, of which three were successful. The second Little Joe flight was named Little Joe 6, because it was inserted into the program after the first 5 airframes had been allocated. Production spacecraft and boilerplates were used for these test flights. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0After suborbital crewed flights\nCanceled.\nNine of the planned flights were canceled.\nMercury-Jupiter was a proposed suborbital launch configuration consisting of a Jupiter missile carrying a Mercury capsule. Two flights were planned in support of Project Mercury. The Mercury-Jupiter 1 flight would have been a heat shield test. The Mercury-Jupiter 2 flight was planned as a maximum dynamic pressure qualification test of the production Mercury spacecraft with a chimpanzee on board. On July 1, 1959, less than a year after the October, 1958 program start date, the flights were canceled due to budget constraints.\nSuborbital flights were planned for four other astronauts but the number of flights was cut down gradually and finally all remaining were canceled after Titov's flight.\nMercury-Atlas 9 was intended to be followed by more one-day flights and even a three-day flight but with the coming of the Gemini Project it seemed unnecessary. The Jupiter booster was, as mentioned above, intended to be used for different purposes.\nLegacy.\nToday the Mercury program is commemorated as the first American human space program. It did not win the race against the Soviet Union, but gave back national prestige and was scientifically a successful precursor of later programs such as Gemini, Apollo and Skylab.\nDuring the 1950s, some experts doubted that human spaceflight was possible. Still, when John F. Kennedy was elected president, many, including him, had doubts about the project. As president he chose to support the programs a few months before the launch of \"Freedom 7\", which became a public success. Afterwards, a majority of the American public supported human spaceflight, and, within a few weeks, Kennedy announced a plan for a crewed mission to land on the Moon and return safely to Earth before the end of the 1960s.\nThe six astronauts who flew were awarded medals, driven in parades and two of them were invited to address a joint session of the US Congress. Seeing as no women previously met the qualifications for the astronaut program, the question was raised as to whether or not they could. This led to the development of a project named Mercury 13 by the media, in which thirteen American women successfully underwent the tests. The Mercury 13 program was not officially conducted by NASA. It was created by NASA physician William Randolph Lovelace, who developed the physical and psychological tests used to select NASA's first seven male astronauts for Project Mercury. The women completed physical and psychological tests, but were never required to complete the training as the privately funded program was quickly cancelled. No female candidates adequately met the qualifications for the astronaut program until 1978, when a few finally qualified for the Space Shuttle program.\nMilitary Highway in Hampton, Virginia and Newport News, Virginia was renamed to Mercury Boulevard.\nOn February 25, 2011, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, the world's largest technical professional society, awarded Boeing (the successor company to McDonnell Aircraft) a Milestone Award for important inventions which debuted on the Mercury spacecraft.\nDepictions on film.\nA short documentary, \"The John Glenn Story\", was released in 1962.\nOn film the program was portrayed in \"The Right Stuff\", a 1983 adaptation of Tom Wolfe's 1979 book of the same name, in the 1998 HBO miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\", in the 2016 film \"Hidden Figures\", and the 2020 Disney+ series \"The Right Stuff\", which is also based on the Tom Wolfe book.\nCommemorations.\nIn 1964, a monument commemorating Project Mercury was unveiled near Launch Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral, featuring a metal logo combining the symbol of Mercury with the number 7. This design was first issued to the Mercury astronauts in 1960 as a lapel pin. In 1962, the United States Postal Service honored the Mercury-Atlas 6 flight with a Project Mercury commemorative stamp, the first US postal issue to depict a crewed spacecraft. \nDisplays.\nThe spacecraft that flew, together with some that did not, are on display in the United States. \"Friendship 7\" (Spacecraft No. 13) went on a global tour, popularly known as its \"fourth orbit\".\nPatches.\nCommemorative patches were designed by entrepreneurs after the Mercury program to satisfy collectors.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19813", "revid": "24304425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19813", "title": "Gaius Maecenas", "text": "Roman political advisor (d. 8 BCE)\nGaius Cilnius Maecenas ( 13 April 68 BC \u2013 8 BC) was a friend and political advisor to Octavian (who later reigned as emperor Augustus). He was also an important patron for the new generation of Augustan poets, including both Horace and Virgil. In many languages, his name is an eponym for \"patron of arts\".\nDuring the reign of Augustus, Maecenas served as a quasi-culture minister to the Roman emperor but in spite of his wealth and power he chose not to enter the Senate, remaining of equestrian rank.\nLife.\nExpressions in Propertius seem to imply that Maecenas had taken some part in the campaigns of Mutina, Philippi, and Perugia. He prided himself on his ancient Etruscan lineage, and claimed descent from the princely house of the Cilnii, who excited the jealousy of their townsmen by their preponderant wealth and influence at Arretium in the 4th century BC. Horace makes reference to this in his address to Maecenas at the opening of his first books of \"Odes\" with the expression \"atavis edite regibus\" (descendant of kings). Tacitus refers to him as \"Cilnius Maecenas\"; it is possible that \"Cilnius\" was his mother's nomen \u2013 or that Maecenas was in fact a cognomen.\nThe Gaius Maecenas mentioned in Cicero as an influential member of the equestrian order in 91 BC may have been his grandfather, or even his father. The testimony of Horace and Maecenas's own literary tastes imply that he had profited from the highest education of his time.\nHis great wealth may have been in part hereditary, but he owed his position and influence to his close connection with the emperor Augustus. He first appears in history in 40 BC, when he was employed by Octavian in arranging his marriage with Scribonia, and afterwards in assisting to negotiate the Treaty of Brundisium and the reconciliation with Mark Antony. As a close friend and advisor he had even acted as deputy for Augustus when he was abroad.\nIt was in 38 BC that Horace was introduced to Maecenas, who had before this received Lucius Varius Rufus and Virgil into his intimacy. In the \"Journey to Brundisium\", in 37, Maecenas and Marcus Cocceius Nerva \u2013 great-grandfather of the future emperor Nerva \u2013 are described as having been sent on an important mission, and they were successful in patching up, by the Treaty of Tarentum, a reconciliation between the two claimants for supreme power. During the Sicilian war against Sextus Pompeius in 36, Maecenas was sent back to Rome, and was entrusted with supreme administrative control in the city and in Italy. He was vicegerent of Octavian during the campaign that led to the Battle of Actium, when, with great promptness and secrecy, he crushed the conspiracy of Lepidus the Younger; during the subsequent absences of his chief in the provinces he again held the same position.\nDuring the latter years of his life as recorded by Suetonius he fell somewhat out of favour with his master. The historian attributes the loss of the imperial favour to Maecenas' having indiscreetly revealed to Terentia, his allegedly beautiful but difficult wife, the discovery of the conspiracy in which her brother Lucius Licinius Varro Murena was implicated, but according to Cassius Dio (writing in the early 3rd century AD) it was due to the emperor's relations with Terentia. Maecenas died in 8 BC, leaving the emperor sole heir to his wealth.\nReputation.\nOpinions were much divided in ancient times as to his personal character; but the testimony as to his administrative and diplomatic ability was unanimous. He enjoyed the credit of sharing largely in the establishment of the new order of things, of reconciling parties, and of carrying the new empire safely through many dangers. To his influence especially were attributed the more humane policies of Octavian after his first alliance with Antony and Lepidus. \nThe best summary of his character as a man and a statesman, by Marcus Velleius Paterculus, describes him as \"of sleepless vigilance in critical emergencies, far-seeing and knowing how to act, but in his relaxation from business more luxurious and effeminate than a woman.\" Expressions in the \"Odes of Horace\" seem to imply that Maecenas was deficient in the robustness of fibre which Romans liked to imagine was characteristic of their city.\n\"Maecenate\" (patronage).\nMaecenas is most famous for his support of young poets; hence, in most European languages, his name has become an eponym for \"patron of arts\": in French, \"m\u00e9c\u00e8ne\"; in Italian, \"mecenate\"; in Spanish, \"mecenas\"; in German, \"M\u00e4zen\"; in Polish, \"mecenas\"; in Czech, \"mecen\u00e1\u0161\"; in Hungarian, \"mec\u00e9n\u00e1s\"; in Ukrainian, Russian, and Bulgarian, \"\u043c\u0435\u0446\u0435\u043d\u0430\u0442\". The eponym has been in use since at least the composition of \"Laus Pisonis\" (\"Praise of Piso\") by an unknown author in the first century AD. Edmund Spenser's shepherds complain that there is no \"Mecoenas\" in England in the 1570s. \nMaecenas supported Virgil, who wrote the \"Georgics\" in his honour. It was Virgil, impressed with examples of Horace's poetry, who introduced Horace to Maecenas. Indeed, Horace begins the first poem of his \"Odes\" (\"Odes\" I.i) by addressing his new patron. Maecenas gave him full financial support as well as an estate in the Sabine Mountains. Propertius and the minor poets Varius Rufus, Plotius Tucca, Valgius Rufus, and Domitius Marsus also were his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s.\nHis character as a munificent patron of literature \u2013 which has made his name a household word \u2013 is gratefully acknowledged by the recipients of it and attested by the regrets of the men of letters of a later age, expressed by Martial and Juvenal. His patronage was exercised, not from vanity or a mere dilettante love of letters, but with a view to the higher interest of the state. He recognized in the genius of the poets of that time not only the truest ornament of the court, but the power of reconciling men's minds to the new order of things, and of investing the actual state of affairs with an ideal glory and majesty. The change in seriousness of purpose between the \"Eclogues\" and the \"Georgics\" of Virgil was in a great measure the result of the direction given by the statesman to the poet's genius. A similar change between the earlier odes of Horace, in which he declares his epicurean indifference to affairs of state, and the great national odes of the third book has been ascribed by some to the same guidance. However, since the organization of the Odes is not entirely chronological, and their composition followed both books of \"Satires\" and the \"Epodes\", this argument is plainly specious; but doubtless the milieu of Maecenas's circle influenced the writing of the Roman Odes (III.1\u20136) and others such as the ode to Pollio, Motum ex Metello (II.1).\nMaecenas endeavoured also to divert the less masculine genius of Propertius from harping continually on his love to themes of public interest, an effort which to some extent backfired in the ironic elegies of Book III. But if the motive of his patronage had been merely political, it never could have inspired the affection which it did in its recipients. The great charm of Maecenas in his relation to the men of genius who formed his circle was his simplicity, cordiality and sincerity. Although not particular in the choice of some of the associates of his pleasures, he admitted none but men of worth to his intimacy, and when once admitted they were treated like equals. Much of the wisdom of Maecenas probably lives in the \"Satires\" and \"Epistles\" of Horace. It has fallen to the lot of no other patron of literature to have his name associated with works of such lasting interest as the \"Georgics\" of Virgil, the first three books of Horace's \"Odes\", and the first book of his \"Epistles.\"\nTwo poems in the \"Appendix Vergiliana\" are elegies to him. Virgil cannot have written them, as he died eleven years before Maecenas; they may have been written by Albinovanus Pedo.\nWorks.\nMaecenas also wrote literature himself in both prose and verse, which are now lost literary work. The some twenty fragments that remain show that he was less successful as an author than as a judge and patron of literature.\nHis prose works on various subjects \u2013 \"Prometheus\", dialogues like \"Symposium\" (a banquet at which Virgil, Horace, and Messalla were present), \"De cultu suo\" (on his manner of life), and a poem \"In Octaviam\" (\"Against Octavia\") of which the content is unclear \u2013 were ridiculed by Augustus, Seneca, and Quintilian for their strange style, the use of rare words and awkward transpositions.\nAccording to Dio Cassius, Maecenas was also the inventor of a system of shorthand.\nGardens of Maecenas.\nMaecenas sited his famous gardens, the first gardens of the Hellenistic-Persian garden style in Rome, on the Esquiline Hill, atop the Servian Wall and its adjoining necropolis, near the gardens of Lamia. It contained terraces, libraries, and other aspects of Roman culture. Maecenas is said to have been the first to construct a swimming bath of hot water in Rome, which may have been in the gardens. The luxury of his gardens and villas incurred the displeasure of Seneca the Younger.\nThough the approximate site is known, it is not easy to reconcile literary indications to determine the gardens' exact location, whether or not they lay on both sides of the Servian \"ager\" and both north and south of the porta Esquilina. Common graves of the archaic Esquiline necropolis have been found near the north-west corner of the modern Piazza Vittorio Emanuele, that is, outside the Esquiline gate of antiquity and north of the \"via Tiburtina vetus\"; most probably the \"horti Maecenatiani\" extended north from this gate and road on both sides of the \"ager\". The \"Auditorium of Maecenas\", a probable venue for dining and entertainment, may still be visited (upon reservation) on Largo Leopardi near Via Merulana.\nThe gardens became imperial property after Maecenas's death, and Tiberius lived there after his return to Rome in 2 AD. Nero connected them with the Palatine Hill via his Domus Transitoria, and viewed the burning of that from the turris Maecenatiana. This turris was probably the \"molem propinquam nubibus arduis\" (\"the pile, among the clouds\") mentioned by Horace.\nWhether the \"horti Maecenatiani\" bought by Fronto actually were the former gardens of Maecenas is unknown, and the \"domus Frontoniana\" mentioned in the twelfth century by Magister Gregorius may also refer to the gardens of Maecenas.\nLegacy.\nHis name has become a byword in many languages for a well-connected and wealthy patron. For instance, John Dewey, in his lectures \"Art as Experience\", said: \"Economic patronage by wealthy and powerful individuals has at many times played a part in the encouragement of artistic production. Probably many a savage tribe had its Maecenas.\" Maecenas is celebrated for this role in two poems, the \"Elegiae in Maecenatem\", which were written after his death and collected in the \"Appendix Vergiliana\".\nIn various languages, Maecenas' name has given rise to a word for private patronage, mainly cultural but sometimes wider, usually perceived as more altruistic than sponsorship. A verse of the Latin-language student song \"Gaudeamus igitur\" wishes longevity upon the charity of the students' benefactors (\"Maecenatum\", genitive plural of \"Maecenas\").\nPhillis Wheatley, the 18th-century poet and the first African-American writer to publish a book, published a poem \"To Maecenas\" as the first poem in her 1773 book \"Poems on Various subjects, Religious and Moral\".\nIn Poland and Western Ukraine, a lawyer would customarily be addressed with the honorific \"Pan Mecenas\".\nIn F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel \"The Great Gatsby\", Maecenas is one of the three famous wealthy men, along with Midas and J. P. Morgan, whose secrets the novel's narrator Nick Carraway hopes to find in the books he buys for his home library.\nIn other media.\nMaecenas is a supporting character in William Shakespeare's play \"Antony and Cleopatra\", in which he is presented as a level-headed and loyal lieutenant to Octavian; Enobarbus describes him as 'half the heart of Caesar'. Maecenas was portrayed by Alex Wyndham in the second season of the 2005 HBO television series \"Rome\". He was portrayed by Russell Barr in the made-for-TV movie \"\". He is also featured in one episode of the second series of \"Plebs\" on ITV. In the 2021 TV series \"Domina\", he was portrayed by Youssef Kerkour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Fragmenta poetarum Latinorum epicorum et lyricorum praeter Ennium et Lucilium\", 3rd ed., Stuttgart: Teubner, 1995, pp. 243\u201348."}
{"id": "19814", "revid": "1548749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19814", "title": "Meander (disambiguation)", "text": "A meander is a bend in a river.\nMeander may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19818", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19818", "title": "March 16", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 16 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19820", "revid": "9813438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19820", "title": "Magick (Thelema)", "text": ""}
{"id": "19821", "revid": "13503327", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19821", "title": "Tacitus (emperor)", "text": "Roman emperor from 275 to 276\nMarcus Claudius Tacitus ( ; died June 276) was Roman emperor from 275 to 276. During his short reign he campaigned against the Goths and the Heruli, for which he received the title \"Gothicus Maximus\".\nEarly life.\nHis early life is largely unknown. An origin story that circulated after his coronation claimed Tacitus to be the heir of an old Umbrian family and one of the wealthiest men of the empire, having inherited and amassed 280 million sestertii. His faction distributed copies of the historian Publius Cornelius Tacitus's work, which was barely read at the time, perhaps contributing to its partial survival. Modern historiography rejects his alleged descent from the historian as a fabrication. It is more likely that he emerged from the Illyrian military, which made him a representative of the army in imperial politics.\nIn the course of his long life he held various civil offices, including the consulship twice, once under Valerian and again in 273, earning unequivocal respect.\nEmperor.\nAfter the assassination of Aurelian, the army, apparently showing remorse towards its role in the death of the beloved emperor, relinquished the right of choosing his successor to the Senate. After a few weeks, the throne was offered to the aged \"Princeps Senatus\", Tacitus.\nAccording to the \"Historia Augusta\", Tacitus, after ascertaining the sincerity of the Senate's regard for him, accepted their nomination on 25 September 275, and the choice was cordially ratified by the army. If true, Tacitus would have been the last emperor elected by the Senate. However, it's possible that much of this narrative is fictitious, as Zosimus and Zonaras report that Tacitus was actually proclaimed by the army without any intervention of the Senate. His proclamation as emperor should have happened in late November or early December.\nIn older historiography, it was generally accepted that Aurelian's wife, Ulpia Severina, ruled in her own right before the election of Tacitus which could indicate an interregnum which lasted as long as six months. Contemporary bibliography considers that no interregnum may have existed between Aurelian's death and the coronation of the new Emperor. Tacitus had been living in Campania before his election, and returned only reluctantly to the assembly of the Senate in Rome, where he was elected. He immediately asked the Senators to deify Aurelian, before arresting and executing Aurelian's murderers. In ancient sources, he was described as very old at that time, but in reality he was possibly in his fifties.\nAmongst the highest concerns of the new reign was the restoration of the ancient Senatorial powers. He granted substantial prerogatives to the Senate, securing to them by law the appointment of the emperor, of the consuls, and the provincial governors, as well as supreme right of appeal from every court in the empire in its judicial function, and the direction of certain branches of the revenue in its long-abeyant administrative capacity. Probus respected these changes, but after the reforms of Diocletian in the succeeding decades not a vestige would be left of them.\nFighting barbarians.\nNext he moved against the barbarian mercenaries that had been gathered by Aurelian to supplement Roman forces for his Eastern campaign. These mercenaries had plundered several towns in the Eastern Roman provinces after Aurelian had been murdered and the campaign cancelled. His half-brother, the Praetorian Prefect Florian, and Tacitus himself won a victory against these tribes, among which were the Heruli, gaining the emperor the title \"Gothicus Maximus\".\nDeath.\nOn his way back to the west to deal with a Frankish and Alamannic invasion of Gaul, according to Aurelius Victor, Eutropius and the Historia Augusta, Tacitus died of fever at Tyana in Cappadocia around June 276, after a rule of just over 6 months. In a contrary account, Zosimus claims that Tacitus was assassinated after he appointed one of his relatives to an important position in Syria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19822", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19822", "title": "MV Tampa", "text": "Container ship built in 1984\nMV \"Tampa\" was a roll-on/roll-off container ship completed in 1984 by Hyundai Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. in South Korea for the Norway-based firm, Wilhelmsen Lines Shipowning.\nIn 2001, the vessel was at the centre of the Tampa affair when its crew rescued 433 refugees in international waters, but the Australian government refused permission for them to disembark on Christmas Island.\nService history.\nTampa was launched in late 1983. It was a so-called ro-ro ship. Ro-ro is an abbreviation of roll-on/roll off. These ships are cargo ships designed to carry wheeled cargo, such as cars, motorcycles, trucks, semi-trailer trucks, buses, trailers, and railroad cars, that are driven on and off the ship on their own wheels or using a platform vehicle, such as a self-propelled modular transporter. This is in contrast to lift-on/lift-off (LoLo) vessels, which use a crane to load and unload cargo.\nTampa affair.\nIn August 2001, under Captain Arne Rinnan, a diplomatic dispute brewed between Australia, Norway, and Indonesia after \"Tampa\" rescued 433 Afghans from a distressed fishing vessel in international waters. The Afghans wanted passage to the nearby Christmas Island. The Australian government sought to prevent this by refusing \"Tampa\" entry into Australian waters, insisting on their disembarkment elsewhere, and deploying the Special Air Service Regiment to board the ship.\nAt the time of the incident, \"Tampa\" carried cargo worth A$, and 27 crew. The crew of \"Tampa\" later received the Nansen Refugee Award for 2002 from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for their efforts to follow international principles of saving people in distress at sea.\nCocaine smuggling bust.\nIn October 2006, \"Tampa\" was one of two Wilhelmsen ships involved in a cocaine-smuggling operation intercepted by the New Zealand Customs Service and the Australian Federal Police. of cocaine was allegedly attached to the side of the two cargo ships bound for Australia in purpose-built metal pods, although New Zealand authorities stated they did not believe the ship's crew or owners were involved.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19823", "revid": "40234806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19823", "title": "Maya numerals", "text": "System used by the ancient Mayan civilization to represent numbers and dates\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Mayan numeral system was the system to represent numbers and calendar dates in the Maya civilization. It was a vigesimal (base-20) positional numeral system. The numerals are made up of three symbols: zero (a shell), one (a dot) and five (a bar). For example, thirteen is written as three dots in a horizontal row above two horizontal bars; sometimes it is also written as three vertical dots to the left of two vertical bars. With these three symbols, each of the twenty vigesimal digits could be written.\nNumbers after 19 were written vertically in powers of twenty. The Mayan used powers of twenty, just as the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system uses powers of ten.\nFor example, thirty-three would be written as one dot, above three dots atop two bars. The first dot represents \"one twenty\" or \"1\u00d720\", which is added to three dots and two bars, or thirteen. Therefore, (1\u00d720) + 13 = 33.\nUpon reaching 202 or 400, another row is started (203 or 8000, then 204 or 160,000, and so on). The number 429 would be written as one dot above one dot above four dots and a bar, or (1\u00d7202) + (1\u00d7201) + 9 = 429.\n\nOther than the bar and dot notation, Maya numerals were sometimes illustrated by face type glyphs or pictures. The face glyph for a number represents the deity associated with the number. These face number glyphs were rarely used, and are mostly seen on some of the most elaborate monumental carvings.\nThere are different representations of zero in the Dresden Codex, as can be seen at page 43b (which is concerned with the synodic cycle of Mars). It has been suggested that these pointed, oblong \"bread\" representations are calligraphic variants of the PET logogram, approximately meaning \"circular\" or \"rounded\", and perhaps the basis of a derived noun meaning \"totality\" or \"grouping\", such that the representations may be an appropriate marker for a number position which has reached its totality.\nAddition and subtraction.\nAdding and subtracting numbers below 20 using Mayan numerals is very simple.\nAddition is performed by combining the numeric symbols at each level:&lt;br&gt;\nIf five or more dots result from the combination, five dots are removed and replaced by a bar. If four or more bars result, four bars are removed and a dot is added to the next higher row. This also means that the value of 1 bar is 5.\nSimilarly with subtraction, remove the elements of the subtrahend Symbol from the minuend symbol:&lt;br&gt;\nIf there are not enough dots in a minuend position, a bar is replaced by five dots. If there are not enough bars, a dot is removed from the next higher minuend symbol in the column and four bars are added to the minuend symbol which is being worked on.\nModified vigesimal system in the Maya calendar.\n The \"Long Count\" portion of the Maya calendar uses a variation on the strictly vigesimal numerals to show a Long Count date. In the second position, only the digits up to 17 are used, and the place value of the third position is not 20\u00d720 = 400, as would otherwise be expected, but 18\u00d720 = 360 so that one dot over two zeros signifies 360. Presumably, this is because 360 is roughly the number of days in a year. (The Maya had however a quite accurate estimation of 365.2422 days for the solar year at least since the early Classic era.) Subsequent positions use all twenty digits and the place values continue as 18\u00d720\u00d720 = 7,200 and 18\u00d720\u00d720\u00d720 = 144,000, etc.\nEvery known example of large numbers in the Maya system uses this 'modified vigesimal' system, with the third position representing multiples of 18\u00d720. It is reasonable to assume, but not proven by any evidence, that the normal system in use was a pure base-20 system.\nOrigins.\nSeveral Mesoamerican cultures used similar numerals and base-twenty systems and the Mesoamerican Long Count calendar requiring the use of zero as a place-holder. The earliest long count date (on Stela 2 at Chiappa de Corzo, Chiapas) is from 36 BC.\nSince the eight earliest Long Count dates appear outside the Maya homeland, it is assumed that the use of zero and the Long Count calendar predated the Maya, and was possibly the invention of the Olmec. Indeed, many of the earliest Long Count dates were found within the Olmec heartland. However, the Olmec civilization had come to an end by the 4th century BC, several centuries before the earliest known Long Count dates\u2014which suggests that zero was \"not\" an Olmec discovery.\nUnicode.\nMayan numerals codes in Unicode comprise the block 1D2E0 to 1D2F3\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19825", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19825", "title": "Murphys Law", "text": ""}
{"id": "19826", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19826", "title": "Michael Foot", "text": "British politician (1913\u20132010)\nMichael Mackintosh Foot (23 July 1913\u00a0\u2013 3 March 2010) was a British politician who was Leader of the Labour Party and Leader of the Opposition from 1980 to 1983. Foot began his career as a journalist on \"Tribune\" and the \"Evening Standard\". He co-wrote the 1940 polemic against appeasement of Adolf Hitler, \"Guilty Men\", under a pseudonym.\nFoot was a Member of Parliament (MP) from 1945 to 1955 and 1960 to 1992. A passionate orator, and associated with the left wing of the Labour Party for most of his career, Foot was an ardent supporter of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) and of British withdrawal from the European Economic Community (EEC). He was appointed to Harold Wilson's Cabinet as Employment Secretary in 1974, and he later was Leader of the House of Commons from 1976 to 1979 under James Callaghan. He was also Deputy Leader of the Labour Party under Callaghan from 1976 to 1980.\nElected as a compromise candidate, Foot served as Labour leader and Leader of the Opposition from 1980 to 1983. Not particularly telegenic, he was nicknamed \"Worzel Gummidge\" for his rumpled appearance. A faction of the party broke away in 1981 to form the Social Democratic Party (SDP). Foot led Labour into the 1983 general election, when the party obtained its lowest share of the vote in 65 years and the fewest parliamentary seats since 1935, which remained the case until Labour's defeat at the 2019 general election. He resigned the party leadership following the election, and was succeeded as leader by Neil Kinnock.\nFamily.\nFoot was born in Lipson Terrace, Plymouth, Devon, the fourth son and fifth of seven children of Isaac Foot (1880\u20131960) and of the Scotswoman Eva Mackintosh (1877\u20131946).\nIsaac Foot was a solicitor and founder of the Plymouth law firm Foot and Bowden (which amalgamated with another firm to become Foot Anstey). Isaac Foot, an active member of the Liberal Party, served as the Liberal Member of Parliament for Bodmin in Cornwall from 1922 to 1924 and again from 1929 to 1935, and as a Lord Mayor of Plymouth.\nMichael Foot's siblings included: Sir Dingle Foot MP (1905\u201378), a Liberal and subsequently Labour MP; Hugh Foot, Baron Caradon (1907\u201390), Governor of Cyprus (1957\u201360) and representative of the United Kingdom at the United Nations from 1964 to 1970; Liberal politician John Foot, later Baron Foot (1909\u201399); Margaret Elizabeth Foot (1911\u201365); Jennifer Mackintosh Highet (1916\u20132002); and Christopher Isaac Foot (1917\u201384). Michael Foot was the uncle of campaigning journalist Paul Foot (1937\u20132004) and of charity worker Oliver Foot (1946\u20132008).\nEarly life.\nFoot was educated at Plymouth College Preparatory School, Forres School in Swanage, and Leighton Park School in Reading. When he left Forres School, the headmaster sent a letter to his father in which he said \"he has been the leading boy in the school in every way\". He then went on to read Philosophy, Politics and Economics at Wadham College, Oxford. Foot was a president of the Oxford Union. He also took part in the ESU USA Tour (the debating tour of the United States run by the English-Speaking Union).\nUpon graduating with a second-class degree in 1934, he took a job as a shipping clerk in Birkenhead. Foot was profoundly influenced by the poverty and unemployment that he witnessed in Liverpool, which was on a different scale from anything he had seen in Plymouth. A Liberal up to this time, Foot was converted to socialism by Oxford University Labour Club president David Lewis, a Canadian Rhodes scholar, and others: \"I knew him [at Oxford] when I was a Liberal [and Lewis] played a part in converting me to socialism.\"\nFoot joined the Labour Party and first stood for parliament, aged 22, at the 1935 general election, where he contested Monmouth. During the election, Foot criticised the Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, for seeking rearmament. In his election address, Foot contended that \"the armaments race in Europe must be stopped now\". Foot also supported unilateral disarmament, after multilateral disarmament talks at Geneva had broken down in 1933.\nFoot became a journalist, working briefly on the \"New Statesman\", before joining the left-wing weekly \"Tribune\" when it was set up in early 1937 to support the Unity Campaign, an attempt to secure an anti-fascist united front between Labour and other left-wing parties. The campaign's members were Stafford Cripps's (Labour-affiliated) Socialist League, the Independent Labour Party and the Communist Party of Great Britain (CP). Foot resigned in 1938 after the paper's first editor, William Mellor, was sacked for refusing to adopt a new CP policy of backing a Popular Front, including non-socialist parties, against fascism and appeasement. In a 1955 interview, Foot ideologically identified as a libertarian socialist.\nHe was an avid anti-imperialist and was heavily involved in the India League. As an Oxford graduate, he was influenced by the founder of the India League, Krishna Menon. The India League was the premier UK-based organisation that fought for the 'Liberation of India'. After Indian independence in 1947, Foot's interest in India continued, and he became Chair of the India League.\nJournalism.\nOn the recommendation of Aneurin Bevan, Foot was soon hired by Lord Beaverbrook to work as a writer on his \"Evening Standard\". (Bevan is supposed to have told Beaverbrook on the phone: \"I've got a young bloody knight-errant here. They sacked his boss, so he resigned. Have a look at him.\") At the outbreak of the Second World War, Foot volunteered for military service, but was rejected because of his chronic asthma.\nIn 1940, under the pen-name \"Cato\" he and two other Beaverbrook journalists (Frank Owen, editor of the \"Standard\", and Peter Howard of the \"Daily Express\") published \"Guilty Men\", which attacked the appeasement policy and slow pace of British re-armament under the National Governments of Ramsay MacDonald, Stanley Baldwin, and Neville Chamberlain; it became a runaway bestseller. (In so doing, Foot reversed his position of the 1935 election \u2013 when he had attacked the Conservatives as militaristic and demanded disarmament in the face of Nazi Germany.) Beaverbrook made Foot editor of the \"Evening Standard\" in 1942, when he was aged 28. During the war, Foot made a speech that was later featured in the documentary TV series \"The World at War\" broadcast in February 1974. Foot was speaking in defence of the \"Daily Mirror\", which had criticised the conduct of the war by the Churchill government. He mocked the notion that the Government would make no more territorial demands of other newspapers if they allowed the \"Mirror\" to be censored.\nFoot left the \"Standard\" in 1945 to join the \"Daily Herald\" as a columnist. The \"Daily Herald\" was jointly owned by the Trades Union Congress and Odhams Press, and was effectively an official Labour Party paper. He rejoined \"Tribune\" as editor from 1948 to 1952, and was again the paper's editor from 1955 to 1960. Throughout his political career he railed against the increasing corporate domination of the press.\nMember of Parliament.\nFoot fought the Plymouth Devonport constituency in the 1945 general election. His election agent was Labour activist and lifelong friend Ron Lemin. He won the seat for Labour for the first time, holding it until his surprise defeat by Dame Joan Vickers at the 1955 general election. Until 1957, he was the most prominent ally of Aneurin Bevan, who had taken Cripps's place as leader of the Labour left. He successfully urged Bevan to follow through with his threat to resign from the Cabinet in protest of the introduction of prescription charges at the National Health Service, leading to a split in the Labour Party between Bevanites and Gaitskellites. Foot and Bevan fell out after Bevan renounced unilateral nuclear disarmament at the 1957 Labour Party conference.\nBefore the Cold War began in the late 1940s, Foot favoured a 'third way' foreign policy for Europe (he was joint author with Richard Crossman and Ian Mikardo of the pamphlet \"Keep Left\" in 1947), but in the wake of the communist seizure of power in Hungary and Czechoslovakia he and \"Tribune\" took a strongly anti-communist position, eventually embracing NATO.\nFoot was, however, a critic of the West's handling of the Korean War, an opponent of West German rearmament in the early 1950s and a founder member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in 1957. Under his editorship, \"Tribune\" opposed both the British government's Suez campaign and the Soviet crushing of the Hungarian Revolution in 1956. During this period, he made regular television appearances on the current-affairs programmes \"In The News\" (BBC Television) and subsequently \"Free Speech\" (ITV). \"There was certainly nothing wrong with his television technique in those days,\" reflected Anthony Howard shortly after Foot's death. Foot joined the \"Who Killed Kennedy Committee?\" set up by Bertrand Russell in 1964.\nFoot returned to parliament at a by-election in Ebbw Vale, Monmouthshire, in 1960, the seat having been left vacant by Bevan's death. He had the Labour whip withdrawn in March 1961 after rebelling against the Labour leadership over Royal Air Force estimates. He only returned to the Parliamentary Labour Group in 1963, when Harold Wilson became Leader of the Labour Party following the sudden death of Hugh Gaitskell.\nHarold Wilson \u2014 the subject of an enthusiastic campaign biography by Foot published by Robert Maxwell's Pergamon Press in 1964 \u2013 offered Foot a place in his first government, but Foot turned it down, instead becoming the leader of Labour's left opposition from the back benches. He opposed the government's moves to restrict immigration, join the European Communities (or \"Common Market\" as they were referred to) and reform the trade unions, was against the Vietnam War and Rhodesia's unilateral declaration of independence, and denounced the Soviet suppression of \"socialism with a human face\" in Czechoslovakia in 1968. He also famously allied with the Tory right-winger Enoch Powell to scupper the government's plan to abolish the voting rights of hereditary peers and create a House of Lords comprising only life peers \u2013 a \"seraglio of eunuchs\" as Foot put it.\nFoot challenged James Callaghan for the post of Treasurer of the Labour Party in 1967, but failed.\nIn government.\nAfter 1970, Labour moved to the left and Wilson came to an accommodation with Foot. Foot served in the second Wilson shadow cabinet in various roles between 1970 and 1974. In April 1972, he stood for the Deputy Leadership of the party, along with Edward Short and Anthony Crosland. The first ballot saw Foot narrowly come second to Short winning 110 votes to the latter's 111. Crosland polled 61 votes and was eliminated. It was reported in the next day's \"Glasgow Herald\" that Short was the favourite to pick up most of Crosland's votes. The second ballot saw Short increase his total to 145 votes, while Foot's only rose to 116, giving Short victory by 29 votes.\nWhen, in 1974, Labour returned to office under Wilson, Foot became Secretary of State for Employment. According to Ben Pimlott, his appointment was intended to please the left of the party and the Trade Unions. In this role, he played the major part in the government's efforts to maintain the trade unions' support. He was also responsible for the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974, as well as the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974 that repealed the Heath ministry's trade union reforms in the Industrial Relations Act 1971, and the Employment Protection Act 1975, which introduced legal protections against being sacked for becoming pregnant and legislated for maternity pay. His time as Employment Secretary also saw Acas adopt its current name and modern form as a body with independence from government.\nFoot was one of the mainstays of the \"no\" campaign in the 1975 referendum on British membership of the European Communities. When Wilson retired in 1976, Foot contested the party leadership and led in the first ballot, but was ultimately defeated by James Callaghan. Later that year Foot was elected Deputy Leader, and during the Callaghan government Foot took a seat in Cabinet as Leader of the House of Commons, which gave him the unenviable task of trying to maintain the survival of the Callaghan government as its majority evaporated. However, he was able to steer numerous government proposals through the Commons, often by very narrow majorities, including increases in pension and benefit rates, the creation of the Police Complaints Board, the expansion of comprehensive schools, the establishment of a statutory responsibility to provide housing for the homeless, universal Child Benefit, the nationalisation of shipbuilding, abolishing pay beds in NHS hospitals, and housing security for agricultural workers, before the government fell in a vote of no confidence by a single vote. Whilst Leader of the Commons, Foot simultaneously held the post of Lord President of the Council.\nIn 1975, Foot, along with Jennie Lee and others, courted controversy when they supported Indira Gandhi, the Prime Minister of India, after she prompted the declaration of a state of emergency. In December 1975, \"The Times\" ran an editorial titled 'Is Mr Foot a Fascist?' \u2014 their answer was that he was \u2014 after Norman Tebbit accused him of 'undiluted fascism' when Foot said that the Ferrybridge Six deserved dismissal for defying a closed shop.\nLabour leadership.\nFollowing Labour's 1979 general election defeat by Margaret Thatcher, James Callaghan remained as party leader for the next 18 months before he resigned. Foot was elected Labour leader on 10 November 1980, beating Denis Healey in the second round of the leadership election (the last leadership contest to involve only Labour MPs). Foot presented himself as a compromise candidate, capable \u2013 unlike Healey \u2013 of uniting the party, which at the time was riven by the grassroots left-wing insurgency centred around Tony Benn.\nThe Bennites called for MPs who had acquiesced in Callaghan's policies to be replaced by left-wingers who would support unilateral nuclear disarmament, withdrawal from the European Communities, and widespread nationalisation. Benn did not stand for the leadership; apart from Foot and Healey, the other candidates (both eliminated in the first round) were John Silkin, a Tribunite like Foot, and Peter Shore, a Eurosceptic.\nIn 1980, Healey was widely expected by the media and many political figures to be the next Labour leader. However, Steve Richards notes that while \"Healey was widely seen as the obvious successor to Callaghan\", and that sections of the media ultimately reacted with \"disbelief\" at Labour not choosing him, the \"choice of Foot was not as perverse as it seemed\". He argues Labour MPs were looking for a figure from the left who could unite the wider party with the leadership, which Healey could not do. Richards states that despite being on the left of the party, Foot was not a \"tribal politician\" and had proved he could work with those of different ideologies and had been a loyal deputy to Callaghan. Thus Foot \"was seen as the unity candidate\" and won the election.\nWhen he became leader, Foot was already 67 years old and frail. Following the 1979 energy crisis, Britain went into recession in 1980, which was blamed on the Conservative government's controversial monetarist policy against inflation, which had the effect of increasing unemployment. As a result, Labour had moved ahead of the Conservatives in the opinion polls. Following Foot's election as leader, opinion polls showed a double-digit lead for Labour, boosting his hopes of becoming prime minister at the next general election, which had to be held by May 1984.\nWhen Foot became leader, the Conservative politician Kenneth Baker commented: \"Labour was led by Dixon of Dock Green under Jim Callaghan. Now it is led by Worzel Gummidge.\" Foot's nickname in the press gradually became \"Worzel Gummidge\", or \"Worzel\". This became particularly common after Remembrance Day 1981, when he attended the Cenotaph observance wearing a coat that some said resembled a donkey jacket. After his tenure as leader, Foot would be \"depicted as a scarecrow on ITV's satirical puppet show \"Spitting Image\".\"\nAlmost immediately following his election as leader, he was faced with a serious crisis. On 25 January 1981, four senior politicians on the right-wing of the Labour Party (Roy Jenkins, Shirley Williams, David Owen and William Rodgers, the so-called \"Gang of Four\") left Labour and formed the Social Democratic Party, which was launched on 26 March 1981. This was largely seen as the consequence of the Labour Party's swing to the left, polarising divisions in an already divided party.\nThe SDP won the support of large sections of the British media. For most of 1981 and early 1982, its opinion poll ratings suggested that the SDP could at least overtake Labour and possibly win a general election. The Conservatives were then unpopular because of the economic policies of Margaret Thatcher, which had seen unemployment reach a postwar high.\nThe Labour left was still strong. In 1981, Benn decided to challenge Healey for the Deputy Leadership of the Labour Party, a contest Healey won, albeit narrowly. Foot struggled to make an impact, and was widely criticised for his ineffectiveness. He was criticised by some on the left for supporting Thatcher's immediate resort to military action during the Falklands War. The conflict further undermined his position as he at first demanded an effective government response to the Argentinian aggression, but then emphasised the need to work for a peace settlement with the military junta led by General Galtieri. The right-wing newspapers lambasted him consistently for what they saw as his bohemian eccentricity, attacking him for wearing what they described as a \"donkey jacket\" (actually he wore a type of duffel coat) at the wreath-laying ceremony at the Cenotaph on Remembrance Day in November 1981, for which he was likened to an \"out-of-work navvy\" by a fellow Labour MP. Foot later said that the Queen Mother had described it as a \"sensible coat for a day like this\". He later donated the coat to the People's History Museum in Manchester, which holds a collection that spans Foot's entire political career from 1938 to 1990, and his personal papers dating back to 1926.\nThe formation of the SDP \u2013 which formed an alliance with the Liberal Party in June 1981 \u2013 contributed to a fall in Labour support. The double-digit lead that had still been intact in opinion polls at the start of 1981 was swiftly wiped out, and by the end of October the opinion polls were showing the Alliance ahead of Labour. Labour briefly regained their lead of most opinion polls in early 1982, but when the Falklands conflict ended on 14 June 1982 with a British victory over Argentina, opinion polls showed the Conservatives firmly in the lead. Their position at the top of the polls was strengthened by the return to economic growth later in the year. It was looking certain that the Conservatives would be re-elected, and the only key issue that the media were still speculating by the end of 1982 was whether it would be Labour or the Alliance who formed the next opposition.\nThrough late 1982 and early 1983, there was constant speculation that Labour MPs would replace Foot with Healey as leader. Such speculation increased after Labour lost the 1983 Bermondsey by-election, in which Peter Tatchell was Labour candidate, standing against a Conservative, a Liberal (eventual winner Simon Hughes) and John O'Grady, who had declared himself the Real Bermondsey Labour candidate. Critically, Labour held on in a subsequent by-election in Darlington, and Foot remained leader for the 1983 general election.\n1983 general election.\nThe 1983 Labour manifesto, strongly socialist in tone, advocated unilateral nuclear disarmament, higher personal taxation and a return to a more interventionist industrial policy. The manifesto also pledged that a Labour government would abolish the House of Lords, nationalise banks and immediately withdraw from the then-European Economic Community. Gerald Kaufman, once Harold Wilson's press officer and during the 1980s a prominent figure on the Labour right-wing, described the 1983 Labour manifesto as \"the longest suicide note in history.\"\nAs a statement on internal democracy, Foot passed the edict that the manifesto would consist of all resolutions arrived at conference. The party also failed to master the medium of television, while Foot addressed public meetings around the country, and made some radio broadcasts, in the same manner as Clement Attlee did in 1945.\nThe \"Daily Mirror\" was the only major newspaper to back Foot and the Labour Party at the 1983 general election, urging its readers to vote Labour and \"Stop the waste of our nation, for your job your children and your future\" in response to the mass unemployment that followed Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's monetarist economic policies to reduce inflation. Most other newspapers urged their readers to vote Conservative.\nThe Labour Party, led by Foot, lost to the Conservatives in a landslide \u2013 a result that had been widely predicted by the opinion polls since the previous summer. The only consolation for Foot and Labour was that they did not lose their place in opposition to the SDP\u2013Liberal Alliance, who came close to them in terms of votes but were still a long way behind in terms of seats. Foot was very critical of the Alliance, accusing them of \"siphoning\" Labour support and enabling the Tories to win more seats.\nFoot resigned days following the bitter election defeat, and was succeeded as leader on 2 October by Neil Kinnock; who had been tipped from the outset to be Labour's choice of new leader.\nBackbenches and retirement.\nFoot took a back seat in Labour politics following 1983 and retired from the House of Commons at the 1992 general election, when Labour lost to the Conservative Party (led by John Major) for the fourth election in succession, but remained politically active. From 1987 to 1992, he was the oldest sitting British MP (preceding former Prime Minister Edward Heath). He defended Salman Rushdie, after Ayatollah Khomeini advocated killing the novelist in a fatw\u0101, and took a strongly pro-interventionist position against Serbia and Montenegro during the Yugoslav Wars, supporting NATO forces whilst citing defence of civilian populations in Croatia and Bosnia. In addition, he was among the Patrons of the British-Croatian Society. \"The Guardian\"'s political editor Michael White criticised Foot's \"overgenerous\" support for Croatian President Franjo Tu\u0111man.\nFoot remained a high-profile member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND). He wrote several books, including highly regarded biographies of Aneurin Bevan and H. G. Wells, and was a vice-president of the H. G. Wells Society.\nFoot was an Honorary Associate of the National Secular Society and a Distinguished Supporter of the British Humanist Association. In 1988, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature. \nIn a poll of Labour Party activists in 2008, he was voted the worst post-war Labour Party leader.\nGordievsky's KGB allegations.\nOleg Gordievsky, a high-ranking KGB officer who defected from the Soviet Union to the UK in 1985, made allegations against Foot in his 1995 memoirs. Essentially, the allegations claimed that, up until 1968, Foot had spoken to KGB agents \"dozens of times\", passing information about politics and the trade unions, and Foot had been paid a total of around \u00a31,500 for his information (said to be worth \u00a337,000 in 2018). \"The Sunday Times\", which serialised Gordievsky's book under the headline \"KGB: Michael Foot was our agent\", stated in an article of 19 February that the Soviet intelligence services regarded Foot as an \"agent of influence\" (and a \"useful idiot\"), codenamed \"Agent BOOT\", and that he was in the pay of the KGB for many years. Crucially, the newspaper used material from the original manuscript of the book that mentioned Foot by name, something excluded from the published book.\nAt the time a leading article in \"The Independent\" newspaper asserted: \"It seems extraordinary that such an unreliable figure should now be allowed, given the lack of supporting evidence, to damage the reputation of figures such as Mr Foot.\" In a February 1992 interview, Gordievsky declared that he had no further revelations to make about the Labour Party. Foot successfully sued the \"Sunday Times\", winning \"substantial\" damages.\nFollowing Foot's death, Charles Moore writing in \"The Daily Telegraph\" in 2010 gave an account that he said had been provided to him by Gordievsky, containing additional uncorroborated information concerning his allegations. Moore said there was no evidence to show that Foot gave away state secrets.\nPlymouth Argyle.\nFoot was a passionate supporter of Plymouth Argyle Football Club from his childhood and once remarked that he was not going to die until he had seen them play in the Premier League.\nHe served for several years as a director of the club, seeing two promotions under his tenure.\nFor his 90th birthday, Foot was registered with the Football League as an honorary player and given the shirt number 90. This made him the oldest registered professional player in the history of football.\nPersonal life.\nFoot was married to the film-maker, author and feminist historian Jill Craigie (1911\u20131999) from 1949 until her death fifty years later. He had no children.\nIn February 2007, it was revealed that Foot had an extramarital affair with a woman around 35 years his junior in the early 1970s. The affair, which lasted nearly a year, put a considerable strain on his marriage. The affair is detailed in Foot's official biography, published in March 2007.\nOn 23 July 2006, his 93rd birthday, Michael Foot became the longest-lived leader of a major British political party, passing Lord Callaghan's record of 92 years, 364 days.\nA staunch republican (though well liked by the Royal Family on a personal level), Foot rejected honours from the Queen and the government, including a knighthood and a peerage, on more than one occasion.\nHe was also an atheist. As of \u00a02021[ [update]], he was one of four leaders of the Labour Party to declare that they did not follow any religion.\nHealth.\nFoot suffered from asthma (which disqualified him from service in the Second World War) and eczema.\nIn October 1963, he was involved in a car crash, suffering pierced lungs, broken ribs, and a broken left leg. Foot used a walking stick for the rest of his life. According to former MP Tam Dalyell, Foot had, up until the accident, been a chain-smoker, but he gave up the habit thereafter. Jill Craigie also suffered a crushed hand in this car crash.\nIn October 1976, Foot became blind in one eye following an attack of shingles.\nDeath.\nFoot died at his Hampstead, north London home on the morning of 3 March 2010 at the age of 96 after a long period of ill health. The House of Commons was informed of the news later that day by Justice Secretary Jack Straw, who told the House: \"I am sure that this news will be received with great sadness not only in my own party but across the country as a whole.\" Foot's funeral was a non-religious service, held on 15 March 2010 at Golders Green Crematorium in North-West London.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Foot Heads Arms Body\".\nOn 22 June 1978, \"The Guardian\" ran an article with the headline \"Foot hits back on Nazi comparison\". Reader David C. Allan of Edinburgh responded with a letter to the editor, which the paper ran on 27 June. Decrying the headline's apparent pun, Allan suggested that, if Foot were in future to be appointed Secretary of State for Defence, \"The Guardian\" might cover it under the headline \"Foot Heads Arms Body\". \nThe belief later gained currency that \"The Times\" actually had run the headline. Some decades later, Martyn Cornell recalled the story as true, saying he had written the headline himself as a \"Times\" subeditor around 1986. The headline does not, however, appear in The Times Digital Archive, which includes every day's newspaper from 1785 into the 21st century. \nIn 2018, John Rentoul included this headline in his \"The Top 10: Headlines\", subtitled \"Clever and memorable plays on words that have made journalistic history\".\nFictional portrayals.\nFoot was portrayed by Patrick Godfrey in the 2002 BBC production of Ian Curteis's long unproduced \"The Falklands Play\" and by Michael Pennington in the film \"The Iron Lady\".\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19827", "revid": "2214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19827", "title": "Memetic drift", "text": ""}
{"id": "19828", "revid": "19431543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19828", "title": "Max and Moritz", "text": "German language illustrated story in verse\nMax and Moritz: A Story of Seven Boyish Pranks (original: \"Max und Moritz \u2013 Eine Bubengeschichte in sieben Streichen\") is a German language illustrated story in verse. It was written and illustrated by Wilhelm Busch and published in 1865, and has since had significant cultural impact, both in German-speaking countries, where the story has been passed down through generations, and in the wider world, after translation into many languages. It has been adapted for film and television, as well as inspiring comic strips and children's TV characters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDescription.\n\"Max and Moritz: A Story of Seven Boyish Pranks\" is an inventive, blackly humorous tale, told entirely in rhymed couplets, about two boys who play pranks. It was written and illustrated by Wilhelm Busch and published in 1865. It is among the early works of Busch, yet it already featured many substantial, effectually aesthetic and formal regularities, procedures and basic patterns of Busch's later works. \nMany familiar with comic strip history consider it to have been the direct inspiration for the \"Katzenjammer Kids\" and \"Quick &amp; Flupke\". The German title satirises the German custom of giving a subtitle to the name of dramas in the form of \"Ein Drama in ... Akten\" (\"A Drama in ... Acts\"), which became dictum in colloquial usage for any event with an unpleasant or dramatic course, such as \"Bundespr\u00e4sidentenwahl - Ein Drama in drei Akten\" (\"Federal Presidential Elections - A drama in three acts\").\nThe pranks.\nThere have been several English translations of the original German verses over the years, but all have maintained the original trochaic tetrameter:\nPreface.\nAh, how oft we read or hear of &lt;br&gt;\nBoys we almost stand in fear of!&lt;br&gt;\nFor example, take these stories&lt;br&gt;\nOf two youths, named Max and Moritz,&lt;br&gt;\nWho, instead of early turning&lt;br&gt;\nTheir young minds to useful learning,&lt;br&gt;\nOften leered with horrid features&lt;br&gt;\nAt their lessons and their teachers.\nLook now at the empty head: he&lt;br&gt;\nIs for mischief always ready.&lt;br&gt;\nTeasing creatures - climbing fences,&lt;br&gt;\nStealing apples, pears, and quinces,&lt;br&gt;\nIs, of course, a deal more pleasant,&lt;br&gt;\nAnd far easier for the present,&lt;br&gt;\nThan to sit in schools or churches,&lt;br&gt;\nFixed like roosters on their perches\nBut O dear, O dear, O deary,&lt;br&gt;\nWhen the end comes sad and dreary!&lt;br&gt;\n'Tis a dreadful thing to tell&lt;br&gt;\nThat on Max and Moritz fell!&lt;br&gt;\nAll they did this book rehearses,&lt;br&gt;\nBoth in pictures and in verses.\nFirst Trick: The Widow.\nThe boys tie several crusts of bread together with thread, and lay this trap in the chicken yard of Bolte (or \"Tibbets\" in the English version), an old widow, causing all the chickens to become fatally entangled.\nThis prank is remarkably similar to the eighth history of the classic German prankster tales of Till Eulenspiegel.\nSecond Trick: The Widow II.\nAs the widow cooks her chickens, the boys sneak onto her roof. When she leaves her kitchen momentarily, the boys steal the chickens using a fishing pole down the chimney. The widow hears her dog barking and hurries upstairs, finds the hearth empty and beats the dog.\nThird Trick: The Tailor.\nThe boys torment B\u00f6ck (or \"Buck\" in the English version), a well-liked tailor who has a fast stream flowing in front of his house. They saw through the planks of his wooden bridgelet, making a precarious gap, then taunt him by making goat noises (a pun on his name being similar to the zoological expression 'buck'; in the English version, they use his name for a straight pun), until he runs outside. The bridge breaks; the tailor is swept away and nearly drowns (but for two geese, which he grabs a hold of and which fly high to safety).\nAlthough Till removes the planks of the bridge instead of sawing them, there are some similarities to Till Eulenspiegel (32nd History).\nFourth Trick: The Teacher.\nWhile their devout teacher, L\u00e4mpel, is busy at church, the boys invade his home and fill his favorite pipe with gunpowder. When he lights the pipe, the blast knocks him unconscious, blackens his skin and burns away all his hair. But: \"Time that comes will quick repair; yet the pipe retains its share.\"\nFifth Trick: The Uncle.\nThe boys collect bags full of May bugs, which they promptly deposit in their Uncle Fritz's bed. Uncle is nearly asleep when he feels the bugs walking on his nose. Horrified, he goes into a frenzy, killing them all before going back to sleep.\nSixth Trick: The Baker.\nThe boys invade a closed bakery to steal some Easter sweets. Attempting to steal pretzels, they fall into a vat of dough. The baker returns, catches the breaded pair, and bakes them. But they survive, and escape by gnawing through their crusts.\nFinal Trick: The Farmer.\nHiding out in the grain storage area of a farmer, Mecke (unnamed in the English version), the boys slit some grain sacks. Carrying away one of the sacks, farmer Mecke immediately notices the problem. He puts the boys in the sack instead, then takes it to the mill. The boys are ground to bits and devoured by the miller's ducks. Later, no one expresses regret.\nLegacy and cultural significance.\nBusch's classic tale of the terrible duo (now in the public domain) has since become a proud part of the culture in German-speaking countries. Even today, parents usually read these tales to their not-yet-literate children. To this day in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, a certain familiarity with the story and its rhymes is still presumed, as it is often referenced in mass communication. The two leering faces are synonymous with mischief, and appear almost logo-like in advertising and even graffiti.\n\"Max and Moritz\" is the first published original foreign children's book in Japan, translated into r\u014dmaji by Shinjir\u014d Shibutani and Kaname Oyaizu in 1887 as \"\" (\"Naughty stories\").\nDuring World War I, the Red Baron, Manfred von Richthofen, named his dog Moritz, giving the name Max to another animal given to his friend.\nThe two Sturer Emil vehicles produced in World War II were named Max and Moritz by their crews. \nAfter World War II, German-U.S. composer Richard Mohaupt, together with choreographer Alfredo Bortoluzzi, created \"Max und Moritz\u200a\", a burlesque dance (), which premiered at Badisches Staatstheater Karlsruhe on 18 December 1949.\nThe Max and Moritz story inspired Rudolph Dirks to create The Katzenjammer Kids, which would in turn serve as inspiration for Art Clokey to create his antagonists for Gumby, the Blockheads. \n\"Max and Moritz\" (along with \"The Katzenjammer Kids\") may have served as inspiration for Ragdoll Productions' British children's show \"Rosie and Jim\", Mike Judge's animated series \"Beavis and Butt-Head\", Terrence and Phillip of the Terrence and Phillip Show from \"South Park\" (the show's creators, Trey Parker and Matt Stone, having said South Park was inspired by \"Beavis and Butt-Head\"), and George Beard and Harold Hutchins in the \"Captain Underpants\" series by Dav Pilkey.\nThe Max &amp; Moritz Prize is an award for comic books, comic strips, and other similar materials, awarded at each of the biennial International Comics Shows of Erlangen since 1984.\n\"Der Fall Max und Moritz\" (), by J\u00f6rg M. G\u00fcnther, published in 1988, is a satirical treatment in which the various misdeeds in the story \u2013 both by the protagonists and their surroundings \u2013 are analysed via the regulations of the German Strafgesetzbuch.\nIn the early 2020s, the Efteling amusement park in the Netherlands opened a pair of rollercoasters named Max &amp; Moritz.\nMax and Moritz are featured in \"The Defeated\", a streaming television series distributed by Netflix in 2021. Set in 1946, in post-war Berlin, the two main characters are brothers named \"Max\" and \"Moritz\", and the book also features prominently throughout the series.\nAdaptations.\nBallet.\n\"Max und Moritz\" was adapted into a ballet by Richard Mohaupt and Alfredo Bortuluzzi. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19829", "revid": "50772559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19829", "title": "May Day", "text": "Festival marking the first day of summer\nMay Day is a European festival of ancient origins marking the beginning of summer, usually celebrated on May 1, around halfway between the Northern Hemisphere's spring equinox and midsummer solstice. Festivities may also be held the night before, known as May Eve. Traditions include gathering green branches and wildflowers (\"bringing in the May\"), which are used to decorate buildings and made into wreaths; crowning a May Queen, sometimes with a male companion decked in greenery; setting up a Maypole, May Tree, or May Bush, around which people dance and sing; as well as parades and processions involving these. Bonfires are also a major part of the festival in some regions. Regional varieties and related traditions include Walpurgis Night in central and northern Europe, the Gaelic festival Beltane, the Welsh festival Calan Mai, and May devotions to the Blessed Virgin Mary. It has also been associated with the ancient Roman festival Floralia.\nInternational Workers' Day observed on 1 May is also called \"May Day\", but the two have different histories.\nOrigins and celebrations.\nThe earliest known May celebrations appeared with the \"Floralia\", festival of Flora, the Roman goddess of flowers, held from 27 April to 3 May during the Roman Republic era, and the \"Maiouma\" or \"Maiuma\", a festival celebrating Dionysus and Aphrodite held every three years during the month of May. The \"Floralia\" opened with theatrical performances. In the \"Floralia\", Ovid says that hares and goats were released as part of the festivities. Persius writes that crowds were pelted with vetches, beans, and lupins. A ritual called the \"Florifertum\" was performed on either 27 April or 3 May, during which a bundle of wheat ears was carried into a shrine, though it is not clear if this devotion was made to Flora or Ceres. \"Floralia\" concluded with competitive events and spectacles, and a sacrifice to Flora.\n\"Maiouma\" was celebrated at least as early as the 2nd century AD, when records show expenses for the month-long festival were appropriated by Emperor Commodus. According to the 6th-century chronicles of John Malalas, the \"Maiouma\" was a \"nocturnal dramatic festival, held every three years and known as Orgies, that is, the Mysteries of Dionysus and Aphrodite\" and that it was \"known as the \"Maioumas\" because it is celebrated in the month of May-Artemisios\". During this time, enough money was set aside by the government for torches, lights, and other expenses to cover a 30-day festival of \"all-night revels.\" The \"Maiouma\" was celebrated with splendorous banquets and offerings. Its reputation for licentiousness caused it to be suppressed during the reign of Emperor Constantine, though a less debauched version of it was briefly restored during the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius, only to be suppressed again during the same period.\nDuring the Middle Ages, May Eve was celebrated in much of northern Europe with the lighting of bonfires at night. In the Germanic countries, this became Walpurgis Night, commemorating the official canonization of Saint Walpurga on 1 May 870. It continued the tradition of lighting bonfires. Folklorist Jack Santino says \"Her day and its traditions almost certainly are traceable to pre-Christian celebrations that took place at this time\". In Gaelic culture, 1 May was the celebration of \"Beltaine\" or \"C\u00e9tshamhain\", while for the Welsh it was \"Calan Mai\" or \"Cyntefin\". First attested in 900 AD, the celebration mainly focused on the symbolic use of fire to bless cattle and other livestock as they were moved to summer pastures. This custom continued into the early 19th century, during which time cattle would be made to jump over fires to protect their milk from being stolen by fairies. People would also leap over the fires for luck.\nSince the 18th century, many Roman Catholics have observed May \u2013 and May Day \u2013 with various May devotions to the Blessed Virgin Mary. In works of art, school skits, and so forth, Mary's head will often be adorned with flowers in a May crowning. 1 May is also one of two feast days of the Catholic patron saint of workers St Joseph the Worker, a carpenter, husband to Mother Mary, and foster father of Jesus. Replacing another feast to St. Joseph, this date was chosen by Pope Pius XII in 1955 as a counterpoint to the communist International Workers' Day celebrations on May Day.\nThe best known modern May Day traditions, observed both in Europe and North America, include dancing around the maypole and crowning the Queen of May. Fading in popularity since the late 20th century is the tradition of giving of \"May baskets\", small baskets of sweets or flowers, usually left anonymously on neighbours' doorsteps.\nIn the late 20th century, many neopagans began reconstructing some of the older pagan festivals and combining them with more recently developed European secular and Catholic traditions, and celebrating May Day as a pagan religious festival.\nGermanic regions.\nGermany.\nIn rural regions of Germany, especially the Harz Mountains, \"Walpurgisnacht\" celebrations are traditionally held on the night before May Day, including bonfires and the wrapping of a \"Maibaum\" (maypole). Young people use this opportunity to party, while the day itself is used by many families to get some fresh air. Motto: \"Tanz in den Mai\" (\"Dance into May\").\nIn the Rhineland, 1 May is also celebrated by the delivery of a maypole, a tree covered in streamers to the house of a girl the night before. The tree is typically from a love interest, though a tree wrapped only in white streamers is a sign of dislike. Women usually place roses or rice in the form of a heart at the house of their beloved one. It is common to stick the heart to a window or place it in front of the doormat. In leap years, it is the responsibility of the women to place the maypole. All the action is usually done secretly and it is an individual's choice whether to give a hint of their identity or stay anonymous.\nTyrol.\nIn \"\", Sir James George Frazer reported May Day customs in Tyrol during the 19th century. It was a time for banishing evil powers from the community. On the last three days of April, all houses were fumigated with juniper and rue incense. At sunset on May Day, the people held a ceremony they called \"burning out the witches\". The church bells were rung and people made as much noise as possible by shouting, banging pots and pans, ringing bells and cracking whips. Men carried lighted bundles of herbs fasted on poles, while women carried censers. Then they would run seven times round the houses and the village, so that the witches would be \"smoked out of their lurking-places and driven away\".\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, there are bonfires and outdoor celebrations on May Eve or Walpurgis Night (\"Valborgsm\u00e4ssoafton\") in the evening of 30 April. Most of the traditions associated elsewhere with May Day are held at Midsummer instead; such as Maypole dancing.\nUp until the 19th century, on May Day itself, there were mock battles between Summer and Winter. Sir James George Frazer wrote in \"The Golden Bough\" (1911):on May Day two troops of young men on horseback used to meet as if for mortal combat. One of them was led by a representative of Winter clad in furs, who threw snowballs and ice in order to prolong the cold weather. The other troop was commanded by a representative of Summer covered with fresh leaves and flowers. In the sham fight which followed the party of Summer came off victorious, and the ceremony ended with a feast\nCeltic regions.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, May Day has long been celebrated as the festival of \"Bealtaine\". It marks the beginning of summer and historically was when cattle were driven out to the summer pastures. Rituals were performed to protect cattle, people and crops, and to encourage growth. Special bonfires were kindled, whose flames, smoke and ashes were deemed to have protective powers. The people and their cattle would walk around or between bonfires, and sometimes leap over the flames or embers. All household fires would be doused and then re-lit from the Bealtaine bonfire. These gatherings would be accompanied by a feast, and some of the food and drink would be offered to the , the 'spirits' or 'fairies'. Doors, windows, byres and cattle would be decorated with yellow May flowers, perhaps because they evoked fire. In parts of Ireland, people would make a May Bush: typically a thorn bush or branch decorated with flowers, ribbons, bright shells and rushlights. Holy wells were also visited, while Bealtaine dew was thought to bring beauty and maintain youthfulness.\nFor almost two centuries, the Dublin suburb of Finglas was well known for its \"May Games\" and its maypole \"was one of the last to survive in Dublin\", according to historian Michael J. Tutty.\nThroughout the eighteenth century, the Finglas maypole was at the centre of a week of festivity which included \"the playing of games, various competitions, and, according to one account the crowning of 'Queen of the May'.\" In a letter written by Major Sirr on 2 May 1803 (shortly after the turbulent 1798 Rebellion), he writes:Godfrey and I went to Finglass and found everything in order. Major Wilkinson, who resides, there, waited upon me... and told me there was not the smallest occasion for military aid nor was there the least possibility of any disturbance... I ordered the guard to return to Dublin and these gentlemen and their families seemed quite rejoiced that the old custom of Maying was not to be interrupted in Finglass where that amusement has been kept up for a century past without ever being curbed before.Public celebrations of Bealtaine fell out of popularity by the 20th century and many old traditions are no longer widely observed. The tradition of a May Bush was reported as being suppressed by law and the magistrates in Dublin in the 18th century. The tradition of lighting bonfires has survived in parts of the country, and other traditions continue to be revived as local cultural events.\nScotland.\nMay Day has been celebrated in Scotland for centuries. It was previously closely associated with the Beltane festival. Reference to this earlier celebration is found in poem 'Peblis to the Play', contained in the Maitland Manuscripts of 15th- and 16th-century Scots poetry:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em;\"&gt;At Beltane, quhen ilk bodie bownis\nTo Peblis to the Play,\nTo heir the singin and the soundis;\nThe solace, suth to say,\nBe firth and forrest furth they found\nThay graythis tham full gay;\nGod wait that wald they do that stound,\nFor it was their feast day the day they celebrate May Day,\nThay said, [...]&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe poem describes the celebration in the town of Peebles in the Scottish Borders, which continues to stage a parade and pageant each year, including the annual 'Common Riding', which takes place in many towns throughout the Borders. As well as the crowning of a Beltane Queen each year, it is custom to sing 'The Beltane Song'.\nJohn Jamieson, in his \"Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language\" (1808) describes some of the May Day/Beltane customs which persisted in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries in parts of Scotland, which he noted were beginning to die out. In the nineteenth century, folklorist Alexander Carmichael (1832\u20131912), collected the song \"Am Beannachadh Bealltain\" (\"The Beltane Blessing\") in his \"Carmina Gadelica\", which he heard from a crofter in South Uist.\nScottish May Day/Beltane celebrations have been somewhat revived since the late twentieth century. Both Edinburgh and Glasgow organise May Day festivals and rallies. In Edinburgh, the Beltane Fire Festival is held on the evening of May eve and into the early hours of May Day on the city's Calton Hill. An older Edinburgh tradition has it that young women who climb Arthur's Seat and wash their faces in the morning dew will have lifelong beauty. At the University of St Andrews, some of the students gather on the beach late on 30 April and run into the North Sea at sunrise on May Day, occasionally naked. This is accompanied by torchlit processions and much elated celebration.\nWales.\nIn Wales, the first day of May is known as \"Calan Mai\" or \"Calan Haf\", and parallels the festival of Beltane and other May Day traditions in Europe.\nTraditions would start the night before (\"Nos Galan Haf\") with bonfires, and is considered a \"Ysbrydnos\" or \"spirit night\" when people would gather hawthorn (\"draenen wen\") and flowers to decorate their houses, celebrating new growth and fertility. While on May Day celebrations would include summer dancing (\"dawnsio haf\") and May carols (\"carolau mai\" or \"carolau haf\") othertimes referred to as \"singing under the wall\" (\"canu dan y pared),\" May Day was also a time for officially opening a village green (twmpath chwarae).\nEngland.\nTraditional English May Day rites and celebrations include crowning a May Queen and celebrations involving a maypole, around which dancers often circle with ribbons. Morris dancing is also often performed as part of May Day celebrations. The earliest records of maypole celebrations date to the 14th century, and by the 15th century the maypole tradition was well established in southern Britain.\nOn 1 May 1515, Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon rode from Greenwich Palace to have breakfast in an arbour constructed in a wood at Shooter's Hill. Catherine and her ladies were dressed in Spanish-style riding gear, Henry was in green velvet. The royal guard appeared in disguise as Robin Hood and his men. There was a pageant chariot or car with Lady May and Lady Flora, followed by a masque and dancing. The chronicle writer Edward Hall recorded the event as a \"Maying\".\nWriter Philip Stubbs described English May Day celebrations in the 1580s, involving a particularly large Maypole:\n\"They have twenty or forty yoke of oxen, every ox having a sweet nosegay of flowers tied to the tip of its horns, and these oxen draw home this maypole ... which is covered all over with flowers and herbs, bound about with strings, from the top to the bottom, and sometimes painted with variable colours, with two or three hundred men, women and children following it with great devotion. And thus being reared up, with handkerchiefs and flags streaming at the top, they strew the ground around about, bind green boughs about it, set up summer halls, bowers and arbours hard by it. And then they fall to banquet and feast, to leap and dance about it\".\nAnother prominent English May Day custom is Jack in the Green, an English folkloric figure who parades through the streets on May Day, accompanied by musicians, beggars, and various other characters. \nMay Day was abolished and its celebration banned by Puritan parliaments during the Interregnum, but reinstated with the restoration of Charles II in 1660.\nTraditional celebrations continue in some places, some with unbroken records (with some known breaks for world wars and COVID-19) for over a century, including: \nIn Cambridgeshire villages, young girls went May Dolling (going around the villages with dressed dolls and collecting pennies). This dressing of dolls and singing was said to have persisted into the 1960s in Swaffham Prior\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sing a song of May-time.\nSing a song of Spring.\nFlowers are in their beauty.\nBirds are on the wing.\nMay time, play time.\nGod has given us May time.\nThank Him for His gifts of love.\nSing a song of Spring.\nIn Oxford, it is a centuries-old tradition for May Morning revellers to gather below the Great Tower of Magdalen College at 6am to listen to the college choir sing traditional madrigals as a conclusion to the previous night's celebrations. Since the 1980s some people then jump off Magdalen Bridge into the River Cherwell. For some years, the bridge has been closed on 1 May to prevent people from jumping, as the water under the bridge is only deep and jumping from the bridge has resulted in serious injury in the past. There are still people who climb the barriers and leap into the water, causing themselves injury.\nPadstow in Cornwall holds its annual 'Obby-'Oss (Hobby Horse) day of festivities. This is believed to be one of the oldest fertility rites in the UK; revellers dance with the Oss through the streets of the town and even though the private gardens of the citizens, accompanied by accordion players and followers dressed in white with red or blue sashes who sing traditional May Day songs. The whole town is decorated with springtime greenery, and every year thousands of onlookers attend. Before the 19th century, distinctive May Day celebrations were widespread throughout West Cornwall, and are being revived in St Ives and Penzance. A similar 'Obby 'Oss festival is also held in the Somerset town of Minehead, dating back to at least the 19th century.\nKingsand, Cawsand and Millbrook in Cornwall celebrate Flower Boat Ritual on the May Day bank holiday. A model of the ship \"The Black Prince\" is covered in flowers and is taken in a procession from the Quay at Millbrook to the beach at Cawsand where it is cast adrift. The houses in the villages are decorated with flowers and people traditionally wear red and white clothes. There are further celebrations in Cawsand Square with Morris dancing and May pole dancing.\n'Dancing the sun up' is a tradition among Morris dancers to dance at sunrise on May Day, to welcome in the sun and the summer season. It began in Oxford in 1923, and includes dances, traditional May Day songs, and sometimes other activities such as mummers' plays or bonfires. This tradition has since spread across the world, with Morris dance teams dancing the sun up in Asia, Australia, Canada, France, New Zealand, and the USA.\nThe early May bank holiday on the first Monday in May was created in 1978; May Day itself\u00a0\u2013 1 May\u00a0\u2013 is not a public holiday in England (unless it falls on a Monday).\nFrance.\nIn Provence, 'May trees' decked with flowers and ribbons were traditionally set up on May Day in every village. It was also a tradition for young girls to be dressed in white, decked with crowns and wreaths of roses, and set on seats or platforms strewn with flowers in the streets. Their companions would go about asking for money from passers-by.\nOn 1 May 1561, King Charles IX of France received a lily of the valley as a lucky charm. He decided to offer a lily of the valley each year to the ladies of the court. At the beginning of the 20th century, it became custom to give a sprig of lily of the valley, a symbol of springtime, on 1 May. The government permits individuals and workers' organisations to sell them tax-free on that single day. Nowadays, people may present loved ones either with bunches of lily of the valley or dog rose flowers.\nCzechia.\nIn the Czech Republic, May Day is traditionally considered a holiday of love and May as a month of love. The celebrations of spring are held on 30 April when a maypole () is erected\u2014a tradition possibly connected to Beltane, since bonfires are also lit on the same day. The event is similar to German Walpurgisnacht, its public holiday on 30 April.\nOn 31 May, the maypole is taken down in an event called Maypole Felling.\nOn 1 May, couples in love kiss under a blooming tree. According to the ethnographer Kl\u00e1ra Posekan\u00e1, this is not an old habit. It most likely originated around the beginning of the 20th century in an urban environment, perhaps in connection with Karel Hynek M\u00e1cha's poem M\u00e1j (which is often recited during these days) and Pet\u0159\u00edn. This is usually done under a cherry, an apple or a birch tree.\nFinnic regions.\nEstonia.\nMay Day or \"Spring Day\" (\"Kevadp\u00fcha\") is a national holiday in Estonia celebrating the arrival of spring.\nMore traditional festivities take place throughout the night before and into the early hours of 1 May, on the Walpurgis Night (\"Volbri\u00f6\u00f6\").\nThe tradition of erecting maypoles (meiupuu) exists also in West-Estonia, but instead on 1 May, celebrations take place in Jaanip\u00e4ev.\nFinland.\nIn Finland, Walpurgis night (') (\"\") is one of the five biggest holidays along with Christmas Eve, New Year's Eve, Easter ('), and Midsummer ('). Walpurgis witnesses the biggest carnival-style festival held in Finland's cities and towns. The celebrations, which begin on the evening of 30 April and continue on 1 May, typically centre on the consumption of sima, sparkling wine and other alcoholic beverages. Student traditions, particularly those of engineering students, are one of the main characteristics of '. Since the end of the 19th century, this traditional upper-class feast has been appropriated by university students. Many \"\" (university-preparatory high school) alumni wear the black and white student cap and many higher education students wear student coveralls. One tradition is to drink sima, a home-made low-alcohol mead, along with freshly cooked funnel cakes.\nIberia.\nPortugal.\n\"Maias\" is a superstition throughout Portugal, with special focus on the northern territories and rarely elsewhere. Maias is the dominant naming in Northern Portugal, but it may be referred to by other names, including Dia das Bruxas (Witches' day), O Burro (the Donkey, referring to an evil spirit) or the last of April, as the local traditions preserved to this day occur on that evening only. People put the yellow flowers of broom, the bushes are known as giestas. The flowers of the bush are known as Maias, which are placed on doors or gates and every doorway of houses, windows, granaries, currently also cars, which the populace collect on the evening of 30 April when the Portuguese brooms are blooming, to defend those places from bad spirits, witches and the evil eye. The placement of the May flower or bush in the doorway must be done before midnight.\nThese festivities are a continuum of the \"Os Maios\" of Galiza. In ancient times, this was done while playing traditional night-music. In some places, children were dressed in these flowers and went from place to place begging for money or bread. On 1 May, people also used to sing \"Cantigas de Maio\", traditional songs related to this day and the whole month of May.\nThe origin of this tradition can be traced to the Catholic Church story of Mary and Joseph fleeing to Egypt to protect Jesus from Herod. It was said that brooms could be found at the door of the house holding Jesus, but when Herod's soldiers arrived to the place they found every door decorated with brooms.\nSpain.\nMay Day is celebrated throughout the country as \"Los Mayos\" (lit. \"the Mays\") often in a similar way to \"Fiesta de las Cruces\" in many parts of Hispanic America. One such example, in Galicia, is the festival \"\" (or \"Festa dos Maios\" in Galician, the local language). It has a Celtic origin (from the festivity of Beltane) and consists of different traditions, such as representations around a decorated tree or sculpture. People sing popular songs (also called \"maios\",) making mentions of social and political events during the past year, sometimes under the form of a converse, while they walk around the sculpture with the percussion of two sticks. In Lugo and in the village of Vilagarc\u00eda de Arousa it was usual to ask a tip to the attendees, which used to be a handful of dry chestnuts (\"casta\u00f1as maiolas\"), walnuts or hazelnuts. Today the tradition became a competition where the best sculptures and songs receive a prize.\nIn the Galician city of Ourense, this day is celebrated traditionally on 3 May, the day of the Holy Cross, that in the Christian tradition replaced the tree \"where the health, life and resurrection are,\" according to the introit of that day's mass.\nItaly.\nIn Italy it is called \"Calendimaggio\" or \"cantar maggio\" a seasonal feast held to celebrate the arrival of spring. The event takes its name from the period in which it takes place, that is, the beginning of May, from the Latin \"kalendae maiae\". The Calendimaggio is a tradition still alive today in many regions of Italy as an allegory of the return to life and rebirth: among these Piedmont, Liguria, Lombardy, Emilia-Romagna (for example, is celebrated in the area of the \"Quattro Province\" or Piacenza, Pavia, Alessandria and Genoa), Tuscany and Umbria. This magical-propitiatory ritual is often performed during an almsgiving in which, in exchange for gifts (traditionally eggs, wine, food or sweets), the Maggi (or maggerini) sing auspicious verses to the inhabitants of the houses they visit. Throughout the Italian peninsula these \"Il Maggio\" couplets are very diverse\u2014most are love songs with a strong romantic theme, that young people sang to celebrate the arrival of spring. Roman families traditionally eat pecorino with fresh fava beans during an excursion in the Roman Campagna. Symbols of spring revival are the trees (alder, golden rain) and flowers (violets, roses), mentioned in the verses of the songs, and with which the maggerini adorn themselves. In particular the plant alder, which grows along the rivers, is considered the symbol of life and that's why it is often present in the ritual.\nCalendimaggio can be historically noted in Tuscany as a mythical character who had a predominant role and met many of the attributes of the god Belenus. In Lucania, the 'Maggi' have a clear auspicious character of pagan origin. In Syracuse, Sicily, the \"Albero della Cuccagna\" (cf. \"Greasy pole\") is held during the month of May, a feast celebrated to commemorate the victory over the Athenians led by Nicias. However, Angelo de Gubernatis, in his work \"Mythology of Plants\", believes that without doubt the festival was previous to that of said victory.\nIt is a celebration that dates back to ancient peoples, and is very integrated with the rhythms of nature, such as the Celts (celebrating Beltane), Etruscans and Ligures, in which the arrival of summer was of great importance.\nSoutheastern Europe.\nBulgaria.\nOn May Day, Bulgarians celebrate Irminden (or Yeremiya, Eremiya, Irima, Zamski den). The holiday is associated with snakes and lizards and rituals are made in order to protect people from them. The name of the holiday comes from the prophet Jeremiah, but its origins are most probably pagan.\nIt is said that on the days of the Holy Forty or Annunciation snakes come out of their burrows, and on Irminden their king comes out. Old people believe that those working in the fields on this day will be bitten by a snake in summer.\nWestern Bulgarians light fires, jump over them and make noises to scare snakes. Another custom is to prepare \"podnici\" (special clay pots made for baking bread).\nThis day is especially observed by pregnant women so that their offspring do not catch \"yeremiya\"\u2014an illness due to evil powers.\nGreece.\n1 May is a day that celebrates Spring.\nMaios (Latin Maius), the month of May, took its name from the goddess Maia (Gr ), a Greek and Roman goddess of fertility. The day of Maios (Modern Greek \u03a0\u03c1\u03c9\u03c4\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03b3\u03b9\u03ac) celebrates the final victory of the summer against winter as the victory of life against death. The celebration is similar to an ancient ritual associated with another minor demi-god Adonis which also celebrated the revival of nature. There is today some conflation with yet another tradition, the revival or marriage of Dionysus (the Greek God of theatre and wine-making). This event, however, was celebrated in ancient times not in May but in association with the Anthesteria, a festival held in February and dedicated to the goddess of agriculture Demeter and her daughter Persephone. Persephone emerged every year at the end of winter from the Underworld. The Anthesteria was a festival of souls, plants and flowers, and Persephone's coming to earth from Hades marked the rebirth of nature, a common theme in all these traditions.\nWhat remains of the customs today, echoes these traditions of antiquity. A common, until recently, May Day custom involved the annual revival of a youth called Adonis, or alternatively of Dionysus, or of Maios (in Modern Greek \u039c\u03b1\u03b3\u03b9\u03cc\u03c0\u03bf\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf, the Son of Maia). In a simple theatrical ritual, the significance of which has long been forgotten, a chorus of young girls sang a song over a youth lying on the ground, representing Adonis, Dionysus or Maios. At the end of the song, the youth rose up and a flower wreath was placed on his head.\nThe most common aspect of modern May Day celebrations is the preparation of a flower wreath from wild flowers, although as a result of urbanisation there is an increasing trend to buy wreaths from flower shops. The flowers are placed on the wreath against a background of green leaves and the wreath is hung either on the entrance to the family house/apartment or on a balcony. It remains there until midsummer night. On that night, the flower wreaths are set alight in bonfires known as Saint John's fires. Youths leap over the flames consuming the flower wreaths. This custom has also practically disappeared, like the theatrical revival of Adonis/Dionysus/Maios, as a result of rising urban traffic and with no alternative public grounds in most Greek city neighbourhoods.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary it is called St. Philip and Jacob's day or sometimes Z\u00f6ldfarsang. However, contrary to the name, the ecclesiastical explanation of the feast actually refers to the miracle of St. Walpurga. In contrast, the Hexennacht tradition has survived in only a few places, with witchcraft traditions usually taking place on other days.\nThe Maj\u00e1lis, a merry folk festival, was usually held in a nearby forest, with the food and drink being taken along, which was usually attended by the whole town. There were sack-races, tree climbing, wrestling, strength tests, horse races, singing, dancing and military songs. It was a day of relaxing and walking in nature.\nThe Maj\u00e1lis has a rich tradition in the country, celebrated with dance festivals, concert series and funfairs, set up all throughout the country. There is also an \"utcab\u00e1l\" (\"street bal\"), when the streets are often filled with dancing residents.\nIn smaller settlements like (in e.g. Pilisszentkereszt) together with their neighbouring municipalities, set up a May Pole.\nIn Hungary it was customary to set up May Poles (m\u00e1jfa or m\u00e1jusfa) in several places in the town. It was usually set on May Day or Pentecost. Sometimes they were just tied to the fence, but most of the time they were planted in the ground. The trees were carved and erected in secret, usually in the dead of night. The aim was always to go out with the girls. the boys set them up (usually one for every unmarried girl) and it was danced around together. For the night the tree was usually guarded, so that it would not be taken away by rivals, or toppled by a rival's courting team.\n\"Drink water on an empty stomach: the lungs will be renewed\" - they used to say in Transylvania, where it was customary for girls to go to the spring or river on this day to wash their faces in water, which was believed to have magical powers to make them beautiful and healthy. Other superstitions include decorating the house with elderberries to ward off witches, and that the butter spat out on this day, called Philip-Jacob butter, can be used to treat earache.\nRomania.\nOn May Day, the Romanians celebrate the \"arminden\" (or \"armindeni\"), the beginning of summer, symbolically tied with the protection of crops and farm animals. The name comes from Slavonic \"Jeremiin\u016d d\u012dn\u012d\", meaning prophet Jeremiah's day, but the celebration rites and habits of this day are apotropaic and pagan (possibly originating in the cult of the god Pan).\nThe day is also called \"ziua pelinului\" (\"mugwort day\") or \"ziua be\u021bivilor\" (\"drunkards' day\") and it is celebrated to ensure good wine in autumn and, for people and farm animals alike, good health and protection from the elements of nature (storms, hail, illness, pests). People would have parties in natural surroundings, with \"l\u0103utari\" (fiddlers) for those who could afford it. Then it is customary to roast and eat lamb, along with new mutton cheese, and to drink mugwort-flavoured wine, or just red wine, to refresh the blood and get protection from diseases. On the way back, the men wear lilac or mugwort flowers on their hats.\nOther apotropaic rites include, in some areas of the country, people washing their faces with the morning dew (for good health) and adorning the gates for good luck and abundance with green branches or with birch saplings (for the houses with maiden girls). The entries to the animals' shelters are also adorned with green branches. All branches are left in place until the wheat harvest when they are used in the fire which will bake the first bread from the new wheat.\nOn May Day eve, country women do not work in the field as well as in the house to avoid devastating storms and hail coming down on the village.\n\"Arminden\" is also \"ziua boilor\" (oxen day) and thus the animals are not to be used for work, or else they could die or their owners could get ill.\nIt is said that the weather is always good on May Day to allow people to celebrate.\nSerbia.\n\"Prvomajski uranak\" (Reveille on 1 May) is a folk tradition and feast that consists of the fact that on 1 May, people go in the nature or even leave the day before and spend the night with a camp fire. Most of the time, a dish is cooked in a kettle or in a barbecue. Among Serbs this holiday is widespread. Almost every town in Serbia has its own traditional first-of-may excursion sites, and most often these are green areas outside the city.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nMay Day is celebrated in some parts of the provinces of British Columbia, Quebec, New Brunswick and Ontario.\nToronto\nIn Toronto, on the morning of 1 May, various Morris Dancing troops from Toronto and Hamilton gather on the road by Grenadier Cafe, in High Park to \"dance in the May\". The dancers and crowd then gather together and sing traditional May Day songs such as Hal-An-Tow and Padstow.\nBritish Columbia\nCelebrations often take place not on 1 May but during the Victoria Day long weekend, later in the month and when the weather is likely to be better. The longest continually observed May Day in the British Commonwealth is held in the city of New Westminster, BC. There, the first May Day celebration was held on 4 May 1870.\nUnited States.\nEarly European settlers of the Americas brought their May Day traditions with them, and May Day is still celebrated in many parts of the United States, with customs that vary from region to region. In some parts of the United States, May baskets are made. These are small baskets usually filled with flowers or treats and left at someone's doorstep. The giver rings the bell and runs away.\nMay Day celebrations were common at women's colleges and academic institutions in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, a tradition that continues at Bryn Mawr College and Brenau University to this day.\nIn Minneapolis, the May Day Parade and Festival is presented annually on the first Sunday in May, and draws around 50,000 people to Powderhorn Park. The festival was originated by In the Heart of the Beast Puppet and Mask Theatre and is now decentralized and community-run. On 1 May itself, local Morris Dance sides converge on an overlook of the Mississippi River at dawn, and then spend the remainder of the day dancing around the metro area.\nMorris dancers in the US have continued the English custom of 'dancing the sun up' on May Day, dancing at sunrise to welcome in the sun and the summer season. In 2024, Morris dancers danced the sun up in Colorado, Connecticut, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Missouri, Montana, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Washington, and Wisconsin.\nHawaii\nIn Hawaii, May Day is also known as Lei Day, and it is normally set aside as a day to celebrate island culture in general and the culture of the Native Hawaiians in particular. Invented by poet and local newspaper columnist Don Blanding, the first Lei Day was celebrated on 1 May 1927 in Honolulu. Leonard \"Red\" and Ruth Hawk composed \"May Day Is Lei Day in Hawai'i\", the traditional holiday song.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19830", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19830", "title": "Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution", "text": "Specific probability distribution function, important in physics\n \\, \\frac{x^2}{a^3} \\, \\exp\\left(\\frac{-x^2}{2a^2} \\right)&lt;/math&gt; \nIn physics (in particular in statistical mechanics), the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution, or Maxwell(ian) distribution, is a particular probability distribution named after James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann.\nIt was first defined and used for describing particle speeds in idealized gases, where the particles move freely inside a stationary container without interacting with one another, except for very brief collisions in which they exchange energy and momentum with each other or with their thermal environment. The term \"particle\" in this context refers to gaseous particles only (atoms or molecules), and the system of particles is assumed to have reached thermodynamic equilibrium. The energies of such particles follow what is known as Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann statistics, and the statistical distribution of speeds is derived by equating particle energies with kinetic energy.\nMathematically, the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution is the chi distribution with three degrees of freedom (the components of the velocity vector in Euclidean space), with a scale parameter measuring speeds in units proportional to the square root of formula_8 (the ratio of temperature and particle mass).\nThe Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution is a result of the kinetic theory of gases, which provides a simplified explanation of many fundamental gaseous properties, including pressure and diffusion. The Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution applies fundamentally to particle velocities in three dimensions, but turns out to depend only on the speed (the magnitude of the velocity) of the particles. A particle speed probability distribution indicates which speeds are more likely: a randomly chosen particle will have a speed selected randomly from the distribution, and is more likely to be within one range of speeds than another. The kinetic theory of gases applies to the classical ideal gas, which is an idealization of real gases. In real gases, there are various effects (e.g., van der Waals interactions, vortical flow, relativistic speed limits, and quantum exchange interactions) that can make their speed distribution different from the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann form. However, rarefied gases at ordinary temperatures behave very nearly like an ideal gas and the Maxwell speed distribution is an excellent approximation for such gases. This is also true for ideal plasmas, which are ionized gases of sufficiently low density.\nThe distribution was first derived by Maxwell in 1860 on heuristic grounds. Boltzmann later, in the 1870s, carried out significant investigations into the physical origins of this distribution. The distribution can be derived on the ground that it maximizes the entropy of the system. A list of derivations are:\nDistribution function.\nFor a system containing a large number of identical non-interacting, non-relativistic classical particles in thermodynamic equilibrium, the fraction of the particles within an infinitesimal element of the three-dimensional velocity space \"d\"\u20093v, centered on a velocity vector formula_10 of magnitude formula_11, is given by\nformula_12\nwhere:\nOne can write the element of velocity space as formula_15, for velocities in a standard Cartesian coordinate system, or as formula_16 in a standard spherical coordinate system, where formula_17 is an element of solid angle and formula_18. \nAlternately, the distribution function can also be written in momentum space asformula_19where formula_20 is the momentum vector. \nThe Maxwellian distribution function for particles moving in only one direction, if this direction is x, is a normal distribution with a standard deviation of formula_21:\nformula_22\nwhich can be obtained by integrating the three-dimensional form given above over vy and vz.\nRecognizing the symmetry of formula_23, one can integrate over solid angle and write a probability distribution of speeds as the function\nformula_24\nThis probability density function gives the probability, per unit speed, of finding the particle with a speed near v. This equation is simply the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution (given in the infobox) with distribution parameter formula_25 \nThe Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution is equivalent to the chi distribution with three degrees of freedom and scale parameter formula_25\nThe simplest ordinary differential equation satisfied by the distribution is:\nformula_27\nor in unitless presentation:\nformula_28\nWith the Darwin\u2013Fowler method of mean values, the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution is obtained as an exact result.\nRelaxation to the 2D Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution.\nFor particles confined to move in a plane, the speed distribution is given by\nformula_29\nThis distribution is used for describing systems in equilibrium. However, most systems do not start out in their equilibrium state. The evolution of a system towards its equilibrium state is governed by the Boltzmann equation. The equation predicts that for short range interactions, the equilibrium velocity distribution will follow a Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution. To the right is a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation in which 900\u00a0hard sphere particles are constrained to move in a rectangle. They interact via perfectly elastic collisions. The system is initialized out of equilibrium, but the velocity distribution (in blue) quickly converges to the 2D Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution (in orange).\nTypical speeds.\nThe mean speed formula_30, most probable speed (mode) \"v\"p, and root-mean-square speed formula_31 can be obtained from properties of the Maxwell distribution.\nThis works well for nearly ideal, monatomic gases like helium, but also for molecular gases like diatomic oxygen. This is because despite the larger heat capacity (larger internal energy at the same temperature) due to their larger number of degrees of freedom, their translational kinetic energy (and thus their speed) is unchanged.\n&lt;/math&gt; is still the mean translational kinetic energy. Nitrogen being diatomic only affects the value of the molar mass \"M\" =.\nSee e.g. K. Prakashan, \"Engineering Physics\" (2001), https://.&lt;/ref&gt; at room temperature (), this gives\nformula_32\nIn summary, the typical speeds are related as follows:\nformula_39\nThe root mean square speed is directly related to the speed of sound c in the gas, by\nformula_40\nwhere formula_41 is the adiabatic index, f is the number of degrees of freedom of the individual gas molecule. For the example above, diatomic nitrogen (approximating air) at , formula_42 and\nformula_43\nthe true value for air can be approximated by using the average molar weight of air (), yielding at (corrections for variable humidity are of the order of 0.1% to 0.6%).\nThe average relative velocity\nformula_44\nwhere the three-dimensional velocity distribution is\nformula_45\nThe integral can easily be done by changing to coordinates formula_46 and formula_47\nLimitations.\nThe Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution assumes that the velocities of individual particles are much less than the speed of light, i.e. that formula_48. For electrons, the temperature of electrons must be formula_49. For distribution of speeds of relativistic particles, see Maxwell\u2013J\u00fcttner distribution.\nDerivation and related distributions.\nMaxwell\u2013Boltzmann statistics.\nThe original derivation in 1860 by James Clerk Maxwell was an argument based on molecular collisions of the Kinetic theory of gases as well as certain symmetries in the speed distribution function; Maxwell also gave an early argument that these molecular collisions entail a tendency towards equilibrium. After Maxwell, Ludwig Boltzmann in 1872 also derived the distribution on mechanical grounds and argued that gases should over time tend toward this distribution, due to collisions (see H-theorem). He later (1877) derived the distribution again under the framework of statistical thermodynamics. The derivations in this section are along the lines of Boltzmann's 1877 derivation, starting with result known as Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann statistics (from statistical thermodynamics). Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann statistics gives the average number of particles found in a given single-particle microstate. Under certain assumptions, the logarithm of the fraction of particles in a given microstate is linear in the ratio of the energy of that state to the temperature of the system: there are constants formula_50 and formula_51 such that, for all formula_52,\nformula_53\nThe assumptions of this equation are that the particles do not interact, and that they are classical; this means that each particle's state can be considered independently from the other particles' states. Additionally, the particles are assumed to be in thermal equilibrium.\nThis relation can be written as an equation by introducing a normalizing factor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere:\nThe denominator in equation 1 is a normalizing factor so that the ratios formula_54 add up to unity \u2014 in other words it is a kind of partition function (for the single-particle system, not the usual partition function of the entire system).\nBecause velocity and speed are related to energy, Equation (1) can be used to derive relationships between temperature and the speeds of gas particles. All that is needed is to discover the density of microstates in energy, which is determined by dividing up momentum space into equal sized regions.\nDistribution for the momentum vector.\nThe potential energy is taken to be zero, so that all energy is in the form of kinetic energy.\nThe relationship between kinetic energy and momentum for massive non-relativistic particles is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere \"p\"2 is the square of the momentum vector p = [\"px\", \"py\", \"pz\"]. We may therefore rewrite Equation (1) as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere:\nThis distribution of \"Ni\" : \"N\" is proportional to the probability density function \"f\"p for finding a molecule with these values of momentum components, so:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe normalizing constant can be determined by recognizing that the probability of a molecule having \"some\" momentum must be 1.\nIntegrating the exponential in equation 4 over all px, py, and pz yields a factor of \nformula_55\nSo that the normalized distribution function is:\nformula_56\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0(6)\nThe distribution is seen to be the product of three independent normally distributed variables formula_57, formula_58, and formula_59, with variance formula_60. Additionally, it can be seen that the magnitude of momentum will be distributed as a Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution, with formula_61. The Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution for the momentum (or equally for the velocities) can be obtained more fundamentally using the H-theorem at equilibrium within the Kinetic theory of gases framework.\nDistribution for the energy.\nThe energy distribution is found imposing\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_62 is the infinitesimal phase-space volume of momenta corresponding to the energy interval dE.\nMaking use of the spherical symmetry of the energy-momentum dispersion relation formula_63 this can be expressed in terms of dE as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUsing then (8) in (7), and expressing everything in terms of the energy E, we get\nformula_64\nand finally\nformula_65\nSince the energy is proportional to the sum of the squares of the three normally distributed momentum components, this energy distribution can be written equivalently as a gamma distribution, using a shape parameter, formula_66 and a scale parameter, formula_67\nUsing the equipartition theorem, given that the energy is evenly distributed among all three degrees of freedom in equilibrium, we can also split formula_68 into a set of chi-squared distributions, where the energy per degree of freedom, \u03b5 is distributed as a chi-squared distribution with one degree of freedom,\nformula_69\nAt equilibrium, this distribution will hold true for any number of degrees of freedom. For example, if the particles are rigid mass dipoles of fixed dipole moment, they will have three translational degrees of freedom and two additional rotational degrees of freedom. The energy in each degree of freedom will be described according to the above chi-squared distribution with one degree of freedom, and the total energy will be distributed according to a chi-squared distribution with five degrees of freedom. This has implications in the theory of the specific heat of a gas.\nDistribution for the velocity vector.\nRecognizing that the velocity probability density \"f\"v is proportional to the momentum probability density function by\nformula_70\nand using p = \"m\"v we get\nformula_71\nwhich is the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann velocity distribution. The probability of finding a particle with velocity in the infinitesimal element [\"dvx\", \"dvy\", \"dvz\"] about velocity v = [\"vx\", \"vy\", \"vz\"] is\nformula_72\nLike the momentum, this distribution is seen to be the product of three independent normally distributed variables formula_73, formula_74, and formula_75, but with variance formula_76.\nIt can also be seen that the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann velocity distribution for the vector velocity\n[\"vx\", \"vy\", \"vz\"] is the product of the distributions for each of the three directions:\nformula_77\nwhere the distribution for a single direction is\nformula_78\nEach component of the velocity vector has a normal distribution with mean formula_79 and standard deviation formula_80, so the vector has a 3-dimensional normal distribution, a particular kind of multivariate normal distribution, with mean formula_81 and covariance formula_82, where formula_83 is the 3 \u00d7 3 identity matrix.\nA notable property of the distribution for the velocity vector is direction-independence, which means that velocity components are normally distributed in any selected direction, not only in three base directions formula_84, formula_85, and formula_86.\nDistribution for the speed.\nThe Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution for the speed follows immediately from the distribution of the velocity vector, above. Note that the speed is\nformula_87\nand the volume element in spherical coordinates\nformula_88\nwhere formula_89 and formula_90 are the spherical coordinate angles of the velocity vector. Integration of the probability density function of the velocity over the solid angles formula_91 yields an additional factor of formula_92.\nThe speed distribution with substitution of the speed for the sum of the squares of the vector components:\nIn \"n\"-dimensional space.\nIn n-dimensional space, Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann distribution becomes:\nformula_94\nSpeed distribution becomes:\nformula_95\nwhere formula_96 is a normalizing constant.\nThe following integral result is useful:\nformula_97\nwhere formula_98 is the Gamma function. This result can be used to calculate the moments of speed distribution function:\nformula_99\nwhich is the mean speed itself formula_100\nformula_101\nwhich gives root-mean-square speed formula_102\nThe derivative of speed distribution function:\nformula_103\nThis yields the most probable speed (mode) formula_104\nExtension to real gases.\nThe derivations show that the validity of the Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann velocity distribution is limited to ideal gases. A generalization of the formula to all gases (ideal and real alike) is known, its derivation starts from the fact that the properties of both ideal and real gases must be independent of the direction. The formula obtained contains formula_105 terms instead of formula_106, where formula_107 is the pressure, formula_108 is the molar volume of the gas sample: \nformula_109\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19831", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19831", "title": "Margaret Thatcher", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1979 to 1990\nMargaret Hilda Thatcher, Baroness Thatcher (n\u00e9e\u00a0Roberts; 13 October 1925\u00a0\u2013 8 April 2013), was a British stateswoman who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1979 to 1990 and leader of the Conservative Party from 1975 to 1990. She was the longest-serving British prime minister of the 20th century and the first woman to hold the position. As prime minister, she implemented policies that came to be known as Thatcherism. A Soviet journalist dubbed her the \"Iron Lady\", a nickname that became associated with her uncompromising politics and leadership style.\nThatcher studied chemistry at Somerville College, Oxford, and worked briefly as a research chemist before becoming a barrister. She was elected Member of Parliament for Finchley in 1959. Edward Heath appointed her secretary of state for education and science in his 1970\u20131974 government. In 1975, she defeated Heath in the Conservative Party leadership election to become leader of the opposition, the first woman to lead a major political party in the UK.\nUpon becoming prime minister following her win in the 1979 general election, Thatcher introduced a series of economic policies intended to reverse high inflation and Britain's struggles in the wake of the Winter of Discontent and an oncoming recession. Her political philosophy and economic policies emphasised greater individual liberty, the privatisation of state-owned companies, and reducing the power and influence of trade unions. Her popularity in her first years in office waned amid the recession and rising unemployment. Victory in the 1982 Falklands War and the recovering economy brought a resurgence of support, resulting in her landslide re-election in 1983. She survived an assassination attempt by the Provisional IRA in the 1984 Brighton hotel bombing and achieved a political victory against the National Union of Mineworkers in the 1984\u201385 miners' strike. In 1986, Thatcher oversaw the deregulation of UK financial markets, leading to an economic boom in what came to be known as the Big Bang. Thatcher was re-elected for a third time in another landslide in 1987; however, her subsequent support for the Community Charge (also known as the \"poll tax\") was widely unpopular, and her increasingly Eurosceptic views on the European Community were not shared by others in her cabinet. In 1990, Thatcher resigned as party leader and prime minister following a challenge to her leadership; she was succeeded by John Major, her chancellor of the Exchequer.\nAfter retiring from the Commons in 1992, she was given a life peerage as Baroness Thatcher (of Kesteven in the County of Lincolnshire) which entitled her to sit in the House of Lords. In 2013, she died of a stroke at the Ritz Hotel, London, at the age of 87. A polarising figure in British politics, Thatcher is nonetheless viewed favourably in historical rankings and public opinion of British prime ministers. Her tenure constituted a realignment towards neoliberal policies in Britain; the complex legacy attributed to this shift continues to be debated into the 21st century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nFamily and childhood (1925\u20131943).\nMargaret Hilda Roberts was born on 13 October 1925 in Grantham, Lincolnshire. Her parents were Alfred Roberts (1892\u20131970), from Northamptonshire, and Beatrice Ethel Stephenson (1888\u20131960), from Lincolnshire. Her father's maternal grandmother, Catherine Sullivan, was born in County Kerry, Ireland.\nRoberts spent her childhood in Grantham, where her father owned a tobacconist's and a grocery shop. In 1938, before the Second World War, the Roberts family briefly gave sanctuary to a teenage Jewish girl who had escaped Nazi Germany. With her elder sister Muriel, Margaret saved pocket money to help pay for the teenager's journey.\nAlfred was an alderman and a Methodist local preacher. He brought up his daughter as a strict Wesleyan Methodist, attending the Finkin Street Methodist Church, but Margaret was more sceptical; the future scientist told a friend that she could not believe in angels, having calculated that they needed a breastbone long to support wings. Alfred came from a Liberal family but stood (as was then customary in local government) as an Independent. He served as Mayor of Grantham from 1945 to 1946 and lost his position as alderman in 1952 after the Labour Party won its first majority on Grantham Council in 1950.\nRoberts attended Huntingtower Road Primary School and won a scholarship to Kesteven and Grantham Girls' School, a grammar school. Her school reports showed hard work and continual improvement; her extracurricular activities included the piano, field hockey, poetry recitals, swimming and walking. She was head girl in 1942\u201343, and outside school, while the Second World War was ongoing, she voluntarily worked as a fire watcher in the local ARP service. Other students thought of Roberts as the \"star scientist\", although mistaken advice regarding cleaning ink from parquetry almost caused chlorine gas poisoning. In her upper sixth year, Roberts was accepted for a scholarship to study chemistry at Somerville College, Oxford, a women's college, starting in 1944. After another candidate withdrew, Roberts entered Oxford in October 1943.\nOxford (1943\u20131947).\nFollowing her arrival at Oxford, Roberts began studies under X-ray crystallographer Dorothy Hodgkin, the tutor in chemistry for Somerville College since 1934. Hodgkin considered Roberts a \"good\" student, and later recalled that \"one could always rely on her producing a sensible, well-read essay.\" She opted to read for a classified honours degree, entailing an additional year of supervised research. As her thesis supervisor, Hodgkin assigned Roberts to work with Gerhard Schmidt, a researcher in Hodgkin's lab, to determine the structure of the antibiotic peptide gramicidin S. Although the research made some progress, the peptide's structure proved more complex than anticipated, and Schmidt would only determine its full structure much later; Roberts (by then Thatcher) learned this in the 1960s while visiting the Weizmann Institute, where her former research partner was then working.\nRoberts graduated in 1947 with a second-class honours degree in chemistry, and in 1950 also received the degree of Master of Arts (as an Oxford BA, she was entitled to the degree 21 terms after her matriculation). Although Hodgkin would later be critical of her former student's politics, they continued to correspond into the 1980s, and Roberts in her memoirs would describe her mentor as \"ever-helpful\", \"a brilliant scientist and a gifted teacher\". As prime minister, she would keep a portrait of Hodgkin at 10 Downing Street. Later in life, she was reportedly prouder of becoming the first prime minister with a science degree than becoming the first female prime minister. While prime minister, she attempted to preserve Somerville as a women's college. Twice a week outside study, she worked in a local forces canteen.\nDuring her time at Oxford, Roberts was noted for her isolated and serious attitude. Her first boyfriend, Tony Bray (1926\u20132014), recalled that she was \"very thoughtful and a very good conversationalist. That's probably what interested me. She was good at general subjects\".\nShe was a member of Wesley Memorial Church, became a lay preacher and joined the John Wesley Society. She also attended Somerville College Chapel and St\u00a0Mary's.\nRoberts's coursework involved subjects beyond chemistry as she was already contemplating an entry into law and politics. Her enthusiasm for politics as a girl made Bray think of her as \"unusual\" and her parents as \"slightly austere\" and \"very proper\". Roberts became President of the Oxford University Conservative Association in 1946. She was influenced at university by political works such as Friedrich Hayek's \"The Road to Serfdom\" (1944), which condemned economic intervention by government as a precursor to an authoritarian state.\nPost-Oxford career (1947\u20131951).\nAfter graduating, Roberts secured a position as a research chemist for British Xylonite (BX Plastics) following a series of interviews arranged by Oxford; she subsequently moved to Colchester in Essex to work at the firm. Little is known about her brief time there. By her own account, she was initially enthusiastic about the position, as she had been intended to function as a personal assistant to the company's head of research and development, providing opportunities to learn about operations management: \"But on my arrival it was decided that there was not enough to do in that capacity.\" Instead, she seems to have researched methods of attaching polyvinyl chloride (PVC) to metals. While with the firm, she joined the Association of Scientific Workers. In 1948, she applied for a job at Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) but was rejected after the personnel department assessed her as \"headstrong, obstinate and dangerously self-opinionated\". Jon Agar in \"Notes and Records\" argues that her understanding of modern scientific research later impacted her views as prime minister.\nRoberts joined the local Conservative Association and attended the party conference at Llandudno, Wales, in 1948, as a representative of the University Graduate Conservative Association. Meanwhile, she became a high-ranking affiliate of the Vermin Club, a group of grassroots Conservatives formed in response to a derogatory comment made by Aneurin Bevan. One of her Oxford friends was also a friend of the Chair of the Dartford Conservative Association in Kent, who were looking for candidates. Officials of the association were so impressed by her that they asked her to apply, even though she was not on the party's approved list; she was selected in January 1950 (aged 24) and added to the approved list \"post ante\".\nAt a dinner following her formal adoption as Conservative candidate for Dartford in February 1949, she met divorc\u00e9 Denis Thatcher, a successful and wealthy businessman, who drove her to her Essex train. After their first meeting, she described him to Muriel as \"not a very attractive creature \u2013 very reserved but quite nice\". In preparation for the election, Roberts moved to Dartford, while she supported herself by working as a research chemist for J. Lyons and Co. in Hammersmith, reportedly as part of a team developing emulsifiers for ice cream. As the work was more theoretical in nature than during her prior role with BX Plastics, Roberts found it \"more satisfying\". While at Lyons, she worked under the supervision of Hans Jellinek, who headed the company's physical chemistry section. Jellinek assigned her to research the saponification of \u03b1-monostearin (glycerol monostearate), which has properties as an emulsifier, stabiliser and food preservative. Agar has noted the research may have been connected with the emulsification of ice cream, but only as a possibility. In September 1951, their research was published in the \"Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture\", a recently launched publication of the Society of Chemical Industry, as \"The saponification of \u03b1-monostearin in a monolayer\". This would be Roberts's sole scientific publication. In 1979, following his former assistant's election as prime minister, Jellinek, by then a professor of physical chemistry at Clarkson University in the United States, said she had done \"a very good job\" on the project, \"showing great determination\". She sent Jellinek a congratulatory letter upon his retirement in 1984, and another letter shortly before his death two years later.\nRoberts married at Wesley's Chapel and her children were baptised there, but she and her husband began attending Church of England services and would later convert to Anglicanism.\nEarly political career.\nIn the 1950 and 1951 general elections, Roberts was the Conservative candidate for the Labour seat of Dartford. The local party selected her as its candidate because, though not a dynamic public speaker, Roberts was well-prepared and fearless in her answers. A prospective candidate, Bill Deedes, recalled: \"Once she opened her mouth, the rest of us began to look rather second-rate.\" She attracted media attention as the youngest and the only female candidate; in 1950, she was the youngest Conservative candidate in the country. She lost on both occasions to Norman Dodds but reduced the Labour majority by 6,000 and then a further 1,000. During the campaigns, she was supported by her parents and by her future husband Denis Thatcher, whom she married in December 1951. She trained at the Inns of Court School of Law (now part of The City Law School) and qualified as a barrister in 1953 (specialising in taxation). Denis funded his wife's studies for the bar. Later that same year, their twins Carol and Mark were born, delivered prematurely by Caesarean section.\nMember of Parliament (1959\u20131970).\nIn 1954, Thatcher was defeated when she sought selection to be the Conservative Party candidate for the Orpington by-election of January 1955. She chose not to stand as a candidate in the 1955 general election, in later years, stating: \"I really just felt the twins were [...] only two, I really felt that it was too soon. I couldn't do that.\" Afterwards, Thatcher began looking for a Conservative safe seat and was selected as the candidate for Finchley in April 1958 (narrowly beating Ian Montagu Fraser). She was elected as MP for the seat after a hard campaign in the 1959 election. Benefiting from her fortunate result in a lottery for backbenchers to propose new legislation, Thatcher's maiden speech was, unusually, in support of her private member's bill, the Public Bodies (Admission to Meetings) Act 1960, requiring local authorities to hold their council meetings in public; the bill was successful and became law. In 1961 she went against the Conservative Party's official position by voting for the restoration of birching as a judicial corporal punishment.\nOn the frontbenches.\nThatcher's talent and drive caused her to be mentioned as a future prime minister in her early 20s although she herself was more pessimistic, stating as late as 1970: \"There will not be a woman prime minister in my lifetime \u2013 the male population is too prejudiced.\" In October 1961 she was promoted to the frontbench as Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry for Pensions by Harold Macmillan. Thatcher was the youngest woman in history to receive such a post, and among the first MPs elected in 1959 to be promoted. After the Conservatives lost the 1964 election, she became spokeswoman on housing and land. In that position, she advocated her party's policy of giving tenants the right to buy their council houses. She moved to the Shadow Treasury team in 1966 and, as Treasury spokeswoman, opposed Labour's mandatory price and income controls, arguing they would unintentionally produce effects that would distort the economy.\nJim Prior suggested Thatcher as a Shadow Cabinet member after the Conservatives' 1966 defeat, but party leader Edward Heath and Chief Whip William Whitelaw eventually chose Mervyn Pike as the Conservative shadow cabinet's sole woman member. At the 1966 Conservative Party conference, Thatcher criticised the high-tax policies of the Labour government as being steps \"not only towards Socialism, but towards Communism\", arguing that lower taxes served as an incentive to hard work. Thatcher was one of the few Conservative MPs to support Leo Abse's bill to decriminalise male homosexuality. She voted in favour of David Steel's bill to legalise abortion, as well as a ban on hare coursing. She supported the retention of capital punishment and voted against the relaxation of divorce laws.\nIn the Shadow Cabinet.\nIn 1967, the United States Embassy chose Thatcher to take part in the International Visitor Leadership Program (then called the Foreign Leader Program), a professional exchange programme that allowed her to spend about six weeks visiting various US cities and political figures as well as institutions such as the International Monetary Fund. Although she was not yet a Shadow Cabinet member, the embassy reportedly described her to the State Department as a possible future prime minister. The description helped Thatcher meet with prominent people during a busy itinerary focused on economic issues, including Paul Samuelson, Walt Rostow, Pierre-Paul Schweitzer and Nelson Rockefeller. Following the visit, Heath appointed Thatcher to the Shadow Cabinet as fuel and power spokeswoman. Before the 1970 general election, she was promoted to shadow transport spokeswoman and later to education.\nIn 1968, Enoch Powell delivered his \"Rivers of Blood\" speech in which he strongly criticised Commonwealth immigration to the United Kingdom and the then-proposed Race Relations Bill. When Heath telephoned Thatcher to inform her that he would sack Powell from the Shadow Cabinet, she recalled that she \"really thought that it was better to let things cool down for the present rather than heighten the crisis\". She believed that his main points about Commonwealth immigration were correct and that the selected quotations from his speech had been taken out of context. In a 1991 interview for \"Today\", Thatcher stated that she thought Powell had \"made a valid argument, if in sometimes regrettable terms\".\nAround this time, she gave her first Commons speech as a shadow transport minister and highlighted the need for investment in British Rail. She argued: \"[I]f we build bigger and better roads, they would soon be saturated with more vehicles and we would be no nearer solving the problem.\" Thatcher made her first visit to the Soviet Union in the summer of 1969 as the Opposition transport spokeswoman, and in October, delivered a speech celebrating her ten years in Parliament. In early 1970, she told \"The Finchley Press\" that she would like to see a \"reversal of the permissive society\".\nEducation Secretary (1970\u20131974).\nThe Conservative Party, led by Edward Heath, won the 1970 general election, and Thatcher was appointed to the Cabinet as Secretary of State for Education and Science. Thatcher caused controversy when, after only a few days in office, she withdrew Labour's Circular 10/65, which attempted to force comprehensivisation, without going through a consultation process. She was highly criticised for the speed at which she carried this out. Consequently, she drafted her own new policy (Circular 10/70), which ensured that local authorities were not forced to go comprehensive. Her new policy was not meant to stop the development of new comprehensives; she said: \"We shall [...] expect plans to be based on educational considerations rather than on the comprehensive principle.\"\nThatcher supported Lord Rothschild's 1971 proposal for market forces to affect government funding of research. Although many scientists opposed the proposal, her research background probably made her sceptical of their claim that outsiders should not interfere with funding. The department evaluated proposals for more local education authorities to close grammar schools and to adopt comprehensive secondary education. Although Thatcher was committed to a tiered secondary modern-grammar school system of education and attempted to preserve grammar schools, during her tenure as education secretary, she turned down only 326 of 3,612 proposals (roughly 9 per cent) for schools to become comprehensives; the proportion of pupils attending comprehensive schools consequently rose from 32 per cent to 62 per cent. Nevertheless, she managed to save 94 grammar schools.\nDuring her first months in office, she attracted public attention due to the government's attempts to cut spending. She gave priority to academic needs in schools, while administering public expenditure cuts on the state education system, resulting in the abolition of free milk for school children aged seven to eleven. She held that few children would suffer if schools were charged for milk but agreed to provide younger children with daily for nutritional purposes. She also argued that she was simply carrying on with what the Labour government had started since they had stopped giving free milk to secondary schools. Milk would still be provided to those children that required it on medical grounds, and schools could still sell milk. The aftermath of the milk row hardened her determination; she told the editor-proprietor Harold Creighton of \"The Spectator\": \"Don't underestimate me, I saw how they broke Keith [Joseph], but they won't break me.\"\nCabinet papers later revealed that she opposed the policy but had been forced into it by the Treasury. Her decision provoked a storm of protest from Labour and the press, leading to her being notoriously nicknamed \"Margaret Thatcher, Milk Snatcher\". She reportedly considered leaving politics in the aftermath and later wrote in her autobiography: \"I learned a valuable lesson. I had incurred the maximum of political odium for the minimum of political benefit.\"\nLeader of the Opposition (1975\u20131979).\nThe Heath government continued to experience difficulties with oil embargoes and union demands for wage increases in 1973, subsequently losing the February 1974 general election. Labour formed a minority government and went on to win a narrow majority in the October 1974 general election. Heath's leadership of the Conservative Party looked increasingly in doubt. Thatcher was not initially seen as the obvious replacement, but she eventually became the main challenger, promising a fresh start. Her main support came from the parliamentary 1922 Committee and \"The Spectator\", but Thatcher's time in office gave her the reputation of a pragmatist rather than that of an ideologue. She defeated Heath on the first ballot, and he resigned from the leadership. In the second ballot she defeated Whitelaw, Heath's preferred successor. Thatcher's election had a polarising effect on the party; her support was stronger among MPs on the right, and also among those from southern England, and those who had not attended public schools or Oxbridge.\nThatcher became Conservative Party leader and Leader of the Opposition on 11 February 1975; she appointed Whitelaw as her deputy. Heath was never reconciled to Thatcher's leadership of the party.\nTelevision critic Clive James, writing in \"The Observer\" prior to her election as Conservative Party leader, compared her voice of 1973 to \"a cat sliding down a blackboard\". Thatcher had already begun to work on her presentation on the advice of Gordon Reece, a former television producer. By chance, Reece met the actor Laurence Olivier, who arranged lessons with the National Theatre's voice coach.\nThatcher began attending lunches regularly at the Institute of Economic Affairs (IEA), a think tank founded by poultry magnate Antony Fisher; she had been visiting the IEA and reading its publications since the early 1960s. There she was influenced by the ideas of Ralph Harris and Arthur Seldon and became the face of the ideological movement opposing the British welfare state. Keynesian economics, they believed, was weakening Britain. The institute's pamphlets proposed less government, lower taxes, and more freedom for business and consumers.\nThatcher intended to promote neoliberal economic ideas at home and abroad. Despite setting the direction of her foreign policy for a Conservative government, Thatcher was distressed by her repeated failure to shine in the House of Commons. Consequently, Thatcher decided that as \"her voice was carrying little weight at home\", she would \"be heard in the wider world\". Thatcher undertook visits across the Atlantic, establishing an international profile and promoting her economic and foreign policies. She toured the United States in 1975 and met President Gerald Ford, visiting again in 1977, when she met President Jimmy Carter. Among other foreign trips, she met Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi during a visit to Iran in 1978. Thatcher chose to travel without being accompanied by her shadow foreign secretary, Reginald Maudling, in an attempt to make a bolder personal impact.\nIn domestic affairs, Thatcher opposed Scottish devolution (home rule) and the creation of a Scottish Assembly. She instructed Conservative MPs to vote against the Scotland and Wales Bill in December 1976, which was successfully defeated, and then when new Bills were proposed, she supported amending the legislation to allow the English to vote in the 1979 referendum on Scottish devolution.\nBritain's economy during the 1970s was so weak that then Foreign Secretary James Callaghan warned his fellow Labour Cabinet members in 1974 of the possibility of \"a breakdown of democracy\", telling them: \"If I were a young man, I would emigrate.\" In mid-1978, the economy began to recover, and opinion polls showed Labour in the lead, with a general election being expected later that year and a Labour win a serious possibility. Now prime minister, Callaghan surprised many by announcing on 7 September that there would be no general election that year and that he would wait until 1979 before going to the polls. Thatcher reacted to this by branding the Labour government \"chickens\", and Liberal Party leader David Steel joined in, criticising Labour for \"running scared\".\nThe Labour government then faced fresh public unease about the direction of the country and a damaging series of strikes during the winter of 1978\u201379, dubbed the \"Winter of Discontent\". The Conservatives attacked the Labour government's unemployment record, using advertising with the slogan \"Labour Isn't Working\". A general election was called after the Callaghan ministry lost a motion of no confidence in early 1979. The Conservatives won a 44-seat majority in the House of Commons, and Thatcher became the first female British prime minister.\n\"Iron Lady\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I stand before you tonight in my \"Red Star\" chiffon evening gown, my face softly made up and my fair hair gently waved, the Iron Lady of the Western world.\u2014\u200a\nIn 1976, Thatcher gave her \"Britain Awake\" foreign policy speech which lambasted the Soviet Union, saying it was \"bent on world dominance\". The Soviet Army journal \"Red Star\" reported her stance in a piece headlined \"Iron Lady Raises Fears\", alluding to her remarks on the Iron Curtain. \"The Sunday Times\" covered the \"Red Star\" article the next day, and Thatcher embraced the epithet a week later; in a speech to Finchley Conservatives she likened it to the Duke of Wellington's nickname \"\". The \"Iron\" metaphor followed her throughout the rest of her career, and would become a generic sobriquet for other strong-willed female politicians.\nPrime Minister of the United Kingdom (1979\u20131990).\nThatcher became prime minister on 4 May 1979. Arriving at Downing Street she said, paraphrasing the Prayer of Saint Francis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn office throughout the 1980s, Thatcher was frequently referred to as the most powerful woman in the world.\nDomestic affairs.\nMinorities.\nThatcher was the Opposition leader and prime minister at a time of increased racial tension in Britain. During the 1977 local elections, \"The Economist\" commented: \"The Tory tide swamped the smaller parties\u00a0\u2013 specifically the National Front [NF], which suffered a clear decline from last year.\" Her standing in the polls had risen by 11% after a 1978 interview for \"World in Action\" in which she said \"the British character has done so much for democracy, for law and done so much throughout the world that if there is any fear that it might be swamped people are going to react and be rather hostile to those coming in\", as well as \"in many ways [minorities] add to the richness and variety of this country. The moment the minority threatens to become a big one, people get frightened\". In the 1979 general election, the Conservatives had attracted votes from the NF, whose support almost collapsed. In a July 1979 meeting with Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington and Home Secretary William Whitelaw, Thatcher objected to the number of Asian immigrants, in the context of limiting the total of Vietnamese boat people allowed to settle in the UK to fewer than 10,000 over two years.\nThe Queen.\nAs prime minister, Thatcher met weekly with Queen Elizabeth II to discuss government business, and their relationship came under scrutiny. states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One question that continued to fascinate the public about the phenomenon of a woman Prime Minister was how she got on with the Queen. The answer is that their relations were punctiliously correct, but there was little love lost on either side. As two women of very similar age \u2013 Mrs Thatcher was six months older \u2013 occupying parallel positions at the top of the social pyramid, one the head of government, the other head of state, they were bound to be in some sense rivals. Mrs Thatcher's attitude to the Queen was ambivalent. On the one hand she had an almost mystical reverence for the institution of the monarchy [...] Yet at the same time she was trying to modernise the country and sweep away many of the values and practices which the monarchy perpetuated.\nMichael Shea, the Queen's press secretary, in 1986 leaked stories of a deep rift to \"The Sunday Times\". He said that she felt Thatcher's policies were \"uncaring, confrontational and socially divisive\". Thatcher later wrote: \"I always found the Queen's attitude towards the work of the Government absolutely correct [...] stories of clashes between 'two powerful women' were just too good not to make up.\"\nEconomy and taxation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThatcher's economic policy was influenced by monetarist thinking and economists such as Milton Friedman and Alan Walters. Together with her first chancellor, Geoffrey Howe, she lowered direct taxes on income and increased indirect taxes. She increased interest rates to slow the growth of the money supply, and thereby lower inflation; introduced cash limits on public spending and reduced expenditure on social services such as education and housing. Cuts to higher education led to Thatcher being the first Oxonian post-war prime minister without an honorary doctorate from Oxford University after a 738\u2013319 vote of the governing assembly and a student petition.\nSome Heathite Conservatives in the Cabinet, the so-called \"wets\", expressed doubt over Thatcher's policies. The 1981 England riots resulted in the British media discussing the need for a policy U-turn. At the 1980 Conservative Party conference, Thatcher addressed the issue directly with a speech written by the playwright Ronald Millar, that notably included the following lines:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To those waiting with bated breath for that favourite media catchphrase, the \"U\" turn, I have only one thing to say. \"You turn if you want to. The lady's not for turning.\"\nThatcher's job approval rating fell to 23% by December 1980, lower than recorded for any previous prime minister. As the recession of the early 1980s deepened, she increased taxes, despite concerns expressed in a March 1981 statement signed by 364 leading economists, which argued there was \"no basis in economic theory [...] for the Government's belief that by deflating demand they will bring inflation permanently under control\", adding that \"present policies will deepen the depression, erode the industrial base of our economy and threaten its social and political stability\".\nBy 1982, the UK began to experience signs of economic recovery; inflation was down to 8.6% from a high of 18%, but unemployment was over 3\u00a0million for the first time since the 1930s. By 1983, overall economic growth was stronger, and inflation and mortgage rates had fallen to their lowest levels in 13 years, although manufacturing employment as a share of total employment fell to just over 30%, with total unemployment remaining high, peaking at 3.3\u00a0million in 1984.\nDuring the 1982 Conservative Party Conference, Thatcher said: \"We have done more to roll back the frontiers of socialism than any previous Conservative Government.\" She said at the Party Conference the following year that the British people had completely rejected state socialism and understood \"the state has no source of money other than money which people earn themselves [...] There is no such thing as public money; there is only taxpayers' money.\"\nBy 1987, unemployment was falling, the economy was stable and strong, and inflation was low. Opinion polls showed a comfortable Conservative lead, and local council election results had also been successful, prompting Thatcher to call a general election for 11 June that year, despite the deadline for an election still being 12 months away. The election saw Thatcher re-elected for a third successive term.\nThatcher had been firmly opposed to British membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM, a precursor to European Economic and Monetary Union), believing that it would constrain the British economy, despite the urging of both Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson and Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe; in October 1990 she was persuaded by John Major, Lawson's successor as chancellor, to join the ERM at what proved to be too high a rate.\nThatcher reformed local government taxes by replacing domestic rates (a tax based on the nominal rental value of a home) with the Community Charge (or poll tax) in which the same amount was charged to each adult resident. The new tax was introduced in Scotland in 1989 and in England and Wales the following year, and proved to be among the most unpopular policies of her premiership. Public disquiet culminated in a 70,000 to 200,000-strong demonstration in London in March 1990; the demonstration around Trafalgar Square deteriorated into riots, leaving 113 people injured and 340 under arrest. The Community Charge was abolished in 1991 by her successor, John Major. It has since transpired that Thatcher herself had failed to register for the tax and was threatened with financial penalties if she did not return her form.\nIndustrial relations.\nThatcher believed that the trade unions were harmful to both ordinary trade unionists and the public. She was committed to reducing the power of the unions, whose leadership she accused of undermining parliamentary democracy and economic performance through strike action. Several unions launched strikes in response to legislation introduced to limit their power, but resistance eventually collapsed. Only 39% of union members voted Labour in the 1983 general election. According to the BBC's political correspondent in 2004, Thatcher \"managed to destroy the power of the trade unions for almost a generation\". The miners' strike of 1984\u201385 was the biggest and most devastating confrontation between the unions and the Thatcher government.\nIn March 1984, the National Coal Board (NCB) proposed to close 20 of the 174 state-owned mines and cut 20,000 jobs out of 187,000. Two-thirds of the country's miners, led by the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) under Arthur Scargill, went on strike in protest. However, Scargill refused to hold a ballot on the strike, having previously lost three ballots on a national strike (in January and October 1982, and March 1983). This led to the strike being declared illegal by the High Court of Justice.\nThatcher refused to meet the union's demands and compared the miners' dispute to the Falklands War, declaring in a speech in 1984: \"We had to fight the enemy without in the Falklands. We always have to be aware of the enemy within, which is much more difficult to fight and more dangerous to liberty.\" Thatcher's opponents characterised her words as indicating contempt for the working class and have been employed in criticism of her ever since.\nAfter a year out on strike in March 1985, the NUM leadership conceded without a deal. The cost to the economy was estimated to be at least \u00a31.5\u00a0billion, and the strike was blamed for much of the pound's fall against the US dollar. Thatcher reflected on the end of the strike in her statement that \"if anyone has won\", it was \"the miners who stayed at work\" and all those \"that have kept Britain going\".\nThe government closed 25 unprofitable coal mines in 1985, and by 1992 a total of 97 mines had been closed; those that remained were privatised in 1994. The resulting closure of 150 coal mines, some of which were not losing money, resulted in the loss of tens of thousands of jobs and had the effect of devastating entire communities. Strikes had helped bring down Heath's government, and Thatcher was determined to succeed where he had failed. Her strategy of preparing fuel stocks, appointing hardliner Ian MacGregor as NCB leader and ensuring that police were adequately trained and equipped with riot gear contributed to her triumph over the striking miners.\nThe number of stoppages across the UK peaked at 4,583 in 1979, when more than 29\u00a0million working days had been lost. In 1984, the year of the miners' strike, there were 1,221, resulting in the loss of more than 27\u00a0million working days. Stoppages then fell steadily throughout the rest of Thatcher's premiership; in 1990, there were 630 and fewer than 2\u00a0million working days lost, and they continued to fall thereafter. Thatcher's tenure also witnessed a sharp decline in trade union density, with the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union falling from 57.3% in 1979 to 49.5% in 1985. In 1979 up until Thatcher's final year in office, trade union membership also fell, from 13.5\u00a0million in 1979 to fewer than 10\u00a0million.\nPrivatisation.\nThe policy of privatisation has been called \"a crucial ingredient of Thatcherism\". After the 1983 election, the sale of state utilities accelerated; more than \u00a329\u00a0billion was raised from the sale of nationalised industries, and another \u00a318\u00a0billion from the sale of council houses. The process of privatisation, especially the preparation of nationalised industries for privatisation, was associated with marked improvements in performance, particularly in terms of labour productivity.\nSome of the privatised industries, including gas, water, and electricity, were natural monopolies for which privatisation involved little increase in competition. The privatised industries that demonstrated improvement sometimes did so while still under state ownership. British Steel Corporation had made great gains in profitability while still a nationalised industry under the government-appointed MacGregor chairmanship, which faced down trade-union opposition to close plants and halve the workforce. Regulation was also significantly expanded to compensate for the loss of direct government control, with the foundation of regulatory bodies such as Oftel (1984), Ofgas (1986), and the National Rivers Authority (1989). There was no clear pattern to the degree of competition, regulation, and performance among the privatised industries.\nIn most cases, privatisation benefited consumers in terms of lower prices and improved efficiency but results overall have been mixed. Not all privatised companies have had successful share price trajectories in the longer term. A 2010 review by the free-market think tank the Institute of Economic Affairs states: \"[I]t does seem to be the case that once competition and/or effective regulation was introduced, performance improved markedly [...] But I hasten to emphasise again that the literature is not unanimous.\"\nThatcher always resisted privatising British Rail and was said to have told Transport Secretary Nicholas Ridley: \"Railway privatisation will be the Waterloo of this government. Please never mention the railways to me again.\" Shortly before her resignation in 1990, she accepted the arguments for privatisation, which her successor John Major implemented in 1994.\nThe privatisation of public assets was combined with financial deregulation to fuel economic growth. Chancellor Geoffrey Howe abolished the UK's exchange controls in 1979, which allowed more capital to be invested in foreign markets, and the Big Bang of 1986 removed many restrictions on the London Stock Exchange.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn 1980 and 1981, Provisional Irish Republican Army (PIRA) and Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) prisoners in Northern Ireland's Maze Prison carried out hunger strikes to regain the status of political prisoners that had been removed in 1976 by the preceding Labour government. Bobby Sands began the 1981 strike, saying that he would fast until death unless prison inmates won concessions over their living conditions. Thatcher refused to countenance a return to political status for the prisoners, having declared \"Crime is crime is crime; it is not political\". Nevertheless, the British government privately contacted republican leaders in a bid to bring the hunger strikes to an end. After the deaths of Sands and nine others, the strike ended. Some rights were restored to paramilitary prisoners, but not official recognition of political status. Violence in Northern Ireland escalated significantly during the hunger strikes.\nThatcher narrowly escaped injury in an IRA assassination attempt at a Brighton hotel early in the morning on 12 October 1984. Five people were killed, including the wife of minister John Wakeham. Thatcher was staying at the hotel to prepare for the Conservative Party conference, which she insisted should open as scheduled the following day. She delivered her speech as planned, though rewritten from her original draft, in a move that was supported across the political spectrum and enhanced her popularity with the public.\nOn 6 November 1981, Thatcher and Taoiseach (Irish prime minister) Garret FitzGerald had established the Anglo-Irish Inter-Governmental Council, a forum for meetings between the two governments. On 15 November 1985, Thatcher and FitzGerald signed the Hillsborough Anglo-Irish Agreement, which marked the first time a British government had given the Republic of Ireland an advisory role in the governance of Northern Ireland. In protest, the Ulster Says No movement led by Ian Paisley attracted 100,000 to a rally in Belfast, Ian Gow, later assassinated by the PIRA, resigned as Minister of State in HM Treasury, and all 15 Unionist MPs resigned their parliamentary seats; only one was not returned in the subsequent by-elections on 23 January 1986.\nEnvironment.\nThatcher supported an active climate protection policy; she was instrumental in the passing of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, the founding of the Hadley Centre for Climate Research and Prediction, the establishment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and the ratification of the Montreal Protocol on preserving the ozone.\nThatcher helped to put climate change, acid rain and general pollution in the British mainstream in the late 1980s, calling for a global treaty on climate change in 1989. Her speeches included one to the Royal Society in 1988, followed by another to the UN General Assembly in 1989. However, by the 2003 release of her book \"Statecraft\", she had revised her opinion on climate change.\nForeign affairs.\nThatcher appointed Lord Carrington, an ennobled member of the party and former Secretary of State for Defence, to run the Foreign Office in 1979. Although considered a \"wet\", he avoided domestic affairs and got along well with Thatcher. One issue was what to do with Rhodesia, where the white minority had determined to rule the prosperous, black-majority breakaway colony in the face of overwhelming international criticism. With the 1975 Portuguese collapse in the continent, South Africa (which had been Rhodesia's chief supporter) realised that their ally was a liability; black rule was inevitable, and the Thatcher government brokered a peaceful solution to end the Rhodesian Bush War in December 1979 via the Lancaster House Agreement. The conference at Lancaster House was attended by Rhodesian prime minister Ian Smith, as well as by the key black leaders: Muzorewa, Mugabe, Nkomo and Tongogara. The result was the new Zimbabwean nation under black rule in 1980.\nCold War.\nThatcher's first foreign-policy crisis came with the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. She condemned the invasion, said it showed the bankruptcy of a d\u00e9tente policy and helped convince some British athletes to boycott the 1980 Moscow Olympics. She gave weak support to US president Jimmy Carter who tried to punish the USSR with economic sanctions. Britain's economic situation was precarious, and most of NATO was reluctant to cut trade ties. Thatcher nevertheless gave the go-ahead for Whitehall to approve MI6 (along with the SAS) to undertake \"disruptive action\" in Afghanistan. As well as working with the CIA in Operation Cyclone, they also supplied weapons, training and intelligence to the \"mujaheddin\".\nThe \"Financial Times\" reported in 2011 that her government had secretly supplied Iraq under Saddam Hussein with \"non-lethal\" military equipment since 1981.\nHaving withdrawn formal recognition from the Pol Pot regime in 1979, the Thatcher government backed the Khmer Rouge keeping their UN seat after they were ousted from power in Cambodia by the Cambodian\u2013Vietnamese War. Although Thatcher denied it at the time, it was revealed in 1991 that, while not directly training any Khmer Rouge, from 1983 the Special Air Service (SAS) was sent to secretly train \"the armed forces of the Cambodian non-communist resistance\" that remained loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk and his former prime minister Son Sann in the fight against the Vietnamese-backed puppet regime.\nThatcher was one of the first Western leaders to respond warmly to reformist Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev. Following Reagan\u2013Gorbachev summit meetings and reforms enacted by Gorbachev in the USSR, she declared in November 1988 that \"[w]e're not in a Cold War now\" but rather in a \"new relationship much wider than the Cold War ever was\". She went on a state visit to the Soviet Union in 1984 and met with Gorbachev and Council of Ministers chairman Nikolai Ryzhkov.\nTies with the US.\nDespite opposite personalities, Thatcher bonded quickly with US president Ronald Reagan. She gave strong support to the Reagan administration's Cold War policies based on their shared distrust of communism. A sharp disagreement came in 1983 when Reagan did not consult with her on the invasion of Grenada.\nDuring her first year as prime minister, she supported NATO's decision to deploy US nuclear cruise and Pershing II missiles in Western Europe, permitting the US to station more than 160 cruise missiles at RAF Greenham Common, starting in November 1983 and triggering mass protests by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament. She bought the Trident nuclear missile submarine system from the US to replace Polaris, tripling the UK's nuclear forces at an eventual cost of more than \u00a312\u00a0billion (at 1996\u201397 prices). Thatcher's preference for defence ties with the US was demonstrated in the Westland affair of 1985\u201386 when she acted with colleagues to allow the struggling helicopter manufacturer Westland to refuse a takeover offer from the Italian firm Agusta in favour of the management's preferred option, a link with Sikorsky Aircraft. Defence Secretary Michael Heseltine, who had supported the Agusta deal, resigned from the government in protest.\nIn April 1986 she permitted US F-111s to use Royal Air Force bases for the bombing of Libya in retaliation for the Libyan bombing of a Berlin discoth\u00e8que, citing the right of self-defence under Article 51 of the UN Charter. Polls suggested that fewer than one in three British citizens approved of her decision.\nThatcher was in the US on a state visit when Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990. During her talks with President George H. W. Bush, who succeeded Reagan in 1989, she recommended intervention, and put pressure on Bush to deploy troops in the Middle East to drive the Iraqi Army out of Kuwait. Bush was apprehensive about the plan, prompting Thatcher to remark to him during a telephone conversation: \"This was no time to go wobbly!\" Thatcher's government supplied military forces to the international coalition in the build-up to the Gulf War, but she had resigned by the time hostilities began on 17 January 1991. She applauded the coalition victory on the backbenches, while warning that \"the victories of peace will take longer than the battles of war\". It was disclosed in 2017 that Thatcher had suggested threatening Saddam with chemical weapons after the invasion of Kuwait.\nCrisis in the South Atlantic.\nOn 2 April 1982, the military junta in Argentina ordered the invasion of the Crown colony of the Falkland Islands and its dependency of South Georgia, beginning the Falklands War. The subsequent crisis was \"a defining moment of [Thatcher's] premiership\". At the suggestion of Harold Macmillan and Robert Armstrong, she set up and chaired a small War Cabinet to oversee the conduct of the war, which by 5\u20136 April had authorised and dispatched a naval task force to retake the islands. Argentina surrendered on 14 June and \"Operation Corporate\" was hailed a success, notwithstanding the deaths of 255 British servicemen and three Falkland Islanders. Argentine fatalities totalled 649, half of them aboard that was torpedoed and sunk by on 2 May.\nThatcher was criticised for the neglect of the Falklands' defence that led to the war, and especially by Labour MP Tam Dalyell in Parliament for the decision to torpedo the \"General Belgrano\", but overall, she was considered a competent and committed war leader. The \"Falklands factor\", an economic recovery beginning early in 1982, and a bitterly divided opposition, all contributed to Thatcher's second election victory in 1983. Thatcher often referred after the war to the \"Falklands spirit\".\nNegotiating Hong Kong.\nIn September 1982, she visited China to discuss with Deng Xiaoping the sovereignty of Hong Kong after 1997. China was the first communist state Thatcher had visited as prime minister, and she was the first British prime minister to visit China. Throughout their meeting, she sought the PRC's agreement to a continued British presence in the territory. Deng insisted that the PRC's sovereignty over Hong Kong was non-negotiable but stated his willingness to settle the sovereignty issue with the British government through formal negotiations. Both governments promised to maintain Hong Kong's stability and prosperity. After the two-year negotiations, Thatcher conceded to the PRC government and signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration in Beijing in 1984, agreeing to hand over Hong Kong's sovereignty in 1997.\nApartheid in South Africa.\nDespite saying that she was in favour of \"peaceful negotiations\" to end apartheid, Thatcher opposed sanctions imposed on South Africa by the Commonwealth and the European Economic Community (EEC). She attempted to preserve trade with South Africa while persuading its government to abandon apartheid. This included \"[c]asting herself as President Botha's candid friend\" and inviting him to visit the UK in 1984, despite the \"inevitable demonstrations\" against his government. Alan Merrydew of the Canadian broadcaster BCTV News asked Thatcher what her response was \"to a reported ANC statement that they will target British firms in South Africa?\" to which she later replied: \"[...] when the ANC says that they will target British companies [...] This shows what a typical terrorist organisation it is. I fought terrorism all my life and if more people fought it, and we were all more successful, we should not have it and I hope that everyone in this hall will think it is right to go on fighting terrorism.\" During his visit to Britain five months after his release from prison, Nelson Mandela praised Thatcher: \"She is an enemy of apartheid [...] We have much to thank her for.\"\nEurope.\nThatcher and her party supported British membership of the EEC in the 1975 national referendum and the Single European Act of 1986, and obtained the UK rebate on contributions, but she believed that the role of the organisation should be limited to ensuring free trade and effective competition, and feared that the EEC approach was at odds with her views on smaller government and deregulation. Believing that the single market would result in political integration, Thatcher's opposition to further European integration became more pronounced during her premiership and particularly after her third government in 1987. In her Bruges speech in 1988, Thatcher outlined her opposition to proposals from the EEC, forerunner of the European Union, for a federal structure and increased centralisation of decision-making:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We have not successfully rolled back the frontiers of the state in Britain, only to see them re-imposed at a European level, with a European super-state exercising a new dominance from Brussels.\nSharing the concerns of French president Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, Thatcher was initially opposed to German reunification, telling Gorbachev that it \"would lead to a change to postwar borders, and we cannot allow that because such a development would undermine the stability of the whole international situation and could endanger our security\". She expressed concern that a united Germany would align itself more closely with the Soviet Union and move away from NATO.\nIn March 1990, Thatcher held a Chequers seminar on the subject of German reunification that was attended by members of her cabinet and historians such as Norman Stone, George Urban, Timothy Garton Ash and Gordon A. Craig. During the seminar, Thatcher described \"what Urban called 'saloon bar clich\u00e9s' about the German character, including 'angst, aggressiveness, assertiveness, bullying, egotism, inferiority complex [and] sentimentality'\". Those present were shocked to hear Thatcher's utterances and \"appalled\" at how she was \"apparently unaware\" about the post-war German collective guilt and Germans' attempts to work through their past. The words of the meeting were leaked by her foreign-policy advisor Charles Powell and, subsequently, her comments were met with fierce backlash and controversy.\nDuring the same month, German chancellor Helmut Kohl reassured Thatcher that he would keep her \"informed of all his intentions about unification\", and that he was prepared to disclose \"matters which even his cabinet would not know\".\nChallenges to leadership and resignation.\nDuring her premiership, Thatcher had the second-lowest average approval rating (40%) of any post-war prime minister. Since Nigel Lawson's resignation as chancellor in October 1989, polls consistently showed that she was less popular than her party. A self-described conviction politician, Thatcher always insisted that she did not care about her poll ratings and pointed instead to her unbeaten election record.\nIn December 1989, Thatcher was challenged for the leadership of the Conservative Party by the little-known backbench MP Sir Anthony Meyer. Of the 374 Conservative MPs eligible to vote, 314 voted for Thatcher and 33 for Meyer. Her supporters in the party viewed the result as a success and rejected suggestions that there was discontent within the party.\nOpinion polls in September 1990 reported that Labour had established a 14% lead over the Conservatives, and by November, the Conservatives had been trailing Labour for 18 months. These ratings, together with Thatcher's combative personality and tendency to override collegiate opinion, contributed to further discontent within her party.\nIn July 1989, Thatcher removed Geoffrey Howe as foreign secretary after he and Lawson had forced her to agree to a plan for Britain to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM). Britain joined the ERM in October 1990.\nOn 1 November 1990, Howe, by then the last remaining member of Thatcher's original 1979 cabinet, resigned as deputy prime minister, ostensibly over her open hostility to moves towards European monetary union. In his resignation speech on 13 November, which was instrumental in Thatcher's downfall, Howe attacked Thatcher's openly dismissive attitude to the government's proposal for a new European currency competing against existing currencies (a \"hard ECU\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How on earth are the Chancellor and the Governor of the Bank of England, commending the hard ECU as they strive to, to be taken as serious participants in the debate against that kind of background noise? I believe that both the Chancellor and the Governor are cricketing enthusiasts, so I hope that there is no monopoly of cricketing metaphors. It is rather like sending your opening batsmen to the crease only for them to find, the moment the first balls are bowled, that their bats have been broken before the game by the team captain.\nOn 14 November, Michael Heseltine mounted a challenge for the leadership of the Conservative Party. Opinion polls had indicated that he would give the Conservatives a national lead over Labour. Although Thatcher led on the first ballot with the votes of 204 Conservative MPs (54.8%) to 152 votes (40.9%) for Heseltine, with 16 abstentions, she was four votes short of the required 15% majority. A second ballot was therefore necessary. Thatcher initially declared her intention to \"fight on and fight to win\" the second ballot, but consultation with her cabinet persuaded her to withdraw. After holding an audience with the Queen, calling other world leaders, and making one final Commons speech, on 28 November she left Downing Street in tears. She reportedly regarded her ousting as a betrayal. Her resignation was a shock to many outside Britain, with such foreign observers as Henry Kissinger and Gorbachev expressing private consternation.\nChancellor John Major replaced Thatcher as head of government and party leader, whose lead over Heseltine in the second ballot was sufficient for Heseltine to drop out. Major oversaw an upturn in Conservative support in the 17 months leading to the 1992 general election and led the party to a fourth successive victory on 9 April 1992. Thatcher had lobbied for Major in the leadership contest against Heseltine, but her support for him waned in later years.\nLater life.\nReturn to backbenches (1990\u20131992).\nAfter leaving the premiership, Thatcher returned to the backbenches as a constituency parliamentarian. Her domestic approval rating recovered after her resignation, though public opinion remained divided on whether her government had been good for the country. Aged 66, she retired from the House of Commons at the 1992 general election, saying that leaving the Commons would allow her more freedom to speak her mind.\nPost-Commons (1992\u20132003).\nOn leaving the Commons, Thatcher became the first former British prime minister to set up a foundation; the British wing of the Margaret Thatcher Foundation was dissolved in 2005 due to financial difficulties. She wrote two volumes of memoirs, \"The Downing Street Years\" (1993) and \"The Path to Power\" (1995). In 1991, she and her husband Denis moved to a house in Chester Square, a residential garden square in central London's Belgravia district.\nThatcher was hired by the tobacco company Philip Morris as a \"geopolitical consultant\" in July 1992 for $250,000 per year and an annual contribution of $250,000 to her foundation. Thatcher earned $50,000 for each speech she delivered.\nThatcher became an advocate of Croatian and Slovenian independence. Commenting on the Yugoslav Wars, in a 1991 interview for Croatian Radiotelevision, she was critical of Western governments for not recognising the breakaway republics of Croatia and Slovenia as independent and for not supplying them with arms after the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army attacked. In August 1992, she called for NATO to stop the Serbian assault on Gora\u017ede and Sarajevo to end ethnic cleansing during the Bosnian War, comparing the situation in Bosnia\u2013Herzegovina to \"the barbarities of Hitler's and Stalin's\".\nShe made a series of speeches in the Lords criticising the Maastricht Treaty, describing it as \"a treaty too far\" and stated: \"I could never have signed this treaty.\" She cited A. V. Dicey when arguing that, as all three main parties were in favour of the treaty, the people should have their say in a referendum.\nThatcher served as honorary chancellor of the College of William &amp; Mary in Virginia from 1993 to 2000, while also serving as chancellor of the private University of Buckingham from 1992 to 1998, a university she had formally opened in 1976 as the former education secretary.\nAfter Tony Blair's election as Labour Party leader in 1994, Thatcher praised Blair as \"probably the most formidable Labour leader since Hugh Gaitskell\", adding: \"I see a lot of socialism behind their front bench, but not in Mr Blair. I think he genuinely has moved.\" Blair responded in kind: \"She was a thoroughly determined person, and that is an admirable quality.\"\nIn 1998, Thatcher called for the release of former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet when Spain had him arrested and sought to try him for human rights violations. She cited the help he gave Britain during the Falklands War. In 1999, she visited him while he was under house arrest near London. Pinochet was released in March 2000 on medical grounds by Home Secretary Jack Straw.\nAt the 2001 general election, Thatcher supported the Conservative campaign, as she had done in 1992 and 1997, and in the Conservative leadership election following its defeat, she endorsed Iain Duncan Smith over Kenneth Clarke. In 2002 she encouraged George W. Bush to aggressively tackle the \"unfinished business\" of Iraq under Saddam Hussein, and praised Blair for his \"strong, bold leadership\" in standing with Bush in the Iraq War.\nThatcher broached the same subject in her \"\", which was published in April 2002 and dedicated to Ronald Reagan, writing that there would be no peace in the Middle East until Saddam was toppled. Her book also said that Israel must trade land for peace and that the European Union (EU) was a \"fundamentally unreformable\", \"classic utopian project, a monument to the vanity of intellectuals, a programme whose inevitable destiny is failure\". She argued that Britain should renegotiate its terms of membership or else leave the EU and join the North American Free Trade Area.\nFollowing several small strokes, her doctors advised her not to engage in further public speaking. In March 2002 she announced that, on doctors' advice, she would cancel all planned speaking engagements and accept no more.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Extract from \"The Downing Street Years\"\n&lt;q&gt;Being Prime Minister is a lonely job. In a sense, it ought to be: you cannot lead from the crowd. But with Denis there I was never alone. What a man. What a husband. What a friend.&lt;/q&gt;\nOn 26 June 2003, Thatcher's husband, Sir Denis, died aged 88; his body was cremated on 3 July at Mortlake Crematorium in London.\nFinal years (2003\u20132013).\nOn 11 June 2004, Thatcher (against doctors' orders) attended the state funeral service for Ronald Reagan. She delivered her eulogy via videotape; in view of her health, the message had been pre-recorded several months earlier. Thatcher flew to California with the Reagan entourage, and attended the memorial service and interment ceremony for the president at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library.\nIn 2005, Thatcher criticised how Blair had decided to invade Iraq two years previously. Although she still supported the intervention to topple Saddam Hussein, she said that (as a scientist) she would always look for \"facts, evidence and proof\" before committing the armed forces. She celebrated her 80th birthday on 13 October at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel in Hyde Park, London; guests included the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, Princess Alexandra and Tony Blair. Geoffrey Howe, Baron Howe of Aberavon, was also in attendance and said of his former leader: \"Her real triumph was to have transformed not just one party but two, so that when Labour did eventually return, the great bulk of Thatcherism was accepted as irreversible.\"\nIn 2006, Thatcher attended the official Washington memorial service to commemorate the fifth anniversary of the 9/11 attacks on the US. She was a guest of Vice President Dick Cheney and met Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice during her visit. In February 2007 Thatcher became the first living British prime minister to be honoured with a statue in the Houses of Parliament. The bronze statue stood opposite that of her political hero, Winston Churchill, and was unveiled on 21 February 2007 with Thatcher in attendance; she remarked in the Members' Lobby of the Commons: \"I might have preferred iron \u2013 but bronze will do [...] It won't rust.\"\nThatcher was a public supporter of the Prague Declaration on European Conscience and Communism and the resulting Prague Process and sent a public letter of support to its preceding conference.\nAfter collapsing at a House of Lords dinner, Thatcher, suffering low blood pressure, was admitted to St Thomas' Hospital in central London on 7 March 2008 for tests. In 2009 she was hospitalised again when she fell and broke her arm. Thatcher returned to 10 Downing Street in late November 2009 for the unveiling of an official portrait by artist Richard Stone, an unusual honour for a living former prime minister. Stone was previously commissioned to paint portraits of the Queen and Queen Mother.\nOn 4 July 2011, Thatcher was to attend a ceremony for the unveiling of a statue of Ronald Reagan outside the US embassy in London, but was unable to attend due to her frail health. She last attended a sitting of the House of Lords on 19 July 2010, and on 30 July 2011 it was announced that her office in the Lords had been closed. Earlier that month, Thatcher was named the most competent prime minister of the past 30 years in an Ipsos MORI poll.\nThatcher's daughter Carol that her mother had dementia in 2005, saying \"Mum doesn't read much any more because of her memory loss\". In her 2008 memoir, Carol wrote that her mother \"could hardly remember the beginning of a sentence by the time she got to the end\". She later recounted how she was first struck by her mother's dementia when, in conversation, Thatcher confused the Falklands and Yugoslav conflicts; she recalled the pain of needing to tell her mother repeatedly that her husband Denis was dead.\nDeath and funeral (2013).\nThatcher died on 8 April 2013, at the age of 87, after suffering a stroke. She had been staying at a suite in the Ritz Hotel in London since December 2012 after having difficulty with stairs at her Chester Square home in Belgravia. Her death certificate listed the primary causes of death as a \"cerebrovascular accident\" and \"repeated transient ischaemic attack\"; secondary causes were listed as a \"carcinoma of the bladder\" and dementia.\n were mixed across the UK, ranging from tributes lauding her as Britain's greatest-ever peacetime prime minister to public celebrations of her death and expressions of hatred and personalised vitriol.\nDetails of Thatcher's funeral had been agreed upon with her in advance. She received a ceremonial funeral, including full military honours, with a church service at St Paul's Cathedral on 17 April.\nQueen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh attended her funeral, marking only the second and final time in the Queen's reign that she attended the funeral of any of her former prime ministers, after that of Churchill, who received a state funeral in 1965.\nAfter the service at St Paul's, Thatcher's body was cremated at Mortlake, where her husband's had been cremated. On 28 September, a service for Thatcher was held in the All Saints Chapel of the Royal Hospital Chelsea's Margaret Thatcher Infirmary. In a private ceremony, Thatcher's ashes were interred in the hospital's grounds, next to her husband's.\nLegacy.\nPolitical impact.\nThatcherism represented a systematic and decisive overhaul of the post-war consensus, whereby the major political parties largely agreed on the central themes of Keynesianism, the welfare state, nationalised industry, and close regulation of the economy, and high taxes. Thatcher generally supported the welfare state while proposing to rid it of abuses.\nShe promised in 1982 that the highly popular National Health Service was \"safe in our hands\". At first, she ignored the question of privatising nationalised industries; heavily influenced by right-wing think tanks, and especially by Sir Keith Joseph, Thatcher broadened her attack. Thatcherism came to refer to her policies as well as aspects of her ethical outlook and personal style, including moral absolutism, nationalism, liberal individualism, and an uncompromising approach to achieving political goals.\nThatcher defined her political philosophy, in a major and controversial break with the one-nation conservatism of her predecessor Edward Heath, in a 1987 interview published in \"Woman's Own\" magazine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think we have gone through a period when too many children and people have been given to understand \"I have a problem, it is the Government's job to cope with it!\" or \"I have a problem, I will go and get a grant to cope with it!\" \"I am homeless, the Government must house me!\" and so they are casting their problems on society and who is society? There is no such thing! There are individual men and women and there are families and no government can do anything except through people and people look to themselves first. It is our duty to look after ourselves and then also to help look after our neighbour and life is a reciprocal business and people have got the entitlements too much in mind without the obligations.\nOverview.\nThe number of adults owning shares rose from 7 per cent to 25 per cent during her tenure, and more than a million families bought their council houses, increasing from 55 per cent to 67 per cent in owner-occupiers from 1979 to 1990. The houses were sold at a discount of 33\u201355 per cent, leading to large profits for some new owners. Personal wealth rose by 80 per cent in real terms during the 1980s, mainly due to rising house prices and increased earnings. Shares in the privatised utilities were sold below their market value to ensure quick and wide sales rather than maximise national income.\nThe \"Thatcher years\" were also marked by periods of high unemployment and social unrest, and many critics on the left of the political spectrum fault her economic policies for the unemployment level; many of the areas affected by mass unemployment as well as her monetarist economic policies remained blighted for decades, by such social problems as drug abuse and family breakdown. Unemployment did not fall below its May 1979 level during her tenure, only falling below its April 1979 level in 1990. The long-term effects of her policies on manufacturing remain contentious.\nSpeaking in Scotland in 2009, Thatcher insisted she had no regrets and was right to introduce the poll tax and withdraw subsidies from \"outdated industries, whose markets were in terminal decline\", subsidies that created \"the culture of dependency, which had done such damage to Britain\". Political economist Susan Strange termed the neoliberal financial growth model \"casino capitalism\", reflecting her view that speculation and financial trading were becoming more important to the economy than industry.\nCritics on the left describe her as divisive and say she condoned greed and selfishness. Leading Welsh politician Rhodri Morgan, among others, characterised Thatcher as a \"Marmite\" figure. Journalist Michael White, writing in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, challenged the view that her reforms were still a net benefit. Others consider her approach to have been \"a mixed bag\" and \"[a] Curate's egg\".\nThatcher did \"little to advance the political cause of women\" within her party or the government. Some British feminists regarded her as \"an enemy\". June Purvis in \"Women's History Review\" says that, although Thatcher had struggled laboriously against the sexist prejudices of her day to rise to the top, she made no effort to ease the path for other women. Thatcher did not regard women's rights as requiring particular attention as she did not, especially during her premiership, consider that women were being deprived of their rights. She had once suggested the shortlisting of women by default for all public appointments and proposed that those with young children should leave the workforce.\nThatcher's stance on immigration in the late 1970s was perceived as part of a rising racist public discourse, which Martin Barker terms \"new racism\". In opposition, Thatcher believed that the National Front (NF) was winning over large numbers of Conservative voters with warnings against floods of immigrants. Her strategy was to undermine the NF narrative by acknowledging that many of their voters had serious concerns in need of addressing. In 1978 she criticised Labour's immigration policy to attract voters away from the NF to the Conservatives. Her rhetoric was followed by increased Conservative support at the expense of the NF. Critics on the left accused her of pandering to racism.\nMany Thatcherite policies influenced the Labour Party, which returned to power in 1997 under Tony Blair. Blair rebranded the party \"New Labour\" in 1994 with the aim of increasing its appeal beyond its traditional supporters, and to attract those who had supported Thatcher, such as the \"Essex man\". Thatcher is said to have regarded the \"New Labour\" rebranding as her greatest achievement. In contrast to Blair, the Conservative Party under William Hague attempted to distance himself and the party from Thatcher's economic policies in an attempt to gain public approval.\nShortly after Thatcher died in 2013, Scottish first minister Alex Salmond argued that her policies had the \"unintended consequence\" of encouraging Scottish devolution. Lord Foulkes of Cumnock agreed on \"Scotland Tonight\" that she had provided \"the impetus\" for devolution. Writing for \"The Scotsman\" in 1997, Thatcher argued against devolution on the basis that it would eventually lead to Scottish independence.\nReputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMargaret Thatcher was not merely the first woman and the longest-serving Prime Minister of modern times, but the most admired, most hated, most idolised and most vilified public figure of the second half of the twentieth century. To some she was the saviour of her country who [...] created a vigorous enterprise economy which twenty years later was still outperforming the more regulated economies of the Continent. To others, she was a narrow ideologue whose hard-faced policies legitimised greed, deliberately increased inequality [...] and destroyed the nation's sense of solidarity and civic pride. There is no reconciling these views: yet both are true.\n Biographer John Campbell\u00a0(2011b,\u2002p.\u00a0499)\nThatcher's tenure of 11 years and 209 days as British prime minister was the longest since Lord Salisbury in the late 19th century (13 years and 252 days, in three spells) and the longest continuous period in office since Lord Liverpool in the early 19th century (14 years and 305 days).\nHaving led the Conservative Party to victory in three consecutive general elections, twice in a landslide, she ranks among the most popular party leaders in British history regarding votes cast for the winning party; over 40\u00a0million ballots were cast in total for the party under her leadership. Her electoral successes were dubbed a \"historic hat trick\" by the British press in 1987.\nThatcher ranked highest among living persons in the 2002 BBC poll \"100 Greatest Britons\". In 1999, \"Time\" deemed Thatcher one of the . In 2015 she topped a poll by Scottish Widows, a major financial services company, as the most influential woman of the past 200 years; and in 2016 topped BBC Radio 4's \"Woman's Hour Power List\" of women judged to have had the biggest impact on female lives over the past 70 years. In 2020, \"Time\" magazine included Thatcher's name on its list of 100 Women of the Year. She was chosen as the Woman of the Year in 1982 when the Falklands War began under her command, resulting in the British victory.\nIn contrast to her relatively poor average approval rating as prime minister, Thatcher has since ranked highly in retrospective opinion polling and, according to YouGov, is \"see[n] in overall positive terms\" by the British public. Just after her death in 2013, according to a poll by \"The Guardian\", about half of the public viewed her positively while one third viewed her negatively. In a 2019 opinion poll by YouGov, most Britons rated her as Britain's greatest post-war leader (with Churchill coming second). According to the poll, more than four in ten Britons (44%) think that Thatcher was a \"good\" or \"great\" prime minister, compared to 29% who think she was a \"poor\" or \"terrible\" one. She was voted the fourth-greatest British prime minister of the 20th century in a 2011 poll of 139 academics organised by MORI. In a 2016 University of Leeds survey of 82 academics specialising in post-1945 British history and politics, she was voted the second-greatest British prime minister after the Second World War.\nCultural depictions.\nAccording to theatre critic Michael Billington, Thatcher left an \"emphatic mark\" on the arts while prime minister. One of the earliest satires of Thatcher as prime minister involved satirist John Wells (as writer and performer), actress Janet Brown (voicing Thatcher) and future \"Spitting Image\" producer John Lloyd (as co-producer), who in 1979 were teamed up by producer Martin Lewis for the satirical audio album \"The Iron Lady\", which consisted of skits and songs satirising Thatcher's rise to power. The album was released in September 1979. Thatcher was heavily satirised on \"Spitting Image\", and \"The Independent\" labelled her \"every stand-up's dream\".\nThatcher was the subject or the inspiration for 1980s protest songs. Musicians Billy Bragg and Paul Weller helped to form the Red Wedge collective to support Labour in opposition to Thatcher. Known as \"Maggie\" by supporters and opponents alike, the chant song \"Maggie Out\" became a signature rallying cry among the left during the latter half of her premiership.\nWells parodied Thatcher in several media. He collaborated with Richard Ingrams on the spoof \"Dear Bill\" letters, which ran as a column in \"Private Eye\" magazine; they were also published in book form and became a West End stage revue titled \"Anyone for Denis?\", with Wells in the role of Thatcher's husband. It was followed by a 1982 TV special directed by Dick Clement, in which Thatcher was played by Angela Thorne.\nSince her premiership, Thatcher has been portrayed in a number of television programmes, documentaries, films and plays. She was portrayed by Patricia Hodge in Ian Curteis's long unproduced \"The Falklands Play\" (2002) and by Andrea Riseborough in the TV film \"The Long Walk to Finchley\" (2008). She is the protagonist in two films, played by Lindsay Duncan in \"Margaret\" (2009) and by Meryl Streep in \"The Iron Lady\" (2011), in which she is depicted as suffering from dementia or Alzheimer's disease. She is a main character in the fourth season of \"The Crown\", played by Gillian Anderson. Thatcher has a supporting role in the 2024 biographical film \"Reagan\", played by Lesley-Anne Down.\nTitles, awards and honours.\nThatcher became a privy counsellor (PC) on becoming a secretary of state in 1970. She was the first woman entitled to full membership rights as an honorary member of the Carlton Club on becoming Conservative Party leader in 1975.\nAs prime minister, Thatcher received two honorary distinctions:\nTwo weeks after her resignation, Thatcher was appointed Member of the Order of Merit (OM) by the Queen. Thatcher's husband, Denis, was made a hereditary baronet at the same time; as his wife, Thatcher was entitled to use the honorific style \"Lady\", an automatically conferred title that she declined to use. She would be made Lady Thatcher in her own right on her subsequent ennoblement.\nIn the Falklands, Margaret Thatcher Day has been marked each 10 January since 1992, commemorating her first visit to the Islands in January 1983, six months after the end of the Falklands War in June 1982.\nThatcher became a member of the House of Lords in 1992 with a life peerage as Baroness Thatcher, of Kesteven in the County of Lincolnshire. Subsequently, the College of Arms granted her use of a personal coat of arms; she was allowed to revise these arms, in 1995, on her appointment as Lady Companion of the Order of the Garter (LG), the UK's highest order of chivalry.\nIn the US, Thatcher received the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award from the Reagan Presidential Foundation in 1998; she was designated a patron of the Heritage Foundation in 2006, where she established the Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom.\nPublished works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "19833", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19833", "title": "Metastability", "text": "Intermediate energetic state within a dynamical system\nIn chemistry and physics, metastability is an intermediate energetic state within a dynamical system other than the system's state of least energy.\nA ball resting in a hollow on a slope is a simple example of metastability. If the ball is only slightly pushed, it will settle back into its hollow, but a stronger push may start the ball rolling down the slope. Bowling pins show similar metastability by either merely wobbling for a moment or tipping over completely. A common example of metastability in science is isomerisation. Higher energy isomers are long lived because they are prevented from rearranging to their preferred ground state by (possibly large) barriers in the potential energy.\nDuring a metastable state of finite lifetime, all state-describing parameters reach and hold stationary values. In isolation:\nThe metastability concept originated in the physics of first-order phase transitions. It then acquired new meaning in the study of aggregated subatomic particles (in atomic nuclei or in atoms) or in molecules, macromolecules or clusters of atoms and molecules. Later, it was borrowed for the study of decision-making and information transmission systems.\nMetastability is common in physics and chemistry \u2013 from an atom (many-body assembly) to statistical ensembles of molecules (viscous fluids, amorphous solids, liquid crystals, minerals, etc.) at molecular levels or as a whole (see Metastable states of matter and grain piles below). The abundance of states is more prevalent as the systems grow larger and/or if the forces of their mutual interaction are spatially less uniform or more diverse.\nIn dynamic systems (with feedback) like electronic circuits, signal trafficking, decisional, neural and immune systems, the time-invariance of the active or reactive patterns with respect to the external influences defines stability and metastability (see brain metastability below). In these systems, the equivalent of thermal fluctuations in molecular systems is the \"white noise\" that affects signal propagation and the decision-making.\nStatistical physics and thermodynamics.\nNon-equilibrium thermodynamics is a branch of physics that studies the dynamics of statistical ensembles of molecules via unstable states. Being \"stuck\" in a thermodynamic trough without being at the lowest energy state is known as having kinetic stability or being kinetically persistent. The particular motion or kinetics of the atoms involved has resulted in getting stuck, despite there being preferable (lower-energy) alternatives.\nStates of matter.\nMetastable states of matter (also referred as metastates) range from melting solids (or freezing liquids), boiling liquids (or condensing gases) and sublimating solids to supercooled liquids or superheated liquid-gas mixtures. Extremely pure, supercooled water stays liquid below 0\u00a0\u00b0C and remains so until applied vibrations or condensing seed doping initiates crystallization centers. This is a common situation for the droplets of atmospheric clouds.\nCondensed matter and macromolecules.\nMetastable phases are common in condensed matter and crystallography. This is the case for anatase, a metastable polymorph of titanium dioxide, which despite commonly being the first phase to form in many synthesis processes due to its lower surface energy, is always metastable, with rutile being the most stable phase at all temperatures and pressures.\nAs another example, diamond is a stable phase only at very high pressures, but is a metastable form of carbon at standard temperature and pressure. It can be converted to graphite (plus leftover kinetic energy), but only after overcoming an activation energy \u2013 an intervening hill. Martensite is a metastable phase used to control the hardness of most steel. Metastable polymorphs of silica are commonly observed. In some cases, such as in the allotropes of solid boron, acquiring a sample of the stable phase is difficult.\nThe bonds between the building blocks of polymers such as DNA, RNA, and proteins are also metastable. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a highly metastable molecule, colloquially described as being \"full of energy\" that can be used in many ways in biology.\nGenerally speaking, emulsions/colloidal systems and glasses are metastable. The metastability of silica glass, for example, is characterised by lifetimes on the order of 1098 years (as compared with the lifetime of the universe, which is thought to be around years).\nSandpiles are one system which can exhibit metastability if a steep slope or tunnel is present. Sand grains form a pile due to friction. It is possible for an entire large sand pile to reach a point where it is stable, but the addition of a single grain causes large parts of it to collapse.\nThe avalanche is a well-known problem with large piles of snow and ice crystals on steep slopes. In dry conditions, snow slopes act similarly to sandpiles. An entire mountainside of snow can suddenly slide due to the presence of a skier, or even a loud noise or vibration.\nQuantum mechanics.\nAggregated systems of subatomic particles described by quantum mechanics (quarks inside nucleons, nucleons inside atomic nuclei, electrons inside atoms, molecules, or atomic clusters) are found to have many distinguishable states. Of these, one (or a small degenerate set) is indefinitely stable: the ground state or global minimum.\nAll other states besides the ground state (or those degenerate with it) have higher energies. Of all these other states, the metastable states are the ones having lifetimes lasting at least 102 to 103 times longer than the shortest lived states of the set.\nA \"metastable state\" is then long-lived (locally stable with respect to configurations of 'neighbouring' energies) but not eternal (as the global minimum is). Being excited \u2013 of an energy above the ground state \u2013 it will eventually decay to a more stable state, releasing energy. Indeed, above absolute zero, all states of a system have a non-zero probability to decay; that is, to spontaneously fall into another state (usually lower in energy). One mechanism for this to happen is through tunnelling.\nNuclear physics.\nSome energetic states of an atomic nucleus (having distinct spatial mass, charge, spin, isospin distributions) are much longer-lived than others (nuclear isomers of the same isotope), e.g. technetium-99m. The isotope tantalum-180m, although being a metastable excited state, is long-lived enough that it has never been observed to decay, with a half-life calculated to be least years, over 3 million times the current age of the universe.\nAtomic and molecular physics.\nSome atomic energy levels are metastable. Rydberg atoms are an example of metastable excited atomic states. Transitions from metastable excited levels are typically those forbidden by electric dipole selection rules. This means that any transitions from this level are relatively unlikely to occur. In a sense, an electron that happens to find itself in a metastable configuration is trapped there. Since transitions from a metastable state are not impossible (merely less likely), the electron will eventually decay to a less energetic state, typically by an electric quadrupole transition, or often by non-radiative de-excitation (e.g., collisional de-excitation).\nThis slow-decay property of a metastable state is apparent in phosphorescence, the kind of photoluminescence seen in glow-in-the-dark toys that can be charged by first being exposed to bright light. Whereas spontaneous emission in atoms has a typical timescale on the order of 10\u22128 seconds, the decay of metastable states can typically take milliseconds to minutes, and so light emitted in phosphorescence is usually both weak and long-lasting.\nChemistry.\nIn chemical systems, a system of atoms or molecules involving a change in chemical bond can be in a metastable state, which lasts for a relatively long period of time. Molecular vibrations and thermal motion make chemical species at the energetic equivalent of the top of a round hill very short-lived. Metastable states that persist for many seconds (or years) are found in energetic \"valleys\" which are not the lowest possible valley (point 1 in illustration). A common type of metastability is isomerism.\nThe stability or metastability of a given chemical system depends on its environment, particularly temperature and pressure. The difference between producing a stable vs. metastable entity can have important consequences. For instances, having the wrong crystal polymorph can result in failure of a drug while in storage between manufacture and administration. The map of which state is the most stable as a function of pressure, temperature and/or composition is known as a phase diagram. In regions where a particular state is not the most stable, it may still be metastable.\nReaction intermediates are relatively short-lived, and are usually thermodynamically unstable rather than metastable. The IUPAC recommends referring to these as \"transient\" rather than metastable.\nMetastability is also used to refer to specific situations in mass spectrometry and spectrochemistry.\nElectronic circuits.\nA digital circuit is supposed to be found in a small number of stable digital states within a certain amount of time after an input change. However, if an input changes at the wrong moment a digital circuit which employs feedback (even a simple circuit such as a flip-flop) can enter a metastable state and take an unbounded length of time to finally settle into a fully stable digital state.\nComputational neuroscience.\nMetastability in the brain is a phenomenon studied in computational neuroscience to elucidate how the human brain recognizes patterns. Here, the term metastability is used rather loosely. There is no lower-energy state, but there are semi-transient signals in the brain that persist for a while and are different than the usual equilibrium state.\nIn philosophy.\nGilbert Simondon invokes a notion of metastability for his understanding of systems that rather than resolve their tensions and potentials for transformation into a single final state rather, 'conserves the tensions in the equilibrium of metastability instead of nullifying them in the equilibrium of stability' as a critique of cybernetic notions of homeostasis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19834", "revid": "14377864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19834", "title": "Mary Wollstonecraft", "text": "English writer and philosopher (1759\u20131797)\nMary Wollstonecraft (, ; 27 April 1759\u00a0\u2013 10 September 1797) was an English writer and philosopher best known for her advocacy of women's rights. Until the late twentieth century, Wollstonecraft's life, which encompassed several unconventional (at the time) personal relationships, received more attention than her writing. Wollstonecraft is regarded as one of the founding feminist philosophers, and feminists often cite both her life and her works as important influences.\nDuring her brief career she wrote novels, treatises, a travel narrative, a history of the French Revolution, a conduct book, and a children's book. Wollstonecraft is best known for \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\" (1792), in which she argues that women are not naturally inferior to men but appeared to be only because they lack education. She suggests that both men and women should be treated as rational beings and imagines a social order founded on reason.\nAfter two ill-fated affairs, with Henry Fuseli and Gilbert Imlay (by whom she had a daughter, Fanny Imlay), Wollstonecraft married the philosopher William Godwin, one of the forefathers of the anarchist movement. Wollstonecraft died at the age of 38, leaving behind several unfinished manuscripts. She died 11 days after giving birth to her second daughter, Mary Shelley, who became an accomplished writer and the author of \"Frankenstein\".\nWollstonecraft's widower published a \"Memoir\" (1798) of her life, revealing her unorthodox lifestyle, which inadvertently destroyed her reputation for almost a century. However, with the emergence of the feminist movement at the turn of the twentieth century, Wollstonecraft's advocacy of women's equality and critiques of conventional femininity became increasingly important.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nWollstonecraft was born on 27 April 1759 in Spitalfields, London. She was the second of the seven children of Elizabeth Dixon and Edward John Wollstonecraft. Although her family had a comfortable income when she was a child, her father gradually squandered it on speculative projects. Consequently, the family became financially unstable and they were frequently forced to move during Wollstonecraft's youth. The family's financial situation eventually became so dire that Wollstonecraft's father compelled her to turn over money that she would have inherited at her maturity. Moreover, he was apparently a violent man who would beat his wife in drunken rages. As a teenager, Wollstonecraft used to lie outside the door of her mother's bedroom to protect her. Wollstonecraft played a similar maternal role for her sisters, Everina and Eliza, throughout her life. In a defining moment in 1784, she persuaded Eliza, who was suffering from what was probably postpartum depression, to leave her husband and infant; Wollstonecraft made all of the arrangements for Eliza to flee, demonstrating her willingness to challenge social norms. The human costs, however, were severe: her sister suffered social condemnation and, because she could not remarry, was doomed to a life of poverty and hard work.\nTwo friendships shaped Wollstonecraft's early life. The first was with Jane Arden in Beverley. The two frequently read books together and attended lectures presented by Arden's father, a self-styled philosopher and scientist. Wollstonecraft revelled in the intellectual atmosphere of the Arden household and valued her friendship with Arden greatly, sometimes to the point of being emotionally possessive. Wollstonecraft wrote to her: \"I have formed romantic notions of friendship\u00a0... I am a little singular in my thoughts of love and friendship; I must have the first place or none.\" In some of Wollstonecraft's letters to Arden, she reveals the volatile and depressive emotions that would haunt her throughout her life. The second and more important friendship was with Fanny (Frances) Blood, introduced to Wollstonecraft by the Clares, a couple in Hoxton who became parental figures to her; Wollstonecraft credited Blood with opening her mind.\nUnhappy with her home life, Wollstonecraft struck out on her own in 1778 and accepted a job as a lady's companion to Sarah Dawson, a widow living in Bath. However, Wollstonecraft had trouble getting along with the irascible woman (an experience she drew on when describing the drawbacks of such a position in \"Thoughts on the Education of Daughters\", 1787). In 1780 she returned home upon being called back to care for her dying mother. Rather than return to Dawson's employ after the death of her mother, Wollstonecraft moved in with the Bloods. She realized during the two years she spent with the family that she had idealized Blood, who was more invested in traditional feminine values than was Wollstonecraft. But Wollstonecraft remained dedicated to Fanny and her family throughout her life, frequently giving pecuniary assistance to Blood's brother.\nWollstonecraft had envisioned living in a female utopia with Blood; they made plans to rent rooms together and support each other emotionally and financially, but this dream collapsed under economic realities. In order to make a living, Wollstonecraft, her sisters and Blood set up a school together in Newington Green, a Dissenting community. Blood soon became engaged and, after her marriage, moved to Lisbon, Portugal with her husband, Hugh Skeys, in hopes that it would improve her health which had always been precarious. Despite the change of surroundings Blood's health further deteriorated when she became pregnant, and in 1785 Wollstonecraft left the school and followed Blood to nurse her, but to no avail. Moreover, her abandonment of the school led to its failure. Blood's death devastated Wollstonecraft and was part of the inspiration for her first novel, \"\" (1788).\n\"The first of a new genus\".\nAfter Blood's death in 1785, Wollstonecraft's friends helped her obtain a position as governess to the daughters of the Anglo-Irish Kingsborough family in Ireland. Although she could not get along with Lady Kingsborough, the children found her an inspiring instructor; one of the daughters, Margaret King, would later say she \"had freed her mind from all superstitions\". Some of Wollstonecraft's experiences during this year would make their way into her only children's book, \"Original Stories from Real Life\" (1788).\nFrustrated by the limited career options open to respectable yet poor women\u2014an impediment which Wollstonecraft eloquently describes in the chapter of \"Thoughts on the Education of Daughters\" entitled \"Unfortunate Situation of Females, Fashionably Educated, and Left Without a Fortune\"\u2014she decided, after only a year as a governess, to embark upon a career as an author. This was a radical choice, since, at the time, few women could support themselves by writing. As she wrote to her sister Everina in 1787, she was trying to become \"the first of a new genus\". She moved to London and, assisted by the liberal publisher Joseph Johnson, found a place to live and work to support herself. She learned French and German and translated texts, most notably \"Of the Importance of Religious Opinions\" by Jacques Necker and \"Elements of Morality, for the Use of Children\" by Christian Gotthilf Salzmann. She also wrote reviews, primarily of novels, for Johnson's periodical, the \"Analytical Review\". Wollstonecraft's intellectual universe expanded during this time, not only from the reading that she did for her reviews but also from the company she kept: she attended Johnson's famous dinners and met the radical pamphleteer Thomas Paine and the philosopher William Godwin. The first time Godwin and Wollstonecraft met, they were disappointed in each other. Godwin had come to hear Paine, but Wollstonecraft assailed him all night long, disagreeing with him on nearly every subject. Johnson himself, however, became much more than a friend; she described him in her letters as a father and a brother.\nIn London, Wollstonecraft lived on Dolben Street, in Southwark; an up-and-coming area following the opening of the first Blackfriars Bridge in 1769. While in London, she formed connections with members of the Blue Stockings Society and pursued a relationship with the artist Henry Fuseli, even though he was already married. She was, she wrote, enraptured by his genius, \"the grandeur of his soul, that quickness of comprehension, and lovely sympathy\". She proposed a platonic living arrangement with Fuseli and his wife, but Fuseli's wife was appalled, and he broke off the relationship with Wollstonecraft. After Fuseli's rejection, Wollstonecraft decided to travel to France to escape the humiliation of the incident, and to participate in the revolutionary events that she had just celebrated in her recent \"Vindication of the Rights of Men\" (1790). She had written the \"Rights of Men\" in response to the Whig MP Edmund Burke's politically conservative critique of the French Revolution in \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" (1790) and it made her famous overnight. \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" was published on 1 November 1790, and so angered Wollstonecraft that she spent the rest of the month writing her rebuttal. \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men, in a Letter to the Right Honourable Edmund Burke\" was published on 29 November 1790, initially anonymously; the second edition of \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men\" was published on 18 December, and this time the publisher revealed Wollstonecraft as the author.\nWollstonecraft called the French Revolution a \"glorious chance to obtain more virtue and happiness than hitherto blessed our globe\". Against Burke's dismissal of the Third Estate as men of no account, Wollstonecraft wrote, \"Time may show, that this obscure throng knew more of the human heart and of legislation than the profligates of rank, emasculated by hereditary effeminacy\". About the events of 5\u20136 October 1789, when the royal family was marched from Versailles to Paris by a group of angry housewives, Burke praised Queen Marie Antoinette as a symbol of the refined elegance of the , who was surrounded by \"furies from hell, in the abused shape of the vilest of women\". Wollstonecraft by contrast wrote of the same event: \"Probably you [Burke] mean women who gained a livelihood by selling vegetables or fish, who never had any advantages of education\".\nWollstonecraft was compared with such leading lights as the theologian and controversialist Joseph Priestley and Paine, whose \"Rights of Man\" (1791) would prove to be the most popular of the responses to Burke. She pursued the ideas she had outlined in \"Rights of Men\" in \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\" (1792), her most famous and influential work. Wollstonecraft's fame extended across the English channel, for when the French statesman Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-P\u00e9rigord visited London in 1792, he visited her, during which she asked that French girls be given the same right to an education that French boys were being offered by the new regime in France.\nFrance.\nWollstonecraft left for Paris in December 1792, and arrived about a month before Louis XVI was guillotined. Britain and France were on the brink of war when she left for Paris, and many advised her not to go. France was in turmoil. She sought out other British visitors such as Helen Maria Williams and joined the circle of expatriates then in the city. During her time in Paris, Wollstonecraft associated mostly with the moderate Girondins rather than the more radical Jacobins. It was indicative that when Archibald Hamilton Rowan, the United Irishman, encountered her in the city in 1794 it was at a post-Terror festival in honour of the moderate revolutionary leader Mirabeau, who had been a great hero for Irish and English radicals before his death in April 1791.\nOn 26 December 1792, Wollstonecraft saw the former king, Louis XVI, being taken to be tried before the National Assembly, and much to her own surprise, found \"the tears flow[ing] insensibly from my eyes, when I saw Louis sitting, with more dignity than I expected from his character, in a hackney coach going to meet death, where so many of his race have triumphed\".\nFrance declared war on Britain in February 1793. Wollstonecraft tried to leave France for Switzerland but was denied permission. The Jacobin faction increased in power, and in March the formation of the Committee of Public Safety and the Revolutionary Tribunal were symptomatic of an increasingly totalitarian regime. Life became very difficult for foreigners in France. At first, they were put under police surveillance and, to get a residency permit, had to produce six written statements from Frenchmen testifying to their loyalty to the republic. Then, on 12 April 1793, all foreigners were forbidden to leave France. Despite her sympathy for the revolution, life for Wollstonecraft become very uncomfortable, all the more so as the Girondins had lost out to the Jacobins. Some of Wollstonecraft's French friends lost their heads to the guillotine as the Jacobins set out to annihilate their enemies.\nGilbert Imlay, the Reign of Terror, and her first child.\nHaving just written the \"Rights of Woman\", Wollstonecraft was determined to put her ideas to the test, and in the stimulating intellectual atmosphere of the French Revolution, she attempted her most experimental romantic attachment yet: she met and fell passionately in love with Gilbert Imlay, an American adventurer. Wollstonecraft put her own principles in practice by sleeping with Imlay even though they were not married, which was widely viewed as unacceptable behaviour for a \"respectable\" woman. Whether or not she was interested in marriage, he was not, and she appears to have fallen in love with an idealization of Imlay. Despite her rejection of the sexual component of relationships in the \"Rights of Woman\", Wollstonecraft discovered that Imlay awakened her interest in sex.\nWollstonecraft was to a certain extent disillusioned by what she saw in France, writing that the people under the republic still behaved slavishly to those who held power while the new French government remained \"venal\" and \"brutal\". Despite her disenchantment, Wollstonecraft wrote:\nI cannot yet give up the hope, that a fairer day is dawning on Europe, though I must hesitatingly observe, that little is to be expected from the narrow principle of commerce, which seems everywhere to be shoving aside \"the point of honour\" of the \"noblesse\" [nobility]. For the same pride of office, the same desire of power are still visible; with this aggravation, that, fearing to return to obscurity, after having but just acquired a relish for distinction, each hero, or philosopher, for all are dubbed with these new titles, endeavors to make hay while the sun shines.\nWollstonecraft was offended by the Jacobins' treatment of women. They refused to grant women equal rights, denounced \"Amazons\", and made it clear that women were supposed to conform to Jean-Jacques Rousseau's ideal of helpers to men. On 16 October 1793, Marie Antoinette was guillotined; among her charges and convictions, she was found guilty of committing incest with her son. Though Wollstonecraft disliked the former queen, she was troubled that the Jacobins would make Marie Antoinette's alleged perverse sexual acts one of the central reasons for the French people to hate her.\nAs the daily arrests and executions of the Reign of Terror began, Wollstonecraft came under suspicion due to being a British subject and friendly with leading Girondins. On 31 October 1793, most Girondin leaders were guillotined; when Imlay broke the news to Wollstonecraft, she fainted. By this time, Imlay was taking advantage of the Royal Navy's blockade of France, which had caused shortages and worsened inflation levels, by chartering ships to bring food and soap from the United States past the blockade which he could then sell at a premium in French markets. Imlay's blockade-running gained the respect and support of some Jacobins, ensuring, as he had hoped, his freedom during the Terror. To protect Wollstonecraft from arrest, Imlay made a false statement to the U.S. embassy in Paris that he had married her, automatically making her an American citizen. Some of her friends were not so lucky; many were arrested. Her sisters believed she had been imprisoned.\nWollstonecraft called life under the Jacobins \"nightmarish\". There were gigantic daytime parades requiring everyone to show themselves and lustily cheer lest they be suspected of inadequate commitment to the republic, as well as nighttime police raids to arrest \"enemies of the republic\". In a March 1794 letter to her sister Everina, Wollstonecraft wrote:\nIt is impossible for you to have any idea of the impression the sad scenes I have been a witness to have left on my mind ... death and misery, in every shape of terrour, haunts this devoted country\u2014I certainly am glad that I came to France, because I never could have had else a just opinion of the most extraordinary event that has ever been recorded.\nWollstonecraft soon became pregnant by Imlay; on 14 May 1794, she gave birth to her first child, Fanny, naming her after perhaps her closest friend. Wollstonecraft was overjoyed; she wrote to a friend, \"My little Girl begins to suck so MANFULLY that her father reckons saucily on her writing the second part of the R[igh]ts of Woman\" (emphasis hers). She continued to write avidly, despite not only her pregnancy and the burdens of being a new mother alone in a foreign country, but also the growing tumult of the French Revolution. While at Le Havre in northern France, she wrote a history of the early revolution, \"An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution\", which was published in London in December 1794. Imlay, unhappy with the domestic-minded and maternal Wollstonecraft, eventually left her. He promised that he would return to her and Fanny at Le Havre, but his delays in writing to her and his long absences convinced Wollstonecraft that he had found another woman. Her letters to him are full of needy expostulations, which most critics explain as the expressions of a deeply depressed woman, while others say they resulted from her circumstances\u2014a foreign woman alone with an infant in the middle of a revolution that had seen good friends imprisoned or executed.\nThe fall of the Jacobins and \"An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution\".\nIn July 1794, Wollstonecraft welcomed the fall of the Jacobins, predicting it would be followed with a restoration of freedom of the press in France, which led her to return to Paris. In August 1794, Imlay departed for London and promised to return soon. In 1793, the first Pitt ministry had begun a crackdown on British radicals, suspending civil liberties, imposing drastic censorship and trying anyone suspected of sympathising with the revolution with treason, which led Wollstonecraft to fear she would be imprisoned if she returned to England.\nThe winter of 1794\u20131795 was the coldest winter in Europe for over a century, which reduced Wollstonecraft and her daughter Fanny to desperate circumstances. The river Seine froze that winter, which made it impossible for ships to bring food and coal to Paris, leading to widespread starvation and deaths from the cold in the city. Wollstonecraft continued to write to Imlay, asking him to return to France at once, declaring she still had faith in the revolution and did not wish to return to England. After she left France on 7 April 1795, she continued to refer to herself as \"Mrs. Imlay\", even to her sisters, in order to bestow legitimacy upon her child.\nBritish historian Tom Furniss called \"An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution\" the most neglected of Wollstonecraft's books. It was first published in London in 1794, but a second edition did not appear until 1989. Later generations were more interested in her feminist writings than in her account of the French Revolution, which Furniss has called her \"best work\". Wollstonecraft was not trained as a historian, but she used all sorts of journals, letters and documents recounting how ordinary people in France reacted to the revolution. She was trying to counteract what Furniss called the \"hysterical\" anti-revolutionary mood in Britain, which depicted the revolution as due to the entire French nation going mad. Wollstonecraft argued instead that the revolution arose from a set of social, economic and political conditions that left no other way out of the crisis that gripped France in 1789.\n\"An Historical and Moral View of the French Revolution\" was a difficult balancing act for Wollstonecraft. She condemned the Jacobin regime and the Reign of Terror, but at same time she argued that the revolution was a great achievement, which led her to stop her history in late 1789 rather than write about the Terror of 1793\u201394. Edmund Burke had ended his \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" with reference to the events of 5\u20136 October 1789, when a group of women from Paris forced the French royal family from the Palace of Versailles to Paris. Burke called the women \"furies from hell\", while Wollstonecraft defended them as ordinary housewives angry about the lack of bread to feed their families. Against Burke's idealized portrait of Marie Antoinette as a noble victim of a mob, Wollstonecraft portrayed the queen as a femme fatale, a seductive, scheming and dangerous woman. Wollstonecraft argued that the values of the French aristocracy corrupted women in a monarchy because women's main purpose in such a society was to bear sons to continue a dynasty, which essentially reduced a woman's value to only her womb. Moreover, Wollstonecraft pointed out that unless a queen was a queen regnant, most queens were queen consorts, which meant a woman had to exercise influence via her husband or son, encouraging her to become more and more manipulative. Wollstonecraft argued that aristocratic values, by emphasizing a woman's body and her ability to be charming over her mind and character, had encouraged women like Marie Antoinette to be manipulative and ruthless, making the queen into a corrupted and corrupting product of the .\nIn \"Biographical Memoirs of the French Revolution\" (1799), the strongly anti-Jacobin historian John Adolphus condemned Wollstonecraft's work as a \"rhapsody of libellous declamations\" and took particular offence at her depiction of Louis XVI.\nEngland and William Godwin.\nSeeking Imlay, Wollstonecraft returned to London in April 1795, but he rejected her. In May 1795, she attempted to commit suicide, probably with laudanum. Imlay saved her life, but it is unclear how. In a last attempt to win back Imlay, she embarked upon some business negotiations for him in Scandinavia, trying to locate a Norwegian captain who had absconded with silver that Imlay was trying to get past the British blockade of France. Wollstonecraft undertook this hazardous trip with only her young daughter and Marguerite, her maid. She recounted her travels and thoughts in letters to Imlay, many of which were eventually published as \"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" in 1796. When she returned to England and came to the full realisation that her relationship with Imlay was over, she attempted suicide for the second time, leaving a note for Imlay:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let my wrongs sleep with me! Soon, very soon, shall I be at peace. When you receive this, my burning head will be cold\u00a0... I shall plunge into the Thames where there is the least chance of my being snatched from the death I seek. God bless you! May you never know by experience what you have made me endure. Should your sensibility ever awake, remorse will find its way to your heart; and, in the midst of business and sensual pleasure, I shall appear before you, the victim of your deviation from rectitude.\nShe then went out on a rainy night and \"to make her clothes heavy with water, she walked up and down about half an hour\" before jumping into the River Thames, but a stranger saw her jump and rescued her. Wollstonecraft considered her suicide attempt deeply rational, writing after her rescue, I have only to lament, that, when the bitterness of death was past, I was inhumanly brought back to life and misery. But a fixed determination is not to be baffled by disappointment; nor will I allow that to be a frantic attempt, which was one of the calmest acts of reason. In this respect, I am only accountable to myself. Did I care for what is termed reputation, it is by other circumstances that I should be dishonoured.\nGradually, Wollstonecraft returned to her literary life, becoming involved with Joseph Johnson's circle again, in particular with Mary Hays, Elizabeth Inchbald, and Sarah Siddons through William Godwin. Godwin and Wollstonecraft's unique courtship began slowly, but it eventually became a passionate love affair. Godwin had read her \"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" and later wrote that \"If ever there was a book calculated to make a man in love with its author, this appears to me to be the book. She speaks of her sorrows, in a way that fills us with melancholy, and dissolves us in tenderness, at the same time that she displays a genius which commands all our admiration.\" Once Wollstonecraft became pregnant, they decided to marry so that their child would be legitimate. Their marriage revealed the fact that Wollstonecraft had never been married to Imlay, and as a result she and Godwin lost many friends. Godwin was further criticized because he had advocated the abolition of marriage in his philosophical treatise \"Political Justice\". After their marriage on 29 March 1797, Godwin and Wollstonecraft moved to 29 The Polygon, Somers Town. Godwin rented an apartment 20 doors away at 17 Evesham Buildings in Chalton Street as a study, so that they could both still retain their independence; they often communicated by letter. By all accounts, theirs was a happy and stable, though brief, relationship.\nBirth of Mary, death.\nOn 30 August 1797, Wollstonecraft gave birth to her second daughter, Mary. Although the delivery seemed to go well initially, the placenta broke apart during the birth and became infected; childbed fever (post-partum infection) was a common and often fatal occurrence in the eighteenth century. After several days of agony, Wollstonecraft died of septicaemia on 10 September. Godwin was devastated: he wrote to his friend Thomas Holcroft, \"I firmly believe there does not exist her equal in the world. I know from experience we were formed to make each other happy. I have not the least expectation that I can now ever know happiness again.\" She was buried in the churchyard of St Pancras Old Church, where her tombstone reads \"Mary Wollstonecraft Godwin, Author of \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\": Born 27 April 1759: Died 10 September 1797.\"\nPosthumous, Godwin's \"Memoirs\".\nIn January 1798 Godwin published his \"Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\". Although Godwin felt that he was portraying his wife with love, compassion, and sincerity, many readers were shocked that he would reveal Wollstonecraft's illegitimate children, love affairs, and suicide attempts. The Romantic poet Robert Southey accused him of \"the want of all feeling in stripping his dead wife naked\" and vicious satires such as \"The Unsex'd Females\" were published. Godwin's \"Memoirs\" portrays Wollstonecraft as a woman deeply invested in feeling who was balanced by his reason and as more of a religious sceptic than her own writings suggest. Godwin's views of Wollstonecraft were perpetuated throughout the nineteenth century and resulted in poems such as by British poet Robert Browning and that by William Roscoe which includes the lines:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nHard was thy fate in all the scenes of life\nAs daughter, sister, mother, friend, and wife;\nBut harder still, thy fate in death we own,\nThus mourn'd by Godwin with a heart of stone.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn 1851, Wollstonecraft's remains were moved by her grandson Sir Percy Shelley, 3rd Baronet, to his family tomb in St Peter's Church, Bournemouth.\nLegacy.\nCora Kaplan describes Wollstonecraft's legacy as \"curious\", and further notes its evolution over time: \"for an author-activist adept in many genres\u00a0... up until the last quarter-century Wollstonecraft's life has been read much more closely than her writing\". After the devastating effect of Godwin's \"Memoirs\", Wollstonecraft's reputation lay in tatters for nearly a century; she was pilloried by such writers as Maria Edgeworth, who patterned the \"freakish\" Harriet Freke in \"Belinda\" (1801) after her. Other novelists such as Mary Hays, Charlotte Smith, Fanny Burney, and Jane West created similar figures, all to teach a \"moral lesson\" to their readers. (Hays had been a close friend, and helped nurse her in her dying days.) \nHowever, the author Mary Robinson, who was associated with both Godwin and Wollstonecraft, is noted for her support and admiration for Wollstonecraft, even amidst the controversy of Godwin's biography. In her 1799 pamphlet, \"Thoughts on the Condition of Women\", Robinson describes Wollstonecraft as \u201can illustrious British female, (whose death has not been sufficiently lamented, but to whose genius posterity will render justice)\u201d. The poet Anna Seward admired Wollstonecraft and was largely positive towards Godwin's \"Memoirs\", writing in 1798: \u201cBearing strong marks of impartial authenticity as to the character, sentiments, conduct, and destiny of a very extraordinary woman, they appear to be highly valuable.\u201d\nJane Austen never mentioned her by name, but several of her novels contain positive allusions to Wollstonecraft's work. The American literary scholar Anne K. Mellor notes several examples. In \"Pride and Prejudice\", Mr Wickham seems to be based upon the sort of man Wollstonecraft claimed that standing armies produce, while the sarcastic remarks of protagonist Elizabeth Bennet about \"female accomplishments\" closely echo Wollstonecraft's condemnation of these activities. The balance a woman must strike between feelings and reason in \"Sense and Sensibility\" follows what Wollstonecraft recommended in her novel \"Mary\", while the moral equivalence Austen drew in \"Mansfield Park\" between slavery and the treatment of women in society back home tracks one of Wollstonecraft's favourite arguments. In \"Persuasion\", Austen's characterization of Anne Eliot (as well as her late mother before her) as better qualified than her father to manage the family estate also echoes a Wollstonecraft thesis.\nScholar Virginia Sapiro states that few read Wollstonecraft's works during the nineteenth century as \"her attackers implied or stated that no self-respecting woman would read her work\". (Still, as Craciun points out, new editions of \"Rights of Woman\" appeared in the UK in the 1840s and in the US in the 1830s, 1840s, and 1850s.) If readers were few, then \"many\" were inspired; one such reader was Elizabeth Barrett Browning, who read \"Rights of Woman\" at age 12 and whose poem \"Aurora Leigh\" reflected Wollstonecraft's unwavering focus on education. Lucretia Mott, a Quaker minister, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Americans who met in 1840 at the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London, discovered they both had read Wollstonecraft, and they agreed upon the need for (what became) the Seneca Falls Convention, an influential women's rights meeting held in 1848. Another woman who read Wollstonecraft was George Eliot, a prolific writer of reviews, articles, novels, and translations. In 1855, she devoted an essay to the roles and rights of women, comparing Wollstonecraft and Margaret Fuller. Fuller was an American journalist, critic, and women's rights activist who, like Wollstonecraft, had travelled to the Continent and had been involved in the struggle for reform (in this case the 1849 Roman Republic)\u2014and she had a child by a man without marrying him. Wollstonecraft's children's tales were adapted by Charlotte Mary Yonge in 1870.\nWollstonecraft's work was exhumed with the rise of the women's suffrage movement in the United Kingdom. First was an attempt at rehabilitation in 1879 with the publication of Wollstonecraft's \"Letters to Imlay, with prefatory memoir\" by Charles Kegan Paul. Then followed the first full-length biography, which was by Elizabeth Robins Pennell; it appeared in 1884 as part of a series by the Roberts Brothers on famous women. Millicent Garrett Fawcett, a suffragist and later president of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies, wrote the introduction to the centenary edition (i.e. 1892) of the \"Rights of Woman\"; it cleansed the memory of Wollstonecraft and claimed her as the foremother of the struggle for the vote. By 1898, Wollstonecraft was the subject of a first doctoral thesis and its resulting book.\nWith the advent of the modern feminist movement, women as politically dissimilar from each other as Virginia Woolf and Emma Goldman embraced Wollstonecraft's life story. By 1929 Woolf described Wollstonecraft\u2014her writing, arguments, and \"experiments in living\"\u2014as immortal: \"she is alive and active, she argues and experiments, we hear her voice and trace her influence even now among the living\". Others, however, continued to decry Wollstonecraft's lifestyle. A biography published in 1932 refers to recent reprints of her works, incorporating new research, and to a \"study\" in 1911, a play in 1922, and another biography in 1924. Interest in her never completely died, with full-length biographies in 1937 and 1951.\nWith the emergence of feminist criticism in academia in the 1960s and 1970s, Wollstonecraft's works returned to prominence. Their fortunes reflected that of the second wave of the North American feminist movement itself; for example, in the early 1970s, six major biographies of Wollstonecraft were published that presented her \"passionate life in apposition to [her] radical and rationalist agenda\". \nWollstonecraft's work has also had an effect on feminism outside academia. The feminist artwork \"The Dinner Party\", first exhibited in 1979, features a place setting for Wollstonecraft. Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a political writer and former Muslim who is critical of Islam in general and its dictates regarding women in particular, cited the \"Rights of Woman\" in her autobiography \"\" and wrote that she was \"inspired by Mary Wollstonecraft, the pioneering feminist thinker who told women they had the same ability to reason as men did and deserved the same rights\". British writer Caitlin Moran, author of the best-selling \"How to Be a Woman\", described herself as \"half Wollstonecraft\" to the \"New Yorker\". She has also inspired more widely. Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen, the Indian economist and philosopher who first identified the missing women of Asia, draws repeatedly on Wollstonecraft as a political philosopher in \"The Idea of Justice\".\nIn 2009, Wollstonecraft was selected by the Royal Mail for their \"Eminent Britons\" commemorative postage stamp issue. Several plaques have been erected to honour Wollstonecraft. A commemorative sculpture, \"A Sculpture for Mary Wollstonecraft\" by Maggi Hambling, was unveiled at Newington Green, London on 10 November 2020; it was criticised for its symbolic depiction rather than a lifelike representation of Wollstonecraft, which commentators felt represented stereotypical notions of beauty and the diminishing of women. In November 2020, it was announced that Trinity College Dublin, whose library had previously held forty busts, all of them of men, was commissioning four new busts of women, one of whom would be Wollstonecraft.\nMajor works.\nEducational works.\nThe majority of Wollstonecraft's early productions are about education; she assembled an anthology of literary extracts \"for the improvement of young women\" entitled \"The Female Reader\" and she translated two children's works, Maria Geertruida van de Werken de Cambon's \"Young Grandison\" and Christian Gotthilf Salzmann's \"Elements of Morality\". Her own writings also addressed the topic. In both her conduct book \"Thoughts on the Education of Daughters\" (1787) and her children's book \"Original Stories from Real Life\" (1788), Wollstonecraft advocates educating children into the emerging middle-class ethos: self-discipline, honesty, frugality, and social contentment. Both books also emphasise the importance of teaching children to reason, revealing Wollstonecraft's intellectual debt to the educational views of seventeenth-century philosopher John Locke. However, the prominence she affords religious faith and innate feeling distinguishes her work from his and links it to the discourse of sensibility popular at the end of the eighteenth century. Both texts also advocate the education of women, a controversial topic at the time and one which she would return to throughout her career, most notably in \"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\". Wollstonecraft argues that well-educated women will be good wives and mothers and ultimately contribute positively to the nation.\n\"Vindications\".\n\"Vindication of the Rights of Men\" (1790).\nPublished in response to Edmund Burke's \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" (1790), which was a defence of constitutional monarchy, aristocracy, and the Church of England, and an attack on Wollstonecraft's friend, the Rev. Richard Price at the Newington Green Unitarian Church, Wollstonecraft's \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men\" (1790) attacks aristocracy and advocates republicanism. Hers was the first response in a pamphlet war that subsequently became known as the \"Revolution Controversy\", in which Thomas Paine's \"Rights of Man\" (1792) became the rallying cry for reformers and radicals.\nWollstonecraft attacked not only monarchy and hereditary privilege but also the language that Burke used to defend and elevate it. In a famous passage in the \"Reflections\", Burke had lamented: \"I had thought ten thousand swords must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened her [Marie Antoinette] with insult.\u2014But the age of chivalry is gone.\" Most of Burke's detractors deplored what they viewed as theatrical pity for the French queen\u2014a pity they felt was at the expense of the people. Wollstonecraft was unique in her attack on Burke's gendered language. By redefining the sublime and the beautiful, terms first established by Burke himself in \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\" (1756), she undermined his rhetoric as well as his argument. Burke had associated the beautiful with weakness and femininity and the sublime with strength and masculinity; Wollstonecraft turns these definitions against him, arguing that his theatrical \"tableaux\" turn Burke's readers\u2014the citizens\u2014into weak women who are swayed by show. In her first unabashedly feminist critique, which Wollstonecraft scholar Claudia L. Johnson argues remains unsurpassed in its argumentative force, Wollstonecraft indicts Burke's defence of an unequal society founded on the passivity of women.\nIn her arguments for republican virtue, Wollstonecraft invokes an emerging middle-class ethos in opposition to what she views as the vice-ridden aristocratic code of manners. Influenced by Enlightenment thinkers, she believed in progress and derides Burke for relying on tradition and custom. She argues for rationality, pointing out that Burke's system would lead to the continuation of slavery, simply because it had been an ancestral tradition. She describes an idyllic country life in which each family can have a farm that will just suit its needs. Wollstonecraft contrasts her utopian picture of society, drawn with what she says is genuine feeling, to Burke's false feeling.\nThe \"Rights of Men\" was Wollstonecraft's first overtly political work, as well as her first feminist work; as Johnson contends, \"it seems that in the act of writing the later portions of \"Rights of Men\" she discovered the subject that would preoccupy her for the rest of her career.\" It was this text that made her a well-known writer.\n\"Vindication of the Rights of Woman\" (1792).\n\"A Vindication of the Rights of Woman\" is one of the earliest works of feminist philosophy. In it, Wollstonecraft argues that women ought to have an education commensurate with their position in society and then proceeds to redefine that position, claiming that women are essential to the nation because they educate its children and because they could be \"companions\" to their husbands rather than mere wives. Instead of viewing women as ornaments to society or property to be traded in marriage, Wollstonecraft maintains that they are human beings deserving of the same fundamental rights as men. Large sections of the \"Rights of Woman\" respond vitriolically to conduct book writers such as James Fordyce and John Gregory and educational philosophers such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who wanted to deny women an education. (Rousseau famously argues in \"\" (1762) that women should be educated for the pleasure of men.)\nWollstonecraft states that currently many women are silly and superficial (she refers to them, for example, as \"spaniels\" and \"toys\"), but argues that this is not because of an innate deficiency of mind but rather because men have denied them access to education. Wollstonecraft is intent on illustrating the limitations that women's deficient educations have placed on them; she writes: \"Taught from their infancy that beauty is woman's sceptre, the mind shapes itself to the body, and, roaming round its gilt cage, only seeks to adorn its prison.\" She implies that, without the encouragement young women receive from an early age to focus their attention on beauty and outward accomplishments, women could achieve much more.\nWhile Wollstonecraft does call for equality between the sexes in particular areas of life, such as morality, she does not explicitly state that men and women are equal. What she does claim is that men and women are equal in the eyes of God. However, such claims of equality stand in contrast to her statements respecting the superiority of masculine strength and valour. Wollstonecraft famously and ambiguously writes: \"Let it not be concluded that I wish to invert the order of things; I have already granted, that, from the constitution of their bodies, men seem to be designed by Providence to attain a greater degree of virtue. I speak collectively of the whole sex; but I see not the shadow of a reason to conclude that their virtues should differ in respect to their nature. In fact, how can they, if virtue has only one eternal standard? I must therefore, if I reason consequently, as strenuously maintain that they have the same simple direction, as that there is a God.\" Her ambiguous statements regarding the equality of the sexes have since made it difficult to classify Wollstonecraft as a modern feminist, particularly since the word did not come into existence until the 1890s.\nOne of Wollstonecraft's most scathing critiques in the \"Rights of Woman\" is of false and excessive sensibility, particularly in women. She argues that women who succumb to sensibility are \"blown about by every momentary gust of feeling\" and because they are \"the prey of their senses\" they cannot think rationally. In fact, she claims, they do harm not only to themselves but to the entire civilization: these are not women who can help refine a civilization\u2014a popular eighteenth-century idea\u2014but women who will destroy it. Wollstonecraft does not argue that reason and feeling should act independently of each other; rather, she believes that they should inform each other.\nIn addition to her larger philosophical arguments, Wollstonecraft also lays out a specific educational plan. In the twelfth chapter of the \"Rights of Woman\", \"On National Education\", she argues that all children should be sent to a \"country day school\" as well as given some education at home \"to inspire a love of home and domestic pleasures.\" She also maintains that schooling should be co-educational, arguing that men and women, whose marriages are \"the cement of society\", should be \"educated after the same model.\"\nWollstonecraft addresses her text to the middle-class, which she describes as the \"most natural state\", and in many ways the \"Rights of Woman\" is inflected by a bourgeois view of the world. It encourages modesty and industry in its readers and attacks the uselessness of the aristocracy. But Wollstonecraft is not necessarily a friend to the poor; for example, in her national plan for education, she suggests that, after the age of nine, the poor, except for those who are brilliant, should be separated from the rich and taught in another school.\nNovels.\nBoth of Wollstonecraft's novels criticize what she viewed as the patriarchal institution of marriage and its deleterious effects on women. In her first novel, \"Mary: A Fiction\" (1788), the eponymous heroine is forced into a loveless marriage for economic reasons; she fulfils her desire for love and affection outside marriage with two passionate romantic friendships, one with a woman and one with a man. \"Maria: or, The Wrongs of Woman\" (1798), an unfinished novel published posthumously and often considered Wollstonecraft's most radical feminist work, revolves around the story of a woman imprisoned in an insane asylum by her husband; like Mary, Maria also finds fulfilment outside of marriage, in an affair with a fellow inmate and a friendship with one of her keepers. Neither of Wollstonecraft's novels depict successful marriages, although she posits such relationships in the \"Rights of Woman\". At the end of \"Mary\", the heroine believes she is going \"to that world where there is neither marrying, nor giving in marriage\", presumably a positive state of affairs.\nBoth of Wollstonecraft's novels also critique the discourse of sensibility, a moral philosophy and aesthetic that had become popular at the end of the eighteenth century. \"Mary\" is itself a novel of sensibility and Wollstonecraft attempts to use the tropes of that genre to undermine sentimentalism itself, a philosophy she believed was damaging to women because it encouraged them to rely overmuch on their emotions. In \"The Wrongs of Woman\" the heroine's indulgence on romantic fantasies fostered by novels themselves is depicted as particularly detrimental.\nFemale friendships are central to both of Wollstonecraft's novels, but it is the friendship between Maria and Jemima, the servant charged with watching over her in the insane asylum, that is the most historically significant. This friendship, based on a sympathetic bond of motherhood, between an upper-class woman and a lower-class woman is one of the first moments in the history of feminist literature that hints at a cross-class argument, that is, that women of different economic positions have the same interests because they are women.\n\"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" (1796).\nWollstonecraft's \"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" is a deeply personal travel narrative. The 25 letters cover a wide range of topics, from sociological reflections on Scandinavia and its peoples to philosophical questions regarding identity to musings on her relationship with Imlay (although he is not referred to by name in the text). Using the rhetoric of the sublime, Wollstonecraft explores the relationship between the self and society. Reflecting the strong influence of Rousseau, \"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" shares the themes of the French philosopher's \"Reveries of a Solitary Walker\" (1782): \"the search for the source of human happiness, the stoic rejection of material goods, the ecstatic embrace of nature, and the essential role of sentiment in understanding\". While Rousseau ultimately rejects society, however, Wollstonecraft celebrates domestic scenes and industrial progress in her text.\nWollstonecraft promotes subjective experience, particularly in relation to nature, exploring the connections between the sublime and sensibility. Many of the letters describe the breathtaking scenery of Scandinavia and Wollstonecraft's desire to create an emotional connection to that natural world. In so doing, she gives greater value to the imagination than she had in previous works. As in her previous writings, she champions the liberation and education of women. In a change from her earlier works, however, she illustrates the detrimental effects of commerce on society, contrasting the imaginative connection to the world with a commercial and mercenary one, an attitude she associates with Imlay.\n\"Letters Written in Sweden, Norway, and Denmark\" was Wollstonecraft's most popular book in the 1790s. It sold well and was reviewed positively by most critics. Godwin wrote \"if ever there was a book calculated to make a man in love with its author, this appears to me to be the book.\" It influenced Romantic poets such as William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, who drew on its themes and its aesthetic.\nList of works.\nThis is a complete list of Mary Wollstonecraft's works; all works are the first edition unless otherwise noted.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19836", "revid": "48328928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19836", "title": "Molecular mass", "text": "Mass of a given molecule in daltons\nThe molecular mass (m) is the mass of a given molecule, often expressed in units of daltons (Da). Different molecules of the same compound may have different molecular masses because they contain different isotopes of an element. The derived quantity relative molecular mass is the unitless ratio of the mass of a molecule to the atomic mass constant (which is equal to one dalton).\nThe molecular mass and relative molecular mass are distinct from but related to the \"molar mass\". The molar mass is defined as the mass of a given substance divided by the amount of the substance, and is expressed in grams per mole (g/mol). That makes the molar mass an \"average\" of many particles or molecules (weighted by abundance of the isotopes), and the molecular mass the mass of one specific particle or molecule. The molar mass is usually the more appropriate quantity when dealing with macroscopic (weigh-able) quantities of a substance.\nThe definition of molecular weight is most authoritatively synonymous with \"relative molecular mass\", which is dimensionless; however, in common practice, use of this terminology is highly variable. When the molecular weight is given with the unit Da, it is frequently as a weighted average (by abundance) similar to the molar mass but with different units. In molecular biology and biochemistry, the mass of macromolecules is referred to as their molecular weight and is expressed in kilodaltons (kDa), although the numerical value is often approximate and representative of an average.\nThe terms \"molecular mass\", \"molecular weight\", and \"molar mass\" may be used interchangeably in less formal contexts where unit- and quantity-correctness is not needed. The molecular mass is more commonly used when referring to the mass of a single or specific well-defined molecule and less commonly than molecular weight when referring to a weighted average of a sample. Prior to the 2019 revision of the SI, quantities expressed in daltons (Da) were by definition numerically equivalent to molar mass expressed in the units g/mol and were thus strictly numerically interchangeable. After the 2019 revision, this relationship is only approximate, but the equivalence may still be assumed for all practical purposes.\nThe molecular mass of small to medium size molecules, measured by mass spectrometry, can be used to determine the composition of elements in the molecule. The molecular masses of macromolecules, such as proteins, can also be determined by mass spectrometry; however, methods based on viscosity and light-scattering are also used to determine molecular mass when crystallographic or mass spectrometric data are not available.\nCalculation.\nMolecular masses are calculated from the atomic masses of each nuclide present in the molecule, while molar masses and relative molecular masses (molecular weights) are calculated from the standard atomic weights of each element. The standard atomic weight takes into account the isotopic distribution of the element in a given sample (usually assumed to be \"normal\"). For example, water has a molar mass of 18.0153(3) g/mol, but individual water molecules have molecular masses which range between 18.010\u00a0564\u00a06863(15)\u00a0Da (1H16O) and 22.027\u00a07364(9)\u00a0Da (2H18O).\nAtomic and molecular masses are usually reported in daltons, which is defined in terms of the mass of the isotope 12C (carbon-12). However, the name \"unified atomic mass unit\" (u) is still used in common practice. Relative atomic and molecular masses as defined are dimensionless. Molar masses when expressed in g/mol have almost identical numerical values as relative atomic and molecular masses. For example, the molar mass and molecular mass of methane, whose molecular formula is CH4, are calculated respectively as follows:\nThe uncertainty in molecular mass reflects variance (error) in measurement not the natural variance in isotopic abundances across the globe. In high-resolution mass spectrometry the mass isotopomers 12C1H4 and 13C1H4 are observed as distinct molecules, with molecular masses of approximately 16.031 Da and 17.035 Da, respectively. The intensity of the mass-spectrometry peaks is proportional to the isotopic abundances in the molecular species. 12C 2H 1H3 can also be observed with molecular mass of 17 Da.\nDetermination.\nMass spectrometry.\nIn mass spectrometry, the molecular mass of a small molecule is usually reported as the monoisotopic mass: that is, the mass of the molecule containing only the most common isotope of each element. This also differs subtly from the molecular mass in that the choice of isotopes is defined and thus is a single specific molecular mass out of the (perhaps many) possibilities. The masses used to compute the monoisotopic molecular mass are found in a table of isotopic masses and are not found in a typical periodic table. The average molecular mass is often used for larger molecules, since molecules with many atoms are often unlikely to be composed exclusively of the most abundant isotope of each element. A theoretical average molecular mass can be calculated using the standard atomic weights found in a typical periodic table. The average molecular mass of a very small sample, however, might differ substantially from this since a single sample average is not the same as the average of many geographically distributed samples.\nMass photometry.\nMass photometry (MP) is a rapid, in-solution, label-free method of obtaining the molecular mass of proteins, lipids, sugars and nucleic acids at the single-molecule level. The technique is based on interferometric scattered light microscopy. Contrast from scattered light by a single binding event at the interface between the protein solution and glass slide is detected and is linearly proportional to the mass of the molecule. This technique can also be used to measure sample homogeneity, to detect protein oligomerisation states, and to identify complex macromolecular assemblies (ribosomes, GroEL, AAV) and protein interactions such as protein-protein interactions. Mass photometry can accurately measure molecular mass over a wide range of molecular masses (40 kDa \u2013 5 MDa).\nHydrodynamic methods.\nTo a first approximation, the basis for determination of molecular mass according to Mark\u2013Houwink relations is the fact that the intrinsic viscosity of solutions (or suspensions) of macromolecules depends on volumetric proportion of the dispersed particles in a particular solvent. Specifically, the hydrodynamic size as related to molecular mass depends on a conversion factor, describing the shape of a particular molecule. This allows the apparent molecular mass to be described from a range of techniques sensitive to hydrodynamic effects, including DLS, SEC (also known as GPC when the eluent is an organic solvent), viscometry, and diffusion ordered nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (DOSY). The apparent hydrodynamic size can then be used to approximate molecular mass using a series of macromolecule-specific standards. As this requires calibration, it's frequently described as a \"relative\" molecular mass determination method.\nStatic light scattering.\nIt is also possible to determine absolute molecular mass directly from light scattering, traditionally using the Zimm method. This can be accomplished either via classical static light scattering or via multi-angle light scattering detectors. Molecular masses determined by this method do not require calibration, hence the term \"absolute\". The only external measurement required is refractive index increment, which describes the change in refractive index with concentration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19838", "revid": "9691140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19838", "title": "Metallic bonding", "text": "Type of chemical bond in metals\nMetallic bonding is a type of chemical bonding that arises from the electrostatic attractive force between conduction electrons (in the form of an electron cloud of delocalized electrons) and positively charged metal ions. It may be described as the sharing of \"free\" electrons among a structure of positively charged ions (cations). Metallic bonding accounts for many physical properties of metals, such as strength, ductility, thermal and electrical resistivity and conductivity, opacity, and lustre.\nMetallic bonding is not the only type of chemical bonding a metal can exhibit, even as a pure substance. For example, elemental gallium consists of covalently-bound pairs of atoms in both liquid and solid-state\u2014these pairs form a crystal structure with metallic bonding between them. Another example of a metal\u2013metal covalent bond is the mercurous ion (Hg22+).\nHistory.\nAs chemistry developed into a science, it became clear that metals formed the majority of the periodic table of the elements, and great progress was made in the description of the salts that can be formed in reactions with acids. With the advent of electrochemistry, it became clear that metals generally go into solution as positively charged ions, and the oxidation reactions of the metals became well understood in their electrochemical series. A picture emerged of metals as positive ions held together by an ocean of negative electrons.\nWith the advent of quantum mechanics, this picture was given a more formal interpretation in the form of the free electron model and its further extension, the nearly free electron model. In both models, the electrons are seen as a gas traveling through the structure of the solid with an energy that is essentially isotropic, in that it depends on the square of the magnitude, \"not\" the direction of the momentum vector k. In three-dimensional k-space, the set of points of the highest filled levels (the Fermi surface) should therefore be a sphere. In the nearly-free model, box-like Brillouin zones are added to k-space by the periodic potential experienced from the (ionic) structure, thus mildly breaking the isotropy.\nThe advent of X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis made it possible to study the structure of crystalline solids, including metals and their alloys; and phase diagrams were developed. Despite all this progress, the nature of intermetallic compounds and alloys largely remained a mystery and their study was often merely empirical. Chemists generally steered away from anything that did not seem to follow Dalton's ; and the problem was considered the domain of a different science, metallurgy.\nThe nearly-free electron model was eagerly taken up by some researchers in metallurgy, notably Hume-Rothery, in an attempt to explain why intermetallic alloys with certain compositions would form and others would not. Initially Hume-Rothery's attempts were quite successful. His idea was to add electrons to inflate the spherical Fermi-balloon inside the series of Brillouin-boxes and determine when a certain box would be full. This predicted a fairly large number of alloy compositions that were later observed. As soon as cyclotron resonance became available and the shape of the balloon could be determined, it was found that the balloon was not spherical as the Hume-Rothery believed, except perhaps in the case of caesium. This revealed how a model can sometimes give a whole series of correct predictions, yet still be wrong in its basic assumptions.\nThe nearly-free electron debacle compelled researchers to modify the assumpition that ions flowed in a sea of free electrons. A number of quantum mechanical models were developed, such as band structure calculations based on molecular orbitals, and the density functional theory. These models either depart from the atomic orbitals of neutral atoms that share their electrons, or (in the case of density functional theory) departs from the total electron density. The free-electron picture has, nevertheless, remained a dominant one in introductory courses on metallurgy.\nThe electronic band structure model became a major focus for the study of metals and even more of semiconductors. Together with the electronic states, the vibrational states were also shown to form bands. Rudolf Peierls showed that, in the case of a one-dimensional row of metallic atoms\u2014say, hydrogen\u2014an inevitable instability would break such a chain into individual molecules. This sparked an interest in the general question: when is collective metallic bonding stable, and when will a localized bonding take its place? Much research went into the study of clustering of metal atoms.\nAs powerful as the band structure model proved to be in describing metallic bonding, it remains a one-electron approximation of a many-body problem: the energy states of an individual electron are described as if all the other electrons form a homogeneous background. Researchers such as Mott and Hubbard realized that the one-electron treatment was perhaps appropriate for strongly delocalized s- and p-electrons; but for d-electrons, and even more for f-electrons, the interaction with nearby individual electrons (and atomic displacements) may become stronger than the delocalized interaction that leads to broad bands. This gave a better explanation for the transition from localized unpaired electrons to itinerant ones partaking in metallic bonding.\nThe nature of metallic bonding.\nThe combination of two phenomena gives rise to metallic bonding: delocalization of electrons and the availability of a far larger number of delocalized energy states than of delocalized electrons. The latter could be called electron deficiency.\nIn 2D.\nGraphene is an example of two-dimensional metallic bonding. Its metallic bonds are similar to aromatic bonding in benzene, naphthalene, anthracene, ovalene, etc.\nIn 3D.\nMetal aromaticity in metal clusters is another example of delocalization, this time often in three-dimensional arrangements. Metals take the delocalization principle to its extreme, and one could say that a crystal of a metal represents a single molecule over which all conduction electrons are delocalized in all three dimensions. This means that inside the metal one can generally not distinguish molecules, so that the metallic bonding is neither intra- nor inter-molecular. 'Nonmolecular' would perhaps be a better term. Metallic bonding is mostly non-polar, because even in alloys there is little difference among the electronegativities of the atoms participating in the bonding interaction (and, in pure elemental metals, none at all). Thus, metallic bonding is an extremely delocalized communal form of covalent bonding. In a sense, metallic bonding is not a 'new' type of bonding at all. It describes the bonding only as present in a \"chunk\" of condensed matter: be it crystalline solid, liquid, or even glass. Metallic vapors, in contrast, are often atomic (Hg) or at times contain molecules, such as Na2, held together by a more conventional covalent bond. This is why it is not correct to speak of a single 'metallic bond'.\nDelocalization is most pronounced for s- and p-electrons. Delocalization in caesium is so strong that the electrons are virtually freed from the caesium atoms to form a gas constrained only by the surface of the metal. For caesium, therefore, the picture of Cs+ ions held together by a negatively charged electron gas is very close to accurate (though not perfectly so). For other elements the electrons are less free, in that they still experience the potential of the metal atoms, sometimes quite strongly. They require a more intricate quantum mechanical treatment (e.g., tight binding) in which the atoms are viewed as neutral, much like the carbon atoms in benzene. For d- and especially f-electrons the delocalization is not strong at all and this explains why these electrons are able to continue behaving as unpaired electrons that retain their spin, adding interesting magnetic properties to these metals.\nElectron deficiency and mobility.\nMetal atoms contain few electrons in their valence shells relative to their periods or energy levels. They are electron-deficient elements and the communal sharing does not change that. There remain far more available energy states than there are shared electrons. Both requirements for conductivity are therefore fulfilled: strong delocalization and partly filled energy bands. Such electrons can therefore easily change from one energy state to a slightly different one. Thus, not only do they become delocalized, forming a sea of electrons permeating the structure, but they are also able to migrate through the structure when an external electrical field is applied, leading to electrical conductivity. Without the field, there are electrons moving equally in all directions. Within such a field, some electrons will adjust their state slightly, adopting a different wave vector. Consequently, there will be more moving one way than another and a net current will result.\nThe freedom of electrons to migrate also gives metal atoms, or layers of them, the capacity to slide past each other. Locally, bonds can easily be broken and replaced by new ones after a deformation. This process does not affect the communal metallic bonding very much, which gives rise to metals' characteristic malleability and ductility. This is particularly true for pure elements. In the presence of dissolved impurities, the normally easily formed cleavages may be blocked and the material become harder. Gold, for example, is very soft in pure form (24-karat), which is why alloys are preferred in jewelry.\nMetals are typically also good conductors of heat, but the conduction electrons only contribute partly to this phenomenon. Collective (i.e., delocalized) vibrations of the atoms, known as phonons that travel through the solid as a wave, are bigger contributors.\nHowever, a substance such as diamond, which conducts heat quite well, is not an electrical conductor. This is not a consequence of delocalization being absent in diamond, but simply that carbon is not electron deficient.\nElectron deficiency is important in distinguishing metallic from more conventional covalent bonding. Thus, we should amend the expression given above to: \"Metallic bonding is an extremely delocalized communal form of electron-deficient covalent bonding\".\nMetallic radius.\nThe metallic radius is defined as one-half of the distance between the two adjacent metal ions in the metallic structure. This radius depends on the nature of the atom as well as its environment\u2014specifically, on the coordination number (CN), which in turn depends on the temperature and applied pressure.\nWhen comparing periodic trends in the size of atoms it is often desirable to apply the so-called Goldschmidt correction, which converts atomic radii to the values the atoms would have if they were 12-coordinated. Since metallic radii are largest for the highest coordination number, correction for less dense coordinations involves multiplying by x, where 0 &lt; x &lt; 1. Specifically, for CN = 4, x = 0.88; for CN = 6, x = 0.96, and for CN = 8, x = 0.97. The correction is named after Victor Goldschmidt who obtained the numerical values quoted above.\nThe radii follow general periodic trends: they decrease across the period due to the increase in the effective nuclear charge, which is not offset by the increased number of valence electrons; but the radii increase down the group due to an increase in the principal quantum number. Between the 4d and 5d elements, the lanthanide contraction is observed\u2014there is very little increase of the radius down the group due to the presence of poorly shielding f orbitals.\nStrength of the bond.\nThe atoms in metals have a strong attractive force between them. Much energy is required to overcome it. Therefore, metals often have high boiling points, with tungsten (5828\u00a0K) being extremely high. A remarkable exception is the elements of the zinc group: Zn, Cd, and Hg. Their electron configurations end in ...ns2, which resembles a noble gas configuration, like that of helium, more and more when going down the periodic table, because the energy differential to the empty np orbitals becomes larger. These metals are therefore relatively volatile, and are avoided in ultra-high vacuum systems.\nOtherwise, metallic bonding can be very strong, even in molten metals, such as gallium. Even though gallium will melt from the heat of one's hand just above room temperature, its boiling point is not far from that of copper. Molten gallium is, therefore, a very nonvolatile liquid, thanks to its strong metallic bonding.\nThe strong bonding of metals in liquid form demonstrates that the energy of a metallic bond is not highly dependent on the direction of the bond; this lack of bond directionality is a direct consequence of electron delocalization, and is best understood in contrast to the directional bonding of covalent bonds. The energy of a metallic bond is thus mostly a function of the number of electrons which surround the metallic atom, as exemplified by the embedded atom model. This typically results in metals assuming relatively simple, close-packed crystal structures, such as FCC, BCC, and HCP.\nGiven high enough cooling rates and appropriate alloy composition, metallic bonding can occur even in glasses, which have amorphous structures.\nMuch biochemistry is mediated by the weak interaction of metal ions and biomolecules. Such interactions, and their associated conformational changes, have been measured using dual polarisation interferometry.\nSolubility and compound formation.\nMetals are insoluble in water or organic solvents, unless they undergo a reaction with them. Typically, this is an oxidation reaction that robs the metal atoms of their itinerant electrons, destroying the metallic bonding. However metals are often readily soluble in each other while retaining the metallic character of their bonding. Gold, for example, dissolves easily in mercury, even at room temperature. Even in solid metals, the solubility can be extensive. If the structures of the two metals are the same, there can even be complete solid solubility, as in the case of electrum, an alloy of silver and gold. At times, however, two metals will form alloys with different structures than either of the two parents. One could call these materials metal compounds. But, because materials with metallic bonding are typically not molecular, Dalton's law of integral proportions is not valid; and often a range of stoichiometric ratios can be achieved. It is better to abandon such concepts as 'pure substance' or 'solute' in such cases and speak of phases instead. The study of such phases has traditionally been more the domain of metallurgy than of chemistry, although the two fields overlap considerably.\nLocalization and clustering: from bonding to bonds.\nThe metallic bonding in complex compounds does not necessarily involve all constituent elements equally. It is quite possible to have one or more elements that do not partake at all. One could picture the conduction electrons flowing around them like a river around an island or a big rock. It is possible to observe which elements do partake: e.g., by looking at the core levels in an X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectrum. If an element partakes, its peaks tend to be skewed.\nSome intermetallic materials, e.g., do exhibit metal clusters reminiscent of molecules; and these compounds are more a topic of chemistry than of metallurgy. The formation of the clusters could be seen as a way to 'condense out' (localize) the electron-deficient bonding into bonds of a more localized nature. Hydrogen is an extreme example of this form of condensation. At high pressures it is a metal. The core of the planet Jupiter could be said to be held together by a combination of metallic bonding and high pressure induced by gravity. At lower pressures, however, the bonding becomes entirely localized into a regular covalent bond. The localization is so complete that the (more familiar) H2 gas results. A similar argument holds for an element such as boron. Though it is electron-deficient compared to carbon, it does not form a metal. Instead it has a number of complex structures in which icosahedral B12 clusters dominate. Charge density waves are a related phenomenon.\nAs these phenomena involve the movement of the atoms toward or away from each other, they can be interpreted as the coupling between the electronic and the vibrational states (i.e. the phonons) of the material. A different such electron-phonon interaction is thought to lead to a very different result at low temperatures, that of superconductivity. Rather than blocking the mobility of the charge carriers by forming electron pairs in localized bonds, Cooper pairs are formed that no longer experience any resistance to their mobility.\nOptical properties.\nThe presence of an ocean of mobile charge carriers has profound effects on the optical properties of metals, which can only be understood by considering the electrons as a \"collective\", rather than considering the states of individual electrons involved in more conventional covalent bonds.\nLight consists of a combination of an electrical and a magnetic field. The electrical field is usually able to excite an elastic response from the electrons involved in the metallic bonding. The result is that photons cannot penetrate very far into the metal and are typically reflected, although some may also be absorbed. This holds equally for all photons in the visible spectrum, which is why metals are often silvery white or grayish with the characteristic specular reflection of metallic lustre. The balance between reflection and absorption determines how white or how gray a metal is, although surface tarnish can obscure the lustre. Silver, a metal with high conductivity, is one of the whitest.\nNotable exceptions are reddish copper and yellowish gold. The reason for their color is that there is an upper limit to the frequency of the light that metallic electrons can readily respond to: the plasmon frequency. At the plasmon frequency, the frequency-dependent dielectric function of the free electron gas goes from negative (reflecting) to positive (transmitting); higher frequency photons are not reflected at the surface, and do not contribute to the color of the metal. There are some materials, such as indium tin oxide (ITO), that are metallic conductors (actually degenerate semiconductors) for which this threshold is in the infrared, which is why they are transparent in the visible, but good reflectors in the infrared.\nFor silver the limiting frequency is in the far ultraviolet, but for copper and gold it is closer to the visible. This explains the colors of these two metals. At the surface of a metal, resonance effects known as surface plasmons can result. They are collective oscillations of the conduction electrons, like a ripple in the electronic ocean. However, even if photons have enough energy, they usually do not have enough momentum to set the ripple in motion. Therefore, plasmons are hard to excite on a bulk metal. This is why gold and copper look like lustrous metals albeit with a dash of color. However, in colloidal gold the metallic bonding is confined to a tiny metallic particle, which prevents the oscillation wave of the plasmon from 'running away'. The momentum selection rule is therefore broken, and the plasmon resonance causes an extremely intense absorption in the green, with a resulting purple-red color. Such colors are orders of magnitude more intense than ordinary absorptions seen in dyes and the like, which involve individual electrons and their energy states.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19839", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19839", "title": "Methyl group", "text": "Chemical group (\u2013CH3) derived from methane\nIn organic chemistry, a methyl group is an alkyl derived from methane, containing one carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms, having chemical formula (whereas normal methane has the formula ). In formulas, the group is often abbreviated as Me. This hydrocarbon group occurs in many organic compounds. It is a very stable group in most molecules. While the methyl group is usually part of a larger molecule, bonded to the rest of the molecule by a single covalent bond (), it can be found on its own in any of three forms: methanide anion (), methylium cation () or methyl radical (CH3\u2022). The anion has eight valence electrons, the radical seven and the cation six. All three forms are highly reactive and rarely observed.\nMethyl cation, anion, and radical.\nMethyl cation.\nThe methylium cation () exists in the gas phase, but is otherwise not encountered. Some compounds are considered to be sources of the cation, and this simplification is used pervasively in organic chemistry. For example, protonation of methanol gives an electrophilic methylating reagent that reacts by the SN2 pathway:\nSimilarly, methyl iodide and methyl triflate are viewed as the equivalent of the methyl cation because they readily undergo SN2 reactions by weak nucleophiles.\nThe methyl cation has been detected in interstellar space.\nMethyl anion.\nThe methanide anion () exists only in rarefied gas phase or under exotic conditions. It can be produced by electrical discharge in ketene at low pressure (less than one torr) and its enthalpy of reaction is determined to be about 252.2 \u00b1 3.3 kJ/mol. It is a powerful superbase; only the lithium monoxide anion () and the diethynylbenzene dianions are known to be stronger.\nIn discussing mechanisms of organic reactions, methyl lithium and related Grignard reagents are often considered to be salts of ; and though the model may be useful for description and analysis, it is only a useful fiction. Such reagents are generally prepared from the methyl halides:\nwhere M is an alkali metal.\nMethyl radical.\nThe methyl radical has the formula CH3\u2022. It exists in dilute gases, but in more concentrated form it readily dimerizes to ethane. It is routinely produced by various enzymes of the radical SAM and methylcobalamin varieties.\nReactivity.\nThe reactivity of a methyl group depends on the adjacent substituents. Methyl groups can be quite unreactive. For example, in organic compounds, the methyl group resists attack by even the strongest acids.\nOxidation.\nThe oxidation of a methyl group occurs widely in nature and industry. The oxidation products derived from methyl are hydroxymethyl group , formyl group , and carboxyl group . For example, permanganate often converts a methyl group to a carboxyl () group, e.g. the conversion of toluene to benzoic acid. Ultimately oxidation of methyl groups gives protons and carbon dioxide, as seen in combustion.\nMethylation.\nDemethylation (the transfer of the methyl group to another compound) is a common process, and reagents that undergo this reaction are called methylating agents. Common methylating agents are dimethyl sulfate, methyl iodide, and methyl triflate. Methanogenesis, the source of natural gas, arises via a demethylation reaction. Together with ubiquitin and phosphorylation, methylation is a major biochemical process for modifying protein function. The field of epigenetics focuses on the influence of methylation on gene expression.\nDeprotonation.\nCertain methyl groups can be deprotonated. For example, the acidity of the methyl groups in acetone () is about 1020 times more acidic than methane. The resulting carbanions are key intermediates in many reactions in organic synthesis and biosynthesis. Fatty acids are produced in this way.\nFree radical reactions.\nWhen placed in benzylic or allylic positions, the strength of the bond is decreased, and the reactivity of the methyl group increases. One manifestation of this enhanced reactivity is the photochemical chlorination of the methyl group in toluene to give benzyl chloride.\nChiral methyl.\nIn the special case where one hydrogen is replaced by deuterium (D) and another hydrogen by tritium (T), the methyl substituent becomes chiral. Methods exist to produce optically pure methyl compounds, e.g., chiral acetic acid (deuterotritoacetic acid ). Through the use of chiral methyl groups, the stereochemical course of several biochemical transformations have been analyzed.\nRotation.\nA methyl group may rotate around the axis. This is a free rotation only in the simplest cases like gaseous methyl chloride . In most molecules, the remainder R breaks the \"C\"\u221e symmetry of the axis and creates a potential \"V\"(\"\u03c6\") that restricts the free motion of the three protons. For the model case of ethane , this is discussed under the name ethane barrier.\nIn condensed phases, neighbour molecules also contribute to the potential. Methyl group rotation can be experimentally studied using quasielastic neutron scattering.\nEtymology.\nFrench chemists Jean-Baptiste Dumas and Eugene Peligot, after determining methanol's chemical structure, introduced \"methylene\" from the Greek (\"methy\") \"wine\" and (\"h\u0233l\u0113\") \"wood, patch of trees\" with the intention of highlighting its origins, \"alcohol made from wood (substance)\". The term \"methyl\" was derived in about 1840 by back-formation from \"methylene\", and was then applied to describe \"methyl alcohol\" (which since 1892 is called \"methanol\").\n\"Methyl\" is the IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry term for an alkane (or alkyl) molecule, using the prefix \"meth-\" to indicate the presence of a single carbon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19842", "revid": "9583260", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19842", "title": "Mild ale", "text": "Type of ale with a predominantly malty palate\nMild ale is a type of ale. Modern milds are mostly dark-coloured, with an alcohol by volume (ABV) of 3% to 3.6%, although there are lighter-hued as well as stronger milds, reaching 6% abv and higher. Mild originated in Britain in the 17th century or earlier, and originally meant a young ale, as opposed to a \"stale\" aged or old ale.\nMild experienced a sharp decline in popularity in the 1960s, and was in danger of completely disappearing, but the increase of microbreweries has led to a modest renaissance and an increasing number of milds (sometimes labelled \"dark\") being brewed.\nIn 2016, the Campaign for Real Ale designated May as Mild Month. In the United States, a group of beer bloggers organised the first American Mild Month for May 2015, with forty-five participating breweries across the country.\nHistory.\n\"Mild\" was originally used to designate any beer which was young, fresh or unaged and did not refer to a specific style of beer. Thus there was Mild Ale but also Mild Porter and even Mild Bitter Beer. These young beers were often blended with aged \"stale\" beer to improve their flavour. As the 19th century progressed public taste moved away from the aged taste; unblended young beer, mostly in the form of Mild Ale or Light Bitter Beer, began to dominate the market.\nIn the 19th century a typical brewery produced three or four mild ales, usually designated by a number of X marks, the weakest being X, the strongest XXXX. They were considerably stronger than the milds of today, with the gravity ranging from around 1.055 to 1.072 (about 5.5% to 7% abv). Gravities dropped throughout the late 19th century and by 1914 the weakest milds were down to about 1.045, still considerably stronger than modern versions.\nThe draconian measures applied to the brewing industry during the First World War had a particularly dramatic effect upon mild. As the biggest-selling beer, it suffered the largest cut in gravity when breweries had to limit the average OG of their beer to 1.030. In order to be able to produce some stronger beer - which was exempt from price controls and thus more profitable - mild was reduced to 1.025 or lower.\nModern dark mild varies from dark amber to near-black in colour and is very light-bodied. Its flavour is dominated by malt, sometimes with roasty notes derived from the use of black malt, with a subdued hop character, though there are some quite bitter examples. Most are in the range 1.030\u20131.036 (3\u20133.6% abv).\nLight mild is generally similar, but paler in colour. Some dark milds are created by the addition of caramel to a pale beer.\nUntil the 1960s mild was the most popular beer style in England. Pockets of demand remain, particularly in the West Midlands and North West England, but it has been largely ousted by bitter and lager elsewhere. In 2002, only 1.3% of beer sold in pubs was Mild. Some brewers have found it sells better under a different name. Outside Britain, mild is virtually unknown, with the exception of New South Wales and microbreweries in North America and Scandinavia. Some notable examples are Bank's Mild, Cain's Dark Mild, Highgate Dark Mild, Brain's Dark, Moorhouse's Black Cat and Theakston Traditional Mild.\nIn June 2025, Czech homebrewer and radio journalist Ond\u0159ej Soukup collaborated with the Prague-based microbrewery Lajka to recreate a traditional British-style mild ale, named \"Anthropoid\", in honour of the Czechoslovak paratroopers who assassinated Reinhard Heydrich in 1942. According to contemporary reports, Czech soldiers training in Britain during World War II had received similar beer from British suppliers but found it undrinkable compared to Czech lagers, describing it as resembling \"goat's urine\".\nBrown and mild.\nA popular drink in the West Midlands, \"brown and mild\" (also known as a \"boilermaker\") is a half pint of draught mild served mixed with a half pint of bottled brown ale in a pint glass. In North West England, a mixture of half a pint of mild and half a pint of bitter is known as a \"mixed\". In Norfolk, the same mixture was called a pint of \"twos\", while the same drink in the West Midlands was called a \"Mickey Mouse\".\nBrewing.\nMild ales are generally based on mild malt or pale malt. Most milds contain, in addition, a quantity of crystal malt; dark milds, meanwhile, make use of chocolate malt, black malt or dark brewing sugars. Milds tend to be lightly hopped compared to pale ale and are usually low in alcohol; strong mild ales used to reach six or seven per cent abv, but very few such beers are still brewed. Sarah Hughes Dark Ruby Mild, brewed to a pre-World War I recipe, is a rare example of a strong Mild (6.0% ABV).\nAs part of the first American Mild Month, the project organizers challenged participating breweries to create a new variation on the mild ale style by brewing with American malts and hops. They defined American Mild as \"a restrained, darkish ale, with gentle hopping and a clean finish so that the malt and what hops are present, shine through\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19843", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19843", "title": "Mars Society", "text": "Advocacy group for Mars exploration\nThe Mars Society is a nonprofit organization that advocates for human exploration and colonization of Mars. It was founded by Robert Zubrin in 1998 and its principles are based on Zubrin's Mars Direct philosophy, which aims to make human missions to Mars as feasible as possible. The Mars Society generates interest in the Mars program by garnering support from the public and through lobbying. Many current and former Mars Society members are influential in the wider spaceflight community, such as Buzz Aldrin and Elon Musk. \nSince its founding, the Mars Society has organized events and research activities. It has hosted its annual International Mars Society Convention and operated research projects such as the Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station and the Mars Desert Research Station, both using Mars analog habitats. Both of the stations are placed in remote locations for research. Crew members perform simulated extravehicular activities, carry out research assignments and reside at the station on strictly rationed supplies. The organization also hosts a college robotics competition in Utah called the University Rover Challenge.\nStructure.\nThe Mars Society is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization that is funded by donations and operated by volunteers. Membership to the Mars Society is available to all on payment of a small fee.xvi The society's aims are garnering public support for human Mars missions, lobbying government and space agencies, and verifying mission proposals via Mars analog habitats.352 These goals were set out in the \"Founding Declaration of the Mars Society\".352\nThe Mars Society's founder and current president is Robert Zubrin. Notable current and former members of the organization include Buzz Aldrin, Elon Musk, Gregory Benford and James Cameron.347 The society is a member of the Alliance for Space Development and has chapters in Australia, Canada, Europe, Japan, and many other countries. Since its foundation in 1998, the society organizes the annual International Mars Society Convention, with presentations primarily about Mars exploration and colonization.273\nIn the 2019 filing to the Internal Revenue Service, the Mars Society reported to receive around US$400,000 in donations per year. Some noteworthy expenses include the annual Mars Society convention (US$58,800), the Mars Desert Research Station (US$200,000), and the University Rover Challenge (US$46,500). The Mars Society's Taxpayer Identification Number is 31-1585646.\nPhilosophy and propositions.\nMany of the Mars Society's members believe that a human mission to Mars is achievable within a decade (as laid out in Zubrin's Mars Direct) and such a mission would lay the foundation for the colonization of Mars. The Mars Direct philosophy has permeated through the society's lobbying efforts. During testimony to the 2009 Augustine Commission, a panel set up by the Obama administration to outline the future of the U.S. space program, Zubrin advocated initiating a lean human Mars program in a similar manner to Mars Direct. The committee was indifferent to the testimony; in the final report, the commission concluded that a human Mars mission in general would \"demand decades of investment and carry considerable safety risk to humans\".\nIn 2005, Robert Markley, a science fiction researcher, pointed out that Zubrin used his president of the Mars Society position to espouse his own views on how human missions to Mars should be carried out. To make the Mars Direct plan appealing to the American public, he compared Mars to the Great American Frontier and the colonization of Mars as a way to resolve social stagnation and \"Hobbesian despair\" on Earth. Mars would be a way to give birth to an ideal society. In effect, Markley commented, Zubrin has created an \"interplanetary vision of manifest destiny\". Most members of the Mars Society agreed with the less extreme version of Zubrin's ideal, in that colonizing Mars is critical for preventing a dystopian future for humankind.\nOliver Morton commented in 2003 that the Mars Society is a fundamentally \"utopian and escapist organization\". He observed that many Mars Society convention participants were unhappy with government space programs. As a consequence, they favored funding alternatives that are often impractical, such as sponsorship deals, private philanthropy, and Martian bonds (on the basis of future resources and profits). Markley commented in 2005 that the Mars Society is somewhat similar to the Royal Society at its founding in the 17th century: \"as much of a social club of enthusiasts as a professional scientific organization\",353\u2013354 with influences from science fiction.23 In a way, he continued, the Mars Direct plan provided a grand vision for future Martian endeavors to follow and the Mars Society is a platform for exploring the implications of Mars colonization.353\u2013354\nBackground and founding.\nThe forerunner of the Mars Society was a small network of space enthusiasts colloquially known as the Mars Underground, which emerged around 1978. The members of this network were frustrated by the U.S. administration's lack of attention to Mars exploration. Most members belonging to the group were researchers and graduate students, which included Chris McKay, Penelope Boston, Tom Meyer, Carol Stoker, and Carter Emmart. This is part of the reason some Mars Society members held environmentalism and counterculture ideals.351 In April 1981, the Mars Underground organized the first Case for Mars convention about Mars exploration at the University of Colorado. The Case for Mars conventions were held every three years until the sixth and final one in 1996.\nAt the now-defunct aerospace company Martin Marietta, Robert Zubrin \u2013 who had attended the third Case for Mars convention in 1987 \u2013 and engineer David Baker developed the human Mars mission plan, titled Mars Direct.260 They published their plan for NASA and the public to review in early 1990. The core tenet of the Mars Direct plan is to use existing technologies and eliminate the need for dangerous space rendezvous or an expensive space station. A modified Mars Direct plan (called NASA Design Reference Mission 3.0) was budgeted by NASA at US$;117 less than one-twentieth the cost117 of the Mars mission plan in NASA's Space Exploration Initiative (US$).\nIn 1996, Zubrin published \"The Case For Mars\", the same year as the last Case for Mars convention took place. The book criticized prior Mars exploration mission proposals for being too costly and complicated, proposed an alternative mission plan based on the Mars Direct plan, gave philosophical arguments for it and rebutted criticisms of the plan.\nThe Mars Society was founded by Zubrin on 13 August 1998 during the Mars Society's first convention in Boulder, Colorado, the same place where the first Case for Mars convention took place 17 years earlier. With a duration of four days, the convention was attended by 750 persons and can be seen as a successor to the prior Case for Mars conventions.27 Some of those invited were from the Mars Underground or had written to Zubrin about \"The Case For Mars\". The Mars Society's founding convention in August 1998 emphasized its focus on the Mars Direct plan and efforts of lobbying the government, holding that there was no technical reason that would prevent a human mission to Mars within a decade. The first convention saw the signing of the \"Founding Declaration of the Mars Society\" which outlined primary goals for the society, amidst rifts between Mars Society members' Martian ideals.352 \nOn the second day of the convention, there was an intense debate about the ethics of Mars terraforming, which science writer Oliver Morton described as 'rancorous'. The moderator of the debate was Chris McKay. On one side of the debate were Zubrin and a few other people, who championed that terraforming is the end goal of Mars colonization. On the other side of the debate, the audience reminded them that for life on Mars, the act of terraforming will be similar to that of Native American genocide. The terms \" and 'manifest destiny' used by the Zubrin side were prohibited in later conventions.311 The next few conventions organized additional debates between proponents of nuclear power/terraforming and environmentalists.352\nPast activities.\nIn Zubrin's book \"The Case for Mars\", he recounts how the big break for the Mars Society came when Michael D. Griffin advocated for their ideas to then NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. Later in mid-2001, the Mars Society received a US$ check from Elon Musk at a fundraiser event. After briefly researching Mars concepts and missions, Musk joined the Mars Society's board of directors and gave it US$.112 In August 2001, Musk left the Mars Society after a meeting with its members and established a temporary foundation for his publicity projects, despite pleas for collaboration from Zubrin. In a public presentation at the 4th Mars Society convention, Musk stated that the Mars Society might have a purpose in his efforts. By April 2002, Musk had abandoned the temporary foundation entirely; instead, he founded SpaceX to build a low-cost rocket and invited aerospace engineers whom he had met at Mars Society-sponsored trips.112 In the following years, Musk kept in contact with the Mars Society, as is evident in his presentation of the Falcon 1 rocket in 2008, his acceptance of the Mars Pioneer Award from the society in 2012 and his presentation at the society's 2020 convention.\nAfter the first convention, the Mars Society decided to construct a Mars analog facility named Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station (FMARS) on Devon Island, Nunavut, Canada. The FMARS is the second Mars analog facility in the world; the first one is the Haughton\u2013Mars Project. Some of FMARS's construction cost was paid by the Mars Society and the Haughton\u2013Mars Project team. Other funding came from commercial sponsorship, such as with the Discovery Channel. FMARS was first occupied during a test run in July and August 2000. It began the first simulated mission around 2001. The money donated by Elon Musk was spent on the next Mars analog habitat, called the Mars Desert Research Station (MDRS). In December 2001, the habitat's construction near Hanksville, Utah,4 was completed.\nFrom 2001 to 2005, Mars mission simulations in FMARS were around 2\u20138 weeks long and consisted of ten rotated crews. The first four-month-long mock mission took place in 2007, which revealed cultural conflicts and inadequate coping strategies. Shorter missions were carried out in 2009 and 2013, before another long-duration mission called Mars 160 was conducted in 2017, in collaboration with the MDRS. The crew stayed in MDRS for eighty days before being transferred to FMARS, rotating the crew every month. As of April 2020, the MDRS had hosted nineteen field seasons (one per year) totaling 236 crews, with each crew consisting of six or seven members.101\nThe society also formulated plans to launch space-based experiments, which never materialized. In 2001, after a discussion between Zubrin, Musk and the board members, the Mars Society announced the Translife Mission, later renamed to the Mars Gravity Biosatellite. The mission aimed to study the effect of Martian-level gravity on mice, with satellite construction supported by students from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Georgia Tech. In August 2008, the Mars Society announced the project TEMPO3 after a preliminary selection of proposals. TEMPO3 was conceived as a system of two CubeSats attached to a tether and spun with carbon dioxide-powered thrusters, aimed to demonstrate rotational artificial gravity system in space. Neither of these proposals were built: the Mars Gravity Biosatellite was canceled in June 2009 due to a lack of funding and no further development of TEMPO3 has been reported since the initial proposal.\nAt the Mars Society's 2015 convention, a debate was organized between two representatives of Mars One (CEO Bas Lansdorp and Barry Finger) and two researchers from MIT (Sydney Do and Andrew Owens). Mars One, a now-defunct non-profit organization founded in 2011, aimed to establish a human settlement on Mars through a one-way mission called Mars to Stay. The MIT researchers criticized the plan as infeasible and suicidal. According to Dwayne A. Day from \"The Space Review\", the MIT team won the debate by making specific and realistic arguments. He also noted that the popularity of Mars One had dwarfed that of the Mars Society, stating that the perceived absurdness of Mars One may potentially be detrimental to the Mars Society's reputation.\nIn 2021, around a week before the first crewed New Shepard mission, Blue Origin donated US$1 million to the Mars Society and 18 other space-related organizations. The donation money came from a seat auction in that New Shepard flight. The donation vastly exceeded the Mars Society annual revenue, which was reported to be less than $400,000 in a filing with the Internal Revenue Service.\nCurrent projects.\nThe Mars Society's premier project is the Mars Analog Research Station Program. The program aims to further the understanding of Mars missions' technical and human factors via its two Mars analog habitats: the Flashline Mars Arctic Research Station (FMARS) and the Mars Desert Research Station (MDRS). The FMARS is located on Devon Island in Canada and near the Haughton impact crater, above the 75th parallel north where the island is uninhabited and barren. The MDRS is located near Hanksville, Utah, where the habitat is isolated from civilization. Both stations' locations are chosen for the landscape similarities with Mars.4 Because these stations are meant for research, both FMARS and MDRS are closed to public visits. These stations are staffed by volunteers with degrees in planetary science, geology, and engineering.353\nThe Mars Society has plans to build additional analog stations. The Euro-MARS, operated by the Mars Society's European chapter, was intended to have three decks and more extensive facilities. However, during transport from the United Kingdom to the deploying location at Krafla, Iceland, the Euro-MARS sustained irreparable damage. It was reported in 2017 that Euro-MARS was back at the planning phase, but no further updates about the station are available. The Mars Society is also planning to build another Mars analog station in Arkaroola, Australia, as of October 2022. The station would replicate a spacecraft launching directly from the Earth's surface, featuring a mock propulsion module, heat shield and landing engines.\nAs well as research, the Mars Society organizes the Rover Challenge Series, a group of annual university competitions for making mock Martian rovers. Around May and June each year, the three-day University Rover Challenge takes place in Utah's desert near the MDRS where teams compete in exploration tasks. The rover's operators must only use sensor data for navigation, similar to actual Martian rovers. Similar regional competitions that belong to the Rover Challenge Series include the European Rover Challenge, the Canadian International Rover Challenge and the Indian Rover Challenge.\nMarsVR Project is a virtual reality program that simulates MDRS and terrain one square mile around the base. The program was made in collaboration with a local virtual reality company. MarsVR is used to train MDRS's crews by simulating the use of spacesuits, airlocks, rovers and activities such as cooking. The software can also simulate playing sports on Mars such as soccer and mountaineering. The exploration portion of MarsVR is free to download on Steam, however, the training part has an attached cost for the public.\nIn 2023, the Mars Society established the non-profit Mars Technology Institute and the corresponding C corporation Mars Technology Lab to research solutions for labor, agriculture, and energy problems in the colonization of Mars. The Institute plans to outsource research to universities before building its own campus.\nReferences.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19845", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19845", "title": "Minerva", "text": "Roman goddess of wisdom\nMinerva (; ; ) is the Roman goddess of wisdom, justice, law, victory, and the sponsor of arts, trade, and strategy. She is also a goddess of warfare, though with a focus on strategic warfare, rather than the violence of gods such as Mars. Beginning in the second century BC, the Romans equated her with the Greek goddess Athena. Minerva is one of the three Roman deities in the Capitoline Triad, along with Jupiter and Juno.\nMinerva is a virgin goddess. Her domain includes medicine, wisdom, commerce, weaving, and the crafts. Minerva is often depicted with her sacred creature, an owl usually named the \"owl of Minerva,\" which symbolised her association with wisdom and knowledge, as well as, less frequently, the snake and the olive tree. Minerva is commonly depicted as tall with an athletic and muscular build. She is often wearing armour and carrying a spear. As an important Roman goddess, she is highly revered, honored, and respected. Marcus Terentius Varro considered her to be ideal and the plan for the universe personified.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Minerva\" possibly derives from Proto-Italic , and perhaps ultimately from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) (\"thought\"). Helmut Rix (1981) and Gerhard Meiser (1998) have proposed the PIE derivative (\"provided with a mind, intelligent\") as the transitional form. However, the linguist Benjamin W. Fortson IV criticizes the connection with the root (\"to think\"), arguing that the connections between Minerva and wisdom emerged at a later date under the influence of Athena. Another hypothesis, advanced by the linguist Ranko Matasovi\u0107, connects the term with a possible Proto-Indo-European term (\"moon\"). Alternatively, the name of the goddess may not derive from Indo-European\u2014it may be a borrowing from Etruscan.\nOrigin.\nAccording to the \"Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture\", Minerva constitutes a type of \"transfunctional goddess,\" a mythic archetype common throughout Indo-European cultures in which a goddess simultaneously is associated with warfare, a priesthood, and agricultural activity. The religious role of Minerva can be compared to deities such as Iranian Anahaita or Irish Macha, though these goddesses cannot be derived from a singular divinity in the original Proto-Indo-European religion. \nThrough her role in the Capitoline Triad, Minerva may distantly reflect the proposed construct of Proto-Indo-European trifunctionality. However, according to the trifunctional theory, it is likely that Minerva supplanted a preexisting deity, perhaps Quirinus, within a hypothetical Archaic triad. The place of Minerva within the Capitoline Triad may also be attested for Faliscan religion, as one inscription from Faliscan emigrants in Sardinia dated to the 2nd-century BCE mentions the deities , , and . Minerva may have acquired her role in the Capitoline triad under Etruscan influence, as a similar set of Etruscan deities consisting of Tinia, Uni, and Menrva is known to have existed. Minerva has been interpreted as a borrowing from Menrva, though it is also possible that the Etruscan deity was a borrowing from Minerva. The Roman 1st-century BCE Varro author attributes Sabine origins to the goddess, writing \"Feronia, Minerva, and the Novensides are from the Sabines.\"\nThe name Minerva may also have been uncovered in an Oscan inscription which may contain the term . However, the philologist Carl Darling Buck argues that the rhotacism indicates that the word, and possibly the cult of the goddess itself, was borrowed from another Italic dialect\u2014perhaps Latin. Similarly, the name has also been uncovered on a Paelignian inscription, though Buck likewise argues that this term was borrowed from another Italic language. In contrast, the linguist Michiel de Vaan notes that the rhotacism could reflect a Proto-Italic sound shift of to , which may also be attested in terms such as . Nevertheless, the purported existence of this sound change in Proto-Italic remains controversial.\nArchaeological excavations at a sanctuary in Lavinium revealed terracotta statues depicting Minerva dating to the 4th-century BCE, indicating the existence of a contemporary cult of the goddess. Other terracotta statuettes from the site varyingly portray unveiled girls with short hair and veiled women with expensive adornments, which likely represent unmarried and married women respectively. Though these votives appear to be natively Italic, some of the veiled women are depicted with accompanying doves, a design element perhaps attributable to the influence of Greek Aphrodite. Additional finds from the sanctuary include figurines of swaddled infants and votive depictions of breasts and wombs, all of which reinforce the prominence of childbirth at the site. According to the archaeologist Fritz Graf, the evidence from this sanctuary indicates that Minerva operated as a guardian of young women during the transition into marriage and motherhood. The theme of transition was not, however exclusive to women\u2014votive items from Lavinium portray young men adorned with a offering toys. \nThe connections between Minerva and childbirth at Lavinium could be construed as a distinction between the Roman divinity and the Greek goddess Athena, who was a virgin deity that actively avoided attempts at procreation, such as in the story of the mythical birth of Erichthonius. However, Graf suggests that the childrearing associations may have emerged from the shared characteristic of Athena and Minerva as guardians of young women during transitional phases. In further support of this theory, Graf notes that none of the votives from Lavinium depict conception, arguing that they instead gesture towards potential future childbirth. The role of Minerva as a protector of young women may have also contributed to her association with healing, as attested at the Temple of Minerva Medica on the Esquiline Hill, which contains a deposit of anatomical votives that also dates to the 4th-century BCE. Alternatively, her medicinal connotations may have emerged from her role as a goddess of crafts, or perhaps due to the influence of Athena Hygieia. Though, a Greek origin for this aspect of Minerva is slightly problematic, as the connection between Athena and Hygieia was largely restricted to Athens and the Greek divinity functioned as a protector of preexisting health whereas Minerva served to actively treat illness.\nNumerous loom weights have also been discovered at Lavinium, possibly in relation to the traditional association of women in prehistoric Italy with weaving. Alternatively, these items could be related to the function of Athena in her role as \"(\"\",\" \"worker\"), in which she operated as a patroness of artisanship. In particular, the Greek goddess was associated with weaving at practices such as the Arrhephoria\u2014a ritual involving the weaving of the peplos of Athena. However, the Greek ceremonies were largely reserved for a small sample of young girls, whereas the sanctuary at Lavinium was likely open to a broad swathe of the population. Regardless, the connection between Athena and craftsmanship could have spurred the acquisition of similar traits for Minerva, whose sacred festival\u2014the \u2014was itself associated with artisanry. Uniquely, in Rome, at least by the late Roman Republic, the connection with craftsmanship had arisen as one of the primary characteristics of Minerva, perhaps\u2014according to Graff\u2014because her role as a civic goddess was already fulfilled by Jupiter. In contrast, within Greece, Athena was largely defined by her relationship with the , whereas her artisanship associations were relatively minor.\nIt is possible that the association of Minerva with the city center may have been borrowed from Athena in her capacity as \"Polias\" (\"\", \"of the city\"), which referred to her role as a protectress of the city. In Pompeii, a votive deposit uncovered near the Porta Stabia contained an ancient terracotta bust that may depict Minerva. It is possible that this statue was intended to sanctify the fortifications, thereby incurring the added support of the divine to safeguard the city. This particular invocation of Minerva may also reflect the influence of poliad Athena. Livy, a 1st-century BCE Roman historian, describes a lectisternium during which a couch (\"\") was on display for Minerva and Neptune. It is likely that the connection between these two deities also stems from Greek influence, as it mirrors the relation between Athena and Poseidon in the founding myth of Athens.\nPresence in mythology.\nMinerva is a prominent figure in Roman mythology. She appears in many famous myths. Many of the stories of her Greek counterpart Athena are attributed to Minerva in Roman mythology, such as that of the naming of Athens resulting from a competition between Minerva and Neptune, in which Minerva created the olive tree.\nBirth.\nThe myth of Minerva's birth follows that of Athena. Jupiter raped the titaness Metis, which resulted in her attempting to change shape (or shapeshift) to escape him. Jupiter then recalled the prophecy that his own child would overthrow him, just as he himself had overthrown his father Saturn, and in turn, Saturn had overthrown his father Caelus. Fearing that their child would be male, and would grow stronger than he was and rule the Heavens in his place, Jupiter swallowed Metis whole after tricking her into turning herself into a fly. The Titaness gave birth to Minerva and forged weapons and armour for her child while within Jupiter's body. The constant pounding and ringing left Jupiter with agonizing pain. To relieve the pain, Vulcan used a hammer to split Jupiter's head and, from the cleft, Minerva emerged, as a grown adult and in full battle armour.\nMinerva and Arachne.\nArachne was a mortal highly proficient in weaving and embroidery. Not only were her finished works beautiful, but also her process, so much so that nymphs would come out of their natural environments to watch her work. Arachne boasted that her skills could beat those of Minerva, and if she were wrong she would pay the price for it. This angered Minerva, and she took the form of an old woman to approach Arachne, offering her a chance to take back her challenge and ask forgiveness. When Arachne refused, Minerva rid herself of her disguise and took Arachne up on her challenge. Arachne began to weave a tapestry that showed the shortcomings of the gods, while Minerva depicted her competition with Neptune and the gods looking down with disgust on mortals who would dare to challenge them. Minerva's weaving was meant as a final warning to her foe to back down. Minerva was insulted by the scenes that Arachne was weaving, and destroyed it. She then touched Arachne on the forehead, which made her feel shame for what she had done, leading her to hang herself. Minerva then felt bad for the woman, and brought her back to life. However, Minerva transformed her into a spider as punishment for her actions, and hanging from a web would forever be a reminder to Arachne of her actions that offended the gods. This story also acted as a warning to mortals not to challenge the gods.\nMinerva and Medusa.\nMedusa was once a beautiful human girl with magnificent hair, she was also a priestess of Minerva. Neptune was obsessed with her and lusted after her. One day Neptune was watching her pray in the Temple of Minerva and decided to act upon his lustful obsession. He forced himself on Medusa but she was not strong enough to fight him off. Minerva was furious this took place in her temple and she turned Medusa into a monster, replacing her hair with hissing snakes and removing her charm. Medusa turned any living creature she looked upon into stone. Neptune was not ever confronted for his wrongdoings to Medusa. When Perseus approached Medusa he used her reflection in his shield to avoid contact with her eyes, and then beheaded her. Medusa\u2019s spilt blood gave birth to Pegasus; which Minerva immediately tamed and gifted to Bellerophon. He delivered the severed head to Minerva, who placed its image on her Aegis.\nTaming of Pegasus.\nWhen Perseus beheaded Medusa some of the blood spilled onto the ground, and from it came Pegasus. Minerva caught the horse and tamed it before gifting the horse to the Muses. It was a kick from the hoof of Pegasus that opened the fountain Hippocrene. When Bellerophon later went to fight the Chimera he sought to use Pegasus in the fight. In order to do this he slept in Minerva's temple, and she came to him with a golden bridle. When Pegasus saw Bellerophon with the bridle the horse immediately allowed Bellerophon to mount, and they defeated the Chimera.\nTurning Aglauros to stone.\nMetamorphoses by Ovid tell the story of Minerva and Aglauros. When Mercury comes to seduce mortal virgin Herse, her sister Aglauros is driven by her greed to help him. Minerva discovers this and is furious with Aglauros. She seeks the assistance of Envy, who fills Aglauros with so much envy for the good fortune of others that she turns to stone. Mercury fails to seduce Herse.\nMinerva and Hercules.\nMinerva assisted the hero Hercules. In Hyginus' \"Fabulae\" she is said to have helped him kill the Hydra (30.3).\nMinerva and Ulysses.\nMinerva assisted the hero Ulysses. Hyginus describes in his work \"Fabulae\" that Minerva changes Odysseus' appearance in order to protect and assist him multiple times (126).\nInventing the flute.\nMinerva is thought to have invented the flute by piercing holes into boxwood. She enjoyed the music, but became embarrassed by how it made her face look when her cheeks puffed out to play. Because of this she threw it away and it landed on a riverbank where it was found by a satyr.\nWorship in Rome and Italy.\nThe Romans celebrated her festival from March 19 to March 23 during the day that is called, in the neuter plural, Quinquatria, the fifth day after the Ides of March, the nineteenth, an artisans' holiday. This festival was of deepest importance to artists and craftsmen as she was the patron goddess of crafting and arts. According to Ovid (Fasti 3.809) the festival was 5 days long, and the first day was said to be the anniversary of Minerva's birth, so no blood was to be shed. The following four days were full of games of \"drawn swords\" in honour of Minerva's military association. Suetonius tells us (Life of Domitian 4.4) that Domitian celebrated the Quinquatria by appointing a college of priests who were to stage plays and animal games in addition to poetry and oratory competitions. A lesser version, the \"Minusculae Quinquatria\", was held on the Ides of June, June 13, by the flute-players, as Minerva was thought to have invented the flute. In 207 BC, a guild of poets and actors was formed to meet and make votive offerings at the temple of Minerva on the Aventine Hill. Among others, its members included Livius Andronicus. The Aventine sanctuary of Minerva continued to be an important center of the arts for much of the middle Roman Republic.\nAs \"Minerva Medica\", she was the goddess of medicine and physicians. As \"Minerva Achaea\", she was worshipped at Lucera in Apulia where votive gifts and arms said to be those of Diomedes were preserved in her temple.\nAccording to the Acta Arvalia, a cow was sacrificed to Minerva on October 13 58 AD along with many other sacrifices to celebrate the anniversary of Nero coming to power. On January 3 81 AD, as a part of the New Year vows, two cows were sacrificed to Minerva (among many others) to secure the well-being of the emperor Titus, Domitian Caesar, Julia Augusta, and their children. On January 3 87 AD there is again record of a cow being sacrificed to Minerva among the many sacrifices made as a part of the New Year vows.\nIn \"Fasti\" III, Ovid called her the \"goddess of a thousand works\" due to all of the things she was associated with. Minerva was worshipped throughout Italy, and when she eventually became equated with the Greek goddess Athena, she also became a goddess of battle. Unlike Mars, god of war, she was sometimes portrayed with sword lowered, in sympathy for the recent dead, rather than raised in triumph and battle lust. In Rome her bellicose nature was emphasized less than elsewhere.\nAccording to Livy's \"History of Rome\" (7.3), the annual nail marking the year, a process where the praetor maximus drove a nail in to formally keep track of the current year, happened in the temple of Minerva because she was thought to have invented numbers.\nThere is archaeological evidence to suggest that Minerva was worshipped not only in a formal civic fashion, but also by individuals on a more personal level.\nRoman coinage.\nMinerva is featured on the coinage of different Roman emperors. She often is represented on the reverse side of a coin holding an owl and a spear among her attributes.\nWorship in Roman Britain.\nDuring the Roman occupation of Britain, it was common for carpenters to own tools ornamented with images of Minerva to invoke a greater amount of protection from the goddess of crafts. Some women would also have images of her on accessories such as hairpins or jewellery. She was even featured on some funerary art on coffins and signet rings.\nBath.\nDuring Roman rule, Minerva became equated with the Celtic goddess Sulis, to the degree where their names were used both together and interchangeably. She was believed to preside over the healing hot springs located in Bath. Though Minerva is not a water deity, her association with intellectual professions as \"Minerva Medica\" she could also be thought of as a healing goddess, the epigraphic evidence present makes it clear that this is how Minerva was thought of in Bath.\nSome of the archaeological evidence present in Bath leads scholars to believe that it was thought Minerva could provide full healing from things such as rheumatism via the hot springs if she was given full credit for the healing.\nThe temple of Sulis Minerva was known for having a miraculous altar-fire that burned coal as opposed to the traditional wood.\nCarrawburgh.\nThere is evidence of worship of Minerva Medica in Carrawburgh due to archaeological evidence such as a relief depicting her and Aesculapius.\nChester.\nThere is a shrine dedicated to Minerva in Edgar's Field built in the face of a quarry next to the River Dee.\nEtruscan Menrva.\nStemming from an Italic goddess , the Etruscans adopted the inherited Old Latin name, , thereby calling her Menrva. It is presumed that her Roman name, Minerva, is based on this Etruscan mythology. Minerva was the goddess of wisdom, war, art, schools, justice and commerce. She was the Etruscan counterpart to Greek Athena. Like Athena, Minerva burst from the head of her father, Jupiter (Greek Zeus), who had devoured her mother (Metis) in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent her birth.\nBy a process of folk etymology, the Romans could have linked her foreign name to the root \"men-\" in Latin words such as \"mens\" meaning \"mind\", perhaps because one of her aspects as goddess pertained to the intellectual. The word \"mens\" is built from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*men-\" 'mind' (linked with memory as in Greek Mnemosyne (', ) and ('): memory, remembrance, recollection, in Sanskrit meaning mind).\nThe Etruscan Menrva was part of a holy triad with Tinia and Uni, equivalent to the Roman Capitoline Triad of Jupiter-Juno-Minerva.\nModern Depictions of Minerva.\nLiterature.\nShe is remembered in \"De Mulieribus Claris\", a collection of biographies of historical and mythological women by the Florentine author Giovanni Boccaccio, composed in 1361\u201362. It is notable as the first collection devoted exclusively to biographies of women in Western literature. Poet Elizabeth Carter is famously portrayed in an outfit inspired by Minerva, and also wrote poems in her honour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19846", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19846", "title": "Mars Direct", "text": "Proposal for a crewed Mars mission\nMars Direct is a proposal for a human mission to Mars which purports to be both cost-effective and possible with current technology. It was originally detailed in a research paper by Martin Marietta engineers Robert Zubrin and David Baker in 1990, and later expanded upon in Zubrin's 1996 book \"The Case for Mars\". It now serves as a staple of Zubrin's speaking engagements and general advocacy as head of the Mars Society, an organization devoted to the colonization of Mars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nSpace Exploration Initiative.\nOn July 20, 1989, US President George H. W. Bush announced plans for what came to be known as the Space Exploration Initiative (SEI). In a speech on the steps of the National Air and Space Museum he described long-term plans which would culminate in a human mission to the surface of Mars.\nBy December 1990, a study to estimate the project's cost determined that long-term expenditure would total approximately 450 billion dollars spread over 20 to 30 years. The \"90 Day Study\" as it came to be known (also \u201c90 Day Report\u201d from people such as Zubrin), evoked a hostile Congressional reaction towards SEI given that it would have required the largest single government expenditure since World War II. Within a year, all funding requests for SEI had been denied.\nDan Goldin became NASA Administrator on April 1, 1992, officially abandoning plans for near-term human exploration beyond Earth orbit with the shift towards a \"faster, better, cheaper\" strategy for robotic exploration.\nDevelopment.\nWhile working at Martin Marietta designing interplanetary mission architectures, Robert Zubrin perceived a fundamental flaw in the SEI program. Zubrin came to understand that if NASA's plan was to fully utilize as many technologies as possible in support of sending the mission to Mars, it would become politically untenable. In his own words:\nThe exact opposite of the correct way to do engineering.\nZubrin's alternative to this \"Battlestar Galactica\" mission strategy (dubbed so by its detractors for the large, nuclear powered spaceships that supposedly resembled the science-fiction spaceship of the same name) involved a longer surface stay, a faster flight-path in the form of a conjunction class mission, in situ resource utilization and craft launched directly from the surface of Earth to Mars as opposed to be being assembled in orbit or by a space-based drydock. After receiving approval from management at Marietta, a 12-man team within the company began to work out the details of the mission. While they focused primarily on more traditional mission architectures, Zubrin began to collaborate with colleague David Baker's extremely simple, stripped-down and robust strategy. Their goal to \"use local resources, travel light, and live off the land\" became the hallmark of Mars Direct.\nMission scenario.\nFirst launch.\nThe first flight of the Ares rocket (not to be confused with the similarly named rocket of the now defunct Constellation program) would take an uncrewed Earth Return Vehicle to Mars after a 6-month cruise phase, with a supply of hydrogen, a chemical plant and a small nuclear reactor. Once there, a series of chemical reactions (the Sabatier reaction coupled with electrolysis) would be used to combine a small amount of hydrogen (8 tons) carried by the \"Earth Return Vehicle\" with the carbon dioxide of the Martian atmosphere to create up to 112 tonnes of methane and oxygen. This relatively simple chemical-engineering procedure was used regularly in the 19th and 20th centuries, and would ensure that only 7% of the return propellant would need to be carried to the surface of Mars.\n96 tonnes of methane and oxygen would be needed to send the \"Earth Return Vehicle\" on a trajectory back home at the conclusion of the surface stay; the rest would be available for Mars rovers. The process of generating fuel is expected to require approximately ten months to complete.\nSecond launch.\nSome 26 months after the \"Earth Return Vehicle\" is originally launched from Earth, a second vehicle, the Mars Habitat Unit, would be launched on a 6-month long low-energy transfer trajectory to Mars, and would carry a crew of four astronauts (the minimum number required so that the team can be split in two without leaving anyone alone). The Habitat Unit would not be launched until the automated factory aboard the ERV had signaled the successful production of chemicals required for operation on the planet and the return trip to Earth. During the trip, artificial gravity would be generated by tethering the Habitat Unit to the spent upper stage of the booster, and setting them rotating about a common axis. This rotation would produce a comfortable 1\u00a0\"g\" working environment for the astronauts, freeing them of the debilitating effects of long-term exposure to weightlessness.\nLanding and surface operations.\nUpon reaching Mars, the upper stage would be jettisoned, with the Habitat Unit aerobraking into Mars orbit before soft-landing in proximity to the \"Earth Return Vehicle\". Precise landing would be supported by a radar beacon started by the first lander. Once on Mars, the crew would spend 18 months on the surface, carrying out a range of scientific research, aided by a small rover vehicle carried aboard their Mars Habitat Unit, and powered by the methane produced by the Earth Return Vehicle.\nReturn and follow-up missions.\nTo return, the crew would use the \"Earth Return Vehicle\", leaving the Mars Habitat Unit for the possible use of subsequent explorers. On the return trip to Earth, the propulsion stage of the Earth Return Vehicle would be used as a counterweight to generate artificial gravity for the trip back.\nFollow-up missions would be dispatched at 2 year intervals to Mars to ensure that a redundant ERV would be on the surface at all times, waiting to be used by the next crewed mission or the current crew in an emergency. In such an emergency scenario, the crew would trek hundreds of kilometers to the other ERV in their long-range vehicle.\nComponents.\nThe Mars Direct proposal includes a component for a Launch Vehicle \"Ares\", an Earth Return Vehicle (ERV) and a Mars Habitat Unit (MHU).\nLaunch Vehicle.\nThe plan involves several launches making use of heavy-lift boosters of similar size to the Saturn V used for the Apollo missions, which would potentially be derived from Space Shuttle components. This proposed rocket is dubbed \"Ares\", which would use space shuttle Advanced Solid Rocket Boosters, a modified shuttle external tank, and a new Lox/LH2 third stage for the trans-Mars injection of the payload. Ares would put 121 tonnes into a 300\u00a0km circular orbit, and boost 47 tonnes toward Mars.\nEarth Return Vehicle.\nThe Earth Return Vehicle is a two-stage vehicle. The upper stage comprises the living accommodation for the crew during their six-month return trip to Earth from Mars. The lower stage contains the vehicle's rocket engines and a small chemical production plant.\nMars Habitat Unit.\nThe Mars Habitat Unit is a 2- or 3-deck vehicle providing a comprehensive living and working environment for a Mars crew. In addition to individual sleeping quarters which provide a degree of privacy for each of the crew and a place for personal effects, the Mars Habitat Unit includes a communal living area, a small galley, exercise area, and hygiene facilities with closed-cycle water purification. The lower deck of the Mars Habitat Unit provides the primary working space for the crew: small laboratory areas for carrying out geology and life science research; storage space for samples, airlocks for reaching the surface of Mars, and a suiting-up area where crew members prepare for surface operations. Protection from harmful radiation while in space and on the surface of Mars (e.g. from solar flares) would be provided by a dedicated \"storm shelter\" in the core of the vehicle.\nThe Mars Habitat Unit would also include a small pressurized rover that is stored in the lower deck area and assembled on the surface of Mars. Powered by a methane engine, it is designed to extend the range over which astronauts can explore the surface of Mars out to 320\u00a0km.\nSince it was first proposed as a part of Mars Direct, the Mars Habitat Unit has been adopted by NASA as a part of their Mars Design Reference Mission, which uses two Mars Habitat Units \u2013 one of which flies to Mars uncrewed, providing a dedicated laboratory facility on Mars, together with the capacity to carry a larger rover vehicle. The second Mars Habitat Unit flies to Mars with the crew, its interior given over completely to living and storage space.\nTo prove the viability of the Mars Habitat Unit, the Mars Society has implemented the Mars Analogue Research Station Program (MARS), which has established a number of prototype Mars Habitat Units around the world.\nReception.\nBaker pitched Mars Direct at the Marshall Spaceflight Center in April 1990, where reception was very positive. The engineers flew around the country to present their plan, which generated significant interest. When their tour culminated in a demonstration at the National Space Society they received a standing ovation. The plan gained rapid media attention shortly afterwards.\nResistance to the plan came from teams within NASA working on the Space Station and advanced propulsion concepts. The NASA administration rejected Mars Direct. Zubrin remained committed to the strategy, and after parting with David Baker attempted to convince the new NASA administration of Mars Direct's merits in 1992.\nAfter being granted a small research fund at Martin Marietta, Zubrin and his colleagues successfully demonstrated an in-situ propellant generator which achieved an efficiency of 94%. No chemical engineers partook in the development of the demonstration hardware. After showing the positive results to the Johnson Space Center, the NASA administration still held several reservations about the plan.\nIn November 2003, Zubrin was invited to speak to the U.S. Senate committee on the future of space exploration. Two months later the Bush administration announced the creation of the Constellation program, a human spaceflight initiative with the goal of sending humans to the Moon by 2020. While a Mars mission was not specifically detailed, a plan to reach Mars based on utilizing the Orion spacecraft was tentatively developed for implementation in the 2030s. In 2009 the Obama administration began a review of the Constellation program, and after budgetary concerns the program was cancelled in 2010.\nThere are a variety of psychological and sociological issues that could affect long-duration expeditionary space missions. Early human spaceflight missions to Mars are expected by some to have significant psycho-social problems to overcome, as well as provide considerable data for refining mission design, mission planning, and crew selection for future missions.\nRevisions.\nSince Mars Direct was initially conceived, it has undergone regular review and development by Zubrin himself, the Mars Society, NASA, Stanford University and others.\nMars Semi-Direct.\nZubrin and Weaver developed a modified version of Mars Direct, called Mars Semi-Direct, in response to some specific criticisms. This mission consists of three spacecraft and includes a \"Mars Ascent Vehicle\" (MAV). The ERV remains in Mars orbit for the return journey, while the uncrewed MAV lands and manufactures propellants for the ascent back up to Mars orbit. The Mars Semi-Direct architecture has been used as the basis of a number of studies, including the NASA Design Reference Missions.\nWhen subjected to the same cost-analysis as the 90-day report, Mars Semi-Direct was predicted to cost 55 billion dollars over 10 years, capable of fitting into the existing NASA budget.\nMars Semi-Direct became the basis of the Design Reference Mission 1.0 of NASA, replacing the Space Exploration Initiative.\nDesign Reference Mission.\nThe NASA model, referred to as the Design Reference Mission, on version 5.0 as of September 1, 2012, calls for a significant upgrade in hardware (at least three launches per mission, rather than two), and sends the ERV to Mars fully fueled, parking it in orbit above the planet for subsequent rendezvous with the MAV.\nMars Direct and SpaceX.\nWith the potentially imminent advent of low-cost heavy lift capability, Zubrin has posited a dramatically lower cost human Mars mission using hardware developed by space transport company SpaceX. In this simpler plan, a crew of two would be sent to Mars by a single Falcon Heavy launch, the Dragon spacecraft acting as their interplanetary cruise habitat. Additional living space for the journey would be enabled through the use of inflatable add-on modules if required. The problems associated with long-term weightlessness would be addressed in the same manner as the baseline Mars Direct plan, a tether between the Dragon habitat and the TMI (Trans-Mars Injection) stage acting to allow rotation of the craft.\nThe Dragon's heatshield characteristics could allow for a safe descent if landing rockets of sufficient power were made available. Research at NASA's Ames Research Center has demonstrated that a robotic Dragon would be capable of a fully propulsive landing on the Martian surface. On the surface, the crew would have at their disposal two Dragon spacecraft with inflatable modules as habitats, two ERVs, two Mars ascent vehicles and 8 tonnes of cargo.\nOther Studies.\nThe Mars Society and Stanford studies retain the original two-vehicle mission profile of Mars Direct, but increase the crew size to six.\nMars Society Australia developed their own four-person \"Mars Oz\" reference mission, based on Mars Semi-Direct. This study uses horizontally landing, bent biconic shaped modules, and relies on solar power and chemical propulsion throughout, where Mars Direct and the DRMs used nuclear reactors for surface power and, in the case of the DRMs for propulsion as well. The Mars Oz reference mission also differs in assuming, based on space station experience, that spin gravity will not be required.\nMars Analogue Research Stations.\nThe Mars Society has argued the viability of the Mars Habitat Unit concept through their Mars Analogue Research Station program. These are two or three decked vertical cylinders ~8 m in diameter and 8 m high. Mars Society Australia plans to build its own station based on the Mars Oz design. The Mars Oz design features a horizontal cylinder 4.7 m in diameter and 18 m long, with a tapered nose. A second similar module will function as a garage and power and logistics module.\nMars Direct was featured on a Discovery Channel programs \"Mars: The Next Frontier\" in which issues were discussed surrounding NASA funding of the project, and on \"Mars Underground\", where the plan is discussed more in-depth.\nAlternatives.\n\"Mars to Stay\" proposals involve not returning the first immigrant/explorers immediately, or ever. It has been suggested the cost of sending a four or six person team could be one fifth to one tenth the cost of returning that same four or six person team. Depending on the specific approach taken, a quite complete lab could be sent and landed for less than the cost of sending back even 50 kilos of Martian rocks. Twenty or more persons could be sent for the cost of returning four.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19848", "revid": "51039793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19848", "title": "Max Planck", "text": "German theoretical physicist (1858\u20131947)\nMax Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck (; 23 April 1858 \u2013 4 October 1947) was a German theoretical physicist whose discovery of energy quanta won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918.\nPlanck made many substantial contributions to theoretical physics, but his fame as a physicist rests primarily on his role as the originator of quantum theory and one of the founders of modern physics, which revolutionized understanding of atomic and subatomic processes. He is known for the Planck constant, which is of foundational importance for quantum physics, and which he used to derive a set of units, now called Planck units, expressed only in terms of physical constants.\nPlanck was twice President of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society. In 1948 it was renamed the Max Planck Society, and today includes 83 institutions representing a wide range of scientific directions.\nEarly life and education.\nMax Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck was born on 23 April 1858 in Kiel, Holstein, the son of Johann Julius Wilhelm Planck and his second wife, Emma Patzig. He was baptized with the name of \"Karl Ernst Ludwig Marx Planck\"; of his given names, \"Marx\" was indicated as the \"appellation name\". However, by the age of ten he signed with the name \"Max\" and used this for the rest of his life.\nPlanck came from a traditional, intellectual family. His paternal great-grandfather and grandfather were both theology professors in G\u00f6ttingen; his father was a law professor at the University of Kiel and Munich. One of his uncles was also a judge.\nPlanck was the sixth child in the family, though two of his siblings were from his father's first marriage. War was common during Planck's early years and among his earliest memories was the marching of Prussian and Austrian troops into Kiel during the Second Schleswig War in 1864.\nIn 1867, the family moved to Munich, where Planck enrolled at \"Maximiliansgymnasium\". There, his mathematical talents emerged early and he later came under the tutelage of Hermann M\u00fcller, a mathematician who took an interest in the youth, and taught him astronomy and mechanics as well as mathematics. It was from M\u00fcller that Planck first learned the principle of conservation of energy. Planck graduated early, at age 17. This is how Planck first came in contact with the field of physics.\nPlanck was gifted when it came to music; he took singing lessons and played piano, organ and cello, and composed songs and operas. However, instead of music he chose to study physics.\nIn 1874, Planck enrolled at the University of Munich. Under professor Philipp von Jolly's supervision, Planck performed the only experiments of his scientific career, studying the diffusion of hydrogen through heated platinum, but transferred to theoretical physics. Jolly advised Planck against going into theoretical physics; Planck recalls that in 1878, Jolly argued that physics was almost complete, being a \"highly developed, nearly fully matured science, that through the crowning achievement of the discovery of the principle of conservation of energy will arguably soon take its final stable form\".\nIn 1877, Planck went to the University of Berlin for a year of study with physicists Hermann von Helmholtz and Gustav Kirchhoff and mathematician Karl Weierstrass. He wrote that Helmholtz was never quite prepared, spoke slowly, miscalculated endlessly, and bored his listeners, while Kirchhoff spoke in carefully prepared lectures which were dry and monotonous. He soon became a close friend with Helmholtz. While there he undertook a program of mostly self-study of Rudolf Clausius' writings, which led him to choose thermodynamics as his field.\nIn October 1878, Planck passed his qualifying exams and in February 1879 defended his thesis \"\u00dcber den zweiten Hauptsatz der mechanischen W\u00e4rmetheorie\" (On the second law of mechanical heat theory). He briefly taught mathematics and physics at his former school in Munich.\nBy the year 1880, Planck had obtained the two highest academic degrees offered in Europe. The first was a doctorate degree after he completed his paper detailing his research and theory of thermodynamics. He then presented his \"venia legendi\" (habilitation) thesis titled \"Gleichgewichtszust\u00e4nde isotroper K\u00f6rper in verschiedenen Temperaturen\" (Equilibrium states of isotropic bodies at different temperatures).\nCareer and research.\nIn 1880, Planck became a \"Privatdozent\" (unsalaried lecturer) at Munich, waiting until he was offered an academic position. Although he was initially ignored by the academic community, he furthered his work on the field of heat theory and discovered one after another the same thermodynamical formalism as Gibbs without realizing it. Clausius' ideas on entropy occupied a central role in his work.\nIn April 1885, Planck was appointed Associate Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Kiel. Further work on entropy and its treatment, especially as applied in physical chemistry, followed. He published his \"Treatise on Thermodynamics\" in 1897. He proposed a thermodynamic basis for Svante Arrhenius's theory of electrolytic dissociation.\nIn 1889, Planck was named the successor to Kirchhoff's position at the University of Berlin \u2013 presumably thanks to Helmholtz's intercession \u2013 and by 1892 became Full Professor. In 1907, he was offered Ludwig Boltzmann's position in Vienna, but turned it down to stay in Berlin. During 1909, as a University of Berlin professor, he was invited to become the Ernest Kempton Adams Lecturer in Theoretical Physics at Columbia University in New York City. A series of his lectures were translated and co-published by Columbia University professor A. P. Wills. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1914. He retired from Berlin on 10 January 1926, and was succeeded by Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger. He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1926 and to the American Philosophical Society in 1933.\nProfessor at Berlin University.\nAs a professor at the University of Berlin, Planck joined the local Physical Society. He later wrote about this time: \"In those days I was essentially the only theoretical physicist there, whence things were not so easy for me, because I started mentioning entropy, but this was not quite fashionable, since it was regarded as a mathematical spook\". Thanks to his initiative, the various local Physical Societies of Germany merged in 1898 to form the German Physical Society (Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft, DPG); from 1905 to 1909 Planck was the president.\nPlanck started a six-semester course of lectures on theoretical physics, \"dry, somewhat impersonal\" according to Lise Meitner, \"using no notes, never making mistakes, never faltering; the best lecturer I ever heard\" according to an English participant, James R. Partington, who continues: \"There were always many standing around the room. As the lecture-room was well heated and rather close, some of the listeners would from time to time drop to the floor, but this did not disturb the lecture.\" Planck did not establish an actual \"school\"; the number of his graduate students was only about 20, among them:\nEntropy.\nThermodynamics, also known as the \"mechanical theory of heat\" at the end of the 19th century, had emerged at the beginning of this century from an attempt to understand the functioning of steam engines and to improve their efficiency. In the 1840s, several researchers independently discovered and formulated the law of conservation of energy, which is now also known as the first law of thermodynamics. In 1850, Rudolf Clausius formulated the so-called second law of thermodynamics, which states that a voluntary (or spontaneous) transfer of energy is only possible from a warmer to a colder body, but not vice versa. In England at this time William Thomson came to the same conclusion.\nClausius generalized his formulation further and further and came up with a new formulation in 1865. To this end, he introduced the concept of entropy, which he defined as a measure of the reversible supply of heat in relation to the absolute temperature.\nThe new formulation of the second law, which is still valid today, was: \"Entropy can be created, but never destroyed\". Clausius, whose work Planck read as a young student during his stay in Berlin, successfully applied this new law of nature to mechanical, thermoelectric and chemical processes.\nIn his thesis in 1879, Planck summarized Clausius' writings, pointing out contradictions and inaccuracies in their formulation and then clarifying them. In addition, he generalized the validity of the second law to all processes in nature; Clausius had limited its application to reversible processes and thermal processes. Furthermore, Planck dealt intensively with the new concept of entropy and emphasized that entropy is not only a property of a physical system, but at the same time a measure of the irreversibility of a process: If entropy is generated in a process, it is irreversible, since entropy cannot be destroyed according to the second law. In reversible processes, the entropy remains constant. He presented this fact in detail in 1887 in a series of treatises entitled \"On the Principle of the Increase of Entropy\".\nIn his study of the concept of entropy, Planck did not follow the molecular, probabilistic interpretation that prevailed at the time, as these do not provide absolute proof of universality. Instead, he pursued a phenomenological approach and was also skeptical of atomism. Even though he later abandoned this attitude in the course of his work on the law of radiation, his early work impressively shows the possibilities of thermodynamics in solving concrete physicochemical problems.\nPlanck's understanding of entropy included the realization that the maximum of entropy corresponds to the equilibrium state. The accompanying conclusion that knowledge of the Entropy allows all laws of thermodynamic equilibrium states to be derived corresponds to the modern understanding of such states. Planck therefore chose equilibrium processes as his research focus and, based on his habilitation thesis, researched the coexistence of aggregate states and the equilibrium of gas reactions, for example. This work on the frontier of chemical thermodynamics also received great attention due to the rapidly expanding chemical work at that time.\nIndependently of Planck, Josiah Willard Gibbs had also discovered almost all the knowledge Planck gained about the properties of physicochemical equilibria and published them from 1876 onwards. Planck was unaware of these essays, and they did not appear in German until 1892. However, both scientists approached the topic in different ways, while Planck dealt with irreversible processes, Gibbs looked at equilibria. This approach was finally able to prevail because of its simplicity, but Planck's approach is attributed the greater universality.\nBlack-body radiation.\nIn 1894, Planck turned his attention to the problem of black-body radiation. The problem had been stated by Kirchhoff in 1859: \"how does the intensity of the electromagnetic radiation emitted by a black body (a perfect absorber, also known as a cavity radiator) depend on the frequency of the radiation (i.e., the color of the light) and the temperature of the body?\". The question had been explored experimentally, but no theoretical treatment had agreed with the experimentally observed evidence. Wilhelm Wien proposed Wien's law, which correctly predicted the behaviour at high frequencies, but failed at low frequencies. The Rayleigh\u2013Jeans law, another approach to the problem, agreed with experimental results at low frequencies, but created what was later known as the \"ultraviolet catastrophe\" at high frequencies, as predicted by classical physics. However, contrary to many textbooks, this was not a motivation for Planck.\nPlanck's first proposed solution to the problem in 1899 followed from what he called the \"principle of elementary disorder\", which allowed him to derive Wien's law from a number of assumptions about the entropy of an ideal oscillator, creating what was referred to as the Wien\u2013Planck law. Soon, however, it was found that experimental evidence did not confirm the new law at all, to Planck's frustration. He revised his approach and now derived the first version of the famous Planck black-body radiation law, which described clearly the experimentally observed black-body spectrum. It was first proposed in a meeting of the DPG on 19 October 1900 and published in 1901. (This first derivation did not include energy quantisation, and did not use statistical mechanics, to which he held an aversion.) In November 1900 Planck revised this first version, now relying on Boltzmann's statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics as a way of gaining a more fundamental understanding of the principles behind his radiation law. Planck was deeply suspicious of the philosophical and physical implications of such an interpretation of Boltzmann's approach; thus his recourse to them was, as he later put it, \"an act of despair ... I was ready to sacrifice any of my previous convictions about physics\".\nThe central assumption behind his new derivation, presented to the DPG on 14 December 1900, was the supposition, now known as the Planck postulate, that electromagnetic energy could be emitted only in quantized form, in other words, the energy could only be a multiple of an elementary unit:\n formula_1\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant, also known as Planck's action quantum (introduced already in 1899), and \"\u03bd\" is the frequency of the radiation. Note that the elementary units of energy discussed here are represented by \"h\u03bd\" and not simply by \"\u03bd\". Physicists now call these quanta photons, and a photon of frequency \"\u03bd\" will have its own specific and unique energy. The total energy at that frequency is then equal to \"h\u03bd\" multiplied by the number of photons at that frequency.\nAt first Planck considered that quantisation was only \"a purely formal assumption ... actually I did not think much about it ...\"; nowadays this assumption, incompatible with classical physics, is regarded as the birth of quantum physics and the greatest intellectual accomplishment of Planck's career. (Boltzmann had been discussing in a theoretical paper in 1877 the possibility that the energy states of a physical system could be discrete). The discovery of the Planck constant enabled him to define a new universal set of physical units (such as the Planck length and the Planck mass), all based on fundamental physical constants, upon which much of quantum theory is based. In a discussion with his son in December 1918 Planck described his discovery as 'a discovery of the first rank, comparable perhaps only to the discoveries of Newton'. In recognition of Planck's fundamental contribution to a new branch of physics, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for 1918; (he received the award in 1919).\nSubsequently, Planck tried to grasp the meaning of energy quanta, but to no avail. \"My unavailing attempts to somehow reintegrate the action quantum into classical theory extended over several years and caused me much trouble.\" Even several years later, other physicists such as Rayleigh, Jeans, and Lorentz set the Planck constant to zero in order to align with classical physics, but Planck knew well that this constant had a precise nonzero value. \"I am unable to understand Jeans' stubbornness \u2013 he is an example of a theoretician as should never be existing, the same as Hegel was for philosophy. So much the worse for the facts if they don't fit.\"\nMax Born wrote about Planck: \"He was, by nature, a conservative mind; he had nothing of the revolutionary and was thoroughly skeptical about speculations. Yet his belief in the compelling force of logical reasoning from facts was so strong that he did not flinch from announcing the most revolutionary idea which ever has shaken physics.\"\nEinstein and the theory of relativity.\nIn 1905, three papers by Albert Einstein were published in the journal \"Annalen der Physik\". Planck was among the few who immediately recognized the significance of the special theory of relativity. Thanks to his influence, this theory was soon widely accepted in Germany. Planck also contributed considerably to extend the special theory of relativity. For example, he recast the theory in terms of classical action.\nEinstein's hypothesis of light \"quanta\" (photons), based on Heinrich Hertz's 1887 discovery (and further investigation by Philipp Lenard) of the photoelectric effect, was initially rejected by Planck. He was unwilling to discard completely Maxwell's theory of electrodynamics. \"The theory of light would be thrown back not by decades, but by centuries, into the age when Christiaan Huygens dared to fight against the mighty emission theory of Isaac Newton ...\"\nIn 1910, Einstein pointed out the anomalous behavior of specific heat at low temperatures as another example of a phenomenon which defies explanation by classical physics. Planck and Walther Nernst, seeking to clarify the increasing number of contradictions, organized the First Solvay Conference (Brussels 1911). At this meeting Einstein was able to convince Planck.\nMeanwhile, Planck had been appointed dean of Berlin University, whereby it was possible for him to call Einstein to Berlin and establish a new professorship for him (1914). Soon the two scientists became close friends and met frequently to play music together.\nFirst World War.\nAt the onset of the First World War Planck endorsed the general excitement of the public, writing that, \"Besides much that is horrible, there is also much that is unexpectedly great and beautiful: the smooth solution of the most difficult domestic political problems by the unification of all parties (and) ... the extolling of everything good and noble.\" Planck also signed the infamous \"Manifesto of the 93 intellectuals\", a pamphlet of polemic war propaganda (while Einstein retained a strictly pacifistic attitude which almost led to his imprisonment, only being spared thanks to his Swiss citizenship).\nIn 1915, when Italy was still a neutral power, Planck voted successfully for a scientific paper from Italy, which received a prize from the Prussian Academy of Sciences, where Planck was one of four permanent presidents.\nPost-war and the Weimar Republic.\nIn the turbulent post-war years, Planck, now the highest authority of German physics, issued the slogan \"persevere and continue working\" to his colleagues.\nIn October 1920, he and Fritz Haber established the \"Notgemeinschaft der Deutschen Wissenschaft\" (Emergency Organization of German Science), aimed at providing financial support for scientific research. A considerable portion of the money the organization would distribute was raised abroad.\nPlanck held leading positions at Berlin University, the Prussian Academy of Sciences, the German Physical Society, and the Kaiser Wilhelm Society (which became the Max Planck Society in 1948). During this time economic conditions in Germany were such that he was hardly able to conduct research. In 1926, Planck became a foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.\nDuring the interwar period, Planck became a member of the \"Deutsche Volks-Partei\" (German People's Party), the party of Nobel Peace Prize laureate Gustav Stresemann, which aspired to liberal aims for domestic policy and rather revisionistic aims for politics around the world.\nPlanck disagreed with the introduction of universal suffrage and later expressed the view that the Nazi dictatorship resulted from \"the ascent of the rule of the crowds\".\nQuantum mechanics.\nAt the end of the 1920s, Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, and Wolfgang Pauli had worked out the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, but it was rejected by Planck, and by Schr\u00f6dinger, Laue, and Einstein as well. Planck expected that wave mechanics would soon render quantum theory\u00a0\u2013 his own child\u00a0\u2013 unnecessary. This was not to be the case, however. Further work only served to underscore the enduring central importance of quantum theory, even against his and Einstein's philosophical revulsions. Here Planck experienced the truth of his own earlier observation from his struggle with the older views during his younger years: \"A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it.\"\nNazi dictatorship and the Second World War.\nWhen the Nazis came to power in 1933, Planck was 74 years old. He witnessed many Jewish friends and colleagues expelled from their positions and humiliated, and hundreds of scientists emigrate from Nazi Germany. Again he tried to \"persevere and continue working\" and asked scientists who were considering emigration to remain in Germany. Nevertheless, he did help his nephew, the economist Hermann Kranold, to emigrate to London after his arrest. He hoped the crisis would abate soon and the political situation would improve.\nOtto Hahn asked Planck to gather well-known German professors in order to issue a public proclamation against the treatment of Jewish professors, but Planck replied, \"If you are able to gather today 30 such gentlemen, then tomorrow 150 others will come and speak against it, because they are eager to take over the positions of the others.\" Under Planck's leadership, the Kaiser Wilhelm Society (KWG) avoided open conflict with the Nazi regime, except concerning the Jewish Fritz Haber. In May 1933 Planck requested and received an interview with the recently appointed Chancellor of Germany Adolf Hitler to discuss the issue, telling him that the \"forced emigration of Jews would kill German science and Jews could be good Germans\", to which the chancellor replied \"but we don't have anything against the Jews, only against communists\". Planck was therefore unsuccessful, since this reply \"took from him every basis for further negotiation\", as to Hitler \"the Jews are all Communists, and these are my enemies.\" In the following year, 1934, Haber died in exile.\nOne year later, Planck, having been the president of the KWG since 1930, organized in a somewhat provocative style an official commemorative meeting for Haber. He also succeeded in secretly enabling a number of Jewish scientists to continue working in institutes of the KWG for several years. In 1936, his term as president of the KWG ended, and the Nazi government pressured him to refrain from seeking another term.\nAs the political climate in Germany gradually became more hostile, Johannes Stark, prominent exponent of the \"Deutsche Physik\" (\"German Physics\", also called \"Aryan Physics\") attacked Planck, Arnold Sommerfeld, and Heisenberg for continuing to teach the theories of Einstein, calling them \"white Jews\". The \"Hauptamt Wissenschaft\" (Nazi government office for science) started an investigation of Planck's ancestry, claiming that he was \"1/16 Jewish\", but Planck denied it.\nIn 1938, Planck celebrated his 80th birthday. The DPG held a celebration, during which the Max-Planck medal (founded as the highest medal by the DPG in 1928) was awarded to French physicist Louis de Broglie. At the end of 1938, the Prussian Academy lost its remaining independence and was taken over by Nazis, as part of their process of \"Gleichschaltung\". Planck protested by resigning his presidency. He continued to travel frequently, giving numerous public talks, such as his talk on Religion and Science and, five years later, he was sufficiently fit to climb 3,000-metre peaks in the Alps.\nDuring the Second World War, the increasing number of Allied bombing missions against Berlin forced Planck and his wife to temporarily leave the city and live in the countryside. In 1942, he wrote: \"In me an ardent desire has grown to persevere this crisis and live long enough to be able to witness the turning point, the beginning of a new rise.\" In February 1944, his home in Berlin was completely destroyed by an air raid, annihilating all his scientific records and correspondence. His rural retreat was threatened by the rapid advance of the Allied armies from both sides.\nIn 1944, Planck's son Erwin was arrested by the Gestapo following the attempted assassination of Hitler in the 20 July plot. He was tried and sentenced to death by the People's Court in October 1944. Erwin was hanged at Berlin's Pl\u00f6tzensee Prison in January 1945. The death of his son destroyed much of Planck's will to live.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn March 1887, Planck married Marie Merck (1861\u20131909), sister of a school fellow, and moved with her into a sublet apartment in Kiel. They had four children: Karl (1888\u20131916), the twins Emma (1889\u20131919) and Grete (1889\u20131917), and Erwin (1893\u20131945).\nAfter living in the apartment in Berlin, the Planck family lived in a villa in Berlin-Grunewald, Wangenheimstrasse 21. Several other professors from University of Berlin lived nearby, among them theologian Adolf von Harnack, who became a close friend of Planck. Soon the Planck home became a social and cultural center. Numerous well-known scientists, such as Albert Einstein, Otto Hahn and Lise Meitner were frequent visitors. The tradition of jointly performing music had already been established in the home of Helmholtz.\nAfter several happy years, in July 1909 Marie Planck died, possibly of tuberculosis.\nIn March 1911 Planck married his second wife, Marga von Hoesslin (1882\u20131948); in December his fifth child, Hermann, was born.\nDuring the First World War, Planck's second son, Erwin, was taken prisoner by the French in 1914, while his oldest son, Karl, was killed in action at Verdun. Grete died in 1917 while giving birth to her first child. Her sister died the same way two years later, after having married Grete's widower. Both granddaughters survived and were named after their mothers. Planck endured these losses stoically.\nIn January 1945, Erwin Planck, to whom he had been particularly close, was sentenced to death by the \"Volksgerichtshof\" (People's Court) because of his participation in the failed attempt to assassinate Hitler in July 1944. Erwin was executed on 23 January 1945.\nAfter World War II ended, Planck, his second wife, and their son were brought to a relative in G\u00f6ttingen, where Planck died on October 4, 1947. He is buried at the \"Stadtfriedhof\" (City Cemetery) in G\u00f6ttingen.\nReligious views.\nPlanck was a member of the Lutheran Church in Germany. He was very tolerant toward alternative views and religions. In a lecture in 1937 entitled \"Religion und Naturwissenschaft\" (\"Religion and Natural Science\") he suggested the importance of these symbols and rituals related directly with a believer's ability to worship God, but that one must be mindful that the symbols provide an imperfect illustration of divinity. He criticized atheism for being focused on the derision of such symbols, while at the same time warned of the over-estimation of the importance of such symbols by believers.\nPlanck said in 1944, \"As a man who has devoted his whole life to the most clear headed science, to the study of matter, I can tell you as a result of my research about atoms this much: There is no matter as such. All matter originates and exists only by virtue of a force which brings the particle of an atom to vibration and holds this most minute solar system of the atom together. We must assume behind this force the existence of a conscious and intelligent spirit [orig. \"Geist\"]. This spirit is the matrix of all matter.\"\nPlanck argued that the concept of God is important to both religion and science, but in different ways: \"Both religion and science require a belief in God. For believers, God is in the beginning, and for physicists He is at the end of all considerations \u2026 To the former He is the foundation, to the latter, the crown of the edifice of every generalized world view\".\nFurthermore, Planck wrote, ...\"to believe\" means \"to recognize as a truth\", and the knowledge of nature, continually advancing on incontestably safe tracks, has made it utterly impossible for a person possessing some training in natural science to recognize as founded on truth the many reports of extraordinary occurrences contradicting the laws of nature, of miracles which are still commonly regarded as essential supports and confirmations of religious doctrines, and which formerly used to be accepted as facts pure and simple, without doubt or criticism. The belief in miracles must retreat step by step before relentlessly and reliably progressing science and we cannot doubt that sooner or later it must vanish completely.\nNoted historian of science John L. Heilbron characterized Planck's views on God as deistic. Heilbron further relates that when asked about his religious affiliation, Planck replied that although he had always been deeply religious, he did not believe \"in a personal God, let alone a Christian God\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19849", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19849", "title": "March 30", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 30 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19850", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19850", "title": "Motocross racing", "text": ""}
{"id": "19851", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19851", "title": "Madhuri Dixir", "text": ""}
{"id": "19852", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19852", "title": "Madhuri Dixit", "text": "Indian actress (born 1967)\nMadhuri Dixit Nene (n\u00e9e Dixit, ; born 15 May 1967) is an Indian actress and television personality. She has appeared in over 70 Hindi films, attaining nationwide stardom that influenced Indian popular culture. Noted by critics for her performances and dancing abilities, Dixit was credited for singularly paralleling her male contemporaries by leading star vehicles in a male-dominated industry. Her accolades include six Filmfare Awards from a record 17 nominations. In 2008, the Government of India awarded her with Padma Shri, the fourth-highest civilian honour of the country.\nBorn and raised in Mumbai, Dixit made her acting debut in 1984 with a leading role in the drama \"Abodh\". After a few successive commercially failed films, she rose to prominence with the action drama \"Tezaab\" (1988), and established herself with starring roles in the top-grossing romantic dramas \"Dil\" (1990), \"Beta\" (1992), \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\" (1994), and \"Dil To Pagal Hai\" (1997). She won four Filmfare Awards for Best Actress for her performances in them. Other commercially successful films during this period include \"Ram Lakhan\", \"Tridev\" (both 1989), \"Thanedaar\", \"Kishen Kanhaiya\" (both 1990), \"Saajan\" (1991), \"Khalnayak\" (1993), and \"Raja\" (1995).\nApart from Dixit's mainstream success, she earned appreciation from critics for her performances in \"Prem Pratigyaa\", \"Parinda\" (both 1989), \"Anjaam\" (1994), \"Mrityudand\" (1997), \"Pukar\" (2000), and \"Lajja\" (2001). She received the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress for playing Chandramukhi in \"Devdas\" (2002). Following a hiatus, Dixit made a brief comeback by starring in the musical \"Aaja Nachle\" (2007), and acted intermittently over the next decades. During this period, she primarily featured as a talent judge for dance reality shows, such as \"Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa\" (2010\u20132022) and \"Dance Deewane\" (since 2018). She continued to gain praise for starring in the black comedy \"Dedh Ishqiya\" (2014) and the Netflix drama series \"The Fame Game\" (2022), and had her highest-grossing releases in the comedies \"Total Dhamaal\" (2019) and \"Bhool Bhulaiyaa 3\" (2024).\nDixit was among the country's highest-paid celebrities throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, and has featured in \"Forbes India\"'s Celebrity 100 list since its inception in 2012. In addition to acting, she has been engaged in philanthropic activities. She has worked with UNICEF since 2014 to advocate the rights of children and prevent child labour, participates in concert tours and stage shows, and is the co-founder of the production company RnM Moving Pictures. Since 1999, she has been married to Shriram Nene, with whom she has two sons.\nEarly life and background.\nMadhuri Dixit was born on 15 May 1967 into a Marathi Kokanastha Brahmin family in Bombay to Shankar and Snehlata Dixit. She has two elder sisters and an elder brother. She kindled an interest in dance at an early age of three, and went on to train in Kathak for eight years; later on becoming a professionally trained Kathak dancer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I received a scholarship as a Kathak dancer when I was nine. I even remember that it was due to a dance performance that the first time my name had appeared in the paper. I was seven or eight years old at that time and had performed at the Guru Purnima festival. And there was a journalist who was there and he had written this article saying that 'this little girl stole the show' \u2013 something like that. I was over the moon. So dance gave me a sense of achievement. Of worth.\"\nDixit received her education at Divine Child High School in Andheri. Apart from her studies, she participated in extra-curricular activities, such as dramatics. Aspiring to become a microbiologist, Dixit enrolled at the Sathaye college in Vile Parle (Mumbai) where she studied microbiology as one of her subjects in BSc. However, six months after she had commenced her course, Dixit decided to discontinue studies and pursue a full-time career in films.\nActing career.\n1980s: Early roles and breakthrough.\nDixit made her debut in film in 1984 with Rajshri Productions' drama \"Abodh\", opposite Bengali actor, Tapas Paul. The film failed commercially but Dixit's performance earned her positive reviews from critics. Aakash Barvalia of Gomolo wrote, \"Madhuri excels in her role as a young bride who acquits herself well as the naive village girl and does not realise what marriage actually entails.\" Her only release of 1985 \u2013 \"Awara Baap\" \u2013 flopped at the box office. During this time, a monochrome photograph of hers, shot by Gautam Rajadhyaksha was featured on the cover of the then-popular magazine \"Debonair\" and she appeared as the cover girl of Filmfare in April 1986.\nDixit's next four releases were the dramas \"Swati\" (1986), \"Manav Hatya\" (1986), \"Hifazat\" (1987) and \"Uttar Dakshin\" (1987). All films were critical and commercial failures. Hifazat marked Dixit's first of several collaborations with Anil Kapoor. In 1988, Dixit had film releases; two of them \u2014\"Mohre\", and \"Khatron Ke Khiladi\" \u2014were commercial failures.\nIn 1988, Dixit acted in \"Dayavan\", which was a commercially successful film. Her next release of the year was N. Chandra's action drama \"Tezaab\", opposite Anil Kapoor. Dixit performance as Mohini, an impoverished and miserable woman compelled to perform dances in order to earn money for her father, earned her mainstream recognition. \"Tezaab\" went on to become the highest-grossing film of the year and Dixit received her first Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination. The film's success established Dixit as a leading actress of Hindi cinema and marked a significant point in her career. Akshay Shah of \"Planet Bollywood\" wrote, \"Madhuri Dixit also gives a fine tuned performance. Though she is more remembered for her crowd pleasing dance act 'Ek Do Teen', her acting needs to be noted, specially in the scenes where she is pitted against Anupam Kher.\"\nHer first release of 1989, \"Vardi\", did fairly well at the box office. She next re-united with Anil Kapoor for Subhash Ghai's \"Ram Lakhan\". She played Radha Shastri, a girl who falls in love with her childhood friend, but finds it hard to convince her father. \"Ram Lakhan\" was the second highest-grossing Hindi-language film of the year. Dixit's next release was the romantic drama \"Prem Pratigyaa\", opposite Mithun Chakraborty. Her portrayal of Laxmi Rao, a distraught woman who reforms a local underworld don, earned her a second nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress. Madhuri Dixit was cast opposite Sunny Deol in Trimurti Films' multi-cast thriller film\"Tridev\". It finished up as one of the biggest hits and the third highest-grossing film of the year.\nHer next release of the year, Vidhu Vinod Chopra's drama \"Parinda\", co-starring Anil Kapoor, Jackie Shroff and Nana Patekar was another box office hit. She played Paro, a schoolteacher who is killed on her wedding night along with Karan (played by Kapoor) by a gangster (played by Patekar). A major critical success, the film was included in News18's 2013 list of the \"100 greatest Indian films of all time\". It was selected as the official Indian submission for the 1990 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film but was not nominated. Rediff.com opined that Dixit added \"touching vulnerability and soft focus appeal to the heavy duty proceedings\". Also that year, after \"Prem Pratigyaa\" she starred in \"Ilaaka\", \"Mujrim\" (both opposite Mithun Chakraborty) and all three were hits. Other films such as \"Paap Ka Ant\" (opposite Govinda) and \"Kanoon Apna Apna\" (opposite Sanjay Dutt) was an average grosser.\n1990s: Established actress.\nIn 1990, Dixit appeared in nine films. Five of them\u2014\"Maha-Sangram\", \"Deewana Mujh Sa Nahin\", \"Jeevan Ek Sanghursh\", \"Sailaab\" and \"Jamai Raja\"\u2014were commercially unsuccessful. Her next release that year was Rakesh Roshan's action comedy \"Kishen Kanhaiya\" (alongside Anil Kapoor and Shilpa Shirodkar). It tells the story of twin brothers who are separated at birth and re-unite in their youth. Dixit and Shirodkar played the love interests of Kapoor's characters. It was the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year in India. Dixit next played a strong-willed woman in the box-office average action drama \"Izzatdaar\". She won her first Filmfare Award for Best Actress for portraying Madhu, a rich and arrogant girl who falls in love with a poorer boy, in Indra Kumar's romantic drama \"Dil\" opposite Aamir Khan. It emerged as the highest-grossing film of the year. Rediff.com hailed her performance, commenting \"..she showed her range as a performer. She breathed fire as the rebellious lover defying her family, or the forlorn estranged wife longing to be with her ailing better half.\" Dixit's final release of the year was the action drama \"Thanedaar\", opposite Dutt, which was another commercial hit.\nIn 1991, Dixit had five film releases, the first of which was the romance \"Pyar Ka Devta\". She next starred alongside Jackie Shroff in the psychological thriller \"100 Days\". She played Devi, a clairvoyant woman who has a vision of a murder and sets out to uncover the truth. The film was a moderately successful. She next starred in \"Saajan\" opposite Dutt and Salman Khan. A major critical and commercial success, the film earned Dixit praise for her portrayal of Pooja Saxena, who is in love with her idol \u2013 Sagar. She received her fourth Best Actress nomination at Filmfare for her work in the film. T. Rama Rao's \"Pratikar\" and Nana Patekar's \"\" were her other releases.\nIn 1992, Dixit starred in Sudhir Mishra's \"Dharavi\" starring Om Puri, Shabana Azmi and Anil Kapoor. Dixit appears in the film as part of the lead character's (played by Puri) escapist dreams, portraying the fictional version of herself. The film was a joint NFDC-Doordarshan production and went on to win the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi. Dixit's next release of the year was Kumar's drama \"Beta\", co-starring Anil Kapoor and Aruna Irani. Dixit's portrayal of Saraswati, an educated woman who rebels against her manipulative mother-in-law, earned her critical acclaim. Sukanya Verma mentioned that Dixit delivered \"a powerhouse performance against an equally lethal looking Irani, even as Kapoor was overshadowed between the ladies.\" The film finished up as the biggest hit of the year and won her a second Filmfare Award for Best Actress. Following the film's success, Dixit became famously known as the \"Dhak Dhak Girl\". \"Zindagi Ek Juaa\", \"Prem Deewane\", \"Khel\" and \"Sangeet\" were her other releases of the year.\nIn 1993, Dixit appeared in Ramesh Talwar's \"Sahibaan\" which was commercially successful. Dixit next reunited with Sanjay Dutt and Jackie Shroff in Subhash Ghai's crime drama \"Khalnayak\". Her portrayal of Ganga, a police officer, who volunteers to go undercover, to trap an escaped criminal, garnered her critical acclaim. \"India Today\" wrote, \"..she grinds and thrusts in her trademark dhak dhak style. The whistles grow deafening when she stares into the camera, looks at every man in the dark, and promises him her heart-and much more. In one Bangalore theatre, the police were kept on stand-by in case the crowds went berserk.\" Dixit's performance in \"Khalnayak\" earned her a sixth nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress and became the second highest-grossing film of the year in India. Singeetam Srinivasa Rao's \"Phool\" and Lawrence D'Souza's \"Dil Tera Aashiq\" were her other releases of the year.\nIn 1994, Dixit starred in Rahul Rawail's psychological thriller \"Anjaam\", which marked her first of many collaborations with Shah Rukh Khan. Dixit's portrayal of Shivani Chopra, a revenge-seeking wife and mother earned her a seventh nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress. The film performed moderately well at the box office. Her next release was Rajshri Productions' family drama \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\" opposite Salman Khan. The film emerged as one of the biggest hits of Hindi cinema and made \u20b9 1.35\u00a0billion worldwide, breaking the record of the film \"Sholay\" (1975). It became the highest-grossing Hindi film after its theatrical run and held the record for 7 years. Dixit played Nisha, a witty and charming personality who falls in love with her sister's brother-in-law Prem (Khan), but their plans to be together are put in jeopardy when Nisha's sister dies, fetched her a third Filmfare Award for Best Actress and her first Screen Award for Best Actress. Critics believed the film to be \"too sweet\" but appreciated Dixit's performance. Tripat Narayanan of \"New Straits Times\" wrote \"The Madhuri magic looms large throughout the film. As she emotes through dance, you simply cannot take your eyes off her.\" In a retrospect review, \"Rediff\" wrote, \"Madhuri's Nisha was stunning, enthused, plucky and irresistible.\" Film critic K Hariharan noted, \"She is seducing every person on screen, but does it in ways that are so graceful, there is a good balance between profanity and the sacred.\" The film won two National Film Awards, including the Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment and in the Millennium Edition of the \"Guinness Book of World Records\", \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun\" became Bollywood's highest-grossing film.\nDixit achieved further success when she reunited with Indra Kumar for the romantic drama \"Raja\" opposite Sanjay Kapoor. She portrayed Madhu, a rich girl who falls for her childhood friend (played by Kapoor), however, she finds it tough to convince her two brothers of this relationship. It emerged as the third highest-grossing film of the year and its success was attributed to Dixit's immense popularity. She won a second Screen Award for Best Actress for her performance. Her next release was David Dhawan's \"Yaraana\" opposite Rishi Kapoor, in which she played Lalita, a dancer on the run from her abusive lover. The film underperformed at the box office. Both the films earned her nominations for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress.\nThe following year, both her films \"Prem Granth\" and \"Rajkumar\" flopped at the box office. In 1997, Dixit received critical acclaim for her portrayal of Ketki Singh, a village woman who struggles to confront and defeat the forces of oppression and male domination in Prakash Jha's \"Mrityudand\" alongside Shabana Azmi and Shilpa Shirodkar. In a review for India Today, Anupama Chopra wrote, \" Dixit gives her career's best performance. Simply dressed, she looks stunning and acts even better. She is by turns romantic, vulnerable, angry \u2013 the perfect foil to Azmi's long-suffering 'badi bahu'.\" \"Screen\" magazine deemed her portrayal \"fiery\" and appreciated the lack of glamour in the part. For her performance, Dixit won a third Screen Award for Best Actress. She next starred in the dramas \"Koyla\", \"Mahaanta\" and \"Mohabbat\". With the exception of Koyla, none of these films performed well either critically or commercially.\nDixit's fifth and final release of 1997 was Yash Chopra's musical romantic drama \"Dil To Pagal Hai\". Co-starring Shah Rukh Khan, Karisma Kapoor and Akshay Kumar, the film depicts the love stories of the dancers in a musical dance troupe. Her role of Pooja, a woman faced with a moral dilemma in a love quadrangle fetched her a fourth Filmfare Award for Best Actress and the Zee Cine Award for Best Actor \u2013 Female. \"Dil To Pagal Hai\" emerged as a blockbuster at the box office and emerged as the highest-grossing film of the year in India. At the 45th National Film Awards, the film won three awards, including the Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment.\nShe next starred in the N.Chandra-directed drama \"Wajood\" (1998) opposite Nana Patekar and Mukul Dev. She played Apoorva, a very rich girl who is misunderstood by Malhar, played by Patekar. Suparn Verma of \"Rediff\" commented: \"..She nevertheless shows that even a weak role cannot stifle her as she animates the screen like only she can. Truly, the coming together of Nana, Madhuri and Chandra in one film is a tour de force.\" The same year, she appeared in a cameo role in the comedy \"Bade Miyan Chote Miyan\", once again playing herself onscreen after \"Dharavi\". Her next and only release of 1999 was the romance \"Aarzoo\" (1999) opposite Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan. Upon release, the film emerged commercially unsuccessful.\n2000s: Career downturn and sabbaticals.\nIn 2000, Dixit starred in Rajkumar Santoshi's \"Pukar\" opposite Anil Kapoor. A love story based on the backdrop of the Indian Army, the film was shot over a course of 350 days. Dixit's portrayal of Anjali, a heartbroken and jealous woman who swears revenge on Jai (played by Kapoor) for rejecting her, garnered her several Best Actress nominations at various award ceremonies, including Filmfare and Screen. A review in \"Filmfare\" said that both \"Anil Kapoor and Madhuri, veterans in their field, outdo themselves in the film\". It won two National Film Awards, including the Nargis Dutt Award for Best Feature Film on National Integration. She then played the title character in \"Gaja Gamini\", the first feature film directed by painter M. F. Husain. Hussain got fixated with Dixit, and watched her movie \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\" several times, and was certain that he would make a film only with her. The film followed the story of Gaja Gamini, who appears in various incarnations as Mona Lisa, Shakuntala and others. \"Pukar\" was an average grosser, while the latter underperformed at the box office.\nIn 2001, Dixit starred in Deepak Shivdasani's love triangle \"Yeh Raaste Hain Pyaar Ke\" opposite Ajay Devgan and Preity Zinta. Upon release, the film met with largely negative reviews. Critic Gautam Buragohain, however, described her as \"the saving grace of the film\", adding that \"she gives a delightful performance\". Commercially too, the film failed to do well. Subsequently, Dixit reunited with Rajkumar Santoshi for the social drama \"Lajja\" (2001). Dealing with the issue of gender inequality, Dixit played Janki, a theatre actress who gets pre-maritally pregnant. Anita Bora of Rediff.com wrote: \"Madhuri slips into her role as Janaki..with consummate ease..and..dazzles us with a class act.\" The film was a box-office failure in India but was an overseas success. Dixit's performance fetched her a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress nomination and won her the Zee Cine Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role \u2013 Female. Dixit's first release of 2002 was the love triangle \"Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam\" opposite Shah Rukh Khan and Salman Khan, where she played Radha whose married life blemishes when she gets obsessed with the career of her friend. A remake of director K. S. Adhiyaman's own Tamil film \"Thotta Chinungi\" (1995), the film took six years in making, with huge sabbaticals in between shoots due to several production problems. The film emerged moderately successful at the Indian box office. Few critics noted that the delay made the film look outdated.\nDixit's next release was Sanjay Leela Bhansali's period romantic drama \"Devdas\", co-starring Shah Rukh Khan and Aishwarya Rai. It was based on Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay's novel of the same name. She portrayed Chandramukhi, a courtesan who is in love with the title character. Sita Menon of Rediff.com wrote: \"The most understated role and perhaps the one that is most lingering, in terms of virtuosity, is that played by Madhuri Dixit. As Chandramukhi, she is simply stunning, lending passion, fire and gentleness with such consummate ease that watching her perform is sheer delight.\" The film was screened at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival and was featured by \"Time\" in their listing of the \"10 Best Films of the Millennium\". The film emerged as a major commercial success with revenues of over million (). \"Devdas\" was chosen as India's official entry for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film and received a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language. At the 50th National Film Awards, the film won five awards, including the Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment. Dixit eventually won the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress and the Screen Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in the film. Post \"Devdas\", Dixit took a break from actively working in films to focus on her married life in Denver, Colorado.\nIn 2007, after a five-year hiatus from films, Dixit made her first comeback with a leading role in cinematographer Anil Mehta's dance film \"Aaja Nachle\". She played Dia, a choreographer who returns to her town to save the endangered theatre where she learnt to dance. A box office failure, the film generated positive reviews for Dixit's portrayal. Rajeev Masand of \"CNN-IBN\" criticised the plot, while he wrote about Dixit's performance: \"It's hard to take your eyes off the screen when she's up there, dazzling you with her spontaneity, her easy charm and her 100-watt smile.\" Her performance earned her another nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress.\n2010s: Sporadic work and television focus.\nDixit relocated to India with her family in 2011 and was felicitated by Filmfare with a special jury recognition for completing 25 years in the Indian film industry. In 2013, Dixit made a special appearance in the romantic comedy-drama \"Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani\" as Mohini, a callback to her character from the 1988 film \"Tezaab\". Dixti appeared in the item song \"Ghagra\" alongside Ranbir Kapoor.\nIn 2014, Dixit first starred in the black comedy \"Dedh Ishqiya\", a sequel to the 2010 film \"Ishqiya\" She played a con-woman, Begum Para, opposite Naseeruddin Shah, Arshad Warsi and Huma Qureshi and expressed that she agreed to do the film because of the \"unapologetic way\" director Abhishek Chaubey presented Vidya Balan's character in \"Ishqiya\". The film opened to positive response from critics who called it \"one of the year's most important releases\". Anupama Chopra called Dixit \"compelling\", while Deepanjana Pal of Firstpost wrote \"She's still capable of keeping an audience glued to their seats when the credits start rolling, all because she's dancing on screen.\". The film earned Dixit her fourteenth nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress. \"Dedh Ishqiya\" earned little at the box-office.\nHer next release of the year was debutant director Soumik Sen's \"Gulaab Gang\", alongside Juhi Chawla. Dixit portrayed Rajjo, the leader of a women's activist group, inspired by the real vigilante activist Sampat Pal Devi and her group Gulabi Gang. Pal filed a case against the film claiming that the makers did not take permission to make a film on her life, but the court later lifted the stay from the film. To prepare for her role, Dixit practised Shaolin Kung fu, stick training, and close combat. \"Gulaab Gang\" failed at the box office, earning mixed reviews. Subhash K. Jha labelled Dixit's performance and demeanour \"inconsistent\". However, Sampat Pal claimed that in Dixit's character she finds a \"reflection of her own life so stark\" that it makes her feel \"it was she on screen\". The film was a box-office failure.\nFour years later, Dixit made her debut in Marathi Cinema with the comedy drama \"Bucket List\". She played Madhura Sane, a middle aged housewife who takes the initiative to complete the bucket list of her deceased teenage heart donor. Dixit garnered critical acclaim for her portrayal; Mihir Bhanage of \"The Times of India\"\nwrote \"Madhuri owns the film and sails through it with flying colours.\" Kunal Guha of \"Mumbai Mirror\" said, \"Madhuri Dixit long-overdue debut in Marathi cinema is a comfort watch even if a tad predictable and sappy.\"\nDixit reunited with Anil Kapoor and Ajay Devgn in Indra Kumar's adventure comedy \"Total Dhamaal\" (2019). She portrayed Bindu Patel, who along with a group of people learns about a hidden treasure and then races to claim it. The film received mixed to negative reviews, however, Dixit's performance received a mixed-to-positive reception. Lakshana N Palat of \"India Today\" wrote: \"The little respite in this adventure-comedy is the pairing of Anil Kapoor and Madhuri Dixit, who prove that they still have the same impeccable chemistry and partnership almost two decades later.\" \"Total Dhamaal\" emerged as a major commercial success at the box office, grossing more than () worldwide, and ranks as the ninth highest-grossing Hindi film of the year. Dixit produced the Marathi Netflix drama \"15 August\" under her production company RnM Moving Pictures. In an interview with Scroll.in, Dixit said, \"The film is about the freedom to love, the freedom to choose your career and the freedom to die\".\nShe next starred in Abhishek Varman's period romantic drama \"Kalank\", featuring an ensemble cast including Sonakshi Sinha, Alia Bhatt, Varun Dhawan, Aditya Roy Kapur and Sanjay Dutt. Set in the 1940s prior to the partition of India, the film featured her as Bahaar Begum, the madam of a brothel. Saibal Chatterjee of \"NDTV\" wrote, \"In the blinding glow of Dixit's presence as a nautch girl who can turn on the magic at will, the younger cast members pale somewhat in comparison. She lights up the screen as only she can, pushing the others to strive harder.\" It did not perform well at the box office; however, she earned a third nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in the film.\n2020s.\nDixit was the lead actress in the 2022 Netflix family mystery series \"The Fame Game\", where she played a high-profile actress. The same year, she portrayed a housewife struggling with her sexual identity in the Amazon Prime Video release \"Maja Ma\". Rachana Dubey from \"The Times of India\" found Dixit to have delivered a \"lived-in\" performance.\nAfter producing the Marathi-language comedy-drama \"Panchak\" in 2023, in 2024, she played a ghost in the horror comedy \"Bhool Bhulaiyaa 3\", starring alongside Kartik Aaryan, Triptii Dimri, and Vidya Balan. The film emerged to be one of the highest-grossing Hindi films of the year.\nOther ventures.\nTelevision.\nIn 1985, Dixit made her television debut in the Rajshri Production's series \"Paying Guest\", in which she played Neena.\nIn 2002, Dixit hosted Sony Entertainment's matrimonial show \"Kahi Na Kahi Koi Hai\". Dixit featured as a talent judge for five seasons of the dance reality show \"Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa\": alongside Remo D'Souza and Malaika Arora Khan for the fourth season, D'Souza and Karan Johar for the fifth, sixth, seventh seasons and alongside Johar and Nora Fatehi for the tenth season in 2022.\nIn 2011, she featured as an anchor to launch a new entertainment channel, Life OK. The same year, she hosted a competitive cooking game show, \"Food Food Maha Challenge\" along with Sanjeev Kapoor. In 2016, Dixit featured as one of the jury of \"So You Think You Can Dance (India)\", an officially licensed version of the \"So You Think You Can Dance\" franchise, based on the original American production created by Dick Clark Productions. Dixit co-judged three seasons of Colors TV's \"Dance Deewane\", which gives an opportunity to contestants from three different generations.\nDancing and stage performances.\nDixit has participated in several stage shows, concert tours and televised award ceremonies. Since the mid-1990s to early 2000s, she performed at the \"Madhuri Dixit Live\" concert in India, the Middle East and United States. In 2000, she performed at the Pepsi W2K Millennium Concert in Mumbai.\nBetween July and August 2008, Dixit and actors Abhishek Bachchan, Preity Zinta, Ritesh Deshmukh and Aishwarya Rai starred in Amitabh Bachchan's \"Unforgettable World Tour\" stage production in a 40-day show staged in 11 cities across North America, Europe and the Caribbean.\nThe same year, she joined the fourth instalment of \"Temptation Reloaded\" where she performed with Khan, Rani Mukerji, Fernandez and Meiyang Chang in Auckland, Perth, Sydney and Dubai; and in 2014 she performed in Malaysia with Khan, Mukerji and Arijit Singh. Dixit also performed in SLAM! The Tour which was held in the US, Canada, and London.\nIn 2015, Dixit participated in the show Fusion in Houston, along with Akshay Kumar, Sonakshi Sinha and Prabhu Deva. In 2018, she performed at the inaugural ceremony of Men's Hockey World Cup.\nIn 2013, Dixit launched her own online dance academy \"Dance With Madhuri\", where the users get an opportunity to learn to dance various dance styles and have one-on-one lessons.\nMusic.\nDixit has sung small portions in a few songs from her films like \"Kaahe Chhed\" from \"Devdas\" and \"Soniye Mil Ja\" from \"Aaja Nachle\", composed by Birju Maharaj and Salim\u2013Sulaiman respectively. For her 2014 film \"Gulaab Gang\", Dixit sang the traditional folk song \"Rangi Sari Gulaabi Chunariya\" alongside her mother Snehlata Dixit, composed and recreated for the film by its director Soumik Sen.\nDixit made her official singing debut in 2020 with an English single, \"Candle\", dedicating it to frontline workers fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. She released a second single, \"Tu Hai Mera\", in 2022.\nSocial and humanitarian work.\nDuring her years in the film industry, Dixit has been actively involved in promoting children's education and the safety of women. She featured in a series of one-minute telespots on preventing AIDS for the Maharashtra State AIDS Control Society in 2000. In 2001, Dixit won \u20b9 on Kaun Banega Crorepati, a game show then in its first season on the air. She donated her winnings for the welfare of the victims of 2001 Gujarat earthquake and to an orphanage in Pune.\nIn 2009, Dixit performed for NDTV Toyota Greenathon\u2014India's first-ever nationwide campaign for saving the environment and creating awareness about environmental issues. NDTV organised India's first 24-hour live telethon, a fund-raising event that brings in people to donate money to support TERI's initiative\u2014Lighting a Billion Lives which aims at providing solar power to villages without electricity.\nOn 3 February 2011, Dixit spent an evening with 75 orphanage kids of farmers at an ashram in Trimbakeshwar and participated in the birthdays of two children: Hrishikesh and Rani. \"We artists are ready to help such children. People from the higher society should come forward and stand firmly behind them,\" she said on the occasion. Dixit is a Goodwill Ambassador and a patron for \"Emeralds for Elephants\" \u2013 a charity project for the conservation of Asian elephants and other endangered species. The project has been designed to create awareness and raise vital funds for the protection of the critically endangered Asian elephant. A collaborative project between the World Land Trust (a UK based nonprofit environmental organisation) and the Wildlife Trust of India that is creating protected wildlife corridors connecting National Parks and protected areas to others. Speaking about the issue she said: \"Elephants are one of my favourite animals and I love them. So what we need to do today is to see how we can preserve our animals. I feel very strongly about this.\" Two years later, she made donations to the Uttarakhand flood relief.\nIn June 2013, while shooting for the sixth season of \"Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa\", Dixit rescued seven puppies who were drenched in rain. Interrupting the shoot, Dixit, along with her husband Sriram Nene and the show's director Saahil Chhabria contacted PETA, waiting till the volunteers arrived. In response, Sachin Bangera of PETA India said, \"It's been raining cats and dogs and many puppies and kittens are now in need of good homes. Madhuri Dixit, Dr Nene and Saahil Chhabria's kind deed will inspire many to come forward to help animals in distress.\"\nIn January 2014, Dixit and her husband, on behalf of PETA wrote letter to Kolhapur MLA Vinay Kore, requesting him to ensure relocation of the elephant Sunder to a sanctuary \u2013 \"(Sunder) has scars on his legs and cowers in fear and pain because he is being beaten by his mahout,\" \"He should live free from suffering, in the company of other elephants, and have the opportunity to roam vast distances\".\nSince 2014, Dixit began working with UNICEF to advocate the rights of children and prevent child labour and child trafficking. She participated in a fashion show organised by Lilavati hospital, to support the 'Save &amp; Empower the Girl Child' initiative by the organisation. The same year, the Government of Madhya Pradesh appointed her as the brand ambassador for its Mamta Abhiyaan (maternal and child health) campaign. Dixit collaborated with Vogue for its Vogue Empower series on a short film on gender policing, 'Boys don't cry', directed by Vinil Mathew. She was appointed as the brand ambassador for the Beti Bachao Beti Padhao campaign, by the Government of India in 2015, that aims to generate awareness and improve the efficiency of welfare services intended for girls. She lent her voice for narrating the story of one of the eight girls who featured in Girl Rising: Woh Padhegi, Woh Udegi, a film on the education and empowerment of girls. Dixit was appointed the brand ambassador and launched MAA (Mothers Absolute Affection), a flagship programme to ensure adequate awareness is generated on the benefits of breastfeeding.\nAdditionally, Dixit has made public appearances to support charities and causes.\u00a0On 4 February 2012, Madhuri Dixit interacted with Cancer affected children on World Cancer Day which was organised by Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd at Juhu, Mumbai. In 2013, she launched Sanofi India's campaign on World Diabetes Day (WDD), that encourages people to take proactive steps to effectively prevent, manage and control diabetes. A year later, on 24 February 2014, she visited a school in Andheri, Mumbai to support the \"Support My School\" campaign. She participated in 'Set Beautiful Free'\u2013 an event by One Foundation to provide home, education, food and healthcare to the daughters of trafficking victims. In 2018, she attended a charity event by 'Nanhi Kali' NGO.\nOn 17 March 2019, Dixit and her family adopted an abandoned puppy rescued by PETA India. She said, \"Abandoning a companion dog or cat is the cruelest thing to do. I'm happy we will be able to give this pup a new lease of life,\".\nIn March 2021, Dixit along with other Bollywood actors John Abraham, Shilpa Shetty and Sunny Leone joined PETA India for its 20th anniversary. In the virtual party, awards were given to those who have been championing animal rights. Dixit recalling joining the organisation to help elephants recalled, \"From there on it was the beginning of a beautiful friendship. Two years ago, my family adopted Carmelo, a cherished dog, from PETA India. Since then, I urge everyone I see to adopt a dog or a cat from the shelter or from the street.\"\nFalse representation in endorsements\nIn May\u2013June 2015 the Tamil Nadu Consumer's Forum sent her notices for \"false representation\" in advertisements of Maggi, a noodle brand in which toxic levels of lead were found. She continued endorsing the safety of the product on Twitter, even when food regulators had already found more than 17 times the permissible limits of lead and the product was banned.\nReception and legacy.\nArtistry.\nDixit is regarded as one of the most accomplished and influential actresses of Indian cinema. Throughout the late 1980s, the 1990s and the early 2000s, Dixit was among the highest-paid actresses in the Indian entertainment industry. In 2000, the Guinness World Records book featured her as the highest-paid Indian actress. Dixit was placed at the first position by NDTV in 2012, in the listing of \"The most popular Bollywood actresses of all time\". The next year, she was placed at the fourth position, behind Amitabh Bachchan, Dilip Kumar and Shah Rukh Khan and topped among female actors as the greatest Bollywood star in a UK poll celebrating 100 years of Indian cinema. The same year, in a national poll conducted by CNN-IBN on the occasion of the centenary of Indian cinema, Dixit was voted at the second position, behind Sridevi, as \"India's Greatest Actress in 100 Years\". In 2017, Dixit topped an \"India Today\" poll as the most popular actress of Hindi cinema till date.\nDixit has a significant following in the South Asian diaspora. While analysing her career, Reuters published, \"In her prime, Dixit was the undisputed queen of Bollywood, the world's largest film industry by audience size, and her popularity and fees rivaled even the biggest male stars.\" Throughout her career, Dixit has played roles in both mainstream productions and independent films, and appeared in a range of film genres, with Saibal Chatterjee of Outlook crediting \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\" as metamorphosing Dixit into a \"subcontinental icon\". \"The New York Times\" called Dixit, \"India's biggest female star\".\nDiscussing her performances, Baradwaj Rangan labelled her as \"the last of the all-in-one female stars who could do drama and comedy and dance\" and \"Firstpost\" called her, \"one of the last superstars of Hindi cinema\", praising her performances in \"Lajja\", \"Devdas\" and \"Dedh Ishqiya\". In 2010,\u00a0Filmfare Magazine\u00a0included her performance from\u00a0\"Mrityudand\"\u00a0in its list of \"80 Iconic Performances\". Dixit is credited in the media\u00a0for her versatility and achieving a \"balance of critical acclaim and commercial success.\"\nIn addition to acting, she has been noted for her skills as a dancer. Kathak dancer Pandit Birju Maharaj, who choreographed Dixit in \"Devdas\", calls her \"the best Bollywood dancer\" due to her versatility. Saroj Khan, who has collaborated with her on numerous occasions, calls her a \"choreographer's delight\". \"Hindustan Times\" attributed her for giving a 'technical twist' to dance sequences in Hindi films. Dixit was the muse for Indian painter M. F. Husain. He got fascinated by Dixit's performance in \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\"; watching the film 67 times, and booked an entire theatre to see her comeback \"Aaja Nachle\". He made a series of paintings of her, and in 2000 directed \"Gaja Gamini\" starring her, which was intended as a tribute to Dixit herself.\nMedia image.\nDixit featured in Box Office India's \"Top Actresses\" list for ten consecutive years (1988\u201397). In 2001, \"Forbes\" placed her at fifth position in the list of \"top five most powerful Indian film stars\". In 2002 and 2014, Dixit featured in Rediff's annual \"Top Bollywood Actresses\" listing. She has been featured frequently on other Rediff lists, including \"Bollywood's Most Beautiful Actresses\", \"Bollywood's Best Actresses Ever\" and \"Top 10 Bollywood Actresses of all Time\". \"The Economic Times\" featured her in the list of \"33 women who made India proud\" in 2010. In 1997, the Government of Andhra Pradesh honoured her with the \"Kalabhinetri Award\". In 2001, Dixit was awarded the National Citizens' Award for her work and contribution to Indian cinema. In 2008, the Government of India honoured her with the Padma Shri for her contribution to Indian Cinema. The Sathyabama University honoured her as the \"Inspiring Icon of India\" in 2015. An unauthorised biography of her named \"Madhuri Dixit\", written by professor Nandana Bose was released in 2019.\nDixit is frequently referred to as one of the most attractive Indian celebrities and has been described as a sex symbol. Her eyes, sex appeal and urban looks have been cited by the media as her distinctive features; her smile being identified as her trademark. She featured in \"The Times of India\"'s list of 50 Beautiful Faces of cinema and \"Hindustan Times\" called her \"a classic Indian beauty\". Her look and performances have established her as a style icon. In 2007, 2013\u201316 and 2018, the UK magazine \"Eastern Eye\" ranked her as one of \"World's Sexiest Asian Women\".\nSangetsar Tso lake in Arunachal Pradesh was renamed \"Madhuri Lake\" after her, where a song from \"Koyla\" was picturised. She has a star named after her in the Orion constellation. In March 2012, a wax figure of Dixit was put on display in London's Madame Tussaud's wax museum. In 2017, two other figures were displayed at Madame Tussaud's Museum in Singapore and Delhi. Every year since its inception in 2012, Dixit has featured on \"Forbes India\"'s \"Celebrity 100,\" a list based on the income and popularity of India's celebrities with the exception of 2017. In 2018, she was among the twenty Indians invited for the Oscar Academy's Class of 2018.\nPersonal life.\nAmidst media speculation on her personal life, Dixit married Shriram Madhav Nene, a cardiovascular surgeon from Los Angeles, California on 17 October 1999, in a traditional ceremony held at the residence of Dixit's elder brother in Southern California. Nene had never seen any of her films, and was unaware of her celebrity status. Dixit explained their relationship by saying, \"It was very important that he didn't know me as an actress because then he would know me as a person first. When people have seen you as an actress, they have pre-conceived notions... None of it was there here with him. I found the right person, I wanted to get married and I did.\" Dixit and Nene's wedding reception in Mumbai was attended by several prominent Indian personalities, including then Chief Minister of Maharashtra Vilasrao Deshmukh, Shivsena chief Bal Thackeray, Dilip Kumar, Saira Banu, Yash Chopra, Sridevi, and many others.\nFollowing her marriage, Dixit relocated to Denver, Colorado, for over a decade. On 17 March 2003, Dixit gave birth to a son, Arin. Two years later, on 8 March 2005, she gave birth to another son, Ryan. She described motherhood as \"amazing\" and added that her kids kept \"the child in her alive\".\nDixit moved back to Mumbai with her family in October 2011. Speaking about it, Dixit said, \"I always love being here. I have grown up here in Mumbai so for me it is like coming back home. It was a different phase in my life, where I wanted to have a home, family, husband and children... everything that I had dreamt of.\"\nIn 2018, Dixit along with her husband, founded the production company, RnM Moving Pictures. They both also together earned orange belts in taekwondo.\nAccolades.\nDixit has received six Filmfare Awards from a record seventeen nominations, including four Best Actress awards for \"Dil\" (1990), \"Beta\" (1992), \"Hum Aapke Hain Kaun!\" (1994) and \"Dil To Pagal Hai\" (1997), and a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress for \"Devdas\" (2002). She earned a Filmfare Special Award for completing 25 years in the Indian film industry. In 2008, she was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth-highest Indian civilian award, by the Government of India for her contributions to the arts. In 2023, she was awarded the Special Recognition for Contribution to Bharatiya Cinema Award at the 54th IFFI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19853", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19853", "title": "Marine Life Conservation", "text": ""}
{"id": "19854", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19854", "title": "Marine Dumping", "text": ""}
{"id": "19855", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19855", "title": "Mars Attacks", "text": "Trading card series\nMars Attacks is a science fiction-themed trading card series released in 1962 by Topps. The cards feature artwork by science fiction artists Wally Wood and Norman Saunders. The cards form a story arc, which tells of the invasion of Earth by cruel, hideous Martians under the command of a corrupt Martian government who conceal the fact from the Martian populace that Mars is doomed to explode and, therefore, proposes colonization of Earth to turn it into their new homeworld. The cards depict futuristic battle scenes and bizarre methods of Martian attack, torture and slaughter of humans, as well as various Earth nations being attacked. The story concludes with an expeditionary force of humans volunteering to embark on a counterattack on Mars, in which the Earth force attacks the Martians in their manner (bayoneting and bullets). The Earth attack forces, after destroying the Martian cities and killing the Martians, depart just before Mars is destroyed in the predicted cataclysm, thus ensuring the peace and safety of Earth as the Martian race is seemingly doomed to extinction. Backstories included how the invading Martians used growth rays to transform insects into monsters to attack cities, differing geographic regions dealing with the Martian invasion, Earth factions such as rival urban gangs and national differences having to be cast aside for the sake of repelling the invasion, or the sociology of Mars, in this case a small tribe of peaceful Martians who hoped to find a way to escape the destruction of Mars without attacking Earth, but their voice being overruled by the corrupt Martian government.\nThe cards proved popular with children, but depictions of explicit gore and implied sexual content caused an outcry, leading the company to halt production. The cards have since become collector's items, with certain cards commanding over $3,500 at auction.\nIn the 1980s, Topps began developing merchandise based on the \"Mars Attacks\" storyline, including mini-comic books and card reprints. An expanded set of 100 cards called \"Mars Attacks Archives\" was issued in 1994 by Topps and spawned a second round of merchandising. Director Tim Burton released a feature film called \"Mars Attacks!\" in 1996 based on the series, spawning a third round of merchandising, including an intercompany crossover with the Image Universe, titled \"Mars Attacks Image\" and published by Image Comics. In 2012, Topps released a 50th anniversary expanded set of 75 cards called \"Mars Attacks Heritage\", leading to a fourth round of merchandising that continued into 2017 with the release of an official sequel series, \"Mars Attacks: The Revenge!\"\nTrading cards.\nThe \"Mars Attacks\" trading card series was created by Topps in 1962. Product developer Len Brown, inspired by Wally Wood's cover for EC Comics' \"Weird Science\" #16, pitched the idea to Woody Gelman. Gelman and Brown created the story \u2014 with Brown writing the copy \u2014 and created rough sketches. They enlisted Wood to flesh out the sketches and Bob Powell to finish them. Norman Saunders painted most of the 55-card set (Maurice Blumenfeld painted 10 \u2013 20% of them, but Saunders provided the finishing touches to all of the images).\nThe cards, which sold for five cents per pack of five, were test marketed by Topps through the dummy corporation Bubbles, Inc. under the name \"Attack from Space\". Sales were sufficient to expand the marketing and the name was changed to \"Mars Attacks\". The cards sparked parental and community outrage over their graphic violence and implied sexuality. Topps responded initially by repainting 13 of the 55 cards to reduce the gore and sexuality. However, inquiries from a Connecticut district attorney caused Topps to halt production of the series altogether before the replacements could even be printed.\nAdaptations and merchandising.\nIn 1984, the first official item was released since the original series appeared: a direct copy of the original series of 55 cards, plus a 56th card that reprinted the wrapper graphics, was released by Renata Galasso Inc. through an agreement with Topps.\nIn 1994, Topps re-released the cards as an expanded version titled \"Mars Attacks Archives\", with the original 55 cards and 45 \"New Visions\" cards. The 45 new cards are further divided into a #0 card, three subsets (\"The Unpublished 11\" (with 11 cards)), \"Mars Attacks: The Comics\" (with 10 cards) and \"Visions: New and Original\" a.k.a. \"New Visions\" (with 22 cards)) and one card titled \"Norm Saunders: A Self-Portrait\". Twenty-one artists collaborated on the new cards, including Zina Saunders, the daughter of the original artist Norman Saunders. Topps Comics, in conjunction with the trading cards, issued a five-issue comic book miniseries based on the original 55 cards written by Keith Giffen and drawn by Charles Adlard. Topps Comics continued the story in an ongoing series that lasted seven issues, a one-shot special and three more miniseries. \"Wizard\" magazine and Topps Comics also published a #1/2 issue and an Ace Edition issue (#65).\nIn 1995, one year after the \"Archives\" series, Screamin' Productions and Topps released a tie-in set of eight \"Mars Attacks\" vinyl model kits with an accompanying series of eight new trading cards, each one inside one of the kits. Bonus items that could be acquired by sending in proof-of-purchase certificates from all eight of the kits were two new nearly identical bonus cards (one oversized card with the \"Mars Attacks\" logo on the top of it and one regular-sized card without it) and a limited edition ninth vinyl model kit.\nIn 1996, Warner Bros. released Tim Burton's feature film adaptation \"Mars Attacks!\". In conjunction, two hardcover novels were released: \"Mars Attacks: Martian Deathtrap\" by Nathan Archer; and \"Mars Attacks: War Dogs of the Golden Horde\" by Ray W. Murrill. Each contained two new trading cards inside the middle of each book (the paperback editions, however, did not have the trading cards inside them). A paperback movie tie-in novelization by the film's screenwriter was also published, in addition to two comic book intercompany crossovers with Image Comics that continued the Topps Comics run titled \"Mars Attacks the Savage Dragon\" and \"Mars Attacks Image\", both of which respectively depicted the Martians battling the Image Comics superhero the Savage Dragon and the Martians battling other characters from the wider Image Universe. Trendmasters also produced a series of toy figures based on the film.\nIn 2012, to commemorate the franchise's 50th anniversary, Topps partnered with a variety of companies on comic books (via IDW Publishing), bobbleheads and vinyl figures (Funko Pop!), action figures and plush toys (Mezco Toyz), costumes (Incogneato), statues and busts (Quarantine Studio), electronics skins (Gelaskins) and a commemorative hardcover book and 2013 wall calendar, both with nearly identical sets of four new trading cards (the only difference being that the book's cards had white borders on the front of the cards and the calendar's cards had green borders) (Abrams Books). Topps also re-released the original 55-card series again as a second expanded version titled \"Mars Attacks Heritage\", including two subsets (\"Deleted Scenes\" (with 10 cards) and \"Guide to the New Universe\" (with 15 cards)).\nIn 2013, Topps issued \"Mars Attacks: Invasion\", a reboot series of 95 trading cards featuring a new story (\"Mars Attacks: Invasion\" (cards #1\u201358, plus a #0 promo card from the 2013 San Diego Comic-Con)) with new artwork cards (divided into \"Mars Invades IDW\" (cards #59\u201377 and #91\u201392) and \"Art of Mars Attacks\" (cards #78\u201390 and #93\u201395)) and including four new subsets (\"Mars Attacks: Early Missions\" (with six cards), \"Mars Attacks Masterpieces\" (with five cards), \"Join the Fight!\" (with four cards) and \"Anatomy of a Martian\" (also with six cards)). This was the last \"Mars Attacks\" trading card series to be sold in retail stores as of this date; all other such series have been sold online ever since.\nA second series of trading cards, \"Mars Attacks: Occupation\", also featuring a second reboot series of 81 trading cards that picked up where \"Mars Attacks: Invasion\" left off (\"Mars Attacks: Occupation\" (cards #1\u201345) with new artwork cards (divided into \"Art of Mars Attacks\" (cards #46\u201363), \"Factions\" (cards #64\u201372), \"Occupation Profiles\" (cards #73\u201378) and \"The Kickstarter Video\" (cards #79\u201381)) and including six new subsets (\"Mars Attacks Superstars\", Mars Attacks: Then and Now!\", \"Mars Attacks All-Star Art\" and \"Dinosaurs Attack! vs. Mars Attacks\" (each with nine cards (the last one of which was also available as a foil card set)), \"Attacky Packages\" (a hybrid subset between \"Mars Attacks\" and \"Wacky Packages\" with 13 cards; the last three cards in this subset were titled \"Attacky Packages Old School\" (like \"Dinosaurs Attack! vs. Mars Attacks\", this one, too, was also available as a foil card set)) and \"Mars Attacks/Judge Dredd\" (with 18 cards)) was funded by Topps on Kickstarter in 2015 and released in 2016.\nA licensed sourcebook written by David Levine appeared for the fourth edition of the tabletop roleplaying game system \"GURPS\". This included artwork taken from the cards and comics. \nIn 2017, to commemorate the franchise's 55th anniversary, Topps released an official sequel series to the original 1962 55-card series called \"Mars Attacks: The Revenge!\", which takes place five years after the events in the original series and chronicles a second invasion of Earth by the surviving Martians that were off-world and on Earth during the destruction of Mars. It contained 110 cards - the story itself (cards #1\u201355) and rough pencil art for the story cards (cards #P-1\u2013P-55). No subsets were made for this series. It was sold as a complete box set that contained only the unwrapped 110 cards.\nA third series of trading cards, \"Mars Attacks: Uprising\", was released in 2020 exclusively through a Kickstarter campaign, with cards sent to those who donated to the campaign. Multiple artists were tapped to create multiple storylines, which generally depict counterattacking humans beginning to turn the tide against the Martian invasion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19856", "revid": "1313177115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19856", "title": "Montreal Protocol", "text": "1987 treaty to protect the ozone layer\nThe Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer is an international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the production of numerous substances that are responsible for ozone depletion. It was agreed on 16 September 1987, and entered into force on 1 January 1989. Since then, it has undergone several amendments and adjustments, with revisions agreed to in 1990 (London), 1992 (Copenhagen), 1995 (Vienna), 1997 (Montreal), 1999 (Beijing), 2007 (Montreal), 2016 (Kigali) and 2018 (Quito). As a result of the international agreement, the ozone hole over Antarctica is slowly recovering. Climate projections indicate that the ozone layer will return to 1980 levels between 2040 (across much of the world) and 2066 (over Antarctica). Due to its widespread adoption and implementation, it has been hailed as an example of successful international co-operation. Former United Nations (UN) Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated that \"perhaps the single most successful international agreement to date has been the Montreal Protocol\". In comparison, effective burden-sharing and solution proposals mitigating regional conflicts of interest have been among the success factors for the ozone depletion challenge, where global regulation based on the Kyoto Protocol has failed to do so. In this case of the ozone depletion challenge, there was global regulation already being implemented before a scientific consensus was established. Also, overall public opinion was convinced of possible imminent risks.\nThe ozone treaty has been ratified by 198 parties (197 states and the European Union), making it the first universally ratified treaty in United Nations history.\nWith the agreement in 2016 of the Kigali Amendment that phases down production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), the Montreal Protocol became both an ozone and a climate treaty because HFCs are powerful greenhouse gases. This truly universal treaty has also been remarkable in the expedience of the policy-making process at the global scale, where only 14 years lapsed between a basic scientific research discovery (1973) and the international agreement signed (1985 and 1987). \nTerms and purposes.\nThe treaty is structured around several groups of halogenated hydrocarbons that lead to the catalytic destruction of stratospheric ozone. All of the ozone depleting substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol contain either chlorine or bromine (substances containing only fluorine do not harm the ozone layer, although they can be strong greenhouse gases). Some ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) are not yet controlled by the Montreal Protocol, including nitrous oxide (N2O). For a table of ozone-depleting substances controlled by the Montreal Protocol see:\nFor each group of ODSs, the treaty provides a timetable on which the production of those substances must be reduced and eventually eliminated. This includes a 10-year phase-out for developing countries (also referred to as Article 5 Parties) as identified in Article 5 of the treaty. Developed countries in the context of Article 5 are referred to as non-Article 5 Parties.\nChlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) Phase-out Management Plan.\nThe purpose of the treaty is that each signatory states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe substances in Group I of Annex A are:\nFor this group, production and consumption in non-Article 5 Parties was frozen (at a 1986 base level) on July 1, 1989, with 75% phasedown by 1994 and complete phase-out by 1996. For Article 5 Parties, consumption and production was frozen (at a base level of the average of 1995\u201397 amounts), followed by a 50% phasedown by 2005, an 85% phasedown by 2007, and 100% phase-out by 2010. Some chemicals were given individual attention (Carbon tetrachloride; 1,1,1-trichloroethane). The phasing-out of the less damaging HCFCs only began in 1996 and will go on until a complete phasing-out is achieved by 2030.\nProduction and consumption levels of Annex A - Group II Halons (halon-1211, -2404, and -1301) in non-Article 5 Parties was frozen (at a 1986 base level) on January 1, 1992, with complete phase-out by 1994. For Article 5 Parties, production and consumption were frozen (at a base level of the average of 1995\u201397 amounts) on January 1, 2002, followed by a 50% phasedown by 2005 and complete phase-out by 2010. \nThe phasedown and phase-out schedules include a few exceptions for \"essential uses\" where no acceptable substitutes were initially found (for example, metered dose inhalers commonly used to treat asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were previously exempt). Another exception was made for Halon fire suppression systems used in submarines and aircraft (but not in general industry).\nThe provisions of the Protocol include the requirement that the Parties to the Protocol base their future decisions on the current scientific, environmental, technical, and economic information that is assessed through panels drawn from the worldwide expert communities. To provide that input to the decision-making process, advances in understanding on these topics were assessed in 1989, 1991, 1994, 1998 and 2002 in a series of reports entitled Scientific assessment of ozone depletion, by the Scientific Assessment Panel (SAP).\nIn 1990, the Parties to the Montreal Protocol established a Technology and Economic Assessment Panel (TEAP) as a technology and economics advisory body. The TEAP provides, at the request of Parties, technical information related to alternative technologies that have made it possible to virtually eliminate the use of ODSs that harm the ozone layer. The TEAP is also tasked by the Parties every year to assess and evaluate various technical issues, including evaluating nominations for essential use exemptions for CFCs and halons, and nominations for critical use exemptions for methyl bromide. TEAP's annual reports are a basis for the Parties' informed decision-making.\nNumerous reports have been published by various inter-governmental, governmental and non-governmental organizations to catalogue and assess alternatives to the ozone depleting substances, since the substances have been used in various technical sectors, like in refrigeration, air conditioning, flexible and rigid foam, fire protection, aerospace, electronics, agriculture, and laboratory measurements.\nHydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) Phase-out Management Plan (HPMP).\nUnder the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, especially Executive Committee (ExCom) 53/37 and ExCom 54/39, Parties to this Protocol agreed to set year 2013 as the time to freeze the consumption and production of HCFCs for developing countries. For developed countries, reduction of HCFC consumption and production began in 2004 and 2010, respectively, with 100% reduction set for 2020. Developing countries agreed to start reducing its consumption and production of HCFCs by 2015, with 100% reduction set for 2030.\nHydrochlorofluorocarbons, commonly known as HCFCs, are a group of human-made compounds containing hydrogen, chlorine, fluorine and carbon. They are not found anywhere in nature. HCFC production began to take off after countries agreed to phase out the use of CFCs in the 1980s, which were found to be destroying the ozone layer. Like CFCs, HCFCs are used for refrigeration, aerosol propellants, foam manufacture and air conditioning. Unlike the CFCs, however, most HCFCs are broken down in the lowest part of the atmosphere and pose a much smaller risk to the ozone layer. Nevertheless, HCFCs are very potent greenhouse gases, despite their very low atmospheric concentrations, measured in parts per trillion (million million).\nThe HCFCs are transitional CFCs replacements, used as refrigerants, solvents, blowing agents for plastic foam manufacture, and fire extinguishers. In terms of ozone depletion potential (ODP), in comparison to CFCs that have ODP 0.6\u20131.0, these HCFCs have lower ODPs (0.01\u20130.5). In terms of global warming potential (GWP), in comparison to CFCs that have GWP 4,680\u201310,720, HCFCs have lower GWPs (76\u20132,270).\nHydrofluorocarbons (HFCs).\nOn 1 January 2019, the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol came into force. Under the Kigali Amendment countries promised to reduce the use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) by more than 80% over the next 30 years. By 27 December 2018, 65 countries had ratified the Amendment. As of 2024[ [update]], 160 states and the European Union have ratified the Amendment.\nProduced mostly in developed countries, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) replaced CFCs and HCFCs. HFCs pose no harm to the ozone layer because, unlike CFCs and HCFCs, they do not contain chlorine. They are, however, greenhouse gases, with a high global warming potential (GWP), comparable to that of CFCs and HCFCs. In 2009, a study calculated that a fast phasedown of high-GWP HFCs could potentially prevent the equivalent of up to 8.8 Gt CO2-eq per year in emissions by 2050. A proposed phasedown of HFCs was hence projected to avoid up to 0.5C of warming by 2100 under the high-HFC growth scenario, and up to 0.35C under the low-HFC growth scenario. Recognizing the opportunity presented for fast and effective phasing down of HFCs through the Montreal Protocol, starting in 2009 the Federated States of Micronesia proposed an amendment to phase down high-GWP HFCs, with the U.S., Canada, and Mexico following with a similar proposal in 2010.\nAfter seven years of negotiations, in October 2016 at the 28th Meeting of the Parties to the Montreal Protocol in Kigali, the Parties to the Montreal Protocol adopted the Kigali Amendment whereby the Parties agreed to phase down HFCs under the Montreal Protocol. The amendment to the Montreal Protocol commits the signatory parties to reduce their HFC production and consumption by at least 85 per cent from the annual average value in the period from 2011 to 2013. A group of developing countries including China, Brazil and South Africa are mandated to reduce their HFC use by 85 per cent of their average value in 2020\u201322 by the year 2045. India and some other developing countries \u2013 Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, and some oil economies like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait \u2013 will cut down their HFCs by 85 per cent of their values in 2024\u201326 by the year 2047.\nOn 17 November 2017, ahead of the 29th Meeting of the Parties of the Montreal Protocol, Sweden became the 20th Party to ratify the Kigali Amendment, pushing the Amendment over its ratification threshold ensuring that the Amendment would enter into force 1 January 2019.\nRecent Activities.\nThe Parties to the Montreal Protocol, guided by the SAP, EEAP, and TEAP expert groups, continue to address ozone and climate challenges through Meetings of the Parties (MOP) to the Montreal Protocol, combined Conference of the Parties to the Vienna Convention (COP)-MOP meetings, and Open-ended Working Group (OEWG) meetings. Recent areas of focus and activities include:\nHistory.\nIn the 1970s, the chemists Frank Sherwood Rowland and Mario Molina, who were then at the University of California, Irvine, began studying the impacts of CFCs in the Earth's atmosphere. They discovered that CFC molecules were stable enough to remain in the atmosphere until they got up into the middle of the stratosphere where they would finally (after an average of 50\u2013100 years for two common CFCs) be broken down by ultraviolet radiation releasing a chlorine atom. Rowland and Molina then proposed that these chlorine atoms might be expected to cause the breakdown of large amounts of ozone (O3) in the stratosphere. Their argument was based upon an analogy to contemporary work by Paul J. Crutzen and Harold Johnston, which had shown that nitric oxide (NO) could catalyze the destruction of ozone. (Several other scientists, including Ralph Cicerone, Richard Stolarski, Michael McElroy, and Steven Wofsy had independently proposed that chlorine could catalyze ozone loss, but none had realized that CFCs were a potentially large source of chlorine.) Crutzen, Molina and Rowland were awarded the 1995 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for their work on this problem.\nThe environmental consequence of this discovery was that, since stratospheric ozone absorbs most of the ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation reaching the surface of the planet, depletion of the ozone layer by CFCs would lead to an increase in UV-B radiation at the surface, resulting in an increase in skin cancer and other impacts such as damage to crops and to marine phytoplankton.\nThe Rowland-Molina hypothesis was strongly disputed by representatives of the aerosol and halocarbon industries. The chair of the board of DuPont was quoted as saying that ozone depletion theory is \"a science fiction tale...a load of rubbish...utter nonsense\". Robert Abplanalp, the president of Precision Valve Corporation (and inventor of the first practical aerosol spray can valve), wrote to the Chancellor of UC Irvine to complain about Rowland's public statements (Roan, p.\u00a056.)\nAfter publishing their pivotal paper in June 1974, Rowland and Molina testified at a\nhearing before the U.S. House of Representatives in December 1974. As a result, significant funding was made available to study various aspects of the problem and to confirm the initial findings. In 1976, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) released a report that confirmed the scientific credibility of the ozone depletion hypothesis. NAS continued to publish assessments of related science for the next decade.\nIn 1982, representatives from 24 countries met in Stockholm, Sweden to decide on a \"Global Framework Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer.\" The following year, a group of countries, including the United States, Canada, the Nordic Countries, and Switzerland, proposed a worldwide ban on \"nonessential\" uses of CFCs in spray cans.\nThen, in 1985, British Antarctic Survey scientists Joe Farman, Brian Gardiner and Jon Shanklin published results of abnormally low ozone concentrations above Halley Bay near the South Pole. They speculated that this was connected to increased levels of CFCs in the atmosphere. It took several other attempts to establish the Antarctic losses as real and significant, especially after NASA had retrieved matching data from its satellite recordings. This unforeseen phenomenon in the Antarctic, as well as NASA's scientific images of the ozone hole played an important role in the Montreal Protocol negotiations. The impact of these studies, the metaphor 'ozone hole', and the colorful visual representation in a time lapse animation proved shocking enough for negotiators in Montreal, Canada to take the issue seriously.\nAlso in 1985, 20 nations, including most of the major CFC producers, signed the Vienna Convention, which established a framework for negotiating international regulations on ozone-depleting substances. After the discovery of the ozone hole \nby SAGE 2 it only took 18 months to reach a binding agreement in Montreal, Canada. Mostafa Kamal Tolba, the head of the UNEP at the time, was considered the \"father of the Montreal Protocol\" for his role in bringing the nations together for an agreement.\nIn 1986, an assessment spearheaded by NASA and sponsored by the United Nationals Environment Program, the World Meteorological Organization, and various other organizations concluded that continued CFC emissions at the 1980 rate would \"reduce global average ozone by about 9 percent by the latter half of the century.\" Based on these figures, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimated that in the United States alone there could be \"over 150 million new cases of skin cancer among people currently alive and born by the year 2075, resulting in over 3 million deaths.\"\nThe CFC industry continued pushing back against regulation as late as 1986, when the Alliance for Responsible CFC Policy (an association representing the CFC industry founded by DuPont) was still arguing that the science was too uncertain to justify any action. In 1987, DuPont testified before the US Congress that \"We believe there is no imminent crisis that demands unilateral regulation.\" And even in March 1988, Du Pont Chair Richard E. Heckert would write in a letter to the United States Senate, \"we will not produce a product unless it can be made, used, handled and disposed of safely and consistent with appropriate safety, health and environmental quality criteria. At the moment, scientific evidence does not point to the need for dramatic CFC emission reductions. There is no available measure of the contribution of CFCs to any observed ozone change...\"\nIn an unexpected policy change, however, the Alliance for Responsible CFC Policy issued a statement in 1986 declaring that \"large future increases...in CFCs...would be unacceptable to future generations,\" and that it would be \"inconsistent with [industry] goals...to ignore the potential for risk to future generations.\" Three months before the protocol negotiations began, U.S. industry announced its support for new international controls on CFCs.\nMultilateral Fund.\nThe main objective of the \"Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol\" is to assist developing country parties to the Montreal Protocol whose annual per capita consumption and production of ozone depleting substances (ODS) is less than 0.3\u00a0kg to comply with the control measures of the Protocol. Currently, 147 of the 196 Parties to the Montreal Protocol meet these criteria (they are referred to as Article 5 countries).\nIt embodies the principle agreed at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in 1992 that countries have a common but differentiated responsibility to protect and manage the global commons.\nThe Fund is managed by an executive committee with an equal representation of seven industrialized and seven Article 5 countries, which are elected annually by a Meeting of the Parties. The Committee reports annually to the Meeting of the Parties on its operations. The work of the Multilateral Fund on the ground in developing countries is carried out by four Implementing Agencies, which have contractual agreements with the executive committee:\nUp to 20 percent of the contributions of contributing parties can also be delivered through their bilateral agencies in the form of eligible projects and activities.\nThe fund is replenished on a three-year basis by the donors. Pledges amount to US$3.1 billion over the period 1991 to 2005. Funds are used, for example, to finance the conversion of existing manufacturing processes, train personnel, pay royalties and patent rights on new technologies, and establish national ozone offices.\nParties.\nAs of October 2022, all Member States of the United Nations, the Cook Islands, Niue, the Holy See, the State of Palestine as well as the European Union have ratified the original Montreal Protocol (see external link below), with the State of Palestine being the last party to ratify the agreement, bringing the total to 198. 197 of those parties (with the exception of the State of Palestine) have also ratified the London, Copenhagen, Montreal, and Beijing amendments.\nEffect.\nSince the Montreal Protocol came into effect, the atmospheric concentrations of the most important chlorofluorocarbons and related chlorinated hydrocarbons have either leveled off or decreased. Halon concentrations have continued to increase, as the halons presently stored in fire extinguishers are released, but their rate of increase has slowed and their abundances are expected to begin to decline by about 2020. Also, the concentration of the HCFCs increased drastically at least partly because of many uses (e.g. used as solvents or refrigerating agents) CFCs were substituted with HCFCs. While there have been reports of attempts by individuals to circumvent the ban, e.g. by smuggling CFCs from undeveloped to developed nations, the overall level of compliance has been high. Statistical analysis from 2010 show a clear positive signal from the Montreal Protocol to the stratospheric ozone. In consequence, the Montreal Protocol has often been called the most successful international environmental agreement to date. In a 2001 report, NASA found the ozone thinning over Antarctica had remained the same thickness for the previous three years, however in 2003 the ozone hole grew to its second largest size. The most recent (2006) scientific evaluation of the effects of the Montreal Protocol states, \"The Montreal Protocol is working: There is clear evidence of a decrease in the atmospheric burden of ozone-depleting substances and some early signs of stratospheric ozone recovery.\" However, a more recent study seems to point to a relative increase in CFCs due to an unknown source.\nReported in 1997, significant production of CFCs occurred in Russia for sale on the black market to the EU throughout the 90s. Related US production and consumption was enabled by fraudulent reporting due to poor enforcement mechanisms. Similar illegal markets for CFCs were detected in Taiwan, Korea, and Hong Kong.\nThe Montreal Protocol is also expected to have effects on human health. A 2015 report by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency estimates that the protection of the ozone layer under the treaty will prevent over 280 million cases of skin cancer, 1.5 million skin cancer deaths, and 45 million cataracts in the United States.\nHowever, the hydrochlorofluorocarbons, or HCFCs, and hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs, contribute to anthropogenic global warming. On a molecule-for-molecule basis, these compounds are up to 10,000 times more potent greenhouse gases than carbon dioxide. The Montreal Protocol currently calls for a complete phase-out of HCFCs by 2030, but does not place any restriction on HFCs. Since the CFCs themselves are equally powerful greenhouse gases, the mere substitution of HFCs for CFCs does not significantly increase the rate of anthropogenic climate change, but over time a steady increase in their use could increase the danger that human activity will change the climate.\nPolicy experts have advocated for increased efforts to link ozone protection efforts to climate protection efforts. Policy decisions in one arena affect the costs and effectiveness of environmental improvements in the other.\nRegional detections of non-compliance.\nIn 2018, scientists monitoring the atmosphere following the 2010 phaseout date reported evidence of continuing industrial production of CFC-11, likely in eastern Asia, with detrimental global effects on the ozone layer. A monitoring study detected fresh atmospheric releases of carbon tetrachloride from China's Shandong province, beginning sometime after 2012, and accounting for a large part of emissions exceeding global estimates under the Montreal Protocol.\n25th anniversary celebrations.\nThe year 2012 marked the 25th anniversary of the signing of the Montreal Protocol. Accordingly, the Montreal Protocol community organized a range of celebrations at the national, regional and international levels to publicize its considerable success to date and to consider the work ahead for the future.\nAmong its accomplishments are: \nWithin 25 years of signing, parties to the MP celebrate significant milestones. Significantly, the world has phased-out 98% of the Ozone-Depleting Substances (ODS) contained in nearly 100 hazardous chemicals worldwide; every country is in compliance with stringent obligations; and, the MP has achieved the status of the first global regime with universal ratification; even the newest member state, South Sudan, ratified in 2013. UNEP received accolades for achieving global consensus that \"demonstrates the world\u2019s commitment to ozone protection, and more broadly, to global environmental protection\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19857", "revid": "24276765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19857", "title": "Moncton", "text": "City in New Brunswick, Canada\nMoncton (; ) is the most populous city in the Canadian province of New Brunswick. Situated in the Petitcodiac River Valley, it lies at the geographic centre of the Maritime Provinces. The city has earned the nickname \"Hub City\" because of its central inland location in the region and its history as a railway and land transportation hub for the Maritimes. As of the 2024 Statistics Canada estimates, the city had a population of 97,523. The metropolitan population in 2024 was 188,036, making it the fastest growing census metropolitan area (CMA) in Canada for the year with a growth rate of 5.1%. Its land area is .\nAlthough the Moncton area was first settled in 1733, Moncton was officially founded in 1766 with the arrival of Pennsylvania German immigrants from Philadelphia. Initially an agricultural settlement, Moncton was not incorporated until 1855. It was named for Lt. Col. Robert Monckton, the British officer who had captured nearby Fort Beaus\u00e9jour a century earlier. A significant wooden shipbuilding industry had developed in the community by the mid-1840s, allowing for the civic incorporation of the town in 1855. The shipbuilding economy collapsed in the 1860s, causing the town to lose its civic charter in 1862. Moncton regained its charter in 1875 after the community's economy rebounded, mainly due to a growing railway industry. In 1871, the Intercolonial Railway of Canada chose Moncton as its headquarters, and Moncton remained a railway town for well over a century until the Canadian National Railway (CNR) locomotive shops closed in the late 1980s.\nAlthough Moncton's economy was significantly impacted by the collapse of the shipbuilding industry in the 1860s and by the closure of the CNR locomotive shops in the 1980s, the city was able to rebound strongly on both occasions. It adopted the motto \"Resurgo\" (Latin: \"I rise again\") after its rebirth as a railway town. Its economy is stable and diversified, primarily based on its traditional transportation, distribution, retailing, and commercial heritage, and supplemented by strength in the educational, health care, financial, information technology, and insurance sectors. The strength of Moncton's economy has received national recognition in part due to a local unemployment rate that is consistently lower than the national average.\nHistory.\nAcadians settled the head of the Bay of Fundy in the 1670s. The first reference to the \"Petcoucoyer River\" was on the De Meulles map of 1686. Settlement of the Petitcodiac and Memramcook river valleys began about 1700, gradually extending inland and reaching the site of present-day Moncton in 1733. The first Acadian settlers in the Moncton area established a marshland farming community and chose to name their settlement \"Le Coude\" (\"The Elbow\"), an allusion to the 90\u00b0 bend in the river near the site of the settlement.\nIn 1755, nearby Fort Beaus\u00e9jour was captured by British forces under the command of Lt. Col. Robert Monckton. The Beaubassin region including the Memramcook and Petitcodiac river valleys subsequently fell under English control. Later that year, Governor Charles Lawrence issued a decree ordering the expulsion of the Acadian population from Nova Scotia (including recently captured areas of Acadia such as Le Coude). This action came to be known as the \"Great Upheaval\".\nThe reaches of the upper Petitcodiac River valley then came under the control of the Philadelphia Land Company (one of the principals of which was Benjamin Franklin.) In 1766, Pennsylvania German settlers arrived to reestablish the preexisting farming community at Le Coude. The Settlers consisted of eight families: Heinrich Stief (Steeves), Jacob Treitz (Trites), Matthias Sommer (Somers), Jacob Reicker (Ricker), Charles Jones (Schantz), George Wortmann (Wortman), Michael Lutz (Lutes), and George Koppel (Copple). There is a plaque dedicated in their honour at the mouth of Hall's Creek. They renamed the settlement \"The Bend\". The Bend remained an agricultural settlement for nearly 80 more years. Even by 1836, there were only 20 households in the community. At that time, the Westmorland Road became open to year-round travel and a regular mail coach service was established between Saint John and Halifax. The Bend became an important transfer and rest station along the route. Over the next decade, lumbering and then shipbuilding became important industries in the area.\nThe community's turning point came when Joseph Salter took over (and expanded) a shipyard at the Bend in 1847. The shipyard grew to employ about 400 workers. The Bend subsequently developed a service-based economy to support the shipyard and gradually began to acquire all the amenities of a growing town. The prosperity engendered by the wooden shipbuilding industry allowed The Bend to incorporate as the town of Moncton in 1855. Although the town was named for Monckton, a clerical error at the time the town was incorporated resulted in the misspelling of its name, which has remained to the present day. Moncton's first mayor was the shipbuilder Joseph Salter.\nIn 1857, the European and North American Railway opened its line from Moncton to nearby Shediac. This was followed in 1859 by a line from Moncton to Saint John. At about the time of the railway's arrival, the popularity of steam-powered ships forced an end to the era of wooden shipbuilding. The Salter shipyard closed in 1858. The resulting industrial collapse caused Moncton to surrender its civic charter in 1862.\nMoncton's economic depression did not last long; a second era of prosperity came to the area in 1871, when Moncton was selected to be the headquarters of the Intercolonial Railway of Canada (ICR). The arrival of the ICR in Moncton was a seminal event for the community. For the next 120 years, the history of the city was firmly linked with the railway's. In 1875, Moncton reincorporated as a town, and a year later, the ICR line to Quebec opened. The railway boom that emanated from this and the associated employment growth allowed Moncton to achieve city status on April 23, 1890.\nMoncton grew rapidly during the early 20th century, particularly after provincial lobbying helped the city become the eastern terminus of the massive National Transcontinental Railway project in 1912. In 1918, the federal government merged the ICR and the National Transcontinental Railway (NTR) into the newly formed Canadian National Railways (CNR) system. The ICR shops became CNR's major locomotive repair facility for the Maritimes and Moncton became the headquarters for CNR's Maritime division. The T. Eaton Company's catalogue warehouse moved to the city in the early 1920s, employing over 700 people. Transportation and distribution became increasingly important to Moncton's economy in the mid-20th century. The first scheduled air service out of Moncton was established in 1928. During the Second World War, the Canadian Army built a large military supply base in the city to service the Maritime military establishment. The CNR continued to dominate the economy of the city; railway employment in Moncton peaked at nearly 6,000 workers in the 1950s before beginning a slow decline.\nMoncton was placed on the Trans-Canada Highway network in the early 1960s after Route 2 was built along the city's northern perimeter. Later, the Route 15 was built between the city and Shediac. At the same time, the Petitcodiac River Causeway was constructed. The Universit\u00e9 de Moncton was founded in 1963 and became an important resource in the development of Acadian culture in the area.\nThe late 1970s and the 1980s were a period of economic hardship for the city as several major employers closed or restructured. The Eatons catalogue division, CNR's locomotive shops facility and CFB Moncton closed during this time, throwing thousands of citizens out of work.\nThe city diversified in the early 1990s with the rise of information technology, led by call centres that made use of the city's bilingual workforce. By the late 1990s, retail, manufacturing and service expansion began to occur in all sectors and within a decade of the closure of the CNR locomotive shops Moncton had more than made up for its employment losses. This dramatic turnaround in the city's fortunes has been termed the \"Moncton Miracle\".\nThe community's growth has accelerated since the 1990s. The confidence of the community has been bolstered by its ability to host major events such as the Francophonie Summit in 1999, a Rolling Stones concert in 2005, the Memorial Cup in 2006, and both the IAAF World Junior Championships in Athletics and a neutral site regular season CFL football game in 2010. Positive developments include the Atlantic Baptist University (later renamed Crandall University) achieving full university status and relocating to a new campus in 1996, the Greater Moncton Rom\u00e9o LeBlanc International Airport opening a new terminal building and becoming a designated international airport in 2002, and the opening of the new Gunningsville Bridge to Riverview in 2005. In 2002, Moncton became Canada's first officially bilingual city. In the 2006 census, it was designated a Census Metropolitan Area and became New Brunswick's largest metropolitan area.\nOn 1 January 2023, Moncton annexed an area including Charles Lutes Road and Zack Road.\nGeography.\nMoncton lies in southeastern New Brunswick, at the geographic centre of the Maritime Provinces. The city is along the north bank of the Petitcodiac River at a point where the river bends acutely from west\u2212east to north\u2212south flow. This geographical feature has contributed significantly to historical names for the community. \"Petitcodiac\" in the Mi'kmaq language has been translated as \"bends like a bow\". The early Acadian settlers in the region named their community \"Le Coude\" (\"the elbow\"). Subsequent English immigrants changed the settlement's name to The Bend of the Petitcodiac (or simply \"The Bend\").\nThe Petitcodiac river valley at Moncton is broad and relatively flat, bounded by a long ridge to the north (Lutes Mountain) and by the rugged Caledonia Highlands to the south. Moncton lies at the original head of navigation on the river, but a causeway to Riverview (constructed in 1968) resulted in extensive sedimentation of the river channel downstream and rendered the Moncton area of the waterway unnavigable. On April 14, 2010, the causeway gates were opened in an effort to restore the silt-laden river.\nTidal bore.\nThe Petitcodiac River exhibits one of North America's few tidal bores: a regularly occurring wave that travels up the river on the leading edge of the incoming tide. The bore is a result of the Bay of Fundy's extreme tides. Originally, the bore was very impressive, sometimes between high and extending across the width of the Petitcodiac River in the Moncton area. This wave occurred twice a day at high tide, travelling at an average speed of and producing an audible roar. Unsurprisingly, the \"bore\" became a very popular early tourist attraction for the city, but when the Petitcodiac causeway was built in the 1960s, the river channel quickly silted in and reduced the bore so that it rarely exceeded in height. On April 14, 2010, the causeway gates were opened in an effort to restore the silt-laden river. A recent tidal bore since the opening of the causeway gates measured a wave, unseen for many years.\nClimate.\nDespite being less than from the Bay of Fundy and less than from the Northumberland Strait, the climate tends to be more continental than maritime during the summer and winter seasons, with maritime influences somewhat tempering the transitional seasons of spring and autumn.\nMoncton has a warm summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\") with uniform precipitation distribution. Winter days are typically cold but sunny, with solar radiation generating some warmth. Daytime high temperatures usually range a few degrees below the freezing point. Major snowfalls can result from Nor'easter ocean storms moving up the east coast of North America. These major snowfalls typically average 20\u201330\u00a0cm (8\u201312\u00a0in) and are frequently mixed with rain or freezing rain. Spring is often delayed because the sea ice that forms in the nearby Gulf of St. Lawrence during the winter requires time to melt, and this cools onshore winds, which can extend inland as far as Moncton. The ice burden in the gulf has diminished considerably over the last decade, and the springtime cooling effect has weakened as a result. Daytime temperatures above freezing are typical by late February. Trees are usually in full leaf by May. Summers are warm, sometimes hot, and can be somewhat humid due to the seasonal prevailing westerly winds strengthening the climate's continental tendencies. Daytime highs sometimes reach more than 30\u00a0\u00b0C (86\u00a0\u00b0F). Rainfall is generally modest, especially in late July and August, and short periods of drought occur on occasion. Autumn daytime temperatures remain mild until late October. First snowfalls usually do not occur until late November and consistent snow cover on the ground does not happen until late December. New Brunswick's Fundy coast occasionally experiences the effects of post-tropical storms. The stormiest weather of the year, with the greatest precipitation and the strongest winds, usually occurs during the fall/winter transition (November to mid-January).\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in Moncton was on August 18 and 19, 1935. The coldest ever recorded was on February 5, 1948.\nCityscape.\nMoncton generally remains a \"low rise\" city, but its skyline encompasses buildings and structures with varying architectural styles from many periods. The city's most dominant structure is the Bell Aliant Tower, a microwave communications tower built in 1971. When it was constructed, it was the tallest microwave communications tower of its kind in North America. It remains the tallest structure in Moncton, dwarfing the neighbouring Place L'Assomption by . Indeed, the Bell Aliant Tower is also the tallest free-standing structure in all four Atlantic provinces. Assumption Place is a 20-story office building and the headquarters of Assumption Mutual Life Insurance. This building is tall and tied with Brunswick Square (Saint John) as the tallest building in the province. The Blue Cross Centre is a nine-story building in Downtown Moncton. It is architecturally distinctive, encompasses a full city block, and is the city's largest office building by square footage. It is the home of Medavie Blue Cross and the Moncton Public Library. There are about a half dozen other buildings in Moncton between eight and 12 stories, including the Delta Beausejour and Brunswick Crowne Plaza Hotels and the Terminal Plaza office complex.\nUrban parks.\nThe most popular park in the area is Centennial Park which has lighted cross country skiing and hiking trails, the city's largest playground, lawn bowling and tennis facilities, a boating pond, a treetop adventure course, and Rocky Stone Field, a city owned 2,500 seat football stadium with artificial turf, and home to the Moncton Minor Football Association. The city's other main parks are Mapleton Park in the city's north end, Irishtown Nature Park (one of the largest urban nature parks in Canada) and St. Anselme Park (located in Dieppe). The numerous neighbourhood parks throughout the metro Moncton area include Bore View Park (which overlooks the Petitcodiac River), and the downtown Victoria Park, which features a bandshell, flower gardens, fountain, and the city's cenotaph. There is an extensive system of hiking and biking trails in Metro Moncton. The Riverfront Trail is part of the Trans Canada Trail system, and various monuments and pavilions can be found along its length.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the City of Moncton had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nMoncton's urban area (\"population centre\") had a population of living in an area of . Residents lived in 51,830 dwellings out of the 54,519 total private dwellings.\nGreater Moncton, the Census Metropolitan Area (CMA), had a population of living in of its total private dwellings; a change of from its 2016 population of . The CMA includes the neighbouring city of Dieppe and the town of Riverview, as well as adjacent suburban areas in Westmorland and Albert counties. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nMoncton's urban area is the third largest in Atlantic Canada, after Halifax, Nova Scotia, and St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, and the second largest in The Maritimes.\nIn 2016, the median age in Moncton was 41.4, close to the national median age of 41.2.\nThe 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 8,460 persons or 10.9% of the total population of Moncton. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were Philippines (795 persons or 9.4%), India (655 persons or 7.7%), United States of America (555 persons or 6.6%), China (475 persons or 5.6%), Nigeria (470 persons or 5.6%), United Kingdom (395 persons or 4.7%), Syria (385 persons or 4.6%), South Korea (380 persons or 4.5%), France (290 persons or 3.4%), and Democratic Republic of the Congo (270 persons or 3.2%).\nEthnicity.\nAs of 2021, approximately 82.4% of Moncton's residents were of European ancestry, while 14.9% were visible minorities and 2.7% were Indigenous. The largest ethnic minority groups in Moncton were Black (5.3%), South Asian (3.0%), Arab (1.5%), Filipino (1.3%), Chinese (0.9%), Southeast Asian (0.8%), Korean (0.7%), and Latin American (0.7%).\nLanguage.\nMoncton is a bilingual city, 58.5% of its residents having English as their mother tongue, while 27.3% have French, 2.9% learned both English and French as a first language, and 10.8% speak another language as their mother tongue. About 46% of the city population is bilingual and understands both English and French; the only other Canadian cities that approach this level of linguistic duality are Ottawa, Sudbury, and Montreal. Moncton became the first officially bilingual city in the country in 2002. This means that all municipal services, as well as public notices and information, are available in both French and English. The adjacent city of Dieppe is about 64% Francophone and has benefited from an ongoing rural depopulation of the Acadian Peninsula and areas in northern and eastern New Brunswick. The town of Riverview meanwhile is heavily (95%) Anglophone.\nA total of 67% of its residents are fluent in English and 47% are fluent in French.\nCommon non-official languages spoken as mother tongues are Arabic (1.4%), Punjabi (0.7%), Chinese (0.7%), Tagalog (0.6%), Korean (0.6%), Spanish (0.6%), Vietnamese (0.5%), and Portuguese (0.5%). 1.2% of residents listed both English and a non-official language as mother tongues, while 0.4% listed both French and a non-official language.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2021 census, religious groups in Moncton included:\nEconomy.\nThe underpinnings of the local economy are based on Moncton's heritage as a commercial, distribution, transportation, and retailing centre. This is due to Moncton's central location in the Maritimes: it has the largest catchment area in Atlantic Canada with 1.6\u00a0million people living within a three-hour drive of the city. The insurance, information technology, educational, and health care sectors also are major factors in the local economy with the city's two hospitals alone employing over five thousand people, along with a growing high tech sector that includes companies such as Nanoptix, International Game Technology, OAO Technology Solutions, BMM Test Labs, TrustMe, and BelTek Systems Design.\nMoncton has garnered national attention because of the strength of its economy. The local unemployment rate averages around 6%, which is below the national average. In 2004 \"Canadian Business\" magazine named it \"The best city for business in Canada\", and in 2007 FDi magazine named it the fifth most business-friendly small-sized city in North America.\nMoncton's high proportion of bilingual workers and its status as border-city between majority francophone and majority anglophone areas makes it an attractive centre for both federal employment and the stationing of call-centres for Canadian companies (who provide services in both languages). The city is home to the regional head offices for several Canadian federal agencies such as Correctional Service Canada, Transport Canada, the Gulf Fisheries Centre and the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency. There are 37 call centres in the city which employ over 5,000 people. Some of the larger centres include Asurion, Numeris, ExxonMobil, Royal Bank of Canada, Tangerine Bank, UPS, Fairmont Hotels &amp; Resorts, Rogers Communications and Nordia Inc.\nA number of nationally or regionally prominent corporations have their head offices in Moncton including Atlantic Lottery Corporation, Assumption Life Insurance, Medavie Blue Cross Insurance, Armour Transportation Systems and Major Drilling Group International. TD Bank announced in 2018 a new banking services centre to be located in Moncton which will employ over 1,000 people (including a previously announced customer contact centre). Meanwhile, several arms of the Irving corporation have their head offices and/or major operations in greater Moncton. These include Midland Transport, Majesta/Royale Tissues, Irving Personal Care, Master Packaging, Brunswick News, and Cavendish Farms. Kent Building Supplies (an Irving subsidiary) opened their main distribution centre in the Caledonia Industrial Park in 2014. The Irving group of companies employs several thousand people in the Moncton region.\nThere are three large industrial parks in the metropolitan area. The Irving operations are concentrated in the Dieppe Industrial Park. The Moncton Industrial Park in the city's west end has been expanded. Molson Coors opened a brewery in the Caledonia Industrial Park in 2007, its first new brewery in over fifty years. All three industrial parks also have large concentrations of warehousing and regional trucking facilities.\nA new four-lane Gunningsville Bridge was opened in 2005, connecting downtown Riverview directly with downtown Moncton. On the Moncton side, the bridge connects with an extension of Vaughan Harvey Boulevard as well as to Assumption Boulevard and will serve as a catalyst for economic growth in the downtown area. This has become already evident as an expansion to the Blue Cross Centre was completed in 2006 and a Marriott Residence Inn opened in 2008. The new regional law courts on Assumption Blvd opened in 2011. A new 8,800 seat downtown arena (the Avenir Centre) recently opened in September 2018. On the Riverview side, the Gunningsville Bridge now connects to a new ring road around the town and is expected to serve as a catalyst for development in east Riverview.\nThe retail sector in Moncton has become one of the most important pillars of the local economy. Major retail projects such as Champlain Place in Dieppe and the Wheeler Park Power Centre on Trinity Drive have become major destinations for locals and for tourists alike.\nTourism is an important industry in Moncton and historically owes its origins to the presence of two natural attractions, the tidal bore of the Petitcodiac River (see above) and the optical illusion of Magnetic Hill. The tidal bore was the first phenomenon to become an attraction but the construction of the Petitcodiac causeway in the 1960s effectively extirpated the attraction. Magnetic Hill, on the city's northwest outskirts, is the city's most famous attraction. The Magnetic Hill area includes (in addition to the phenomenon itself), a golf course, major water park, zoo, and an outdoor concert facility. A $90\u00a0million casino/hotel/entertainment complex opened at Magnetic Hill in 2010.\nCulture.\nMoncton's Capitol Theatre, an 800-seat restored 1920s-era vaudeville house on Main Street, is the main centre for cultural entertainment for the city. The theatre hosts a performing arts series and provides a venue for various theatrical performances as well as Symphony New Brunswick and the Atlantic Ballet Theatre of Canada. The adjacent Empress Theatre offers space for smaller performances and recitals. The Molson Canadian Centre at Casino New Brunswick provides a 2,000-seat venue for major touring artists and performing groups.\nThe Moncton-based Atlantic Ballet Theatre tours mainly in Atlantic Canada but also tours nationally and internationally on occasion. Th\u00e9\u00e2tre l'Escaouette is a Francophone live theatre company which has its own auditorium and performance space on Botsford Street. The Anglophone Live Bait Theatre is based in the nearby university town of Sackville. There are several private dance and music academies in the metropolitan area, including the Capitol Theatre's own performing arts school.\nThe Aberdeen Cultural Centre is a major Acadian cultural cooperative containing multiple studios and galleries. Among other tenants, the centre houses the Galerie Sans Nom, the principal private art gallery in the city.\nThe city's two main museums are the Moncton Museum at Resurgo Place on Mountain Road and the Mus\u00e9e acadien at Universit\u00e9 de Moncton. The Moncton Museum reopened following major renovations and an expansion to include the Transportation Discovery Centre. The Discovery Centre includes many hands on exhibits highlighting the city's transportation heritage. The city also has several recognized historical sites. The Free Meeting House was built in 1821 and is a New England\u2013style meeting house located adjacent to the Moncton Museum. The Thomas Williams House, a former home of a city industrialist built in 1883, is now maintained in period style and serves as a genealogical research centre and is also home to several multicultural organizations. The Treitz Haus is located on the riverfront adjacent to Bore View Park and has been dated to 1769 both by architectural style and by dendrochronology. It is the only surviving building from the Pennsylvania Dutch era and is the oldest surviving building in the province of New Brunswick.\nIn film production, the city has since 1974 been home to the National Film Board of Canada's French-language Studio Acadie.\nMoncton is home to the Frye Festival, an annual bilingual literary celebration held in honour of world-renowned literary critic and favourite son Northrop Frye. This event attracts noted writers and poets from around the world and takes place in the month of April.\nThe Atlantic Nationals Automotive Extravaganza, held each July, is the largest annual gathering of classic cars in Canada. Other notable events include The Atlantic Seafood Festival in August, The HubCap Comedy Festival, and the World Wine Festival, both held in the spring.\nOur Lady of the Assumption Cathedral is the location of an interpretation centre, Monument for Recognition in the 21st century (MR21).\nSports.\nFacilities.\nThe Avenir Centre is an 8,800-seat arena which serves as a venue for major concerts and sporting events and is the home of the Moncton Wildcats of the Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League and the Moncton Magic of the National Basketball League of Canada. The CN Sportplex is a major recreational facility which has been built on the former CN Shops property. It includes ten ballfields, six soccer fields, an indoor rink complex with four ice surfaces (the Superior Propane Centre) and the Hollis Wealth Sports Dome, an indoor air supported multi-use building. The Sports Dome is large enough to allow for year-round football, soccer and golf activities. A newly constructed YMCA near the CN Sportsplex has extensive cardio and weight training facilities, as well as three indoor pools. The CEPS at Universit\u00e9 de Moncton contains an indoor track and a swimming pool with diving towers. The new Moncton Stadium, also located at the U de M campus was built for the 2010 IAAF World Junior Track &amp; Field Championships. It has a permanent seating for 10,000, but is expandable to a capacity of over 20,000 for events such as professional Canadian football. The only velodrome in Atlantic Canada is in Dieppe. It has since been closed after 17 years of existence due to safety concerns in May 2018. The metro area has a total of 12 indoor hockey rinks and one curling club, Curl Moncton. Other public sporting and recreational facilities are scattered throughout the metropolitan area, including a new $18\u00a0million aquatic centre in Dieppe opened in 2009.\nSports teams.\nThe Moncton Wildcats play major junior hockey in the Quebec Maritimes Junior Hockey League (QMJHL). They won the President's Cup, the QMJHL championship in both 2006 and 2010. Historically there has been a longstanding presence of a Moncton-based team in the Maritime Junior A Hockey League, but the Dieppe Commandos (formerly known as the Moncton Beavers) relocated to Edmundston at the end of the 2017 season. Historically, Moncton also was home to a professional American Hockey League franchise from 1978 to 1994. The New Brunswick Hawks won the AHL Calder Cup by defeating the Binghamton Whalers in 1981\u20131982. The Moncton Mets played baseball in the New Brunswick Senior Baseball League and won the Canadian Senior Baseball Championship in 2006. In 2015, the Moncton Fisher Cats began play in the New Brunswick Senior Baseball League. They were formed by a merger between the Moncton Mets and the Hub City Brewers of the NBSBL. In 2011, the Moncton Miracles began play as one of the seven charter franchises of the professional National Basketball League of Canada. The franchise failed at the end of the 2016/17 season, to be immediately replaced by a new NBL franchise, the Moncton Magic, who played their inaugural season in 2017/18. The Universite de Moncton has a number of active U Sports programs, while Crandall University has a number active Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association programs.\nMajor events.\nMoncton has hosted many large entertainment and sporting events. The 2006 Memorial Cup was held in Moncton with the hometown Moncton Wildcats losing in the championship final to rival Quebec Remparts. Moncton hosted the Canadian Interuniversity Sports (CIS) Men's University Hockey Championship in 2007 and 2008. The World Men's Curling Championship was held in Moncton in 2009; the second time this event has taken place in the city.\nMoncton also hosted the 2010 IAAF World Junior Championships in Athletics. This was the largest sporting event ever held in Atlantic Canada, with athletes from over 170 countries in attendance. The new 10,000-seat capacity Moncton Stadium was built for this event on the Universit\u00e9 de Moncton campus. The construction of this new stadium led directly to Moncton being awarded a regular season neutral site CFL game between the Toronto Argonauts and the Edmonton Eskimos, which was held on September 26, 2010. This was the first neutral site regular season game in the history of the Canadian Football League and was played before a capacity crowd of 20,750. Additional CFL regular season games were held in 2011 and 2013, and again on August 25, 2019.\nMoncton was one of only six Canadian cities chosen to host the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup.\nMajor sporting events hosted by Moncton include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment.\nThe municipal government consists of a mayor and ten city councillors elected to four-year terms of office. The council is non-partisan with the mayor serving as the chairman, casting a ballot only in cases of a tie vote. There are four wards electing two councillors each with an additional two councillors selected at large by the general electorate. Day-to-day operation of the city is under the control of a City Manager.\nMoncton is in the federal riding of Moncton\u2014Riverview\u2014Dieppe. Portions of Dieppe are in the federal riding of Beaus\u00e9jour, and portions of Riverview are in the riding of Fundy Royal. In the current federal parliament, two MPs from the metropolitan area belong to the Liberal Party and one to the Conservative Party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMilitary.\nMoncton had a significant military presence from 1940 until the early 1990s.\nUntil the beginning of the Second World War, Moncton's main military presence was locally formed militia units. In 1940, a large military supply base (later known as CFB Moncton) was constructed on a railway spur line north of downtown next to the CNR shops. This base served as the main supply depot for the large wartime military establishment in the Maritimes. In addition, two British Commonwealth Air Training Plan bases were also built in the Moncton area during the war: No. 8 Service Flying Training School, RCAF, and No. 31 Personnel Depot, RAF. The RCAF also operated No. 5 Supply Depot in Moncton. A naval listening station was also constructed in Coverdale (Riverview) in 1941 to help in coordinating radar activities in the North Atlantic. Military flight training in the Moncton area terminated at the end of World War II and the naval listening station closed in 1971. CFB Moncton remained open to supply the maritime military establishment until just after the end of the Cold War.\nWith the closure of CFB Moncton in the early 1990s, the military presence in Moncton has been significantly reduced. The northern portion of the former base property has been turned over to the Canada Lands Corporation and is slowly being redeveloped. The southern part of the former base remains an active DND property and is now termed the Moncton Garrison. It is affiliated with CFB Gagetown. Resident components of the garrison include the 1 Engineer Support Unit (Regular force). The garrison also houses the 37 Canadian Brigade Group Headquarters (reserve force) and one of the 37 Brigades constituent units; the 8th Canadian Hussars (Princess Louise's), which is an armoured reconnaissance regiment. 3 Area support unit Det Moncton, and 42 Canadian Forces Health Services Centre Det Moncton provide logistical support for the base. In 2013, the last regular forces units left the Moncton base, but the reserve units remain active and Moncton remains the 37 Canadian Brigade Unit headquarters.\nHealth facilities.\nThere are two major regional referral and teaching hospitals in Moncton. The Moncton Hospital has approximately 381 inpatient beds and is affiliated with Dalhousie University Medical School. It is home to the Northumberland family medicine residency training program and is a site for third and fourth year clinical training for medical students in the Dalhousie Medicine New Brunswick Training Program. The hospital hosts UNB degree programs in nursing and medical x-ray technology and professional internships in fields such as dietetics. Specialized medical services at the hospital include neurosurgery, peripheral and neuro-interventional radiology, vascular surgery, thoracic surgery, hepatobiliary surgery, orthopedics, trauma, burn unit, medical oncology, neonatal intensive care, and adolescent psychiatry. A$48\u00a0million expansion to the hospital was completed in 2009 and contains a new laboratory, ambulatory care centre, and provincial level one trauma centre. A new oncology clinic was built at the hospital and opened in late 2014. The Moncton Hospital is managed by Horizon Health Network (formerly the South East Regional Health Authority).\nThe Dr. Georges-L.-Dumont University Hospital Centre has about 302 beds and hosts a medical training program through the local CFMNB and distant Medical School. There are also degree programs in nursing, medical x-ray technology, medical laboratory technology and inhalotherapy which are administered by Universit\u00e9 de Moncton. Specialized medical services include medical oncology, radiation oncology, orthopedics, vascular surgery, and nephrology. \nA cardiac cath lab is being studied for the hospital and a new PET/CT scanner has been installed. A$75\u00a0million expansion for ambulatory care, expanded surgery suites, and medical training is currently under construction. The hospital is also the location of the Atlantic Cancer Research Institute. This hospital is managed by francophone Vitalit\u00e9 Health Network.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nMoncton is served by the Greater Moncton Rom\u00e9o LeBlanc International Airport (YQM). It was renamed for former Canadian Governor General (and native son) Rom\u00e9o LeBlanc in 2016. A new airport terminal with an international arrivals area was opened in 2002 by Queen Elizabeth II. The GMIA handles about 677,000 passengers per year, making it the second busiest airport in the Maritimes in terms of passenger volume. The GMIA is the 10th busiest airport in Canada in terms of freight. FedEx, UPS, and Purolator all have their Atlantic Canadian air cargo bases at the facility. The GMIA is the home of the Moncton Flight College; the largest pilot training institution in Canada, and is also the base for the regional RCMP air service, the New Brunswick Air Ambulance Service and the regional Transport Canada hangar and depot.\nThere is a private aerodrome in the north of the city, McEwen Airfield (CCG4), used for general aviation.\nThe Moncton Area Control Centre is one of only seven regional air traffic control centres in Canada. This centre monitors over 430,000 flights a year, 80% of which are either entering or leaving North American airspace.\nHighways.\nMoncton lies on Route 2 of the Trans-Canada Highway, which leads to Nova Scotia in the east and to Fredericton and Quebec in the west. Route 15 intersects Route 2 at the eastern outskirts of Moncton, heads northeast leading to Shediac and northern New Brunswick, Route 16 connects to route 15 at Shediac and leads to Strait Shores and Prince Edward Island. Route 1 intersects Route 2 approximately west of the city and leads to Saint John and the U.S. border. Wheeler Boulevard (Route 15) serves as an internal ring road, extending from the Petitcodiac River Causeway to Dieppe before exiting the city and heading for Shediac. Inside the city it is an expressway bounded at either end by traffic circles.\nPublic transit.\nGreater Moncton is served by Codiac Transpo, which is operated by the City of Moncton. It operates 40 buses on 19 routes throughout Moncton, Dieppe, and Riverview.\nMaritime Bus provides intercity service to the region. Moncton is the largest hub in the system. All other major centres in New Brunswick, as well as Charlottetown, Halifax, and Truro are served out of the Moncton terminal.\nRailways.\nFreight rail transportation in Moncton is provided by Canadian National Railway. Although the presence of the CNR in Moncton has diminished greatly since the 1970s, the railway still maintains a large classification yard and intermodal facility in the west end of the city, and the regional headquarters for Atlantic Canada is still located here as well. Passenger rail transportation is provided by Via Rail Canada, with their train the \"Ocean\" serving the Moncton railway station three days per week to Halifax and to Montreal, Quebec. The downtown Via station has been refurbished and also serves as the terminal for the Maritime Bus intercity bus service.\nEducation.\nThe South School Board administers 10 Francophone schools, including high schools \u00c9cole Mathieu-Martin and \u00c9cole L'Odyss\u00e9e. The East School Board administers 25 Anglophone schools including Moncton, Harrison Trimble, Bernice MacNaughton, and Riverview high schools.\nPost secondary education in Moncton:\nMedia.\nMoncton's daily newspaper is the \"Times &amp; Transcript\", which has the highest circulation of any daily newspaper in New Brunswick. More than 60 percent of city households subscribe daily, and more than 90 percent of Moncton residents read the Times &amp; Transcript at least once a week. The city's other publications include \"L'Acadie Nouvelle\", a French newspaper published in Caraquet in northern New Brunswick.\nThere are 17 broadcast radio stations in the city covering a variety of genres and interests, all on the FM dial or online streaming. Eleven of these stations are English and six are French.\nRogers Cable has its provincial headquarters and main production facilities in Moncton and broadcasts on two community channels, Cable 9 in French and Cable 10 in English. The French-language arm of the CBC, Radio-Canada, maintains its Atlantic Canadian headquarters in Moncton. There are three other broadcast television stations in Moncton and these represent all of the major national networks.\nNotable people.\nMoncton has been the home of a number of notable people, including National Hockey League Hall of Famer and NHL scoring champion Gordie Drillon, World and Olympic champion curler Russ Howard, distinguished literary critic and theorist Northrop Frye, former Governor General of Canada Rom\u00e9o LeBlanc, and former Supreme Court Justice Ivan Cleveland Rand, developer of the Rand Formula and Canada's representative on the UNSCOP commission. Trudy Mackay FRS, renowned quantitative geneticist, member of the Royal Society and National Academy of Sciences, and recipient of the prestigious Wolf Prize for agriculture (2016), was born in Moncton. Robb Wells, the actor who plays Ricky on the Showcase hit comedy \"Trailer Park Boys\" hails from Moncton, along with Julie Doiron, an indie rock musician, and Holly Dignard the actress who plays Nicole Miller on the CTV series \"Whistler\". Harry Currie, noted Canadian conductor, musician, educator, journalist and author was born in Moncton and graduated from MHS. Antonine Maillet, a francophone author, recipient of the Order of Canada and the \"Prix Goncourt\", the highest honour in francophone literature, is also from Moncton. France Daigle, another acclaimed Acadian novelist and playwright, was born and resides in Moncton, and is noted for her pioneering use of chiac in Acadian literature, was the recipient of the 2012 Governor General's Literary Prize in French Fiction, for her novel \"Pour S\u00fbr\" (translated into English as \"For Sure\"). Canadian hockey star Sidney Crosby graduated from Harrison Trimble High School in Moncton.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19858", "revid": "262699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19858", "title": "Model theory", "text": "Area of mathematical logic\nIn mathematical logic, model theory is the study of the relationship between formal theories (a collection of sentences in a formal language expressing statements about a mathematical structure), and their models (those structures in which the statements of the theory hold). The aspects investigated include the number and size of models of a theory, the relationship of different models to each other, and their interaction with the formal language itself. In particular, model theorists also investigate the sets that can be defined in a model of a theory, and the relationship of such definable sets to each other.\nAs a separate discipline, model theory goes back to Alfred Tarski, who first used the term \"Theory of Models\" in publication in 1954.\nSince the 1970s, the subject has been shaped decisively by Saharon Shelah's stability theory.\nCompared to other areas of mathematical logic such as proof theory, model theory is often less concerned with formal rigour and closer in spirit to classical mathematics.\nThis has prompted the comment that \"if proof theory is about the sacred, then model theory is about the profane\".\nThe applications of model theory to algebraic and Diophantine geometry reflect this proximity to classical mathematics, as they often involve an integration of algebraic and model-theoretic results and techniques. Consequently, proof theory is syntactic in nature, in contrast to model theory, which is semantic in nature.\nThe most prominent scholarly organization in the field of model theory is the Association for Symbolic Logic.\nOverview.\nThis page focuses on finitary first order model theory of infinite structures.\nThe relative emphasis placed on the class of models of a theory as opposed to the class of definable sets within a model fluctuated in the history of the subject, and the two directions are summarised by the pithy characterisations from 1973 and 1997 respectively:\nmodel theory = universal algebra + logic\nwhere universal algebra stands for mathematical structures and logic for logical theories; and\nmodel theory = algebraic geometry \u2212 fields.\nwhere logical formulas are to definable sets what equations are to varieties over a field.\nNonetheless, the interplay of classes of models and the sets definable in them has been crucial to the development of model theory throughout its history. For instance, while stability was originally introduced to classify theories by their numbers of models in a given cardinality, stability theory proved crucial to understanding the geometry of definable sets.\nFundamental notions of first-order model theory.\nFirst-order logic.\nA first-order \"formula\" is built out of atomic formulas such as formula_1 or formula_2 by means of the Boolean connectives formula_3 and prefixing of quantifiers formula_4 or formula_5. A sentence is a formula in which each occurrence of a variable is in the scope of a corresponding quantifier. Examples for formulas are formula_6 (or formula_7 to indicate formula_8 is the unbound variable in formula_6) and formula_10 (or formula_11), defined as follows:\nformula_12\n(Note that the equality symbol has a double meaning here.) It is intuitively clear how to translate such formulas into mathematical meaning. In the semiring of natural numbers formula_13, viewed as a structure with binary functions for addition and multiplication and constants for 0 and 1 of the natural numbers, for example, an element formula_14 \"satisfies\" the formula formula_6 if and only if formula_14 is a prime number. The formula formula_10 similarly defines irreducibility. Tarski gave a rigorous definition, sometimes called \"Tarski's definition of truth\", for the satisfaction relation formula_18, so that one easily proves:\nformula_19 is a prime number.\nformula_20 is irreducible.\nA set formula_21 of sentences is called a (first-order) theory, which takes the sentences in the set as its axioms. A theory is \"satisfiable\" if it has a \"model\" formula_22, i.e. a structure (of the appropriate signature) which satisfies all the sentences in the set formula_21. A complete theory is a theory that contains every sentence or its negation.\nThe complete theory of all sentences satisfied by a structure is also called the \"theory of that structure\".\nIt's a consequence of G\u00f6del's completeness theorem (not to be confused with his incompleteness theorems) that a theory has a model if and only if it is consistent, i.e. no contradiction is proved by the theory.\nTherefore, model theorists often use \"consistent\" as a synonym for \"satisfiable\".\nBasic model-theoretic concepts.\nA signature or language is a set of non-logical symbols such that each symbol is either a constant symbol, or a function or relation symbol with a specified arity. Note that in some literature, constant symbols are considered as function symbols with zero arity, and hence are omitted. A structure is a set formula_24 together with interpretations of each of the symbols of the signature as relations and functions on formula_25 (not to be confused with the formal notion of an \"interpretation\" of one structure in another).\nExample: A common signature for ordered rings is formula_26, where formula_27 and formula_28 are 0-ary function symbols (also known as constant symbols), formula_29 and formula_30 are binary (= 2-ary) function symbols, formula_31 is a unary (= 1-ary) function symbol, and formula_32 is a binary relation symbol. Then, when these symbols are interpreted to correspond with their usual meaning on formula_33 (so that e.g. formula_34 is a function from formula_35 to formula_33 and formula_32 is a subset of formula_35), one obtains a structure formula_39.\nA structure formula_40 is said to model a set of first-order sentences formula_41 in the given language if each sentence in formula_21 is true in formula_43 with respect to the interpretation of the signature previously specified for formula_40. (Again, not to be confused with the formal notion of an \"interpretation\" of one structure in another) A \"model\" of formula_41 is a structure that models formula_41.\nA substructure formula_47 of a \u03c3-structure formula_48 is a subset of its domain, closed under all functions in its signature \u03c3, which is regarded as a \u03c3-structure by restricting all functions and relations in \u03c3 to the subset.\nThis generalises the analogous concepts from algebra; for instance, a subgroup is a substructure in the signature with multiplication and inverse.\nA substructure is said to be \"elementary\" if for any first-order formula formula_6 and any elements \"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"n\" of formula_47,\nformula_51 if and only if formula_52.\nIn particular, if formula_6 is a sentence and formula_47 an elementary substructure of formula_48, then formula_56 if and only if formula_57. Thus, an elementary substructure is a model of a theory exactly when the superstructure is a model.\nExample: While the field of algebraic numbers formula_58 is an elementary substructure of the field of complex numbers formula_59, the rational field formula_60 is not, as we can express \"There is a square root of 2\" as a first-order sentence satisfied by formula_59 but not by formula_60.\nAn embedding of a \u03c3-structure formula_47 into another \u03c3-structure formula_48 is a map \"f\": \"A\" \u2192 \"B\" between the domains which can be written as an isomorphism of formula_47 with a substructure of formula_48. If it can be written as an isomorphism with an elementary substructure, it is called an elementary embedding. Every embedding is an injective homomorphism, but the converse holds only if the signature contains no relation symbols, such as in groups or fields.\nA field or a vector space can be regarded as a (commutative) group by simply ignoring some of its structure. The corresponding notion in model theory is that of a \"reduct\" of a structure to a subset of the original signature. The opposite relation is called an \"expansion\" - e.g. the (additive) group of the rational numbers, regarded as a structure in the signature {+,0} can be expanded to a field with the signature {\u00d7,+,1,0} or to an ordered group with the signature {+,0,&lt;}.\nSimilarly, if \u03c3' is a signature that extends another signature \u03c3, then a complete \u03c3'-theory can be restricted to \u03c3 by intersecting the set of its sentences with the set of \u03c3-formulas. Conversely, a complete \u03c3-theory can be regarded as a \u03c3'-theory, and one can extend it (in more than one way) to a complete \u03c3'-theory. The terms reduct and expansion are sometimes applied to this relation as well.\nCompactness and the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem.\nThe compactness theorem states that a set of sentences S is satisfiable if every finite subset of S is satisfiable. The analogous statement with \"consistent\" instead of \"satisfiable\" is trivial, since every proof can have only a finite number of antecedents used in the proof. The completeness theorem allows us to transfer this to satisfiability. However, there are also several direct (semantic) proofs of the compactness theorem.\nAs a corollary (i.e., its contrapositive), the compactness theorem says that every unsatisfiable first-order theory has a finite unsatisfiable subset. This theorem is of central importance in model theory, where the words \"by compactness\" are commonplace.\nAnother cornerstone of first-order model theory is the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem. According to the theorem, every infinite structure in a countable signature has a countable elementary substructure. Conversely, for any infinite cardinal \u03ba every infinite structure in a countable signature that is of cardinality less than \u03ba can be elementarily embedded in another structure of cardinality \u03ba (There is a straightforward generalisation to uncountable signatures). In particular, the L\u00f6wenheim-Skolem theorem implies that any theory in a countable signature with infinite models has a countable model as well as arbitrarily large models.\nIn a certain sense made precise by Lindstr\u00f6m's theorem, first-order logic is the most expressive logic for which both the L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem and the compactness theorem hold.\nDefinability.\nDefinable sets.\nIn model theory, definable sets are important objects of study. For instance, in formula_67 the formula\nformula_68\ndefines the subset of prime numbers, while the formula\nformula_69\ndefines the subset of even numbers.\nIn a similar way, formulas with \"n\" free variables define subsets of formula_70. For example, in a field, the formula\nformula_71\ndefines the curve of all formula_72 such that formula_73.\nBoth of the definitions mentioned here are \"parameter-free\", that is, the defining formulas don't mention any fixed domain elements. However, one can also consider definitions \"with parameters from the model\".\nFor instance, in formula_74, the formula\nformula_75\nuses the parameter formula_76 from formula_74 to define a curve.\nEliminating quantifiers.\nIn general, definable sets without quantifiers are easy to describe, while definable sets involving possibly nested quantifiers can be much more complicated.\nThis makes quantifier elimination a crucial tool for analysing definable sets: \nA theory \"T\" has quantifier elimination if every first-order formula \"\u03c6\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\") over its signature is equivalent modulo \"T\" to a first-order formula \"\u03c8\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\") without quantifiers, i.e. formula_78 holds in all models of \"T\".\nIf the theory of a structure has quantifier elimination, every set definable in a structure is definable by a quantifier-free formula over the same parameters as the original definition.\nFor example, the theory of algebraically closed fields in the signature \"\u03c3\"ring = (\u00d7,+,\u2212,0,1) has quantifier elimination. This means that in an algebraically closed field, every formula is equivalent to a Boolean combination of equations between polynomials.\nIf a theory does not have quantifier elimination, one can add additional symbols to its signature so that it does. Axiomatisability and quantifier elimination results for specific theories, especially in algebra, were among the early landmark results of model theory. But often instead of quantifier elimination a weaker property suffices:\nA theory \"T\" is called model-complete if every substructure of a model of \"T\" which is itself a model of \"T\" is an elementary substructure. There is a useful criterion for testing whether a substructure is an elementary substructure, called the Tarski\u2013Vaught test. It follows from this criterion that a theory \"T\" is model-complete if and only if every first-order formula \"\u03c6\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"\"n\") over its signature is equivalent modulo \"T\" to an existential first-order formula, i.e. a formula of the following form:\nformula_79,\nwhere \u03c8 is quantifier free. A theory that is not model-complete may have a model completion, which is a related model-complete theory that is not, in general, an extension of the original theory. A more general notion is that of a model companion.\nMinimality.\nIn every structure, every finite subset formula_80 is definable with parameters: Simply use the formula\nformula_81.\nSince we can negate this formula, every cofinite subset (which includes all but finitely many elements of the domain) is also always definable.\nThis leads to the concept of a \"minimal structure\". \nA structure formula_82 is called minimal if every subset formula_83 definable with parameters from formula_82 is either finite or cofinite.\nThe corresponding concept at the level of theories is called \"strong minimality\":\nA theory \"T\" is called strongly minimal if every model of \"T\" is minimal.\nA structure is called \"strongly minimal\" if the theory of that structure is strongly minimal. Equivalently, a structure is strongly minimal if every elementary extension is minimal.\nSince the theory of algebraically closed fields has quantifier elimination, every definable subset of an algebraically closed field is definable by a quantifier-free formula in one variable. Quantifier-free formulas in one variable express Boolean combinations of polynomial equations in one variable, and since a nontrivial polynomial equation in one variable has only a finite number of solutions, the theory of algebraically closed fields is strongly minimal.\nOn the other hand, the field formula_74 of real numbers is not minimal: Consider, for instance, the definable set\nformula_86.\nThis defines the subset of non-negative real numbers, which is neither finite nor cofinite.\nOne can in fact use formula_6 to define arbitrary intervals on the real number line.\nIt turns out that these suffice to represent every definable subset of formula_74.\nThis generalisation of minimality has been very useful in the model theory of ordered structures.\nA densely totally ordered structure formula_82 in a signature including a symbol for the order relation is called o-minimal if every subset formula_83 definable with parameters from formula_82 is a finite union of points and intervals.\nDefinable and interpretable structures.\nParticularly important are those definable sets that are also substructures, i. e. contain all constants and are closed under function application. For instance, one can study the definable subgroups of a certain group.\nHowever, there is no need to limit oneself to substructures in the same signature. Since formulas with \"n\" free variables define subsets of formula_70, \"n\"-ary relations can also be definable. Functions are definable if the function graph is a definable relation, and constants formula_93 are definable if there is a formula formula_7 such that \"a\" is the only element of formula_82 such that formula_96 is true.\nIn this way, one can study definable groups and fields in general structures, for instance, which has been important in geometric stability theory.\nOne can even go one step further, and move beyond immediate substructures.\nGiven a mathematical structure, there are very often associated structures which can be constructed as a quotient of part of the original structure via an equivalence relation. An important example is a quotient group of a group. \nOne might say that to understand the full structure one must understand these quotients. When the equivalence relation is definable, we can give the previous sentence a precise meaning. We say that these structures are \"interpretable\".\nA key fact is that one can translate sentences from the language of the interpreted structures to the language of the original structure. Thus one can show that if a structure formula_82 interprets another whose theory is undecidable, then formula_82 itself is undecidable.\nTypes.\nBasic notions.\nFor a sequence of elements formula_99 of a structure formula_82 and a subset \"A\" of formula_82, one can consider the set of all first-order formulas formula_102 with parameters in \"A\" that are satisfied by formula_99. This is called the \"complete (n-)type realised by\" formula_99 \"over A\".\nIf there is an automorphism of formula_82 that is constant on \"A\" and sends formula_99 to formula_107 respectively, then formula_99 and formula_107 realise the same complete type over \"A\".\nThe real number line formula_74, viewed as a structure with only the order relation {&lt;}, will serve as a running example in this section.\nEvery element formula_111 satisfies the same 1-type over the empty set. This is clear since any two real numbers \"a\" and \"b\" are connected by the order automorphism that shifts all numbers by \"b-a\". The complete 2-type over the empty set realised by a pair of numbers formula_112 depends on their order: either formula_113, formula_114 or formula_115.\nOver the subset formula_116 of integers, the 1-type of a non-integer real number \"a\" depends on its value rounded down to the nearest integer.\nMore generally, whenever formula_82 is a structure and \"A\" a subset of formula_82, a (partial) \"n-type over A\" is a set of formulas \"p\" with at most \"n\" free variables that are realised in an elementary extension formula_119 of formula_82. \nIf \"p\" contains every such formula or its negation, then \"p\" is \"complete\". The set of complete \"n\"-types over \"A\" is often written as formula_121. If \"A\" is the empty set, then the type space only depends on the theory formula_21 of formula_82. The notation formula_124 is commonly used for the set of types over the empty set consistent with formula_21. \nIf there is a single formula formula_126 such that the theory of formula_82 implies formula_128 for every formula formula_10 in \"p\", then \"p\" is called \"isolated\".\nSince the real numbers formula_74 are Archimedean, there is no real number larger than every integer. However, a compactness argument shows that there is an elementary extension of the real number line in which there is an element larger than any integer.\nTherefore, the set of formulas formula_131 is a 1-type over formula_116 that is not realised in the real number line formula_74.\nA subset of formula_70 that can be expressed as exactly those elements of formula_70 realising a certain type over \"A\" is called \"type-definable\" over \"A\".\nFor an algebraic example, suppose formula_136 is an algebraically closed field. The theory has quantifier elimination . This allows us to show that a type is determined exactly by the polynomial equations it contains. Thus the set of complete formula_14-types over a subfield formula_138 corresponds to the set of prime ideals of the polynomial ring formula_139, and the type-definable sets are exactly the affine varieties.\nStructures and types.\nWhile not every type is realised in every structure, every structure realises its isolated types.\nIf the only types over the empty set that are realised in a structure are the isolated types, then the structure is called \"atomic\".\nOn the other hand, no structure realises every type over every parameter set; if one takes all of formula_82 as the parameter set, then every 1-type over formula_82 realised in formula_82 is isolated by a formula of the form \"a = x\" for an formula_143. However, any proper elementary extension of formula_82 contains an element that is \"not\" in formula_82. Therefore, a weaker notion has been introduced that captures the idea of a structure realising all types it could be expected to realise.\nA structure is called \"saturated\" if it realises every type over a parameter set formula_146 that is of smaller cardinality than formula_82 itself.\nWhile an automorphism that is constant on \"A\" will always preserve types over \"A\", it is generally not true that any two sequences formula_99 and formula_107 that satisfy the same type over \"A\" can be mapped to each other by such an automorphism. A structure formula_82 in which this converse does hold for all \"A\" of smaller cardinality than formula_82 is called (strongly) homogeneous.\nThe real number line is atomic in the language that contains only the order formula_152, since all \"n\"-types over the empty set realised by formula_99 in formula_74 are isolated by the order relations between the formula_99. It is not saturated, however, since it does not realise any 1-type over the countable set formula_156 that implies \"x\" to be larger than any integer.\nThe rational number line formula_60 is saturated, in contrast, since formula_60 is itself countable and therefore only has to realise types over finite subsets to be saturated.\nStone spaces.\nThe set of definable subsets of formula_70 over some parameters formula_138 is a Boolean algebra. By Stone's representation theorem for Boolean algebras there is a natural dual topological space, which consists exactly of the complete formula_14-types over formula_138. The topology generated by sets of the form formula_163 for single formulas formula_6. This is called the \"Stone space of n-types over A\".\nThis topology explains some of the terminology used in model theory: The compactness theorem says that the Stone space is a compact topological space, and a type \"p\" is isolated if and only if \"p\" is an isolated point in the Stone topology.\nWhile types in algebraically closed fields correspond to the spectrum of the polynomial ring, the topology on the type space is the constructible topology: a set of types is basic open iff it is of the form formula_165 or of the form formula_166. This is finer than the Zariski topology.\nConstructing models.\nRealising and omitting types.\nConstructing models that realise certain types and do not realise others is an important task in model theory.\nNot realising a type is referred to as \"omitting\" it, and is generally possible by the \"(Countable) Omitting types theorem\":\nLet formula_167 be a theory in a countable signature and let formula_168 be a countable set of non-isolated types over the empty set.\nThen there is a model formula_82 of formula_167 which omits every type in formula_168.\nThis implies that if a theory in a countable signature has only countably many types over the empty set, then this theory has an atomic model.\nOn the other hand, there is always an elementary extension in which any set of types over a fixed parameter set is realised:\nLet formula_82 be a structure and let formula_168 be a set of complete types over a given parameter set formula_174\nThen there is an elementary extension formula_119 of formula_82 which realises every type in formula_168.\nHowever, since the parameter set is fixed and there is no mention here of the cardinality of formula_119, this does not imply that every theory has a saturated model.\nIn fact, whether every theory has a saturated model is independent of the axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory, and is true if the generalised continuum hypothesis holds.\nUltraproducts.\nUltraproducts are used as a general technique for constructing models that realise certain types.\nAn \"ultraproduct\" is obtained from the direct product of a set of structures over an index set I by identifying those tuples that agree on almost all entries, where \"almost all\" is made precise by an ultrafilter U on I. An ultraproduct of copies of the same structure is known as an \"ultrapower\".\nThe key to using ultraproducts in model theory is \"\u0141o\u015b's theorem\":\n Let formula_179 be a set of \u03c3-structures indexed by an index set I and U an ultrafilter on I. Then any \u03c3-formula formula_180 is true in the ultraproduct of the formula_179 by formula_182 if the set of all formula_183 for which formula_184 lies in U.\nIn particular, any ultraproduct of models of a theory is itself a model of that theory, and thus if two models have isomorphic ultrapowers, they are elementarily equivalent.\nThe \"Keisler-Shelah theorem\" provides a converse:\nIf M and N are elementarily equivalent, then there is a set I and an ultrafilter U on I such that the ultrapowers by U of M and :N are isomorphic.\nTherefore, ultraproducts provide a way to talk about elementary equivalence that avoids mentioning first-order theories at all. Basic theorems of model theory such as the compactness theorem have alternative proofs using ultraproducts, and they can be used to construct saturated elementary extensions if they exist.\nCategoricity.\nA theory was originally called \"categorical\" if it determines a structure up to isomorphism. It turns out that this definition is not useful, due to serious restrictions in the expressivity of first-order logic. The L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem implies that if a theory \"T\" has an infinite model for some infinite cardinal number, then it has a model of size \u03ba for any sufficiently large cardinal number \u03ba. Since two models of different sizes cannot possibly be isomorphic, only finite structures can be described by a categorical theory.\nHowever, the weaker notion of \u03ba-categoricity for a cardinal \u03ba has become a key concept in model theory. A theory \"T\" is called \"\u03ba-categorical\" if any two models of \"T\" that are of cardinality \u03ba are isomorphic. It turns out that the question of \u03ba-categoricity depends critically on whether \u03ba is bigger than the cardinality of the language (i.e. formula_185, where is the cardinality of the signature). For finite or countable signatures this means that there is a fundamental difference between \u03c9-cardinality and \u03ba-cardinality for uncountable \u03ba.\n\u03c9-categoricity.\n\u03c9-categorical theories can be characterised by properties of their type space:\nFor a complete first-order theory \"T\" in a finite or countable signature the following conditions are equivalent:\n#\"T\" is \u03c9-categorical.\n#Every type in \"Sn\"(\"T\") is isolated.\n#For every natural number \"n\", \"Sn\"(\"T\") is finite.\n#For every natural number \"n\", the number of formulas \"\u03c6\"(\"x\"1, ..., \"x\"n) in \"n\" free variables, up to equivalence modulo \"T\", is finite.\nThe theory of formula_186, which is also the theory of formula_187, is \u03c9-categorical, as every \"n\"-type formula_188 over the empty set is isolated by the pairwise order relation between the formula_189.\nThis means that every countable dense linear order is order-isomorphic to the rational number line. On the other hand, the theories of \u211a, \u211d and \u2102 as fields are not formula_190-categorical. This follows from the fact that in all those fields, any of the infinitely many natural numbers can be defined by a formula of the form formula_191.\nformula_192-categorical theories and their countable models also have strong ties with oligomorphic groups:\nA complete first-order theory \"T\" in a finite or countable signature is \u03c9-categorical if and only if its automorphism group is oligomorphic.\nThe equivalent characterisations of this subsection, due independently to Engeler, Ryll-Nardzewski and Svenonius, are sometimes referred to as the Ryll-Nardzewski theorem.\nIn combinatorial signatures, a common source of \u03c9-categorical theories are Fra\u00efss\u00e9 limits, which are obtained as the limit of amalgamating all possible configurations of a class of finite relational structures.\nUncountable categoricity.\nMichael Morley showed in 1963 that there is only one notion of \"uncountable categoricity\" for theories in countable languages.\nMorley's categoricity theorem\nIf a first-order theory \"T\" in a finite or countable signature is \u03ba-categorical for some uncountable cardinal \u03ba, then \"T\" is \u03ba-categorical for all uncountable cardinals \u03ba.\nMorley's proof revealed deep connections between uncountable categoricity and the internal structure of the models, which became the starting point of classification theory and stability theory. \nUncountably categorical theories are from many points of view the most well-behaved theories.\nIn particular, complete strongly minimal theories are uncountably categorical. This shows that the theory of algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic is uncountably categorical, with the transcendence degree of the field determining its isomorphism type.\nA theory that is both \u03c9-categorical and uncountably categorical is called \"totally categorical\".\nStability theory.\nA key factor in the structure of the class of models of a first-order theory is its place in the \"stability hierarchy\". \nA complete theory \"T\" is called \"formula_193-stable\" for a cardinal formula_193 if for any model formula_82 of \"T\" and any parameter set formula_146 of cardinality not exceeding formula_193, there are at most formula_193 complete \"T\"-types over \"A\".\nA theory is called \"stable\" if it is formula_193-stable for some infinite cardinal formula_193. Traditionally, theories that are formula_192-stable are called \"formula_190-stable\".\nThe stability hierarchy.\nA fundamental result in stability theory is the \"stability spectrum theorem\", which implies that every complete theory \"T\" in a countable signature falls in one of the following classes:\nA theory of the first type is called \"unstable\", a theory of the second type is called \"strictly stable\" and a theory of the third type is called \"superstable\".\nFurthermore, if a theory is formula_190-stable, it is stable in every infinite cardinal, so formula_190-stability is stronger than superstability.\nMany constructions in model theory are easier when restricted to stable theories; for instance, every model of a stable theory has a saturated elementary extension, regardless of whether the generalised continuum hypothesis is true.\nShelah's original motivation for studying stable theories was to decide how many models a countable theory has of any uncountable cardinality. \nIf a theory is uncountably categorical, then it is formula_190-stable. More generally, the \"Main gap theorem\" implies that if there is an uncountable cardinal formula_193 such that a theory \"T\" has less than formula_215 models of cardinality formula_193, then \"T\" is superstable.\nGeometric stability theory.\nThe stability hierarchy is also crucial for analysing the geometry of definable sets within a model of a theory. \nIn formula_190-stable theories, \"Morley rank\" is an important dimension notion for definable sets \"S\" within a model. It is defined by transfinite induction:\nA theory \"T\" in which every definable set has well-defined Morley rank is called \"totally transcendental\"; if \"T\" is countable, then \"T\" is totally transcendental if and only if \"T\" is formula_190-stable.\nMorley Rank can be extended to types by setting the Morley rank of a type to be the minimum of the Morley ranks of the formulas in the type. Thus, one can also speak of the Morley rank of an element \"a\" over a parameter set \"A\", defined as the Morley rank of the type of \"a\" over \"A\". \nThere are also analogues of Morley rank which are well-defined if and only if a theory is superstable (U-rank) or merely stable (Shelah's formula_219-rank).\nThose dimension notions can be used to define notions of independence and of generic extensions.\nMore recently, stability has been decomposed into simplicity and \"not the independence property\" (NIP). \nSimple theories are those theories in which a well-behaved notion of independence can be defined, while NIP theories generalise o-minimal structures.\nThey are related to stability since a theory is stable if and only if it is NIP and simple, and various aspects of stability theory have been generalised to theories in one of these classes.\nNon-elementary model theory.\nModel-theoretic results have been generalised beyond elementary classes, that is, classes axiomatisable by a first-order theory.\nModel theory in higher-order logics or infinitary logics is hampered by the fact that completeness and compactness do not in general hold for these logics. This is made concrete by Lindstr\u00f6m's theorem, stating roughly that first-order logic is essentially the strongest logic in which both the L\u00f6wenheim-Skolem theorems and compactness hold. However, model theoretic techniques have been developed extensively for these logics too. It turns out, however, that much of the model theory of more expressive logical languages is independent of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory.\nMore recently, alongside the shift in focus to complete stable and categorical theories, there has been work on classes of models defined semantically rather than axiomatised by a logical theory.\nOne example is \"homogeneous model theory\", which studies the class of substructures of arbitrarily large homogeneous models. Fundamental results of stability theory and geometric stability theory generalise to this setting.\nAs a generalisation of strongly minimal theories, quasiminimally excellent classes are those in which every definable set is either countable or co-countable. They are key to the model theory of the complex exponential function.\nThe most general semantic framework in which stability is studied are abstract elementary classes, which are defined by a \"strong substructure\" relation generalising that of an elementary substructure. Even though its definition is purely semantic, every abstract elementary class can be presented as the models of a first-order theory which omit certain types. Generalising stability-theoretic notions to abstract elementary classes is an ongoing research program.\nSelected applications.\nAmong the early successes of model theory are Tarski's proofs of quantifier elimination for various algebraically interesting classes, such as the real closed fields, Boolean algebras and algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic. Quantifier elimination allowed Tarski to show that the first-order theories of real-closed and algebraically closed fields as well as the first-order theory of Boolean algebras are decidable, classify the Boolean algebras up to elementary equivalence and show that the theories of real-closed fields and algebraically closed fields of a given characteristic are unique. Furthermore, quantifier elimination provided a precise description of definable relations on algebraically closed fields as algebraic varieties and of the definable relations on real-closed fields as semialgebraic sets\nIn the 1960s, the introduction of the ultraproduct construction led to new applications in algebra. This includes Ax's work on pseudofinite fields, proving that the theory of finite fields is decidable, and Ax and Kochen's proof of as special case of Artin's conjecture on diophantine equations, the Ax\u2013Kochen theorem. The ultraproduct construction also led to Abraham Robinson's development of nonstandard analysis, which aims to provide a rigorous calculus of infinitesimals.\nMore recently, the connection between stability and the geometry of definable sets led to several applications from algebraic and diophantine geometry, including Ehud Hrushovski's 1996 proof of the geometric Mordell\u2013Lang conjecture in all characteristics In 2001, similar methods were used to prove a generalisation of the Manin-Mumford conjecture.\nIn 2011, Jonathan Pila applied techniques around o-minimality to prove the Andr\u00e9\u2013Oort conjecture for products of Modular curves.\nIn a separate strand of inquiries that also grew around stable theories, Laskowski showed in 1992 that NIP theories describe exactly those definable classes that are PAC-learnable in machine learning theory. This has led to several interactions between these separate areas. In 2018, the correspondence was extended as Hunter and Chase showed that stable theories correspond to online learnable classes.\nHistory.\nModel theory as a subject has existed since approximately the middle of the 20th century, and the name was coined by Alfred Tarski, a member of the Lw\u00f3w\u2013Warsaw school, in 1954. However some earlier research, especially in mathematical logic, is often regarded as being of a model-theoretical nature in retrospect. The first significant result in what is now model theory was a special case of the downward L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem, published by Leopold L\u00f6wenheim in 1915. The compactness theorem was implicit in work by Thoralf Skolem, but it was first published in 1930, as a lemma in Kurt G\u00f6del's proof of his completeness theorem. The L\u00f6wenheim\u2013Skolem theorem and the compactness theorem received their respective general forms in 1936 and 1941 from Anatoly Maltsev.\nThe development of model theory as an independent discipline was brought on by Alfred Tarski during the interbellum. Tarski's work included logical consequence, deductive systems, the algebra of logic, the theory of definability, and the semantic definition of truth, among other topics. His semantic methods culminated in the model theory he and a number of his Berkeley students developed in the 1950s and '60s.\nIn the further history of the discipline, different strands began to emerge, and the focus of the subject shifted. In the 1960s, techniques around ultraproducts became a popular tool in model theory. At the same time, researchers such as James Ax were investigating the first-order model theory of various algebraic classes, and others such as H. Jerome Keisler were extending the concepts and results of first-order model theory to other logical systems. Then, inspired by Morley's problem, Shelah developed stability theory. His work around stability changed the complexion of model theory, giving rise to a whole new class of concepts. This is known as the paradigm shift. \nOver the next decades, it became clear that the resulting stability hierarchy is closely connected to the geometry of sets that are definable in those models; this gave rise to the subdiscipline now known as geometric stability theory. An example of an influential proof from geometric model theory is Hrushovski's proof of the Mordell\u2013Lang conjecture for function fields.\nConnections to related branches of mathematical logic.\nFinite model theory.\nFinite model theory, which concentrates on finite structures, diverges significantly from the study of infinite structures in both the problems studied and the techniques used. In particular, many central results of classical model theory fail when restricted to finite structures. This includes the compactness theorem, G\u00f6del's completeness theorem, and the method of ultraproducts for first-order logic. At the interface of finite and infinite model theory are algorithmic or computable model theory and the study of 0-1 laws, where the infinite models of a generic theory of a class of structures provide information on the distribution of finite models. \nProminent application areas of FMT are descriptive complexity theory, database theory and formal language theory.\nSet theory.\nAny set theory (which is expressed in a countable language), if it is consistent, has a countable model; this is known as Skolem's paradox, since there are sentences in set theory which postulate the existence of uncountable sets and yet these sentences are true in our countable model. Particularly the proof of the independence of the continuum hypothesis requires considering sets in models which appear to be uncountable when viewed from \"within\" the model, but are countable to someone \"outside\" the model.\nThe model-theoretic viewpoint has been useful in set theory; for example in Kurt G\u00f6del's work on the constructible universe, which, along with the method of forcing developed by Paul Cohen can be shown to prove the (again philosophically interesting) independence of the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis from the other axioms of set theory.\nIn the other direction, model theory is itself formalised within Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. For instance, the development of the fundamentals of model theory (such as the compactness theorem) rely on the axiom of choice, and is in fact equivalent over Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory without choice to the Boolean prime ideal theorem. Other results in model theory depend on set-theoretic axioms beyond the standard ZFC framework. For example, if the Continuum Hypothesis holds then every countable model has an ultrapower which is saturated (in its own cardinality). Similarly, if the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis holds then every model has a saturated elementary extension. Neither of these results are provable in ZFC alone. Finally, some questions arising from model theory (such as compactness for infinitary logics) have been shown to be equivalent to large cardinal axioms.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n"}
{"id": "19859", "revid": "16495000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19859", "title": "Moby-Dick", "text": "1851 novel by Herman Melville\nMoby-Dick; or, The Whale is an 1851 epic novel by American writer Herman Melville. The book is centered on the sailor Ishmael's narrative of the maniacal quest of Ahab, captain of the whaling ship \"Pequod\", for vengeance against Moby Dick, the giant white sperm whale that bit off his leg on the ship's previous voyage. A contribution to the literature of the American Renaissance, \"Moby-Dick\" was published to mixed reviews, was a commercial failure, and was out of print at the time of the author's death in 1891. Its reputation as a Great American Novel was established only in the 20th century, after the 1919 centennial of its author's birth. William Faulkner said he wished he had written the book himself, and D. H. Lawrence called it \"one of the strangest and most wonderful books in the world\" and \"the greatest book of the sea ever written\". Its opening sentence, \"Call me Ishmael\", is among world literature's most famous.\nMelville began writing \"Moby-Dick\" in February 1850 and finished 18 months later, a year after he had anticipated. Melville drew on his experience as a common sailor from 1841 to 1844, including on whalers, and on wide reading in whaling literature. The white whale is modeled on a notoriously hard-to-catch albino whale Mocha Dick, and the book's ending is based on the sinking of the whaleship \"Essex\" in 1820. The detailed and realistic descriptions of sailing, whale hunting and of extracting whale oil, as well as life aboard ship among a culturally diverse crew, are mixed with exploration of class and social status, good and evil, and the existence of God. \nThe book's literary influences include Shakespeare, Thomas Carlyle, Sir Thomas Browne and the Bible. In addition to narrative prose, Melville uses styles and literary devices ranging from songs, poetry, and catalogs to Shakespearean stage directions, soliloquies, and asides. In August 1850, with the manuscript perhaps half finished, he met Nathaniel Hawthorne and was deeply impressed by his \"Mosses from an Old Manse\", which he compared to Shakespeare in its cosmic ambitions. This encounter may have inspired him to revise and deepen \"Moby-Dick\", which is dedicated to Hawthorne, \"in token of my admiration for his genius\".\nThe book was first published (in three volumes) as \"The Whale\" in London in October 1851, and under its definitive title, \"Moby-Dick; or, The Whale\", in a single-volume edition in New York in November. The London publisher, Richard Bentley, censored or changed sensitive passages; Melville made revisions as well, including a last-minute change of the title for the New York edition. The whale, however, appears in the text of both editions as \"Moby Dick\", without the hyphen. Reviewers in Britain were largely favorable, though some objected that the tale seemed to be told by a narrator who perished with the ship, as the British edition lacked the epilogue recounting Ishmael's survival. American reviewers were more hostile.\nPlot.\nIshmael narrates his December travels from Manhattan Island to New Bedford, Massachusetts, with plans to sign up for a whaling voyage as a green hand. The inn where he arrives is overcrowded, so he must share a bed with a tattooed cannibal Polynesian named Queequeg, a harpooneer whose father was king of the fictional island of Rokovoko. The next morning, Ishmael and Queequeg attend Father Mapple's sermon on Jonah, then head for Nantucket. Ishmael signs up with the Quaker ship-owners Bildad and Peleg for a voyage on their whaler \"Pequod\". Peleg describes Captain Ahab: \"He's a grand, ungodly, god-like man\" who nevertheless \"has his humanities\". They hire Queequeg the following morning and a man named Elijah prophesies a dire fate should Ishmael and Queequeg join Ahab. Shadowy figures board the ship while provisions are loaded, and on a cold Christmas Day, the \"Pequod\" departs the harbor.\nIshmael begins the journey with an extensive discussion of cetology, his system for the zoological classification and natural history of the whale. He then introduces each of the crew members \u2014 the chief mate 30-year-old Starbuck, a Nantucket Quaker and realist; his harpooneer Queequeg; second mate Stubb, a cheerful man from Cape Cod; Stubb's proud harpooneer Tashtego, a pure-blooded Indian from Gay Head; the third mate Flask from Martha's Vineyard; and Flask's harpooneer Daggoo, a tall African.\nWhen Ahab finally appears on the quarterdeck, he announces he seeks revenge on the white whale that took his leg from the knee down, leaving him with a prosthesis fashioned from a whale's jawbone. Ahab will give the first man to sight Moby Dick a doubloon, which he nails to the mast. Starbuck objects that he has not come for vengeance but for profit, but Ahab's purpose exercises a mysterious spell on Ishmael: \"Ahab's quenchless feud seemed mine.\" \nTraveling from Nantucket to the Azores, Ahab then turns southwest and sails along the coast of South America. But instead of rounding Cape Horn at its tip, he heads to the Pacific Ocean in the other direction. Heading east towards equatorial Africa, he sails around the Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa and into the Indian Ocean. \nAs the ship is en route to Africa, Tashtego sights a sperm whale on the horizon. The five shadowy figures from earlier appear on deck and are revealed as a special crew specially selected by Ahab. Their leader is a Parsee named Fedallah who serves as Ahab's harpooneer. A pursuit of the whale ensues but is unsuccessful.\nSoutheast of the Cape of Good Hope, the \"Pequod\" makes the first of nine sea-encounters, or \"gams\", with other ships: Ahab hails the \"Goney\" (Albatross) to ask whether they have seen the White Whale, but the trumpet through which her captain tries to speak falls into the sea before he can answer. Ishmael explains that because of Ahab's absorption with Moby Dick, he sails on without the customary \"gam\", which Ishmael defines as a \"social meeting of two (or more) Whale-ships\", in which the two captains remain on one ship and the chief mates on the other. In the second gam off the Cape of Good Hope with the \"Town-Ho\", the concealed story of a \"judgment of God\" is revealed, but only to the crew: a defiant sailor who struck an oppressive officer was flogged, and when the punishing officer later led the chase for Moby Dick, he fell from the boat and was killed by the whale.\nIshmael digresses on pictures of whales, brit, squid and\u2014after four boats are lowered in vain because Daggoo mistook a giant squid for the white whale\u2014whale-lines. The next day, in the Indian Ocean, Stubb kills a sperm whale, and that night Fleece, the \"Pequod\"'s black cook, prepares him a rare whale steak. Fleece, at Stubb's request, delivers a sermon to the sharks that fight each other to feast on the whale's carcass, tied to the ship, saying that their nature is to be voracious, but they must overcome it. The whale is prepared, beheaded, and barrels of oil are tried out. Standing at the head of the whale, Ahab begs it to speak of the depths of the sea. The \"Pequod\" next encounters the \"Jeroboam\", which not only lost its chief mate to Moby Dick, but also is now plagued by an endemic infection.\nThe whale carcass still lies in the water. Queequeg mounts it, tied to Ishmael's belt by a monkey-rope as if they were Siamese twins. Stubb and Flask later kill a right whale whose head is fastened to a yardarm opposite the sperm whale's head. Ishmael compares the two heads in a philosophical way: the right whale is Lockean, stoic, and the sperm whale is Kantean, platonic. Tashtego cuts into the head of the sperm whale and retrieves buckets of spermaceti. He falls into the head, which in turn falls off the yardarm into the sea. Queequeg dives after him and frees Tashtego with his sword.\nThe \"Pequod\" next gams with the \"Jungfrau\" from Bremen. Both ships sight whales simultaneously, with the \"Pequod\" winning the contest. The three harpooneers dart their harpoons, and Flask delivers the mortal strike with a lance. The carcass sinks, and Queequeg barely manages to escape. The \"Pequod\"'s next gam is with the French whaler \"Bouton de Rose\", whose crew is ignorant of the ambergris in the gut of the diseased whale in their possession. Stubb talks them out of continuing, but Ahab orders him away. Days later, Pip, a little African American cabin-boy, jumps in panic from Stubb's whale boat and the whale must be cut loose because Pip is entangled in the line; a few days later Pip again jumps in panic, is left alone in the sea, and has gone insane by the time they find him.\nThe crew spends time processing various harvested whale parts \u2014 liquifying congealed spermaceti, boiling blubber, decanting warm oil into casks, stowing them in cargo, and scrubbing the decks. \nIshmael discusses the symbolism in the coin hammered to the main mast, which shows three Andes summits: one with a flame, another a tower, the third a crowing cock. Ahab looks at the doubloon and interprets the mountains as his volcanic energy, firmness, and victory; Starbuck takes the high peaks as the Trinity; Stubb focuses on the zodiacal arch over the mountains; and Flask sees no meaning. The Manxman mutters in front of the mast, and Pip declines when he is told to look.\nThe \"Pequod\" next gams with the \"Samuel Enderby\" of London, captained by Boomer, who lost his right arm to the whale but still carries it no ill will. His ship's surgeon, Dr. Bunger, describes the animal not as malicious, but awkward. Ahab puts an end to the gam by rushing back to his ship. \nIshmael then discusses the evolution of whales, specifically discussing a glen in Tranque of the Arsacides Islands full of carved whale bones and fossilized whales where one can see the decreasing size of their skeletons over time, and he considers the possibility of whale extinction.\nLeaving the \"Samuel Enderby\", Ahab wrenches his ivory leg and orders the carpenter to fashion him another. Meanwhile Queequeg, sweating all day below deck, develops a chill and severe fever. The carpenter makes a coffin for the Polynesian, anticipating a burial at sea. Queequeg tries it for size as Pip sobs and beats his tambourine, standing by and calling himself a coward while he praises his companion. Queequeg suddenly rallies and returns to good health and uses his coffin as a spare seachest.\nThe \"Pequod\" sails northeast toward Formosa and into the Pacific Ocean. Ahab, with one nostril, smells the musk from the Bashee isles, and with the other, the salt of the waters where Moby Dick swims. Ahab goes to Perth, the blacksmith, with a bag of racehorse shoenail stubs to be forged into the shank of a special harpoon, and with his razors for Perth to melt and fashion into a harpoon barb. Ahab tempers the barb in blood from Queequeg, Tashtego, and Daggoo.\nThe \"Pequod\" gams next with the \"Bachelor\", a Nantucket ship heading home full of sperm oil. Every now and then, the \"Pequod\" lowers for whales with success. On one of those nights in the whaleboat, Fedallah prophesies that neither hearse nor coffin can be Ahab's, that before he dies, Ahab must see two hearses \u2014 one not made by mortal hands and the other made of American wood \u2014 that Fedallah will precede his captain in death, and finally that only hemp can kill Ahab.\nAs the \"Pequod\" approaches the equator, Ahab scolds his quadrant for telling him only where he is and not where he will be, and dashes it to the deck. That evening, a typhoon attacks the ship and lightning strikes the mast, setting the doubloon and Ahab's harpoon aglow. Ahab delivers a speech on the fire, seeing the lightning as a portent of Moby Dick. Starbuck sees the lightning as a warning, and feels tempted to shoot the sleeping Ahab with his musket. The next morning, when he finds that the lightning disoriented the compass, Ahab makes a new one out of a lance, a maul, and a sailmaker's needle. He orders the log be heaved, but the weathered line snaps, leaving the ship with no way to fix its location.\nThe \"Pequod\" is now heading southeast toward Moby Dick. A man falls overboard from the mast. The life buoy is thrown, but both sink. Queequeg now proposes that his coffin be used as a new buoy and Starbuck has it sealed and waterproofed. The next morning, the ship meets in another truncated gam with the \"Rachel\", commanded by Captain Gardiner from Nantucket. The \"Rachel\" is seeking survivors from one of her whaleboats which had gone after Moby Dick. Among the missing is Gardiner's young son, but Ahab refuses to join the search.\nAhab now spends twenty-four hours a day on deck while Fedallah shadows him. One day, a sea hawk grabs Ahab's slouched hat and flies off with it. Next, the \"Pequod\", in a ninth and final gam, meets the \"Delight\", badly damaged and with five of her crew left dead by Moby Dick. Her captain shouts that the harpoon which can kill the white whale has yet to be forged, to which Ahab flourishes his special lance and once more orders the ship forward. Ahab speaks to Starbuck about his wife and child, calling himself a fool for spending 40 years whaling, and says he can see his own child in Starbuck. Starbuck tries to persuade Ahab to return to Nantucket to meet their families, but Ahab refuses.\nOn the first day of the chase, Ahab smells the whale, climbs the mast, and sights Moby Dick. He claims the doubloon for himself, and orders all boats to lower except for Starbuck's. The whale bites Ahab's boat in two, tosses the captain into the sea and scatters his crew. On the second day of the chase, Ahab leaves Starbuck in charge of the \"Pequod\". Moby Dick smashes the three boats hunting him to splinters. Ahab is rescued, but his ivory leg and Fedallah are lost. Starbuck begs Ahab to stop, but the captain vows revenge.\nOn the third and final day of the chase, Ahab sights Moby Dick at noon as sharks appear between the ship and the whale in anticipation of the ensuing carnage. Ahab lowers his boat for the final time, leaving Starbuck again on board. Moby Dick breaches and destroys two boats. Fedallah's corpse, still entangled in the fouled lines, is lashed to the whale's back, making Moby Dick the \"hearse not made by human hands\" Fedallah had prophesied earlier.\nAhab plants his harpoon in the whale's flank and Moby Dick destroys the \"Pequod\", tossing its men into the sea. Ishmael is unable to return to the boat and is left behind in the water. Ahab then realizes the destroyed ship is the second hearse of American wood from Fedallah's prophecy.\nMoby Dick returns within a few yards of Ahab's boat and a harpoon is darted from the ship but its line tangles. As Ahab stoops to free it, the line loops around his neck, ensnaring him against his nemesis and completing Fedallah's augury. As the mortally stricken whale swims away, the captain is drawn with him out of sight. Queequeg's coffin comes to the surface as the only thing to escape the vortex when the \"Pequod\" sinks. Ishmael floats on it for a day and a night until the \"Rachel\", still looking for its lost seamen, rescues him.\nStructure.\nPoint of view.\nIshmael is the narrator, shaping his story with the use of many different genres including sermons, stage plays, soliloquies, and emblematical readings. Repeatedly, Ishmael refers to his writing of the book: \"But how can I hope to explain myself here; and yet, in some dim, random way, explain myself? I must, else all these chapters might be naught.\" Scholar John Bryant calls him the novel's \"central consciousness and narrative voice\". Walter Bezanson first distinguishes Ishmael as narrator from Ishmael as character, whom he calls \"forecastle Ishmael\", the younger Ishmael of some years ago. Narrator Ishmael, then, is \"merely young Ishmael grown older\". A second distinction is between either or both Ishmaels with the author Herman Melville. Bezanson warns readers to \"resist any one-to-one equation of Melville and Ishmael\".\nChapter structure.\nAccording to critic Walter Bezanson, the chapter structure can be divided into \"chapter sequences\", \"chapter clusters\", and \"balancing chapters\". The simplest sequences are of narrative progression, then sequences of theme such as the three chapters on whale painting, and sequences of structural similarity, such as the five dramatic chapters beginning with \"The Quarter-Deck\" or the four chapters beginning with \"The Candles\". Chapter clusters are the chapters on the significance of the color white, and those on the meaning of fire. Balancing chapters are chapters of opposites, such as \"Loomings\" versus the \"Epilogue\", or similars, such as \"The Quarter-Deck\" and \"The Candles\".\nScholar Lawrence Buell describes the arrangement of the non-narrative chapters as structured around three patterns: first, the nine meetings of the \"Pequod\" with ships that have encountered Moby Dick. Each has been more and more severely damaged, foreshadowing the \"Pequod\"'s own fate. Second, the increasingly impressive encounters with whales. In the early encounters, the whaleboats hardly make contact; later there are false alarms and routine chases; finally, the massive assembling of whales at the edges of the China Sea in \"The Grand Armada\". A typhoon near Japan sets the stage for Ahab's confrontation with Moby Dick.\nThe third pattern is the cetological documentation, so lavish that it can be divided into two subpatterns. These chapters start with the ancient history of whaling and a bibliographical classification of whales, getting closer with second-hand stories of the evil of whales in general and of Moby Dick in particular, a chronologically ordered commentary on pictures of whales. The climax to this section is chapter 57, \"Of whales in paint etc.\", which begins with the humble (a beggar in London) and ends with the sublime (the constellation Cetus). The next chapter (\"Brit\"), thus the other half of this pattern, begins with the book's first description of live whales, and next the anatomy of the sperm whale is studied, more or less from front to rear and from outer to inner parts, all the way down to the skeleton. Two concluding chapters set forth the whale's evolution as a species and claim its eternal nature.\nSome \"ten or more\" of the chapters on whale killings, beginning at two-fifths of the book, are developed enough to be called \"events\". As Bezanson writes, \"in each case a killing provokes either a chapter sequence or a chapter cluster of cetological lore growing out of the circumstance of the particular killing,\" thus these killings are \"structural occasions for ordering the whaling essays and sermons\".\nBuell observes that the \"narrative architecture\" is an \"idiosyncratic variant of the bipolar observer/hero narrative\", that is, the novel is structured around the two main characters, Ahab and Ishmael, who are intertwined and contrasted with each other, with Ishmael the observer and narrator. As the story of Ishmael, remarks Robert Milder, it is a \"narrative of education\".\nBryant and Springer find that the book is structured around the two consciousnesses of Ahab and Ishmael, with Ahab as a force of linearity and Ishmael a force of digression. While both have an angry sense of being orphaned, they try to come to terms with this hole in their beings in different ways: Ahab with violence, Ishmael with meditation. And while the plot in \"Moby-Dick\" may be driven by Ahab's anger, Ishmael's desire to get a hold of the \"ungraspable\" accounts for the novel's lyricism. Buell sees a double quest in the book: Ahab's is to hunt Moby Dick, Ishmael's is \"to understand what to make of both whale and hunt\".\nOne of the most distinctive features of the book is the variety of genres. Bezanson mentions sermons, dreams, travel account, autobiography, Elizabethan plays, and epic poetry. He calls Ishmael's explanatory footnotes to establish the documentary genre \"a Nabokovian touch\".\nNine meetings with other ships.\nA significant structural device is the series of nine meetings between the \"Pequod\" and other ships. These meetings are important in three ways. First, their placement in the narrative: the initial two meetings and the last two are both close to each other. The central group of five gams are separated by about 12 chapters. This pattern provides a structural element, remarks Bezanson, as if the encounters were \"bones to the book's flesh\". Second, Ahab's developing responses to the meetings plot the \"rising curve of his passion\" and of his monomania. Third, in contrast to Ahab, Ishmael interprets the significance of each ship individually: \"each ship is a scroll which the narrator unrolls and reads\".\nBezanson sees no single way to account for the meaning of all of these ships. Instead, they may be interpreted as \"a group of metaphysical parables, a series of biblical analogues, a masque of the situation confronting man, a pageant of the humors within men, a parade of the nations, and so forth, as well as concrete and symbolic ways of thinking about the White Whale\".\nScholar Nathalia Wright sees the meetings and the significance of the vessels along other lines. She singles out the four vessels which have already encountered Moby Dick. The first, the \"Jeroboam\", is named after the predecessor of the biblical King Ahab. Her \"prophetic\" fate is \"a message of warning to all who follow, articulated by Gabriel and vindicated by the \"Samuel Enderby\", the \"Rachel\", the \"Delight\", and at last the \"Pequod\"\". None of the other ships has been completely destroyed because none of their captains shared Ahab's monomania; the fate of the \"Jeroboam\" reinforces the structural parallel between Ahab and his biblical namesake: \"Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him\" (I Kings 16:33).\nThemes.\nAn early enthusiast for the Melville Revival, the English author E. M. Forster remarked in 1927: \"\"Moby-Dick\" is full of meanings: its meaning is a different problem.\" Yet he saw as \"the essential\" in the book \"its prophetic song\", which flows \"like an undercurrent\" beneath the surface action and morality. The hunt for the whale can be seen as a metaphor for an epistemological quest\u2014in the words of biographer Laurie Robertson-Lorant, \"man's search for meaning in a world of deceptive appearances and fatal delusions\". Ishmael's taxonomy of whales merely demonstrates \"the limitations of scientific knowledge and the impossibility of achieving certainty\". She also contrasts Ishmael's and Ahab's attitudes toward life, with Ishmael's open-minded and meditative, \"polypositional stance\" as antithetical to Ahab's monomania, adhering to dogmatic rigidity.\nMelville biographer Andrew Delbanco cites race as an example of this search for truth beneath surface differences, noting that all races are represented among the crew members of the \"Pequod\". Although Ishmael initially is afraid of Queequeg as a tattooed possible cannibal, he soon decides that he would \"Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian.\" While it may be rare for a mid-19th century American book to feature Black characters in a nonslavery context, slavery is frequently mentioned. The theme of race is carried primarily by Pip, the diminutive Black cabin boy. When Pip has almost drowned, and Ahab, genuinely touched by Pip's suffering, questions him gently, Pip \"can only parrot the language of an advertisement for the return of a fugitive slave: 'Pip! Reward for Pip!'\".\nEditors Bryant and Springer suggest that perception is a central theme\u2014the difficulty of seeing and understanding, which makes deep reality hard to discover and truth hard to pin down. Ahab explains that, like all things, the evil whale wears a disguise: \"All visible objects, man, are but pasteboard masks\"\u2014and Ahab is determined to \"strike through the mask! How can the prisoner reach outside, except by thrusting through the wall? To me, the white whale is that wall\" (Ch. 36, \"The Quarter-Deck\"). This theme pervades the novel, perhaps never so emphatically as in \"The Doubloon\" (Ch. 99), where each crewmember perceives the coin in a way shaped by his own personality. Later, the American edition has Ahab \"discover no sign\" (Ch. 133) of the whale when he is staring into the deep. In fact, Moby Dick is then swimming up at him. In the British edition, Melville changed the word \"discover\" to \"perceive\", and with good reason, for \"discovery\" means finding what is already there, but \"perceiving\", or better still, perception, is \"a matter of shaping what exists by the way in which we see it\". The point is not that Ahab would discover the whale as an object, but that he would perceive it as a symbol of his making.\nYet Melville does not offer easy solutions. Ishmael and Queequeg's sensual friendship initiates a kind of racial harmony that is shattered when the crew's dancing erupts into racial conflict in \"Midnight, Forecastle\" (Ch. 40). Fifty chapters later, Pip suffers mental disintegration after he is reminded that as a slave he would be worth less money than a whale. Commodified and brutalized, \"Pip becomes the ship's conscience\". His views of property are another example of wrestling with moral choice. In Chapter 89, \"Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish\", Ishmael expounds the legal concept \"fast-fish and loose-fish\", which gives right of ownership to those who take possession of an abandoned fish or ship; he compares the concept to various forms of domination, such as slavery, serfdom, tithes and military conquest.\nThe novel has also been read as critical of the contemporary literary and philosophical movement Transcendentalism, attacking the thought of leading Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson in particular. The life and death of Ahab has been read as an attack on Emerson's philosophy of self-reliance, for one, in its destructive potential and possible justification for egoism. Richard Chase writes that for Melville, \"Death\u2014spiritual, emotional, physical\u2014is the price of self-reliance when it is pushed to the point of solipsism, where the world has no existence apart from the all-sufficient self.\" In that regard, Chase sees Melville's art as antithetical to that of Emerson's thought, in that Melville \"[points] up the dangers of an exaggerated self-regard, rather than, as ... Emerson loved to do, [suggested] the vital possibilities of the self\". Newton Arvin further suggests that self-reliance was, for Melville, really the \"[masquerade in kingly weeds of] a wild egoism, anarchic, irresponsible, and destructive\".\nStyle.\n\"Above all\", say the scholars Bryant and Springer, \"Moby-Dick\" is language: \"nautical, biblical, Homeric, Shakespearean, Miltonic, cetological, alliterative, fanciful, colloquial, archaic and unceasingly allusive\". Melville stretches grammar, quotes well-known or obscure sources, or swings from calm prose to high rhetoric, technical exposition, seaman's slang, mystic speculation, or wild prophetic archaism. Melville coined words, critic Newton Arvin recognizes, as if the English vocabulary were too limited for the complex things he had to express. Perhaps the most striking example is the use of verbal nouns, mostly plural, such as \"allurings\", \"coincidings\", and \"leewardings\". Equally abundant are unfamiliar adjectives and adverbs, including participial adjectives such as \"officered\", \"omnitooled\", and \"uncatastrophied\"; participial adverbs such as \"intermixingly\", \"postponedly\", and \"uninterpenetratingly\"; rarities such as the adjectives \"unsmoothable\", \"spermy\", and \"leviathanic\", and adverbs such as \"sultanically\", \"Spanishly\", and \"Venetianly\"; and adjectival compounds ranging from odd to magnificent, such as \"the \"message-carrying\" air\", \"the \"circus-running\" sun\", and \"\"teeth-tiered\" sharks\". It is rarer for Melville to create his own verbs from nouns, but he does this with what Arvin calls \"irresistible effect\", such as in \"who didst \"thunder\" him higher than a throne\", and \"my fingers ... began ... to \"serpentine\" and \"spiralize\"\". For Arvin, the essence of the writing style of \"Moby-Dick\" lies in\nthe manner in which the parts of speech are 'intermixingly' assorted in Melville's style\u2014so that the distinction between verbs and nouns, substantives and modifiers, becomes a half unreal one\u2014this is the prime characteristic of his language. No feature of it could express more tellingly the awareness that lies below and behind \"Moby-Dick\"\u2014the awareness that action and condition, movement and stasis, object and idea, are but surface aspects of one underlying reality.\nLater critics have expanded Arvin's categories. The superabundant vocabulary can be broken down into strategies used individually and in combination. First, the original modification of words as \"Leviathanism\" and the exaggerated repetition of modified words, as in the series \"pitiable\", \"pity\", \"pitied\" and \"piteous\" (Ch. 81, \"The Pequod Meets the Virgin\"). Second, the use of existing words in new ways, as when the whale \"heaps\" and \"tasks\". Third, words lifted from specialized fields, as \"fossiliferous\". Fourth, the use of unusual adjective-noun combinations, as in \"concentrating brow\" and \"immaculate manliness\" (Ch. 26, \"Knights and Squires\"). Fifth, using the participial modifier to emphasize and to reinforce the already established expectations of the reader, as the words \"preluding\" and \"foreshadowing\" (\"so still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene ...\"; \"In this foreshadowing interval ...\").\nOther characteristic stylistic elements are the echoes and overtones, both imitation of distinct styles and habitual use of sources to shape his own work. His three most important sources, in order, are the Bible, Shakespeare, and Milton.\nThe novel uses several levels of rhetoric. The simplest is \"a relatively straightforward \"expository\" style\", such as in the cetological chapters, though they are \"rarely sustained, and serve chiefly as transitions\" between more sophisticated levels. A second level is the \"poetic\", such as in Ahab's quarterdeck monologue, to the point that it can be set as blank verse. Set over a metrical pattern, the rhythms are \"evenly controlled\u2014too evenly perhaps for prose\", Bezanson suggests. A third level is the \"idiomatic\", and just as the poetic it hardly is present in pure form. Examples of this are \"the consistently excellent idiom\" of Stubb, such as in the way he encourages the rowing crew in a rhythm of speech that suggests \"the beat of the oars takes the place of the metronomic meter\". The fourth and final level of rhetoric is the \"composite\", \"a magnificent blending\" of the first three and possible other elements:\nThe Nantucketer, he alone resides and riots on the sea; he alone, in Bible language, goes down to it in ships; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation. \"There\" is his home; \"there\" lies his business, which a Noah's flood would not interrupt, though it overwhelmed all the millions in China. He lives on the sea, as prairie cocks in the prairie; he hides among the waves, he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps. For years he knows not the land; so that when he comes to it at last, it smells like another world, more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman. With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales.\n(\"Nantucket\", Ch. 14).\nBezanson calls this chapter a comical \"prose poem\" that blends \"high and low with a relaxed assurance\". Similar passages include the \"marvelous hymn to spiritual democracy\" in the middle of \"Knights and Squires\".\nThe elaborate use of the Homeric simile may not have been learned from Homer himself, yet Matthiessen finds the writing \"more consistently alive\" on the Homeric than on the Shakespearean level, especially during the final chase the \"controlled accumulation\" of such similes emphasizes Ahab's hubris through a succession of land-images, for instance: \"The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a cannon-ball, missent, becomes a ploughshare and turns up the level field\" (\"The Chase \u2013 Second Day\", Ch. 134). A paragraph-long simile describes how the 30 men of the crew became a single unit:\nFor as the one ship that held them all; though it was put together of all contrasting things\u2014oak, and maple, and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp\u2014yet all these ran into each other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, both balanced and directed by the long central keel; even so, all the individualities of the crew, this man's valor, that man's fear; guilt and guiltiness, all varieties were welded into oneness, and were all directed to that fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did point to.\n(\"The Chase \u2013 Second Day\", Ch. 134).\nThe final phrase fuses the two halves of the comparison; the men become identical with the ship, which follows Ahab's direction. The concentration only gives way to more imagery: the \"mastheads, like the tops of tall palms, were outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs\". All these images contribute their \"startling energy\" to the advance of the narrative. When the boats are lowered, the imagery serves to dwarf everything but Ahab's will in the presence of Moby Dick. These similes, with their astonishing \"imaginative abundance,\" not only create dramatic movement, Matthiessen observes: \"They are no less notable for breadth; and the more sustained among them, for an heroic dignity.\"\nAssimilation of Shakespeare.\nF. O. Matthiessen, in 1941, declared that Melville's \"possession by Shakespeare went far beyond all other influences\" in that it made Melville discover his own full strength \"through the challenge of the most abundant imagination in history\". This insight was then reinforced by the study of Melville's annotations in his reading copy of Shakespeare, which show that he immersed himself in Shakespeare when he was preparing for \"Moby-Dick\", especially \"King Lear\" and \"Macbeth\". Reading Shakespeare, Matthiessen observes, was \"a catalytic agent\", one that transformed his writing \"from limited reporting to the expression of profound natural forces\".\nThe creation of Ahab, Melville biographer Leon Howard discovered, followed an observation by Coleridge in his lecture on \"Hamlet\": \"one of Shakespeare's modes of creating characters is to conceive any one intellectual or moral faculty in \"morbid\" excess, and then to place himself. ... thus \"mutilated\" or \"diseased\", under given circumstances\". Coleridge's vocabulary is echoed in some phrases that describe Ahab. Ahab seemed to have \"what seems a half-wilful \"over-ruling morbidness\" at the bottom of his nature\", and \"all men tragically great\", Melville added, \"are made so through a certain \"morbidness\"; \"all mortal greatness is but \"disease\"\". In addition to this, in Howard's view, the self-references of Ishmael as a \"tragic dramatist\", and his defense of his choice of a hero who lacked \"all outward majestical trappings\" is evidence that Melville \"consciously thought of his protagonist as a tragic hero of the sort found in \"Hamlet\" and \"King Lear\"\".\nMatthiessen demonstrates the extent to which Melville was in full possession of his powers in the description of Ahab, which ends in language\nthat suggests Shakespeare's but is not an imitation of it: 'Oh, Ahab! what shall be grand in thee, it must needs be plucked from the skies and dived for in the deep, and featured in the unbodied air!' The imaginative richness of the final phrase seems particularly Shakespearean, \"but its two key words appear only once each in the plays\u00a0... and to neither of these usages is Melville indebted for his fresh combination\".\nMelville's assimilation of Shakespeare, Matthiessen concludes, gave \"Moby-Dick\" \"a kind of diction that depended upon no source\", and that could, as D.H. Lawrence put it, convey something \"almost superhuman or inhuman, bigger than life\". The prose is not based on anybody else's verse but on \"a sense of speech rhythm\".\nMatthiessen finds debts to Shakespeare, whether hard or easy to recognize, on almost every page. He points out that the phrase \"mere sounds, full of Leviathanism, but signifying nothing\" at the end of \"Cetology\" (Ch.32) echoes the famous phrase in \"Macbeth\": \"Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying nothing.\" Matthiessen shows that Ahab's first extended speech to the crew, in the \"Quarter-Deck\" (Ch.36), is \"virtually blank verse, and can be printed as such\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn addition to this sense of rhythm, Matthiessen shows that Melville \"now mastered Shakespeare's mature secret of how to make language itself dramatic\". He had learned three essential things, Matthiessen sums up:\nThomas Carlyle.\nCritics have seen parallels between \"Moby Dick\" and Thomas Carlyle's work, particularly \"Sartor Resartus\" (1833\u201334), \"On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History\" (1841) and the \"Critical and Miscellaneous Essays\", which Melville read while writing the novel. James Barbour and biographer Leon Howard write that \"Carlyle's rhetoric is reflected\" in much of the dialogue of Ahab and Ishmael, while Melville uses \"Sartor\"'s philosophical concepts of \"an emblematic universe\" and a \"weaver god\" \"almost in Carlyle's words\". Alexander Welsh argues that Carlyle figured \"largely in the undertaking of \"Moby Dick\"\", noting that the \"figure of the sheep in 'The Funeral' ... is taken directly from Carlyle\", specifically the essay \"Boswell's Life of Johnson\" (1832) and that the \"language of herring and whales, fleets and commodores\" may have been borrowed from \"Sartor\". According to Paul Giles, \"Sartor\" \"furnished Melville with a prototype for his playful iconoclastic style in \"Moby-Dick\"\", particularly in its narrative strategy and romantic ironic paradoxes. The \"shared use of the clothing metaphor\" is also inspired by \"Sartor\".\nJonathan Arac sees in \"Moby-Dick\" \"a direct appropriation\" of Carlyle's \"Hero\". \"Ahab\", writes Arac, \"is very much a Carlylean hero\", which Carlyle's \"romantic image of Cromwell helped Melville to create\". Carlyle's portraits of Dante Alighieri and Shakespeare in \"The Hero as Poet\", the third lecture of \"On Heroes\", \"offered models that helped Melville to develop as a reader and to achieve the definition of himself as a writer that made \"Moby-Dick\" possible\".\nRenaissance humanism.\nDuring the composition of \"Moby-Dick\" Melville also read Renaissance humanists such as Thomas Browne, Robert Burton, and Rabelais. Hershel Parker notes that Melville adopted not only their poetic and conversational prose styles, but also their skeptical attitudes towards religion. Browne's statement \"I love to lose my selfe in a mystery to pursue my reason to an \"ob altitudo\"\" mirrors both in ethos and poetics Ishmael's \"I love to sail forbidden seas, and land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what is good, I am quick to perceive a horror, and could still be social with it.\"\nIshmael also mirrors the epistemological uncertainty of Renaissance humanists. For example, Browne argues that \"where there is an obscurity too deepe for our reason ...[reason] becomes more humble and submissive unto the subtilties of faith ... I believe there was already a tree whose fruit our unhappy parents tasted, though in the same chapter, when God forbids it, 'tis positivley said, the plants of the field were not yet growne.\" Ishmael similarly embraces paradox when he proclaims \"Doubts of all things earthly, and intuitions of some things heavenly; this combination makes neither believer nor infidel, but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye.\"\nScholars have also called attention to similarities between Melville's style and that of Robert Burton in \"Anatomy of Melancholy\". William Engel notes that Melville had Burton's book at his side, and says \"this encyclopedic work will serve as a conceptual touchstone for analyzing his looking back to an earlier aesthetic practice.\" Additionally, Hershel Parker writes that in 1847, \"Anatomy of Melancholy\" served as Melville's \"sonorous textbook on morbid psychology\" and in the following year he bought a set of Michel de Montaigne's works. In the \"Essays\" he found \"a worldly wise skepticism that braced him against the superficial pieties demanded by his time\". Melville then read Browne's \"Religio Medici\" which he adored, describing Browne to a friend as \"a kind of 'crack'd archangel'\".\nBackground.\nAutobiographical elements.\n\"Moby-Dick\" draws on Melville's experience on the whaler \"Acushnet\", but is not autobiographical. On December 30, 1840, Melville signed on as a green hand for the maiden voyage of the \"Acushnet\", planned to last for 52 months. Its owner, Melvin O. Bradford, like Bildad, was a Quaker: on several instances when he signed documents, he erased the word \"swear\" and replaced it with \"affirm\". However, the shareholders of the \"Acushnet\" were relatively wealthy, whereas the owners of the \"Pequod\" included poor widows and orphaned children.\nThe model for the Whaleman's Chapel of chapter 7 is the Seamen's Bethel on Johnny Cake Hill. Melville attended a service there shortly before he shipped out on the \"Acushnet\", and he heard a sermon by Reverend Enoch Mudge, who is at least in part the inspiration for Father Mapple. Even the topic of Jonah and the Whale may be authentic, for Mudge contributed sermons on Jonah to \"Sailor's Magazine\".\nThe crew was not as heterogenous or exotic as the crew of the \"Pequod\". Five were foreigners, four of them Portuguese, and the others were American either at birth or naturalized. Three black men were in the crew, two seamen and the cook. Fleece, the black cook of the \"Pequod\", was probably modeled on this Philadelphia-born William Maiden. A first mate, actually called Edward C. Starbuck was discharged at Tahiti under mysterious circumstances. The second mate, John Hall, is identified as Stubb in an annotation in the book's copy of crew member Henry Hubbard, who also identified the model for Pip: John Backus, a little black man added to the crew during the voyage. Hubbard witnessed Pip's fall into the water.\nAhab seems to have had no model, though his death may have been based on an actual event. Melville was aboard \"The Star\" in May 1843 with two sailors from the \"Nantucket\" who could have told him that they had seen their second mate \"taken out of a whaleboat by a foul line and drowned\".\nWhaling sources.\nIn addition to his own experience on the whaling ship \"Acushnet\", two actual events served as the genesis for Melville's tale. One was the sinking of the Nantucket ship \"Essex\" in 1820, after a sperm whale rammed her 2,000 miles (3,200\u00a0km) from the western coast of South America. First mate Owen Chase, one of eight survivors, recorded the events in his 1821 \"Narrative of the Most Extraordinary and Distressing Shipwreck of the Whale-Ship Essex\".\nThe other event was the alleged killing in the late 1830s of the albino sperm whale Mocha Dick, in the waters off the Chilean island of Mocha. Mocha Dick was rumored to have 20 or so harpoons in his back from other whalers, and appeared to attack ships with premeditated ferocity. One of his battles with a whaler served as subject for an article by explorer J. N. Reynolds in the May 1839 issue of \"The Knickerbocker or New-York Monthly Magazine\". Melville was familiar with the article, which described:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This renowned monster, who had come off victorious in a hundred fights with his pursuers, was an old bull whale, of prodigious size and strength. From the effect of age, or more probably from a freak of nature ... a singular consequence had resulted \u2014 \"he was white as wool!\"\nSignificantly, Reynolds writes a first-person narration that serves as a frame for the story of a whaling captain he meets. The captain resembles Ahab and suggests a similar symbolism and single-minded motivation in hunting this whale, in that when his crew first encounters Mocha Dick and cowers from him, the captain rallies them:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As he drew near, with his long curved back looming occasionally above the surface of the billows, we perceived that it was white as the surf around him; and the men stared aghast at each other, as they uttered, in a suppressed tone, the terrible name of MOCHA DICK!\n\"Mocha Dick or the d----l [devil]', said I, 'this boat never sheers off from any thing that wears the shape of a whale.'\"\nMocha Dick had over 100 encounters with whalers in the decades between 1810 and the 1830s. He was described as being gigantic and covered in barnacles. Although he was the most famous, Mocha Dick was not the only white whale in the sea, nor the only whale to attack hunters.\nWhile an accidental collision with a sperm whale at night accounted for sinking of the \"Union\" in 1807, it was not until August 1851 that the whaler \"Ann Alexander\", while hunting in the Pacific off the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands, became the second vessel since the \"Essex\" to be attacked, holed, and sunk by a whale. Melville remarked, \"Ye Gods! What a commentator is this \"Ann Alexander\" whale. What he has to say is short &amp; pithy &amp; very much to the point. I wonder if my evil art has raised this monster.\"\nWhile Melville had already drawn on his different sailing experiences in his previous novels, such as \"Mardi\", he had never focused specifically on whaling. The 18 months he spent as an ordinary seaman aboard the whaler \"Acushnet\" in 1841\u201342, and one incident in particular, now served as inspiration. During a mid-ocean \"gam\" (rendezvous at sea between ships), he met Chase's son William, who lent him his father's book. Melville later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I questioned him concerning his father's adventure; ... he went to his chest &amp; handed me a complete copy ... of the Narrative [of the \"Essex\" catastrophe]. This was the first printed account of it I had ever seen. The reading of this wondrous story on the landless sea, and so close to the very latitude of the shipwreck, had a surprising effect upon me.\nThe book was out of print, and rare. Melville let his interest in the book be known to his father-in-law, Lemuel Shaw, whose friend in Nantucket procured an imperfect but clean copy which Shaw gave to Melville in April 1851. Melville read this copy avidly, made copious notes in it, and had it bound, keeping it in his library for the rest of his life.\n\"Moby-Dick\" contains large sections, most of which are narrated by Ishmael, that seemingly have nothing to do with the plot, but describe aspects of the whaling business. Although a successful earlier novel about Nantucket whalers had been written, \"Miriam Coffin or The Whale-Fisherman\" (1835) by Joseph C. Hart, which is credited with influencing elements of Melville's work, most accounts of whaling tended to be sensational tales of bloody mutiny. Melville believed that no book up to that time had portrayed the whaling industry in as fascinating or immediate a way as he had experienced it.\nMelville found the bulk of his data on whales and whaling in five books, the most important of which was by the English ship's surgeon Thomas Beale, \"Natural History of the Sperm Whale\" (1839), a book of reputed authority which Melville bought on July 10, 1850. \"In scale and complexity,\" scholar Steven Olsen-Smith writes, \"the significance of [this source] to the composition of \"Moby-Dick\" surpasses that of any other source book from which Melville is known to have drawn.\" According to scholar Howard P. Vincent, the general influence of this source is to supply the arrangement of whaling data in chapter groupings. Melville followed Beale's grouping closely, yet adapted it to what art demanded, and he changed the original's prosaic phrases into graphic figures of speech. The second most important whaling book is Frederick Debell Bennett, \"A Whaling Voyage Round the Globe, from the Year 1833 to 1836\" (1840), from which Melville also took the chapter organization, but in a lesser degree than he learned from Beale.\nThe third book was the one Melville reviewed for the \"Literary World\" in 1847, J. Ross Browne's \"Etchings of a Whaling Cruise\" (1846), which may have given Melville the first thought for a whaling book, and in any case contains passages embarrassingly similar to passages in \"Moby-Dick\". The fourth book, Reverend Henry T. Cheever's \"The Whale and His Captors\" (1850), was used for two episodes in \"Moby-Dick\" but probably appeared too late in the writing of the novel to be of much more use. Melville did plunder a fifth book, William Scoresby Jr., \"An Account of the Arctic Regions with a History and Description of the Northern Whale Fishery\" (1820), though\u2014unlike the other four books\u2014its subject is the Greenland whale rather than the sperm whale. Although the book became the standard whaling reference soon after publication, Melville satirized and parodied it on several occasions\u2014for instance in the description of narwhales in the chapter \"Cetology\", where he called Scoresby \"Charley Coffin\" and gave his account \"a humorous twist of fact\": \"Scoresby will help out Melville several times, and on each occasion Melville will satirize him under a pseudonym.\" Vincent suggests several reasons for Melville's attitude towards Scoresby, including his dryness and abundance of irrelevant data, but the major reason seems to have been that the Greenland whale was the sperm whale's closest competitor for the public's attention, so Melville felt obliged to dismiss anything dealing with it.\nIn addition to cetological works, Melville also consulted scattered literary works that mention or discuss whales, as the opening \"Extracts\" section of the novel demonstrates. For instance, Thomas Browne's essay \"Of Sperma-Ceti, and the Sperma-Ceti Whale\" from his \"Pseudodoxia Epidemica\" is consulted not only in the extracts but also in the chapter titled \"Cetology\". Ishmael notes: \"Many are the men, small and great, old and new, landsmen and seamen, who have at large or in little, written of the whale. Run over a few:\u2014The Authors of the Bible; Aristotle; Pliny; Aldrovandi; Sir Thomas Browne.\" Browne's playful examination of whales, which values philosophical interpretations over scientifically accurate examinations, helped shape the novel's style. Browne's comment on \"the [Sperm-Whale's] eyes but small, the pizell [penis] large, and prominent\" likely helped shape the comical chapter concerning whale penises, \"The Cassock\".\nComposition.\nScholars have concluded that Melville composed \"Moby-Dick\" in two or even three stages. Reasoning from biographical evidence, analysis of the functions of characters, and a series of unexplained but perhaps meaningful inconsistencies in the final version, they hypothesize that reading Shakespeare and his new friendship with Hawthorne, in the words of Lawrence Buell, inspired Melville to rewrite a \"relatively straightforward\" whaling adventure into \"an epic of cosmic encyclopedic proportions\".\nThe earliest surviving mention of what became \"Moby-Dick\" is a letter Melville wrote to Richard Henry Dana Jr. on May 1, 1850:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;About the \"whaling voyage\"\u2014I am half way in the work, &amp; am very glad that your suggestion so jumps with mine. It will be a strange sort of book, tho', I fear; blubber is blubber you know; tho' you may get oil out of it, the poetry runs as hard as sap from a frozen maple tree; \u2014 &amp; to cook the thing up, one must needs throw in a little fancy, which from the nature of the thing, must be ungainly as the gambols of the whales themselves. Yet I mean to give the truth of the thing, spite of this.\nBezanson objects that the letter contains too many ambiguities to assume \"that Dana's 'suggestion' would obviously be that Melville do for whaling what he had done for life on a man-of-war in \"White-Jacket\"\". Dana had experienced how incomparable Melville was in dramatic storytelling when he met him in Boston, so perhaps \"his 'suggestion' was that Melville do a book that captured that gift\". And the long sentence in the middle of the above quotation simply acknowledges that Melville is struggling with the problem, not of choosing between fact and fancy but of how to interrelate them. The most positive statements are that it will be a strange sort of a book and that Melville means to give the truth of the thing, but what thing exactly is not clear.\nMelville may have found the plot before writing or developed it after the writing process was underway. Considering his elaborate use of sources, \"it is safe to say\" that they helped him shape the narrative, its plot included. Scholars John Bryant and Haskell Springer cite the development of the character Ishmael as another factor which prolonged Melville's process of composition and which can be deduced from the structure of the final version of the book. Ishmael, in the early chapters, is simply the narrator, just as the narrators in Melville's earlier sea adventures had been, but in later chapters becomes a mystical stage manager who is central to the tragedy.\nLess than two months after mentioning the project to Dana, Melville reported in a letter of June 27 to Richard Bentley, his English publisher:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My Dear Sir, \u2014 In the latter part of the coming autumn I shall have ready a new work; and I write you now to propose its publication in England. The book is a romance of adventure, founded upon certain wild legends in the Southern Sperm Whale Fisheries, and illustrated by the author's own personal experience, of two years &amp; more, as a harpooneer.\nNathaniel Hawthorne and his family had moved to a small red farmhouse near Lenox, Massachusetts, at the end of March 1850. He met Melville on August 5, 1850, when the authors met at a picnic hosted by a mutual friend that included, among others, Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. and James T. Fields. Melville wrote an unsigned review of Hawthorne's short story collection \"Mosses from an Old Manse\" titled \"Hawthorne and His Mosses\", which appeared in \"The Literary World\" on August 17 and 24. Bezanson finds the essay \"so deeply related to Melville's imaginative and intellectual world while writing \"Moby-Dick\"\" that it could be regarded as a virtual preface and should be \"everybody's prime piece of contextual reading\". In the essay, Melville compares Hawthorne to Shakespeare and Dante, and his \"self-projection\" is evident in the repeats of the word \"genius\", the more than two dozen references to Shakespeare, and in the insistence that Shakespeare's \"unapproachability\" is nonsense for an American.\nThe most intense work on the book was done during the winter of 1850\u20131851, when Melville had changed the noise of New York City for a farm in Pittsfield, Massachusetts. The move may well have delayed finishing the book. During these months, he wrote several excited letters to Hawthorne, including one of June 1851 in which he summarizes his career: \"What I feel most moved to write, that is banned,\u2014it will not pay. Yet, altogether, write the \"other\" way I cannot. So the product is a final hash, and all my books are botches.\"\nThis is the stubborn Melville who stood by \"Mardi\" and talked about his other, more commercial books with contempt. The letter also reveals how Melville experienced his development from his 25th year: \"Three weeks have scarcely passed, at any time between then and now, that I have not unfolded within myself. But I feel that I am now come to the inmost leaf of the bulb, and that shortly the flower must fall to the mould.\"\nBuell finds the evidence that Melville changed his ambitions during writing \"on the whole convincing\", since the impact of Shakespeare and Hawthorne was \"surely monumental\", but others challenge the theories of the composition in three ways. The first raises objections on the use of evidence and the evidence itself. Bryant finds \"little concrete evidence, and nothing at all conclusive, to show that Melville radically altered the structure or conception of the book\" and scholar Robert Milder sees \"insufficient evidence and doubtful methodology\" at work. A second type of objection is based on assumptions about Melville's intellectual development. Bryant and Springer object to the conclusion that Hawthorne inspired Melville to write Ahab's tragic obsession into the book; Melville already had experienced other encounters which could just as well have triggered his imagination, such as the Bible's Jonah and Job, Milton's Satan, Shakespeare's King Lear, Byron's heroes. Bezanson is also not convinced that before he met Hawthorne, \"Melville was \"not\" ready for the kind of book \"Moby-Dick\" became\", because in his letters from the time Melville denounces his last two \"straight narratives, \"Redburn\" and \"White-Jacket\", as two books written just for the money, and he firmly stood by \"Mardi\" as the kind of book he believed in. His language is already \"richly steeped in 17th-century mannerisms\", characteristics of \"Moby-Dick\". A third type calls upon the literary nature of passages used as evidence. According to Milder, the cetological chapters cannot be leftovers from an earlier stage of composition and any theory that they are \"will eventually founder on the stubborn meaningfulness of these chapters\", because no scholar adhering to the theory has yet explained how these chapters \"can bear intimate thematic relation to a symbolic story not yet conceived\".\nBuell finds that theories based on a combination of selected passages from letters and what are perceived as \"loose ends\" in the book not only \"tend to dissolve into guesswork\", but he also suggests that these so-called loose ends may be intended by the author: repeatedly the book mentions \"the necessary unfinishedness of immense endeavors\".\nPublication history.\nMelville first proposed the British publication in a June 27, 1850, letter to Richard Bentley, London publisher of his earlier works. Textual scholar G. Thomas Tanselle said that, in these earlier books, American proof sheets had been sent to the British publisher and that publication in the United States did not commence until the work had been set in type and published in England. This procedure was intended to provide the best (though still uncertain) claim for the UK copyright of an American work. In the case of \"Moby-Dick\", Melville had taken almost a year longer than promised, and could not rely on Harpers to prepare the proofs as they had done for the earlier books. Indeed, Harpers had denied him an advance, and since he was already in debt to them for almost $700, he was forced to borrow money and to arrange for the typesetting and plating himself. John Bryant suggests that he did so \"to reduce the number of hands playing with his text\".\nThe final stages of composition overlapped with the early stages of publication. At the end of May 1851, Melville delivered the bulk of his manuscript to Harper's for plating and printing of proof sheets. In June, he wrote to Hawthorne that he was in New York to \"work and slave on my 'Whale' while it is driving through the press\". He was staying with Allan and Sophia in a small room to correct proofs, and to (re)write the closing pages. By the end of the month, \"wearied with the long delay of printers\", Melville came back to finish work on the book in Pittsfield. Three weeks later, the typesetting was almost done, as he announced to Bentley on July 20: \"I am now passing thro' the press, the closing sheets of my new work\". While Melville was simultaneously writing and proofreading what had been set, the corrected proof would be plated, that is, the type fixed in final form. Since earlier chapters were already plated when he was revising the later ones, Melville must have \"felt restricted in the kinds of revisions that were feasible\".\nOn July 3, 1851, Bentley offered Melville \u00a3150 and \"half profits\", that is, half the profits that remained after the expenses of production and advertising. On July 20, Melville accepted, after which Bentley drew up a contract on August 13. Melville signed and returned the contract in early September, and then went to New York with the proof sheets, made from the finished plates, which he sent to London by his brother Allan on September 10. For over a month, these proofs had been in Melville's possession, and because the book would be set anew in London he could devote all his time to correcting and revising them. He still had no American publisher, so the usual hurry about getting the British publication to precede the American was not present. Only on September 12 was the Harper publishing contract signed. Bentley received the proof sheets with Melville's corrections and revisions marked on them on September 24. He published the book less than four weeks later.\nIn the October 1851 issue of \"Harper's New Monthly Magazine\" \"The Town Ho's Story\" was published, with a footnote reading: \"From 'The Whale'. The title of a new work by Mr. Melville, in the press of Harper and Brothers, and now publishing in London by Mr. Bentley.\"\nOn October 18, the British edition, \"The Whale\", was published in a printing of only 500 copies, fewer than Melville's previous books. Their slow sales had convinced Bentley that a smaller number was more realistic. The London \"Morning Herald\" on October 20 printed the earliest known review. On November 14, the American edition, \"Moby-Dick\", was published and the same day reviewed in both the Albany \"Argus\" and the \"Morning Courier and New-York Enquirer\". On November 19, Washington received the copy to be deposited for copyright purposes. The first American printing of 2,915 copies was almost the same as the first of \"Mardi\", but the first printing of Melville's other three Harper books had been a thousand copies more.\nMelville's revisions and British editorial revisions.\nThe British edition, set by Bentley's printers from the American page proofs with Melville's revisions and corrections, differs from the American edition in over 700 wordings and thousands of punctuation and spelling changes.\nExcluding the preliminaries and the one extract, the three volumes of the British edition came to 927 pages and the single American volume to 635 pages. Accordingly, the dedication to Hawthorne in the American edition\u2014\"this book is inscribed to\"\u2014became \"these volumes are inscribed to\" in the British. The table of contents in the British edition generally follows the actual chapter titles in the American edition, but 19 titles in the American table of contents differ from the titles above the chapters themselves. This list was probably drawn up by Melville himself: the titles of chapters describing encounters of the \"Pequod\" with other ships had\u2014apparently to stress the parallelisms between these chapters\u2014been standardized to \"The Pequod meets the ...,\" with the exception of the already published 'The Town-Ho's Story'.\nFor unknown reasons, the \"Etymology\" and \"Extracts\" were moved to the end of the third volume. An epigraph from \"Paradise Lost\", taken from the second of the two quotations from that work in the American edition, appears on the title page of each of the three British volumes. Melville's involvement with this rearrangement is not clear: if it was Bentley's gesture toward accommodating Melville, as Tanselle suggests, its selection put an emphasis on the quotation Melville might not have agreed with.\nThe largest of Melville's revisions is the addition to the British edition of a 139-word footnote in Chapter 87 explaining the word \"gally\". The edition also contains six short phrases and some 60 single words lacking in the American edition. In addition, about 35 changes produce genuine improvements, as opposed to mere corrections: \"Melville may not have made every one of the changes in this category, but it seems certain that he was responsible for the great majority of them.\"\nBritish censorship and missing \"Epilogue\".\nThe British publisher hired one or more revisers who were, in the evaluation of scholar Steven Olsen-Smith, responsible for \"unauthorized changes ranging from typographical errors and omissions to acts of outright censorship\". According to biographer Robertson-Lorant, the result was that the British edition was \"badly mutilated\". The expurgations fall into four categories, ranked according to the apparent priorities of the censor:\nThese expurgations also meant that any corrections or revisions Melville had marked upon these passages are now lost.\nThe final difference in the material not already plated is that the \"Epilogue\", thus Ishmael's miraculous survival, is omitted from the British edition. Obviously, the epilogue was not an afterthought supplied too late for the edition, for it is referred to in \"The Castaway\": \"in the sequel of the narrative, it will then be seen what like abandonment befell myself.\" Why the \"Epilogue\" is missing is unknown. Since nothing objectionable was in it, most likely it was somehow lost by Bentley's printer when the \"Etymology\" and \"Extracts\" were moved.\nLast-minute change of title.\nAfter the sheets had been sent, Melville changed the title. Probably late in September, Allan sent Bentley two pages of proof with a letter of which only a draft survives which informed him that Melville \"has determined upon a new title &amp; dedication\u2014Enclosed you have proof of both\u2014It is thought here that the new title will be a better \"selling\" title\". After expressing his hope that Bentley would receive this change in time, Allan said that \"Moby-Dick is a legitimate title for the book, being the name given to a particular whale who if I may so express myself is the hero of the volume\". Biographer Hershel Parker suggests that the reason for the change was that Harper's had two years earlier published a book with a similar title, \"The Whale and His Captors\".\nChanging the title was not a problem for the American edition, since the running heads throughout the book only showed the titles of the chapters, and the title page, which would include the publisher's name, could not be printed until a publisher was found. In October \"Harper's New Monthly Magazine\" printed chapter 54, \"The Town-Ho's Story\", with a footnote saying: \"From \"The Whale.\" The title of a new work by Mr. Melville\". The one surviving leaf of proof, \"a 'trial' page bearing the title 'The Whale' and the Harper imprint,\" shows that at this point, after the publisher had been found, the original title still stood. When Allan's letter arrived, no sooner than early October, Bentley had already announced \"The Whale\" in both the \"Athenaem\" and the \"Spectator\" of October 4 and 11. Probably to accommodate Melville, Bentley inserted a half-title page in the first volume only, which reads \"The Whale; or, Moby Dick\".\nSales and earnings.\nThe British printing of 500 copies sold fewer than 300 within the first four months. In 1852, some remaining sheets were bound in a cheaper casing, and in 1853, enough sheets were still left to issue a cheap edition in one volume. Bentley recovered only half on the \u00a3150 he advanced Melville, whose share from actual sales would have been just \u00a338, and he did not print a new edition. Harper's first printing was 2,915 copies, including the standard 125 review copies. The selling price was $1.50, about a fifth of the price of the British three-volume edition.\nAbout 1,500 copies were sold within 11 days, and then sales slowed down to less than 300 the next year. After three years, the first edition was still available, almost 300 copies of which were lost when a fire broke out at the firm in December 1853. In 1855, a second printing of 250 copies was issued, in 1863, a third of 253 copies, and finally in 1871, a fourth printing of 277 copies, which sold so slowly that no new printing was ordered. \"Moby-Dick\" was out of print during the last four years of Melville's life, having sold 2,300 in its first year and a half and on average 27 copies a year for the next 34 years, totaling 3,215 copies.\nMelville's earnings from the book add up to $1,260: the \u00a3150 advance from Bentley was equivalent to $703, and the American printings earned him $556, which was $100 less than he earned from any of his five previous books. Melville's widow received another $81 when the United States Book Company issued the book and sold almost 1,800 copies between 1892 and 1898.\nReception.\nThe reception of \"The Whale\" in Britain and of \"Moby-Dick\" in the United States differed in two ways, according to Parker. First, British literary criticism was more sophisticated and developed than in the still-young republic, with British reviewing done by \"cadres of brilliant literary people\" who were \"experienced critics and trenchant prose stylists\", while the United States had only \"a handful of reviewers\" capable enough to be called critics, and American editors and reviewers habitually echoed British opinion. American reviewing was mostly delegated to \"newspaper staffers\" or else by \"amateur contributors more noted for religious piety than critical acumen.\" Second, the differences between the two editions caused \"two distinct critical receptions.\"\nBritish.\nTwenty-one reviews appeared in London, and later one in Dublin. The British reviewers, according to Parker, mostly regarded \"The Whale\" as \"a phenomenal literary work, a philosophical, metaphysical, and poetic romance\". The \"Morning Advertiser\" for October 24 was in awe of Melville's learning, of his \"dramatic ability for producing a prose poem\", and of the whale adventures which were \"powerful in their cumulated horrors.\" To its surprise, \"John Bull\" found \"philosophy in whales\" and \"poetry in blubber\", and concluded that few books that claimed to be either philosophical or literary works \"contain as much true philosophy and as much genuine poetry as the tale of the \"Pequod\"'s whaling expedition\", making it a work \"far beyond the level of an ordinary work of fiction\". The \"Morning Post\" found it \"one of the cleverest, wittiest, and most amusing of modern books\", and predicted that it was a book \"which will do great things for the literary reputation of its author\".\nMelville himself never saw these reviews, and Parker calls it a \"bitter irony\" that the reception overseas was \"all he could possibly have hoped for, short of a few conspicuous proclamations that the distance between him and Shakespeare was by no means immeasurable.\"\nOne of the earliest reviews, by the extremely conservative critic Henry Chorley in the highly regarded London \"Athenaeum\", described it as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A]n ill-compounded mixture of romance and matter-of-fact. The idea of a connected and collected story has obviously visited and abandoned its writer again and again in the course of composition. The style of his tale is in places disfigured by mad (rather than bad) English; and its catastrophe is hastily, weakly, and obscurely managed.\nAccording to the London \"Literary Gazette and Journal of Science and Art\" for December 6, 1851, \"Mr. Melville cannot do without savages, so he makes half of his \"dramatis personae\" wild Indians, Malays, and other untamed humanities\", who appeared in \"an odd book, professing to be a novel; wantonly eccentric, outrageously bombastic; in places charmingly and vividly descriptive\". Most critics regretted the extravagant digressions because they distracted from an otherwise interesting and even exciting narrative, but even critics who did not like the book as a whole praised Melville's originality of imagination and expression.\nBecause the English edition omitted the epilogue describing Ishmael's escape, British reviewers read a book with a first-person narrator who apparently did not survive. The reviewer of the \"Literary Gazette\" asked how Ishmael, \"who appears to have been drowned with the rest, communicated his notes to Mr. Bentley\". The reviewer in the \"Spectator\" objected that \"nothing should be introduced into a novel which it is physically impossible for the writer to have known: thus, he must not describe the conversation of miners in a pit if they \"all\" perish.\" The \"Dublin University Magazine\" asked \"how does it happen that the author is alive to tell the story?\" A few other reviewers, who did not comment upon the apparent impossibility of Ishmael telling the story, pointed out violations of narrative conventions in other passages.\nOther reviewers accepted the flaws they perceived. \"John Bull\" praised the author for making literature out of unlikely and even unattractive matter, and the \"Morning Post\" found that delight far outstripped the improbable character of events. Though some reviewers viewed the characters, especially Ahab, as exaggerated, others felt that it took an extraordinary character to undertake the battle with the white whale. Melville's style was often praised, although some found it excessive or too American.\nAmerican.\nSome sixty reviews appeared in America, the criterion for counting as a review being more than two lines of comment. Only a couple of reviewers expressed themselves early enough not to be influenced by news of the British reception. Though \"Moby-Dick\" did contain the \"Epilogue\" and so accounted for Ishmael's survival, the British reviews influenced the American reception. The earliest American review, in the Boston \"Post\" for November 20, quoted the London \"Athenaeum\"'s scornful review, not realizing that some of the criticism of \"The Whale\" did not pertain to \"Moby-Dick\". This last point, and the authority and influence of British criticism in American reviewing, is clear from the review's opening: \"We have read nearly one half of this book, and are satisfied that the London Athenaeum is right in calling it 'an ill-compounded mixture of romance and matter-of-fact'\". Though the \"Post\" quoted the greater portion of the review, it omitted the condensed extract of Melville's prose the \"Athenaeum\" had included to give readers an example of it. The \"Post\" deemed the price of one dollar and fifty cents far too much: \"'The Whale' is not worth the money asked for it, either as a literary work or as a mass of printed paper\".\nThe New York \"North American Miscellany\" for December summarized the verdict in the \"Athenaeum\". The reviewer of the December New York \"Eclectic Magazine\" had actually read \"Moby-Dick\" in full, and was puzzled why the \"Athenaeum\" was so scornful of the ending. The attack on \"The Whale\" by the \"Spectator\" was reprinted in the December New York \"International Magazine\", which inaugurated the influence of another unfavorable review. Rounding off what American readers were told about the British reception, in January \"Harper's Monthly Magazine\" attempted some damage control, and wrote that the book had \"excited a general interest\" among the London magazines.\nThe most influential American review, ranked according to the number of references to it, appeared in the weekly magazine \"Literary World\", which had printed Melville's \"Mosses\" essay the preceding year. The author of the unsigned review in two installments, on November 15 and 22, was later identified as publisher Evert Duyckinck. The first half of the first installment was devoted to an event of remarkable coincidence: early in the month, between the publishing of the British and the American edition, a whale had sunk the New Bedford whaler \"Ann Alexander\" near Chile.\nIn the second installment, Duyckinck described \"Moby-Dick\" as three books rolled into one: he was pleased with the book as far as it was a thorough account of the sperm whale, less so with it as far as the adventures of the \"Pequod\" crew were considered, perceiving the characters as unrealistic and expressing inappropriate opinions on religions, and condemned the essayistic rhapsodizing and moralizing with what he thought was little respect of what \"must be to the world the most sacred associations of life violated and defaced.\" The review prompted Hawthorne to take the \"unusually aggressive step of reproving Duyckinck\" by criticizing the review in a letter to Duyckinck of December 1:\nWhat a book Melville has written! It gives me an idea of much greater power than his preceding ones. It hardly seemed to me that the review of it, in the Literary World, did justice to its best points.\nThe Transcendental socialist George Ripley published a review in the New York \"Tribune\" for November 22, in which he compared the book favorably to \"Mardi\", because the \"occasional touches of the subtle mysticism\" was not carried on to excess but kept within boundaries by the solid realism of the whaling context. Ripley was almost surely also the author of the review in \"Harper's\" for December, which saw in Ahab's quest the \"slight framework\" for something else: \"Beneath the whole story, the subtle, imaginative reader may perhaps find a pregnant allegory, intended to illustrate the mystery of human life.\" Among the handful of other favorable reviews was one in the \"Albion\" on November 22 which saw the book as a blend of truth and satire.\nMelville's friend Nathaniel Parker Willis, reviewing the book in November 29 \"Home Journal\", found it \"a very racy, spirited, curious and entertaining book ... it enlists the curiosity, excites the sympathies, and often charms the fancy\". In December 6 \"Spirit of the Times\", editor William T. Porter praised the book, and all of Melville's five earlier works, as the writings \"of a man who is at once philosopher, painter, and poet\". Some other, shorter reviews mixed their praise with genuine reservations about the \"irreverence and profane jesting\", as the New Haven \"Daily Palladium\" for November 17 phrased it. Many reviewers, Parker observes, had come to the conclusion that Melville was capable of producing enjoyable romances, but they could not see in him the author of great literature.\nReviewers who actually did read the book \"found much to praise,\" Robertson-Lorant writes, but conservative reviewers did not like it. A friend of Duyckinck's, William Allen Butler, protested in the \"National Intelligencer\" against \"the querulous and cavilling innuendoes\" and the \"irreverent wit,\" while the \"Boston Post\" called it \"a crazy sort of affair.\"\nLegacy and adaptations.\nWithin a year after Melville's death in 1891, \"Moby-Dick\", along with \"Typee\", \"Omoo\", and \"Mardi\", was reprinted by Harper &amp; Brothers, giving it a chance to be rediscovered. However, only New York's literary underground showed interest, just enough to keep Melville's name circulating for the next 25 years in the capital of American publishing. During this time, a few critics were willing to devote time, space, and a modicum of praise to Melville and his works, or at least those that could still be easily obtained or remembered. Other works, especially the poetry, went largely forgotten.\nIn 1917, American author Carl Van Doren became the first of this period to proselytize about Melville's value in his 1921 study, \"The American Novel\", calling \"Moby-Dick\" a pinnacle of American Romanticism.\nIn his 1923 \"Studies in Classic American Literature\", novelist, poet, and short story writer D. H. Lawrence celebrated the originality and value of American authors, among them Melville. Lawrence saw \"Moby-Dick\" as a work of the first order despite his using the expurgated original English edition, which lacked the epilogue.\nThe Modern Library brought out \"Moby-Dick\" in 1926, and the Lakeside Press in Chicago commissioned Rockwell Kent to design and illustrate a striking three-volume edition, which appeared in 1930. Random House then issued a one-volume trade version of Kent's edition, which in 1943 they reprinted as a less expensive Modern Library Giant.\nThe novel has been adapted or represented in art, film, books, cartoons, television, and more than a dozen versions in comic-book format. The first adaptation was the 1926 silent movie \"The Sea Beast\", starring John Barrymore, in which Ahab returns to marry his fianc\u00e9e after killing the whale. The most famous adaptation was the John Huston 1956 film produced from a screenplay by author Ray Bradbury. The long list of adaptations, as Bryant and Springer put it, demonstrates that \"the iconic image of an angry embittered American slaying a mythic beast seemed to capture the popular imagination.\" They conclude that \"different readers in different periods of popular culture have rewritten \"Moby-Dick\"\" to make it a \"true cultural icon\". American artist David Klamen has cited the novel as an important influence on his dark, slow-to-disclose paintings, noting a passage in the book in which a mysterious, undecipherable painting in a bar is gradually revealed to depict a whale.\nBoth Mystic Seaport and the New Bedford Whaling Museum hold annual marathon live readings of Melville's novel in which volunteers read chapters aloud. The Mystic Seaport Marathon Reading is usually held July 31st to August 1st aboard the whaling vessel \"Charles W. Morgan\" with an actor portraying Herman Melville reading the first and final chapters, culminating in a celebration of Melville's birthday. The 2025 New Bedford Whaling Museum Marathon was held January 3\u20135, 2025.\nAmerican author Ralph Ellison wrote a tribute to the book in the prologue of his 1952 novel \"Invisible Man\". The narrator remembers a moment of truth under the influence of marijuana and evokes a church service: \"Brothers and sisters, my text this morning is the 'Blackness of Blackness.' And the congregation answers: 'That blackness is most black, brother, most black\u00a0... '\" This scene, Ellison biographer Arnold Rampersad observes, \"reprises a moment in the second chapter of \"Moby-Dick\"\", where Ishmael wanders around New Bedford looking for a place to spend the night, and momentarily joins a congregation: \"It was a negro church; and the preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the weeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing there.\" According to Rampersad, it was Melville who \"empowered Ellison to insist on a place in the American literary tradition\" by his example of \"representing the complexity of race and racism so acutely and generously in his text\". Rampersad also believes Ellison's choice of a first-person narrator was inspired above all by \"Moby-Dick\", and the novel even has a similar opening sentence with the narrator introducing himself (\"I am an invisible man\"). The oration by Ellison's blind preacher Barbee resembles Father Mapple's sermon in that both prepare the reader for what is to come.\nIn 1961, a Japanese author, K\u014dichir\u014d Uno, won the Akutagawa Prize with his novel \"The Whale God\", which was later made into a tokusatsu film by Daiei Film next year. Uno's \"The Whale God\" was presumably inspired by \"Moby-Dick\" as the former also focuses on vengeful whalers who seek after an unusually large and powerful whale.\n\"The Ice Schooner\" by Michael Moorcock retells the story in a grimdark post-apocalyptic frontier setting where technology has reverted to an early 19th century level and books, wooden furniture and batteries have become rare and expensive luxuries. Land yachts hunt carnivorous mutant sperm whales during an ice age caused by climate change and nuclear war. Captain Konrad Arflane is driven to misfortune not by hatred of the whale (which he kills early in the story), but by curiosity, namely the desire to discover the lost ancient city of New York and meet the goddess he worships known as the Ice Mother. Urquhart, the counterpart to the harpooner Queequeg, joins a human sacrifice cult and reverts to primitive savagery by castrating and mutilating the idealistic young nobleman Manfred Rorfesne before Arflane is forced to fight and kill him to prevent Urquhart from sacrificing his own sister. The technologically advanced and peaceful inhabitants of New York use a helicopter to return the shipwrecked survivors to their home city of Friesgalt, but Arflane chooses to continue heading North on skis to find the goddess, his ultimate fate unknown.\nAccording to critic Camille Paglia in \"Sexual Personae\", a book with the whiteness or blankness of nonmeaning as its main symbol should logically propose a depersonalized view of nature, but in this respect the novel is \"amazingly inconsistent\", as Melville \"elevates the masculine principle above the feminine.\" To be perfectly consistent, in her view the whale should be \"sexually neuter,\" and its whiteness \"an obliteration of person, gender, and meaning.\"\nBritish explorer Tim Severin wrote in his 1999 book \"In Search of Moby Dick: Quest for the White Whale\" about traveling throughout the Pacific, inquiring among indigenous fishermen and watermen about white whales, in personal experience or local folklore.\nAmerican songwriter Bob Dylan's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech of 2017 cited \"Moby-Dick\" as one of the three books that influenced him most. Dylan's description ends with an acknowledgment: \"That theme, and all that it implies, would work its way into more than a few of my songs.\"\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19862", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19862", "title": "Underground", "text": "Underground most commonly refers to:\nUnderground may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n See also: Hamaas (), the Lehi newspaper.\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19863", "revid": "50127667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19863", "title": "Madeira River", "text": "Tributary of the Amazon River\nThe Madeira River ( ) is a major waterway in South America. It is estimated to be in length, while the Madeira-Mamor\u00e9 is estimated near or in length depending on the measuring party and their methods. The Madeira is the biggest tributary of the Amazon, accounting for about 15% of the water in the basin. A map from Emanuel Bowen in 1747, held by the David Rumsey Map Collection, refers to the Madeira by the pre-colonial, indigenous name Cuyari. \nThe River of Cuyari, called by the Portuguese Madeira or the Wood River, is formed by two great rivers, which join near its mouth. It was by this River, that the Nation of Topinambes passed into the River Amazon.\nClimate.\nThe mean inter-annual precipitations on the great basins vary from , the entire upper Madeira basin receiving . The greatest extremes of rainfall are between . Even just below the confluence that forms it, the Madeira is one of the largest rivers by discharge of the world, with a mean inter-annual discharge of , i.e., per year, approximately half the discharge of the Congo River. On the further course towards the Amazon, the mean discharge of the Madeira increases up to .\nCourse.\nBetween Guajar\u00e1-Mirim and the falls of Teot\u00f4nio, the Madeira receives the drainage of the north-eastern slopes of the Andes from Santa Cruz de la Sierra to Cuzco, the whole of the south-western slope of Brazilian Mato Grosso and the northern slope of the Chiquitos sierras. In total, this catchment area, which is slightly more than the combined area of all headwaters, is , almost equal in size to France and Spain combined. The waters flow into the Madeira from many large rivers, the principal of which, (from east to west), are the Guapor\u00e9 or It\u00e9nez, the Baures and Blanco, the Itonamas or San Miguel, the Mamor\u00e9, Beni, and Madre de Dios or Mayutata, all of which are reinforced by numerous secondary but powerful affluents. The climate of the upper catchment area varies from humid in the western edge with the origin of the river's main stem by volume (R\u00edo Madre de Dios, R\u00edo Beni) to semi arid in the southernmost part with the Andine headwaters of the main stem by length (R\u00edo Caine, R\u00edo Rocha, R\u00edo Grande, Mamor\u00e9).\nAll of the upper branches of the river Madeira find their way to the falls across the open, almost level Mojos and Beni plains, of which are yearly flooded to an average depth of about for a period of from three to four months.\nFrom its source in the confluence of Madre de Dios and Mamor\u00e9 rivers and downstream to Abuna River the Madeira flows northward forming border between Bolivia and Brazil. Below its confluence with the latter tributary the flow of river changes to north-eastward direction, inland of Rond\u00f4nia state of Brazil. The section of the river from the border to Porto Velho has notable drop of bed and was not navigable. Before 2012 the falls of Teot\u00f4nio and of San Ant\u00f4nio existed here, they had higher flow rate and bigger level drop than more famous Boyoma Falls in Africa. Currently these rapids are submerged by the reservoir of Santo Ant\u00f4nio Dam. Below Porto Velho the Madeira meanders north-eastward through the Rond\u00f4nia and Amazonas states of north west Brazil to its junction with the Amazon.\nThe Rio Madeira Sustainable Development Reserve, created in 2006, extends along the north bank of the river opposite the town of Novo Aripuan\u00e3.\nAt its mouth is Ilha Tupinambaranas, an extensive marshy region formed by the Madeira's distributaries.\nNavigation.\nThe Madeira river rises more than during the rainy season, and ocean vessels may ascend it to the falls of San Antonio, near Porto Velho, Brazil, above its mouth; but in the dry months, from June to November, it is only navigable for the same distance for craft drawing about of water. The Madeira-Mamor\u00e9 Railroad runs in a loop around the unnavigable section to Guajar\u00e1-Mirim on the Mamor\u00e9 River, but is not functional, limiting shipping from the Atlantic at Porto Velho.\nToday, it is also one of the Amazon basin's most active waterways, and helps export close to four million tons of grains, which are loaded onto barges in Porto Velho, where both Cargill and Amaggi have loading facilities, and then shipped down the Madeira to the ports of Itacoatiara, near the mouth of the Madeira, just upstream on the left bank of the Amazon, or further down the Amazon, to the port of Santarem, at the mouth of the Tapajos River. From these two ports, Panamax-type ships then export the grains - mainly soy and corn - to Europe and Asia. The Madeira waterway is also used to take fuel from the REMAN refinery (Petrobras) in Manaus, state capital of Amazonas, to Porto Velho, from where the states of Acre, Rond\u00f4nia and parts of Mato Grosso are supplied mainly with gasoline (petrol) refined in Manaus. Cargo barges also use the Madeira on the route between Manaus and Porto Velho, which is along the Rio Negro, Amazon and Madeira, connecting Manaus' industrial district with the rest of Brazil, as Manaus is land-locked as far as logistics with the rest of the country are concerned, to bring in part of its raw materials, and export its produce to the major consumer centres of S\u00e3o Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. In 2012, the cargo amounted to 287,835 tons (both directions). The total tonnage shipped in 2012 on the Madeira accounted to 5,076,014.\nTwo large dams (see below) are under construction as part of the IIRSA regional integration project. The dam projects include large ship-locks capable of moving oceangoing vessels between the impounded reservoir and the downstream river. If the project is completed, \"more than of waterways upstream from the dams in Brazil, Bolivia, and Peru would become navigable.\"\nEcology.\nAs typical of Amazonian rivers with the primary headwaters in the Andes, the Madeira River is turbid because of high sediment levels and it is whitewater, but some of its tributaries are clearwater (e.g., Aripuan\u00e3 and Ji-Paran\u00e1) or blackwater (e.g., Manicor\u00e9).\nThe Bolivian river dolphin, variously considered a subspecies of the Amazon river dolphin or a separate species, is restricted to the upper Madeira River system. It has been estimated that there are more than 900 fish species in the Madeira River Basin, making it one of the freshwater systems in the world with the highest species richness.\nIn popular culture.\nThe river is the fifth title of the 1993/1999 Philip Glass album \"Aguas da Amazonia\".\nDams.\nIn July 2007, plans have been approved by the Brazilian Government to construct two hydroelectric dams on the Madeira River, the Santo Ant\u00f4nio Dam near Porto Velho and the Jirau Dam about 100\u00a0km upstream. Both the Jirau and Santo Antonio dams are run-of-the-river projects that do not impound a large reservoir. Both dams also feature some environmental re-mediation efforts (such as fish ladders). As a consequence, it has been suggested that there has not been strong environmental opposition to the implementation of the Madeira river complex. Yet, if the fish ladders fail, \"several valuable migratory fish species could suffer near-extinction as a result of the Madeira dams.\"\nThere are also concerns with deforestation and pressure on conservation areas and indigenous peoples' territories.\nThe Worldwatch institute has also criticized the fast-track approval process for \"kindler, gentler dams with smaller reservoirs, designed to lessen social and environmental impacts\", claiming that no project should \"fast-track the licensing of new dams in Amazonia and allow projects to circumvent Brazil's tough environmental laws\".\nLanguages.\nIndigenous languages of the upper Madeira River basin (in Brazil, Bolivia, and Peru):\n\"Note\": \u2020 = extinct language\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19864", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19864", "title": "Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River", "text": "The Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River (, , ) is the principal or mainstem source of the Amazon River, arising about 160\u00a0km (100 miles) to the northeast of Lima, Peru, and flowing northwest across plateaus 3,650 m (12,000 feet) high, it runs through a deeply eroded Andean valley, along the eastern base of the Cordillera of the Andes, as far as 5\u00b0 36\u2032 southern latitude; from where it makes a great bend to the northeast, and cuts through the jungle Ande in its midcourse, until at the Pongo de Manseriche it flows into the flat Amazon basin. Although historically, the term \"Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River\" often was applied to the river all the way to the Atlantic Ocean, nowadays the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River is generally thought to end at the confluence with the Ucayali River, after which most cartographers label the ensuing waterway the Amazon River.\nAs the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n passes through high jungle in its midcourse, it is marked by a series of unnavigable rapids and falls.\nThe Mara\u00f1\u00f3n was the subject of a landmark legal ruling related to the rights of nature. In March 2024, a Peruvian court ruled that the river itself has fundamental rights, including the right to ecological flows and to be free from pollution.\nGeography.\nThe Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River is Peru's second-longest river, according to a 2005 statistical publication by the Instituto Nacional de Estad\u00edstica e Inform\u00e1tica.\nSource of the Amazon.\nThe Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River was considered the source of the Amazon River starting with the 1707 map published by Padre Samuel Fritz, who indicated the great river \"has its source on the southern shore of a lake that is called Lauriocha, near Hu\u00e1nuco.\" Fritz believed that the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n contributed the most water of all the Amazon's tributaries, making it the most important headstream. \nFor most of the 18th\u201319th centuries and into the 20th century, the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River was generally considered the source of the Amazon. Later explorations have proposed two headwaters rivers of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n in the high Andes as sources of the Amazon: the Lauricocha and Nupe Rivers. The Lauricocha and Nupe unite near the village of Rondos to form from their confluence downstream the river that is called the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n.\nAlthough the Apurimac and Mantaro rivers also have claims to being the source of the Amazon, the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River continues to claim the title of the \"mainstem source\" or \"hydrological source\" of the Amazon due to its contribution of the highest annual discharge rates.\nDescription.\nThe initial section of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n contains a plethora of \"pongos\", which are gorges in the jungle areas often with difficult rapids.\nThe Pongo de Manseriche is the final\" pongo\" on the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n located just before the river enters the flat Amazon basin. It is long and located between the confluence with the Rio Santiago and the village of Borja. According to Captain Carbajal, who attempted ascent through the Pongo de Manseriche in the little steamer \"Napo\", in 1868, it is a vast rent in the Andes about 600\u00a0m (2000\u00a0ft) deep, narrowing in places to a width of only 30\u00a0m (100\u00a0ft), the precipices \"seeming to close in at the top.\" Through this canyon, the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n leaps along, at times, at the rate of 20\u00a0km/h (12\u00a0mi/h). The \"pongo\" is known for wrecking many ships and many drownings.\nDownstream of the Pongo de Manseriche, the river often has islands, and usually nothing is visible from its low banks, but an immense forest-covered plain known as the \"selva baja\" (low jungle) or Peruvian Amazonia. It is home to indigenous peoples such as the Urarina of the Chambira Basin http://, the Candoshi, and the Cocama-Cocamilla peoples.\nA 552-km (343-mi) section of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River between Puente Copuma (Puchka confluence) and Corral Quemado is a class IV raftable river that is similar in many ways to the Grand Canyon of the United States, and has been labeled the \"Grand Canyon of the Amazon\". Most of this section of the river is in a canyon that is up to 3000 m deep on both sides \u2013 over twice the depth of the Colorado's Grand Canyon. It is in dry, desert-like terrain, much of which receives only 250\u2013350\u00a0mm/rain per year (10\u201314 in/yr) with parts such as from Balsas to Ja\u00e9n known as the hottest \"infierno\" area of Peru. The Mara\u00f1\u00f3n Grand Canyon section flows by the village of Calemar, where Peruvian writer Ciro Alegr\u00eda based one of his most important novels, \"La serpiente de oro\" (1935).\nHistorical journeys.\nLa Condamine, 1743.\nOne of the first popular descents of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River occurred in 1743, when Frenchman Charles Marie de La Condamine journeyed from the Chinchipe confluence all the way to the Atlantic Ocean. La Condamine did not descend the initial section of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n by boat due to the \"pongos\". From where he began his boating descent at the Chiriaco confluence, La Condamine still had to confront several \"pongos\", including the Pongo de Huaracayo (or Guaracayo) and the Pongo de Manseriche.\nFlornoy, 1941-1942.\nIn 1936, Bertrand Flornoy was appointed charg\u00e9 de mission at the National Museum of Natural History of France, which sent him on study and exploration missions in Amazonia and the Andes. He specialised in the Peruvian Upper Amazon, and in 1941 and 1942 discovered the sources of the R\u00edo Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, one of the tributaries of the Amazon.\nThe Grand Canyon of the Amazon.\nThe upper Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River has seen a number of descents. An attempt to paddle the river was made by Herbert Rittlinger in 1936. Sebastian Snow was an adventurer who journeyed down most of the river by trekking to Chiriaco River starting at the source near Lake Ni\u00f1acocha.\nIn 1976 and/or 1977, Laszlo Berty descended the section from Chagual to the jungle in a raft. In 1977, a group composed of Tom Fisher, Steve Gaskill, Ellen Toll, and John Wasson spent over a month descending the river from Rondos to Nazareth with kayaks and a raft. In 2004, Tim Biggs and companions kayaked the entire river from the Nupe River to Iquitos. In 2012, Rocky Contos descended the entire river with various companions along the way.\nHydroelectric dams.\nThe Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River may supply 20 hydroelectric mega-dams planned in the Andes, and most of the power is thought to be destined for export to Brazil, Chile, or Ecuador. Dam survey crews have drafted construction blueprints, and the environmental impact statements have been available since November 2009 for the Veracruz dam, and since November 2011, the Chadin2 dam. \nA 2011 law stated \"national demand\" for the hydroelectric energy, while in 2013, Peruvian President Ollanta Humala explicitly made a connection with mining; the energy is to supply mines in the Cajamarca Region, La Libertad, Ancash Region, and Piura Region. Construction of the 406 MW dam in Chaglla District started in 2012.\nConcerns.\nOpposition arose because the dams are expected to disrupt the major source of the Amazon, alter normal silt deposition into the lower river, damage habitat and migration patterns for fish and other aquatic life, displace thousands of residents along the river, and damage a national treasure \"at least as nice as the Grand Canyon in the USA\". Residents have launched efforts to halt the dams along the river with conservation groups such as SierraRios and International Rivers.\nPotential ecological impacts of 151 new dams greater than 2 MW on five of the six major Andean tributaries of the Amazon over the next 20 years are estimated to be high, including the first major break in connectivity between Andean headwaters and lowland Amazon and deforestation due to infrastructure.\nWater Pollution.\nThe Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River has been polluted by oil pipelines and mining activities in its watershed. Between 1970 and 2019, over 60 spills have been documented from the Norperuano oil pipeline. Mercury and other toxic chemicals have been released from illegal mining.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19865", "revid": "50816438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19865", "title": "March 6", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearMarch 6 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19866", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19866", "title": "Morona River", "text": "River in Ecuador and Peru\nThe Morona River is a tributary to the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n River in Peru and Ecuador, and flows parallel to the Pastaza River and immediately to the west of it, and is the last stream of any importance on the northern side of the Amazon before reaching the Pongo de Manseriche.\nIt is formed from a multitude of water-courses which descend the slopes of the Ecuadorian Andes south of the gigantic volcano of Sangay; but it soon reaches the plain, which commences where it receives its Cusulima branch. The Morona is navigable for small craft for about 300 miles above its mouth, but it is extremely tortuous. Canoes may ascend many of its branches, especially the Cusuhma and the Miazal, the latter almost to the base of Sangay. The Morona has been the scene of many rude explorations, with the hope of finding it serviceable as a commercial route between the inter-Andean tableland of Ecuador and the Amazon river.\nIn 2016, a large oil spill from Petroper\u00fa's pipeline contaminated the Morona and Chiriaco rivers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19867", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19867", "title": "Max Newman", "text": "English mathematician (1897\u20131984)\nMaxwell Herman Alexander Newman, FRS (7 February 1897 \u2013 22 February 1984), generally known as Max Newman, was a British mathematician and codebreaker. His work in World War II led to the construction of Colossus, the world's first operational, programmable electronic computer, and he established the Royal Society Computing Machine Laboratory at the University of Manchester, which produced the world's first working, stored-program electronic computer in 1948, the Manchester Baby.\nEarly life and education.\nNewman was born Maxwell Herman Alexander Neumann in Chelsea, London, England, to a Jewish family, on 7 February 1897. His father was Herman Alexander Neumann, originally from the German city of Bromberg (now in Poland), who had emigrated with his family to London at the age of 15. Herman worked as a secretary in a company, and married Sarah Ann Pike, an Irish schoolteacher, in 1896.\nThe family moved to Dulwich in 1903, and Newman attended Goodrich Road school, then City of London School from 1908. At school, he excelled in classics and in mathematics. He played chess and the piano well.\nNewman won a scholarship to study mathematics at St John's College, Cambridge in 1915, and in 1916 gained a First in Part I of the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos.\nWorld War I.\nNewman's studies were interrupted by World War I. His father was interned as an enemy alien after the start of the war in 1914, and upon his release he returned to Germany. In 1916, Herman changed his name by deed poll to the anglicised \"Newman\" and Sarah did likewise in 1920. In January 1917, Newman took up a teaching post at Archbishop Holgate's Grammar School in York, leaving in April 1918. He spent some months in the Royal Army Pay Corps, and then taught at Chigwell School for six months in 1919 before returning to Cambridge. He was called up for military service in February 1918, but claimed conscientious objection due to his beliefs and his father's country of origin, and thereby avoided any direct role in the fighting.\nBetween the wars.\nGraduation.\nNewman resumed his interrupted studies in October 1919, and graduated in 1921 as a Wrangler (equivalent to a First) in Part II of the Mathematical Tripos, and gained distinction in Schedule B (the equivalent of Part III). His dissertation considered the use of \"symbolic machines\" in physics, foreshadowing his later interest in computing machines.\nEarly academic career.\nOn 5 November 1923, Newman was elected a Fellow of St John's. He worked on the foundations of combinatorial topology, and proposed that a notion of equivalence be defined using only three elementary \"moves\". Newman's definition avoided difficulties that had arisen from previous definitions of the concept. Publishing over twenty papers established his reputation as an \"expert in modern topology\". Newman wrote \"Elements of the topology of plane sets of points\", a work on general topology and undergraduate text. He also published papers on mathematical logic, and solved a special case of Hilbert's fifth problem.\nHe was appointed a lecturer in mathematics at Cambridge in 1927. His 1935 lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics and G\u00f6del's theorem inspired Alan Turing to embark on his work on the \"Entscheidungsproblem\" (decision problem) that had been posed by Hilbert and Ackermann in 1928. Turing's solution involved proposing a hypothetical programmable computing machine. In spring 1936, Newman was presented by Turing with a draft of \"On Computable Numbers with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\". He realised the paper's importance and helped ensure swift publication. Newman subsequently arranged for Turing to visit Princeton where Alonzo Church was working on the same problem but using his Lambda calculus. During this period, Newman started to share Turing's dream of building a stored-program computing machine.\nDuring this time at Cambridge, he developed close friendships with Patrick Blackett, Henry Whitehead and Lionel Penrose.\nIn September 1937, Newman and his family accepted an invitation to work for six months at Princeton. At Princeton, he worked on the Poincar\u00e9 Conjecture and, in his final weeks there, presented a proof. However, in July 1938, after he returned to Cambridge, Newman discovered that his proof was fatally flawed.\nIn 1939, Newman was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.\nFamily life.\nIn December 1934, he married Lyn Lloyd Irvine, a writer, with Patrick Blackett as best man. They had two sons, Edward (born 1935) and William (born 1939).\nWorld War II.\nThe United Kingdom declared war on Germany on 3 September 1939. Newman's father was Jewish, which was of particular concern in the face of Nazi Germany, and Lyn, Edward and William were evacuated to America in July 1940, where they spent three years before returning to England in October 1943. After Oswald Veblen \u2014 maintaining 'that every able-bodied man ought to be carrying a gun or hand-grenade and fight for his country'\u2014 opposed moves to bring him to Princeton, Newman remained at Cambridge and at first continued research and lecturing.\nGovernment Code and Cypher School.\nBy spring 1942, Newman was considering involvement in war work. He made enquiries. After Patrick Blackett recommended him to the Director of Naval Intelligence, Newman was sounded out by Frank Adcock in connection with the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park.\nNewman was cautious, concerned to ensure that the work would be sufficiently interesting and useful, and there was also the possibility that his father's German nationality would rule out any involvement in top-secret work. The potential issues were resolved by the summer, and he agreed to arrive at Bletchley Park on 31 August 1942. Newman was invited by F. L. (Peter) Lucas to work on Enigma but decided to join Tiltman's group working on Tunny.\nTunny.\nNewman was assigned to the Research Section and set to work on a German teleprinter cipher known as \"Tunny\". He joined the \"Testery\" in October. Newman enjoyed the company but disliked the work and found that it was not suited to his talents. He persuaded his superiors that Tutte's method could be mechanised, and he was assigned to develop a suitable machine in December 1942. Shortly afterwards, Edward Travis (then operational head of Bletchley Park) asked Newman to lead research into mechanised codebreaking.\nThe Newmanry.\nWhen the war ended, Newman was presented with a silver tankard inscribed 'To MHAN from the Newmanry, 1943\u201345'.\nHeath Robinson.\nConstruction started in January 1943, and the first prototype was delivered in June 1943. It was operated in Newman's new section, termed the \"Newmanry\", was housed initially in Hut 11 and initially staffed by himself, Donald Michie, two engineers, and 16 Wrens. The Wrens nicknamed the machine the \"Heath Robinson\", after the cartoonist of the same name who drew humorous drawings of absurd mechanical devices.\nColossus.\nThe Robinson machines were limited in speed and reliability. Tommy Flowers of the Post Office Research Station, Dollis Hill had experience of thermionic valves and built an electronic machine, the Colossus computer which was installed in the Newmanry. This was a great success and ten were in use by the end of the war.\nLater academic career.\nFielden Chair, Victoria University of Manchester.\nIn September 1945, Newman was appointed head of the Mathematics Department and to the Fielden Chair of Pure Mathematics at the University of Manchester.\nComputing Machine Laboratory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nNewman lost no time in establishing the renowned Royal Society Computing Machine Laboratory at the university. In February 1946, he wrote to John von Neumann, expressing his desire to build a computing machine. The Royal Society approved Newman's grant application in July 1946. Frederic Calland Williams and Thomas Kilburn, experts in electronic circuit design, were recruited from the Telecommunications Research Establishment. Kilburn and Williams built Baby, the world's first electronic stored-program digital computer based on Alan Turing's and John von Neumann's ideas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now let's be clear before we go any further that neither Tom Kilburn nor I knew the first thing about computers when we arrived at Manchester University... Newman explained the whole business of how a computer works to us.\nAfter the Automatic Computing Engine suffered delays and set backs, Turing accepted Newman's offer and joined the Computer Machine Laboratory in May 1948 as Deputy Director (there being no Director). Turing joined Kilburn and Williams to work on Baby's successor, the Manchester Mark I. Collaboration between the University and Ferranti later produced the Ferranti Mark I, the first mass-produced computer to go on sale.\nRetirement.\nNewman retired in 1964 to live in Comberton, near Cambridge. After Lyn's death in 1973, he married Margaret Penrose, widow of his friend Lionel Penrose, father of Sir Roger Penrose.\nHe continued to do research on combinatorial topology during a period when England was a major centre of activity notably Cambridge under the leadership of Christopher Zeeman. Newman made important contributions leading to an invitation to present his work at the 1962 International Congress of Mathematicians in Stockholm at the age of 65, and proved a Generalized Poincar\u00e9 conjecture for topological manifolds in 1966.\nAt the age of 85, Newman began to suffer from Alzheimer's disease. He died in Cambridge in 1984, two years later.\nHonours.\nThe Newman Building at Manchester was named in his honour. The building housed the pure mathematicians from the Victoria University of Manchester between moving out of the Mathematics Tower in 2004 and July 2007 when the School of Mathematics moved into its new Alan Turing Building, where a lecture room is named in his honour. He was elected to membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society on 1 January 1945\nIn 1946, Newman declined the offer of an OBE as he considered the offer derisory. Alan Turing had been appointed an OBE six months earlier and Newman felt that it was inadequate recognition of Turing's contribution to winning the war, referring to it as the \"ludicrous treatment of Turing\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19868", "revid": "47572098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19868", "title": "Measure", "text": "Measure may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "19869", "revid": "51030508", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19869", "title": "Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority", "text": "Public transport agency in the US\nThe Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (abbreviated MBTA and known colloquially as \"the T\") is the public agency responsible for operating most public transportation services in Greater Boston, Massachusetts. The MBTA transit network includes the MBTA subway with three metro lines (the Blue, Orange, and Red lines), two light rail lines (the Green and Mattapan lines), and a five-line bus rapid transit system (the Silver Line); MBTA bus local and express service; the twelve-line MBTA Commuter Rail system, and several ferry routes. In 2024, the system had a ridership of , or about per weekday as of the third quarter of 2025, of which the rapid transit lines averaged and the light rail lines , making it the fourth-busiest rapid transit system and the third-busiest light rail system in the United States. As of the third quarter of 2025, average weekday ridership of the commuter rail system was , making it the fifth-busiest commuter rail system in the U.S.\nThe MBTA is the successor of several previous public and private operators. Privately operated transit in Boston began with commuter rail in 1834 and horsecar lines in 1856. The various horsecar companies were consolidated under the West End Street Railway in the 1880s and electrified over the next decade. The Boston Elevated Railway (BERy) succeeded the West End in 1897; over the next several decades, the BERy built a partially-publicly owned rapid transit system, beginning with the Tremont Street subway in 1897. The BERy came under the control of public trustees in 1919, and was subsumed into the fully-publicly owned Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) in 1947. The MTA was in turn succeeded in 1964 by the MBTA, with an expanded funding district to fund declining suburban commuter rail service. In its first two decades, the MBTA took over the commuter rail system from the private operators and continued expansion of the rapid transit system. Originally established as an individual department within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the MBTA became a division of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) in 2009.\nHistory.\nMass transportation in Boston was provided by private companies, often granted charters by the state legislature for limited monopolies, with powers of eminent domain to establish a right-of-way, until the creation of the MTA in 1947. Development of mass transportation both followed and shaped economic and population patterns.\nRailways.\nShortly after the steam locomotive became practical for mass transportation, the private Boston and Lowell Railroad was chartered in 1830. The rail, which opened in 1835, connected Boston to Lowell, a major northerly mill town in northeast Massachusetts' Merrimack Valley, via one of the oldest railroads in North America. This marked the beginning of the development of American intercity railroads, which in Massachusetts would later become the MBTA Commuter Rail system and the Green Line D branch.\nStreetcars.\nStarting with the opening of the Cambridge Railroad on March 26, 1856, a profusion of streetcar lines appeared in Boston under chartered companies. Despite the change of companies, Boston is the city with the oldest continuously working streetcar system in the world. Many of these companies consolidated, and animal-drawn vehicles were converted to electric propulsion.\nSubways and elevated railways.\nStreetcar congestion in downtown Boston led to the subways in 1897 and elevated rail in 1901. The Tremont Street subway was the first rapid transit tunnel in the United States. Grade-separation added capacity and avoided delays caused by cross streets. The first elevated railway and the first rapid transit line in Boston were built three years before the first underground line of the New York City Subway, but 34 years after the first London Underground lines, and 29 years after the first elevated railway in New York City; its Ninth Avenue El started operations on July 1, 1868, in Manhattan as an elevated cable car line.\nVarious extensions and branches were added at both ends, bypassing more surface tracks. As grade-separated lines were extended, street-running lines were cut back for faster downtown service. The last elevated heavy rail or \"El\" segments in Boston were at the extremities of the Orange Line: its northern end was relocated in 1975 from Everett to Malden, Massachusetts, and its southern end was relocated into the Southwest Corridor in 1987. However, the Green Line's Causeway Street Elevated remained in service until 2004, when it was relocated into a tunnel with an incline to reconnect to the Lechmere Viaduct. The Lechmere Viaduct and a short section of steel-framed elevated at its northern end remain in service, though the elevated section was cut back slightly and connected to a northwards viaduct extension as part of the Green Line Extension.\nPublic enterprise.\nThe old elevated railways proved to be an eyesore and required several sharp curves in Boston's twisty streets. The Atlantic Avenue Elevated was closed in 1938 amidst declining ridership and was demolished in 1942. As rail passenger service became increasingly unprofitable, largely due to rising automobile ownership, government takeover prevented abandonment and dismantlement. The MTA purchased and took over subway, elevated, streetcar, and bus operations from the Boston Elevated Railway in 1947.\nIn the 1950s, the MTA ran new subway extensions, while the last two streetcar lines running into the Pleasant Street Portal of the Tremont Street Subway were substituted with buses in 1953 and 1962. In 1958, the MTA purchased the Highland branch from the Boston and Albany Railroad, reopening it a year later as a rapid transit line (now the Green Line D branch).\nWhile the operations of the MTA were relatively stable by the early 1960s, the privately operated commuter rail lines were in freefall. The New Haven Railroad, New York Central Railroad, and Boston and Maine Railroad were all financially struggling; deferred maintenance was hurting the mainlines while most branch lines had been discontinued. The 1945 Coolidge Commission plan assumed that most of the commuter rail lines would be replaced by shorter rapid transit extensions, or simply feed into them at reduced service levels. Passenger service on the entire Old Colony Railroad system serving the southeastern part of the state was abandoned by the New Haven Railroad in 1959, triggering calls for state intervention. Between January 1963 and March 1964, the Mass Transportation Commission tested different fare and service levels on the B&amp;M and New Haven systems. Determining that commuter rail operations were important but could not be financially self-sustaining, the MTC recommended an expansion of the MTA to commuter rail territory.\nOn August 3, 1964, the MBTA succeeded the MTA, with an enlarged service area intended to fund continued commuter rail operations. The original 14-municipality MTA district was expanded to 78 cities and towns. Several lines were briefly cut back while contracts with out-of-district towns were reached, but, except for the outer portions of the Central Mass Branch (cut back from Hudson to ), West Medway branch (cut back from to ), Blackstone Line (cut back from Blackstone to ), and B&amp;M New Hampshire services (cut back from Portsmouth to ), these cuts were temporary; however, service on three branch lines (all of them with only one round trip daily: one morning rush-hour trip in to Boston, and one evening rush-hour trip back out to the suburbs) was dropped permanently between 1965 and 1976 (the Millis (the new name of the truncated West Medway branch) and Dedham Branches were discontinued in 1967, while the Central Mass branch was abandoned in 1971). The MBTA bought the Penn Central (New York Central and New Haven) commuter rail lines in January 1973, Penn Central equipment in April 1976, and all B&amp;M commuter assets in December 1976; these purchases served to make the system state-owned with the private railroads retained solely as operators. Only two branch lines were abandoned after 1976: service on the Lexington branch (also with only one round trip daily) was discontinued in January 1977 after a snowstorm blocked the line, while the Lowell Line's full-service Woburn Branch was eliminated in January 1981 due to poor track conditions.\nThe MBTA assigned colors to its four rapid transit lines in 1965, and lettered the branches of the Green Line from north to south. Shortages of streetcars, among other factors, caused bustitution of rail service on two branches of the Green Line. The A branch ceased operating entirely in 1969 and was replaced by the 57 bus, while the E branch was truncated from to in 1985, with the section between Heath Street and Arborway replaced by the 39 bus.\nThe MBTA purchased bus routes in the outer suburbs to the north and south from the Eastern Massachusetts Street Railway in 1968. As with the commuter rail system, many of the outlying routes were dropped shortly before or after the takeover due to low ridership and high operating costs. The MBTA started subsidizing the Middlesex and Boston Street Railway in 1964, and acquired it in 1972, creating its 5xx bus routes.\nIn the 1970s, the MBTA received a boost from the Boston Transportation Planning Review area-wide re-evaluation of the role of mass transit relative to highways. Producing a moratorium on highway construction inside Route 128, numerous mass transit lines were planned for expansion by the Voorhees-Skidmore, Owings and Merrill-ESL consulting team. The removal of elevated lines continued, and the closure of the Washington Street Elevated in 1987 brought the end of rapid transit service to the Roxbury neighborhood. Between 1971 and 1985, the Red Line was extended both north and south, providing not only additional subway system coverage, but also major parking structures at several of the terminal and intermediate stations.\nIn 1981, seventeen people and one corporation were indicted for their roles in a number of kickback schemes at the MBTA. Massachusetts Secretary of Transportation and MBTA Chairman Barry Locke was convicted of five counts of bribery and sentenced to 7 to 10 years in prison.\n21st century.\nBy 1999, the district was expanded further to 175 cities and towns, adding most that were served by or adjacent to commuter rail lines, though the MBTA did not assume responsibility for local service in those communities adjacent to or served by commuter rail. In 2016, the Town of Bourne voted to join the MBTA district, bringing the number of MBTA communities to 176. Prior to July 1, 2000, the MBTA was reimbursed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for all costs above revenue collected (net cost of service). \"Forward funding\" introduced at that time consists of a dedicated revenue stream from assessments on served cities and towns, along with a 20% portion of the 5% state sales tax.\nThe Commonwealth assigned to the MBTA responsibility for increasing public transit to compensate for increased automobile pollution from the Big Dig. However, these projects have strained the MBTA's limited resources, since the Big Dig project did not include funding for these improvements. Since 1988, the MBTA has been the fastest expanding transit system in the country, even as Greater Boston has been one of the slowest growing metropolitan areas in the United States. The MBTA subsequently went into debt, and rates underwent an appreciable hike on January 1, 2007.\nIn 2006, the creation of the MetroWest Regional Transit Authority saw several towns subtract their MWRTA assessment from their MBTA assessment, though the amount of funding the MBTA received remained the same. The next year, the MBTA opened the Greenbush Line. Rhode Island also paid for extensions of the Providence/Stoughton Line to T.F. Green Airport in 2010 and Wickford Junction in 2012. A new station on the Fairmount Line, the Talbot Avenue station, opened in November 2012.\nOn June 26, 2009, Governor Deval Patrick signed a law to place the MBTA along with other state transportation agencies within the administrative authority of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT), with the MBTA now part of the Mass Transit division (MassTrans).\nThe 2009 transportation law continued the MBTA corporate structure and changed the MBTA board membership to the five Governor-appointed members of the Mass DOT Board.\nIn February 2015, there was record breaking snowfall in Boston from the 2014\u201315 North American winter, which caused lengthy closures of portions of the MBTA subway system, and many long-term operational and financial problems with the entire MBTA system coming under greater public attention, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker subsequently announced the formation of a special advisory panel to diagnose the MBTA's problems and write a report recommending proposals to address them. The special advisory panel formed the previous February released its report in April 2015.\nThe next month, Baker appointed a new MassDOT Board of Directors and proposed a five-year winter resiliency plan with $83 million being spent to update infrastructure, purchase new equipment, and improve operations during severe weather. A new state law established the MBTA Fiscal and Management Control Board, effective July 17, 2015, with expanded powers to reform the agency during five years. Its term was extended by another year in 2020. Construction of the Green Line Extension, the first expansion to the rail rapid transit system since 1987, began in 2018. In April 2018, the MBTA Silver Line began operating a route from Chelsea to South Station.\nA June 2019 Red Line derailment resulted in train delays for several months, which brought more attention to capital maintenance problems at the T. After complaints from many riders and business groups, the governor proposed adding $50 million for an independent team to speed up inspections and capital projects, and general efforts to speed up existing capital spending from $1 billion to $1.5 billion per year. Replacement of the Red Line signal system was accelerated, including equipment that was damaged in the derailment. Baker proposed allocating to the MBTA $2.7 billion from the state's five-year transportation bond bill plus more money from the proposed multi-state Transportation and Climate Initiative.\nA December 2019 report by the MBTA's Fiscal and Management Control Board panel found that \"safety is not the priority at the T, but it must be.\" The report said, \"There is a general feeling that fiscal controls over the years may have gone too far, which coupled with staff cutting has resulted in the inability to accomplish required maintenance and inspections, or has hampered work keeping legacy system assets fully functional.\" In June 2021, the Fiscal and Management Control Board was dissolved, and the following month, Baker signed into law a supplemental budget bill that included a provision creating a permanent MBTA Board of Directors, and Baker appointed the new board the following October. In February 2022, MBTA staff reported to the MBTA Board of Directors safety subcommittee that of 61 recommendations made by the Fiscal and Management Control Board in 2019, two-thirds were complete and one-third were on progress or on hold (including all financial review recommendations). In April 2022, the Federal Transit Administration announced in a letter to MBTA General Manager Steve Poftak that it would assume an increased safety oversight role over the MBTA and would conduct a safety management inspection.\nAs of 2022, the MBTA had reduced its greenhouse gas emissions by 47% from 2009 levels, and now buys or produces 100% renewable electricity. The first phase of the South Coast Rail project opened on March 24, 2025.\nServices.\nSubway.\nThe subway system has three heavy rail rapid transit lines (the Red, Orange and Blue Lines), and two light rail lines (the Green Line and the Mattapan Line, the latter designated an extension of the Red Line). The system operates according to a spoke-hub distribution paradigm, with the lines running radially between central Boston and its environs. It is common usage in Boston to refer to all four of the color-coded rail lines which run underground as \"the subway\" or \"the T\", regardless of the actual railcar equipment used.\nAll four subway lines cross downtown, forming a quadrilateral configuration, and the Orange and Green Lines (which run approximately parallel in that district) also connect directly at two stations just north of downtown. The Red Line and Blue Line are the only pair of subway lines which do not have a direct transfer connection to each other. Because the various subway lines do not consistently run in any given compass direction, it is customary to refer to line directions as \"inbound\" or \"outbound\". Inbound trains travel towards the four downtown transfer stations, and outbound trains travel away from these hub stations.\nThe Green Line has four branches in the west: B (Boston College), C (Cleveland Circle), D (Riverside), and E (Heath Street). The A branch formerly went to Watertown, filling in the north-to-south letter assignment pattern, and the E branch formerly continued beyond Heath Street to Arborway.\nThe Red Line has two branches in the south, Ashmont and Braintree, named after their terminal stations.\nThe colors were assigned on August 26, 1965, in conjunction with design standards developed by Cambridge Seven Associates, and have served as the primary identifier for the lines since the 1964 reorganization of the MTA into the MBTA. The Orange Line is so named because it used to run along Orange Street (now lower Washington Street), as the former \"Orange Street\" also was the street that joined the city to the mainland through Boston Neck in colonial times; the Green Line because it runs adjacent to parts of the Emerald Necklace park system; the Blue Line because it runs under Boston Harbor; and the Red Line because its northernmost station was, at that time, at Harvard University, whose school color is crimson.\nOpened in September 1897, the four-track-wide segment of the Green Line tunnel between Park Street and Boylston stations was the first subway in the United States, and has been designated a National Historic Landmark. The downtown portions of what are now the Green, Orange, Blue, and Red line tunnels were all in service by 1912. Additions to the rapid transit network occurred in most decades of the 1900s, and continue in the 2000s with the addition of Silver Line bus rapid transit and planned Green Line expansion. (See History and Future plans sections.)\nBuses.\nThe MBTA bus system, the nation's ninth largest by ridership, has 152 bus routes. Most routes provide local service in the urban core; smaller local networks are also centered around Waltham, Lynn, and Quincy. The system also includes longer routes serving less-dense suburbs, including several express routes. The buses are colored yellow on maps and in station decor. Most routes are directly operated by the MBTA, though several suburban routes are run by private operators under contract to the MBTA.\nThe Silver Line is also operated as part of the MBTA bus system. It is designated as bus rapid transit (BRT), even though it lacks some of the characteristics of bus rapid transit. Two routes run on Washington Street between Nubian station and downtown Boston. Three \"waterfront\" routes run in a dedicated tunnel in South Boston and on the surface, elsewhere including the SL1 route that serves Logan Airport. Washington Street service, a belated replacement for the Washington Street Elevated, began in 2002 and was expanded in 2009. Waterfront service began in 2004, with an expansion to opened in 2018.\nMBTA predecessors formerly operated a large trolleybus network, much of which replaced surface streetcar lines. Four lines based out of Harvard station lasted until 2022, when they were replaced with conventional buses. Three Silver Line routes operated as trolleybuses in the Waterfront Tunnel using dual-mode buses until these were replaced with hybrid battery buses in 2023.\nCommuter rail.\nThe MBTA Commuter Rail system is a commuter rail network that reaches from Boston into the suburbs of eastern Massachusetts. The system consists of twelve main lines, three of which have two branches. The rail network operates according to a spoke-hub distribution paradigm, with the lines running radially outward from the city of Boston, with a total of of revenue trackage. Eight of the lines converge at South Station, with four of these passing through Back Bay station. The other four converge at North Station. There is no passenger connection between the two sides; the Grand Junction Railroad is used for non-revenue equipment moves accessing the maintenance facility. The North\u2013South Rail Link has been proposed to connect the two halves of the system; it would be constructed under the Central Artery tunnel of the Big Dig.\nSpecial MBTA trains are run over the Franklin/Foxboro Line and the Providence/Stoughton Line to Foxborough station for New England Patriots home games and other events at Gillette Stadium. The \"CapeFLYER\" intercity service, operated on summer weekends, uses MBTA equipment and operates over the Middleborough/Lakeville Line. Amtrak runs regularly scheduled intercity rail service over four lines: the \"Lake Shore Limited\" over the Framingham/Worcester Line, \"Acela Express\" and \"Northeast Regional\" services over the Providence/Stoughton Line, and the \"Downeaster\" over sections of the Lowell Line and Haverhill Line. Freight trains run by Pan Am Southern, Pan Am Railways, CSX Transportation, the Providence and Worcester Railroad, and the Fore River Railroad also use parts of the network.\nThe first commuter rail service in the United States was operated over what is now the Framingham/Worcester Line beginning in 1834. Within the next several decades, Boston was the center of a massive rail network, with eight trunk lines and dozens of branches. By 1900, ownership was consolidated under the Boston and Maine Railroad to the north, the New York Central Railroad to the west, and the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad to the south. Most branches and one trunk line \u2013 the former Old Colony Railroad main \u2013 had their passenger services discontinued during the middle of the 20th century. In 1964, the MBTA was formed to fund the failing suburban railroad operations, with an eye towards converting many to extensions of the existing rapid transit system. The first unified branding of the system was applied on October 8, 1974, with \"MBTA Commuter Rail\" naming and purple coloration analogous to the four subway lines. The system continued to shrink \u2013 mostly with the loss of marginal lines with one daily round trip \u2013 until 1981. The system has been expanded since, with four lines restored (Fairmount Line in 1979, Old Colony Lines in 1997, and Greenbush Line in 2007), six extended, and a number of stations added and rebuilt, especially on the Fairmount Line.\nEach commuter rail line has up to eleven fare zones, numbered 1A and 1 through 10. Riders are charged based on the number of zones they travel through. Tickets can be purchased on the train, from ticket counters or machines in some rail stations, or with a mobile app called mTicket. If a local vendor or ticket machine is available, riders will pay a surcharge for paying with cash on board. Fares range from $2.40 to $13.25, with multi-ride and monthly passes available, and $10 unlimited weekend passes. In 2016, the system averaged 122,600 daily riders, making it the fourth-busiest commuter rail system in the nation.\nFerries.\nThe MBTA ferry system comprises several ferry routes via Boston Harbor. It is operated by Hornblower Cruises (branded as City Cruises) under contract to the MBTA. In 2024, the system had a ridership of , or about per weekday as of the third quarter of 2025. The system has eight routes that terminate in downtown Boston. Year-round routes run to Hingham directly (F1) and via Hull (F2H), and to the Charlestown Navy Yard (F4). Seasonal routes run to East Boston (F3), Lynn (F5), Winthrop (F6), and Quincy (F7); combined Winthrop/Quincy weekend service operates as F8.\nParatransit.\nThe MBTA contracts out operation of \"The Ride\", a door to door service for people with disabilities. Paratransit services carry 5,400 passengers on a typical weekday, or 0.47% of the MBTA system ridership. The two private service providers under contractual agreement with the MBTA for The Ride: Veterans Transportation LLC, and National Express Transit (NEXT).\nIn September 2016, the MBTA announced that paratransit users would be able to get rides from Uber and Lyft. Riders would pay $2 for a pickup within a few minutes (more for longer trips worth more than $15) instead of $3.15 for a scheduled pickup the next day. The MBTA would pay $13 instead of $31 per ride ($46 per trip when fixed costs of The Ride are considered).\nBicycles.\nConventional bicycles are generally allowed on MBTA commuter rail, ferry, and rapid transit lines during off-peak hours and all day on weekends and holidays. However, bicycles are \"not\" allowed at any time on the Green Line, or the Mattapan Line segment of the Red Line. Buses equipped with bike racks at the front (including the Silver Line) may always accommodate bicycles, up to the capacity limit of the racks. The MBTA claims that 95% of its buses are now equipped with bike racks.\nDue to congestion and tight clearances, bicycles are banned from Park Street, Downtown Crossing, and Government Center stations at all times.\nHowever, compact folding bicycles are permitted on all MBTA vehicles at all times, provided that they are kept completely folded for the duration of the trip, including passage through faregates. Gasoline-powered vehicles, bike trailers, and Segways are prohibited.\nNo special permit is required to take a bicycle onto an MBTA vehicle, but bicyclists are expected to follow the rules and hours of operation. Cyclists under 16 years old are supposed to be accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Detailed rules, and an explanation of how to use front-of-bus bike racks and bike parking are on the MBTA website.\nThe MBTA says that over 95% of its stations are equipped with bike racks, many of them under cover from the weather. In addition, over a dozen stations are equipped with \"Pedal &amp; Park\" fully enclosed areas protected with video surveillance and controlled door access, for improved security. To obtain access, a personally registered CharlieCard must be used. Registration is done online, and requires a valid email address and the serial number of the CharlieCard. All bike parking is free of charge.\nParking.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], the MBTA operates park and ride facilities at 103 locations with a total capacity of 55,000 automobiles, and is the owner of the largest number of off-street paid parking spaces in New England. The number of spaces at stations with parking varies from a few dozen to over 2,500. The larger lots and garages are usually near a major highway exit, and most lots fill up during the morning rush hour. There are some 22,000 spaces on the southern portion of the commuter rail system, 9,400 on the northern portion and 14,600 at subway stations. The parking fee ranges from $4 to $7 per day, and overnight parking (maximum 7 days) is permitted at some stations.\nManagement for a number of parking lots owned by the MBTA is handled by a private contractor. The 2012 contract with LAZ Parking (which was not its first) was terminated in 2017 after employees were discovered \"skimming\" revenue; the company paid $5.5 million to settle the case. A new contract with stronger performance incentives and anti-fraud penalties was then awarded to Republic Parking System of Tennessee.\nCustomers parking in MBTA-owned and operated lots with existing cash \"honor boxes\" can pay for parking online or via phone while in their cars or once they board a train, bus, or ferry. As of \u00a02014[ [update]], the MBTA switched from ParkMobile to PayByPhone as its provider for mobile parking payments by smartphone. Monthly parking permits are available, offering a modest discount. Detailed parking information by station is available online, including prices, estimated vacancy rate, and number of accessible and bicycle parking slots.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], the MBTA has a policy for electric vehicle charging stations in its parking spaces, but does not yet have such facilities available.\nFrom time to time the MBTA has made various agreements with companies that contribute to commuting options. One company the MBTA selected was Zipcar; the MBTA provides Zipcar with a limited number of parking spaces at various subway stations throughout the system.\nHours of operation.\nTraditionally, the MBTA has stopped running around 1 a.m. each day. Like many subways worldwide, the MBTA's subway does not have parallel express and local tracks, so much rail maintenance is only done when the trains are not running. An MBTA spokesperson has said, \"with a 109-year-old system you have to be out there every night\" to do necessary maintenance. The MBTA did experiment with \"Night Owl\" substitute bus service from 2001 to 2005, but abandoned it because of insufficient ridership, citing a $7.53 per rider cost to keep the service open, five times the cost per passenger of an average bus route.\nA modified form of the MBTA's previous \"Night Owl\" service was experimentally reinstated starting in the spring of 2014 \u2013 this time, all subway lines were proposed to run until 3 am on weekends, along with the 15 most heavily used bus lines and the para-transit service \"The Ride\".\nStarting March 28, 2014, the late-night service began operation on a one-year trial basis, with service continuation depending on late-night ridership and on possible corporate sponsorship. As of \u00a02014[ [update]], late-night ridership was stable, and much higher than the earlier failed experimental service. However, it is still unclear whether and on what basis the program might be extended past its first year. The extended hours program has not been implemented on the MBTA commuter rail operations.\nIn early 2016, the MBTA decided that Late-Night service would be canceled because of lack of funding. The last night for late-night service was on March 19, 2016. The last train left at 2 a.m. on March 19, 2016.\nIn 2018, the MBTA further tried \"Early Morning and Late Night Bus Service Pilots\". In June 2019, a year after the trials the board voted to make some changes to the schedule which would allow for further late night service to be incorporated long term.\nIn August 2025, the MBTA announced that service on subway lines and certain bus routes will be extended by about one hour on Friday and Saturday nights, starting on August 24, 2025. The final Friday and Saturday subway trains depart their origin stations between 1 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. depending on line and direction. Certain bus routes will also have their service extended by about an hour every day of the week.\nFunding.\nFares and fare collection.\nThe MBTA has various fare structures for its various types of service. The plastic CharlieCard electronic farecard is accepted only on the subway and bus systems. Subway and bus systems also directly accept contactless payment via contactless credit card, Apple Pay, or Google Pay using the Charlie system. Commuter rail and ferry accept paper CharlieTickets and the mTicket mobile app. Only buses, surface trolleys, and Commuter Rail accept cash on board, which is discouraged (with a $3 fee for Commuter Rail for stations with fare vending machines). Passengers pay for subway and bus rides at faregates in station entrances or fareboxes in the front of vehicles; MBTA employees manually check tickets on the commuter rail and ferries. For paratransit service, instead of physical fare media passengers maintain an account to which funds can be added by web site, phone, mail, or in-person visit. Trips on The RIDE are booked in advance online or by phone, or subsidized on-demand trips can be requested via Uber or Lyft on those companies' mobile apps.\nStarting June 22, 2020, the short, urban Fairmount Line was incorporated into the subway fare structure in a pilot program that also started running weekday trips every 45 minutes. In addition to the usual Commuter Rail fare media, CharlieCards are now accepted by tapping at fare vending machines and obtaining proof of payment.\nSince the 1980s, the MBTA has offered discounted monthly passes on all modes for the convenience of daily commuters and other frequent riders. As of March 2022, it also offers one-day and seven-day passes (often used by tourists) for subway, bus, inner-harbor ferry, and Commuter Rail Zone 1A. Only the CharlieTicket versions of these passes are accepted on all modes. Single-ride CharlieTickets, weekend passes, 5-ride passes, and the mobile app used for the ferries and commuter rail are not accepted for transfers to buses or subways.\nThe MBTA has periodically raised fares to match inflation and keep the system financially solvent. A substantial increase effective July 2012 raised public ire including an \"Occupy the MBTA\" protest. A transportation funding law passed in 2013 limits MBTA fare increases to 7% every two years. Subsequent fare increases took place in 2014, 2016, and 2019.\nSeveral local politicians, including Boston Mayor Michelle Wu, Representative Ayanna Pressley, and Senator Edward J. Markey, have proposed to eliminate MBTA fares.\nThe ongoing \"Fare Transformation\" project adds contactless credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay as payment methods for all subway and bus lines so passengers will not need to purchase a CharlieCard or CharlieTicket. This system was activated on August 1st, 2024. It also adds all-door boarding on all buses and surface trolleys, using a proof of payment system. A new website is planned to allow passengers and employers to perform self-service CharlieCard transactions. By July 2025, more than a quarter of all fares paid on MBTA subway and bus lines were made with contactless taps.\nSubway and bus.\nAll subway trips (Green Line, Blue Line, Orange Line, Red Line, Mattapan Line, and the Waterfront section of the Silver Line) cost $2.40 for all users. Local bus and trackless trolley fares (including the Washington Street section of the Silver Line) are $1.70 for all users.\nPaying directly with cash is only available on buses, Green Line surface stops, and the Mattapan Line; from 2007 to 2020, the higher CharlieTicket price was charged.\nAll transfers between subway lines are free with all fare media, without the need to pass through fare control (except when continuing in either direction at Ashmont Station). Passengers using CharlieCards can transfer free from a subway to a bus, and from a bus to a subway for the difference in price (\"step-up fare\"). CharlieTicket holders can transfer free between buses, but not between subway and bus, except free subway transfers are given for the Silver Line at Airport station and SL4/SL5 branches.\nThe MBTA operates \"Inner Express\" and \"Outer Express\" buses to suburbs outside the subway system. Inner Express bus trips cost $4.25; Outer Express trips cost $5.25. Free transfers are available to the subway and local buses with a CharlieCard, and to local buses with a CharlieTicket.\nCharlieTickets are available from ticket vending machines in MBTA rapid transit stations. Following the installation of upgraded fare vending machines in July 2022, CharlieCards are now available for purchase from all subway lines and Silver Line stations. CharlieCards were not previously dispensed by the machines but were available free of charge on request at most MBTA Customer Service booths in stations, or at the CharlieCard Store at Downtown Crossing station. As given out, the CharlieCards are \"empty\", and must have value added at an MBTA ticket machine before they can be used.\nThe fare system, including on-board and in-station fare vending machines, was purchased from German-based Scheidt and Bachmann, which developed the technology. The CharlieCards were developed by Gemalto and later by Giesecke &amp; Devrient. In 2006, electronic fares replaced metal tokens, which had been used on and off by transit systems in Boston for over a century.\nUpon introduction in 2007, fares for reloadable CharlieCard contactless smart cards were substantially lower, to encourage riders to use them. The alternative magnetic stripe CharlieTickets were not as durable (and so could only be loaded once), were slower to read, and required maintenance of machines with moving parts.\nIn 2020, the MBTA started implementation of its \"Fare Transformation\" program, reducing cash-on-board and CharlieTicket prices to the CharlieCard level. In the fall of that year, the agency started upgrading a portion of faregates at all stations to accept only contactless cards, in anticipation of the phase-out of paper CharlieTickets, which occurred on March 31, 2022. The gates also feature an optical reader, which is currently unused but is capable of scanning QR codes or bar codes, such as those generated by the mTicket app.\nInstallation of upgraded fare vending machines was completed in July 2022, allowing riders to purchase CharlieCards and the new tappable CharlieTickets at any rapid transit station. These also serve as fare validation points for proof of payment on the Green Line Extension.\nAs of July 1, 2022, two free transfers will be given to CharlieCard stored-value users for all combinations of subway, bus, and express bus rides.\nSubway and bus fare history.\nUntil 2007, not all subway fares were identical \u2013 passengers were not charged for boarding outbound Green Line trains at surface stops, while double fares were charged for the outer ends of the Green Line D branch and the Red Line Braintree branch. As part of a general fare hike effective January 1, 2007, the MBTA eliminated these inconsistent fares.\nBecause there was no farebox on the left-facing door, passengers on the 71 and 73 trolleybuses in Cambridge who boarded through that door underground in Harvard station instead paid the only remaining exit fare in the system. This was eliminated starting March 13, 2022, when the trackless trolleys were replaced by conventional buses to allow the Cambridge garage to convert to service battery-electric buses.\nCommuter Rail.\nCommuter rail fares are on a zone-based system, with fares dependent on the distance from downtown. Rides between Zone 1A stations \u2013 South Station, Back Bay, most of the Fairmount Line, and eight other stations within several miles of downtown \u2013 cost $2.40, the same as a subway fare with a CharlieCard. Fares for other stations range from $5.75 from Zone 1 (~5\u201310 miles from downtown) to $14.50 from Zone 10 (~60 miles). All Massachusetts stations are Zone 8 or closer; only T.F. Green Airport and Wickford Junction in Rhode Island are Zone 9 and 10.\nInterzone fares \u2013 for trips that do not go to Zone 1A \u2013 are offered at a substantial discount to encourage riders to take the commuter rail for less common commuting patterns for which transit is not usually taken. Discounted monthly passes are available for all trips; 10-ride passes at full price are also available for trips to Zone 1A. All monthly passes include unlimited trips on the subway and local bus; some outer-zone monthlies also offer free use of express buses and ferries. A cash-on-board surcharge of $3.00 is added for trips originating from stations with fare vending machines.\nStarting in spring 2022, the MBTA began installing fare gates at North Station, South Station, and Back Bay station as part of its \"Fare Transformation\" project. These three stations are the start and end points of the vast majority of Commuter Rail trips, and the gates eliminate the possibility of passengers boarding without tickets or without having a single-use ticket invalidated (though conductors will still manually verify passengers leave the train in the zone they paid for). A common complaint from monthly pass holders was that on-board conductors would sometimes fail to check any tickets for their car, giving a free ride to single-ride and cash-on-board passengers. The new gates have scanners for bar codes on paper tickets, the mTicket app, Amtrak tickets, and military IDs. They also have a reader for tappable CharlieTickets (and CharlieCards, to prepare for potential future use on the Commuter Rail).\nMBTA ferry.\nFerry routes range from $2.40 to $9.75 per ride depending on distance. They are grouped as Zone 1A to Zone 6 monthly commuter rail passes.\nThe Ride.\nFares on The Ride, the MBTA's paratransit program, are structured differently from other modes. Passengers using The Ride must maintain an account with the MBTA in order to pay for service. Fares are $3.35 for \"ADA trips\" originating within of fixed-route bus or subway service and booked in advance, and $5.60 for \"premium trips\" outside the mandated area.\nDiscounted fares.\nDiscounted fares as well as discounted monthly local bus and subway passes are available to seniors aged 65 and older, and passengers who are permanently disabled who utilize a special photo CharlieCard (called \"Senior ID\" and \"Transportation Access Pass\", respectively). Holders of these passes are also entitled to 50% off the Commuter Rail fares. Passengers who are legally blind ride for free on all MBTA services (including express buses and the Commuter Rail) with a \"Blind Access Card\".\nChildren under 12 ride for free with an adult (up to 2 per adult). Military personnel, state police officers, police officers and firefighters from the MBTA service area, and certain government officials (Commonwealth Department of Public Utilities employees and state elevator inspectors) ride at no charge upon presentation of proper ID, or if dressed in official work uniforms.\nMiddle school and high school students receive the aforementioned discounts on fares. Student discounts require a \"Student CharlieCard\" or \"S-Card\" issued through the holder's school which is valid year-round. College students are not generally eligible for reduced fares, but some colleges offer a \"Semester Pass\" program. A special \"Youth Pass\" program was introduced in 2017, allowing young adults less than 25 years old who reside in participating cities or towns and are enrolled in specific low income programs to pay reduced fares.\nEmployer and college subsidized.\nFederal law allows employers to deduct the cost of transit passes from wages on a pre-tax basis. Some employers and colleges also choose to subsidize the cost of these passes for employees or students. The MBTA has long had a program that facilitates these bulk purchases for monthly passes. In 2016, it began allowing MIT to subsidize on a per-ride basis, which is considerably cheaper to the institution; this expanded to other employers in 2022.\nBudget.\nSince the \"forward funding\" reform in 2000, the MBTA is funded primarily through 16% of the state sales tax excluding the meals tax (with minimum dollar amount guarantee), which is set at 6.25% statewide, and therefore equal to 1% of taxable non-meal purchases statewide. The authority is also funded by passenger fares and formula assessments of the cities and towns in its service area (excepting those which are assessed for the MetroWest Regional Transit Authority). Supplemental income is obtained from its paid parking lots, renting space to retail vendors in and around stations, rents from utility companies using MBTA rights of way, selling surplus land and movable property, advertising on vehicles and properties, and federal operating funding for special programs.\nA May 2019 report found the MBTA had a maintenance backlog of approximately $10 billion, which it hopes to clear by 2032 by increasing spending on capital projects.\nThe Capital Investment Program is a rolling 5-year plan which programs capital expenses. The draft FY2009-2014 CIP allocates $3,795M, including $879M in projects funded from non-MBTA state sources (required for Clean Air Act compliance), and $299M in projects with one-time federal funding from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Capital projects are paid for by federal grants, allocations from the general budget of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts (for legal commitments and expansion projects) and MBTA bonds (which are paid off through the operating budget). The FY2014 budget includes $1.422 billion for operating expenses and $443.8M in debt and lease payments.\nThe FY2010 budget was supplemented by $160 million in sales tax revenue when the statewide rate was raised from 5% to 6.25%, to avoid service cuts or a fare increase in a year when deferred debt payments were coming due.\nCapital improvements and planning process.\nThe Boston Metropolitan Planning Organization is responsible for overall regional surface transportation planning. As required by federal law for projects to be eligible for federal funding (except earmarks), the MPO maintains a fiscally constrained 20+ year Regional Transportation Plan for surface transportation expansion, the current edition of which is called \"Journey to 2030\". The required 4-year MPO plan is called the Transportation Improvement Plan.\nThe MBTA maintains its own 25-year capital planning document, called the Program for Mass Transportation, which is fiscally unconstrained. The agency's 4-year plan is called the Capital Improvement Plan; it is the primary mechanism by which money is actually allocated to capital projects. Major capital spending projects must be approved by the MBTA Board, and except for unexpected needs, are usually included in the initial CIP.\nIn addition to federal funds programmed through the Boston MPO, and MBTA capital funds derived from fares, sales tax, municipal assessments, and other minor internal sources, the T receives funding from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for certain projects. The state may fund items in the State Implementation Plan (SIP) \u2013 such as the Big Dig mitigation projects \u2013 which is the plan required under the Clean Air Act to reduce air pollution. (As of 2007[ [update]], all of Massachusetts is designated as a clean air \"non-attainment\" zone.)\nProjects underway and future plans.\nBlue Line.\nThere is a proposal to extend the Blue Line northward to Lynn, with two potential extension routes having been identified. One proposed path would run through marshland alongside the existing Newburyport/Rockport commuter rail line, while the other would extend the line along the remainder of the BRB&amp;L right of way.\nIn addition, the MBTA has committed to designing an extension of the line's southern terminus westward to Charles/MGH, where it would connect with the Red Line. This was one of the mitigation measures the Commonwealth of Massachusetts agreed to offset increased automobile emissions from the Big Dig, but it was later replaced in this agreement by other projects.\nOrange and Red Lines.\nIn October 2013, MassDOT announced plans for a $1.3 billion subway car order for the Orange and Red Lines, which would replace and expand the existing car fleets and add more frequent service. The MassDOT Board awarded a $566.6 million contract to a China based manufacturer CNR (which became part of CRRC the following year) to build 404 replacement railcars for the Orange Line and Red Line. The other bidders were Bombardier Transportation, Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Hyundai Rotem. The Board forwent federal funding to allow the contract to specify the cars be built in Massachusetts, in order to create a local railcar manufacturing industry. CNR began assembling the cars at a new manufacturing plant in Springfield, Massachusetts, with initial deliveries expected in 2018 and all cars in service by 2023. However, by the beginning of 2023, only 78 of the promised 152 Orange Line cars had been delivered. In a letter dated December 22, 2022, from the MBTA's Deputy Director of Vehicle Engineering to CRRC, the former complains of \"several significant lapses in overall quality management for the Red and Orange Line project\" with \"no meaningful progress...made by CRRC to address these concerns despite several commitments by CRRC's Management to address these over the period of the last several years\" On January 6, 2023, the MBTA announced its intention to keep the older Orange Line cars as \"a backup plan\".\nIn addition to the new rolling stock, the $1.3 billion allocated for the project will pay for testing, signal improvements and expanded maintenance facilities, as well as other related expenses. Sixty percent of the car's components are sourced from the United States. Replacement of the signal systems, which will increase reliability and allow more frequent trains, was expected to be complete by 2022, with a total cost of $218 million for both lines. As of the end of 2022, the project was described by the MBTA as \"48% complete\"\nCommuter rail.\nThe MBTA plans to convert the system from diesel-powered commuter rail \u2013 which is primarily designed for Boston-centric trips at peak hours \u2013 to an electric regional rail system with frequent all-day service. In June 2022, the MBTA indicated plans to purchase battery electric multiple units, with catenary for charging on part of the network. Plans call for electric service on the Providence/Stoughton Line and Fairmount line by 2028\u201329, followed by the Newburyport/Rockport Line in 2031; all lines would be electrified by 2050.\nNo direct connection exists between the two downtown commuter rail terminals; passengers must use the MBTA subway or other modes to transfer between the two halves of the system. (For non-revenue transfers of equipment, the MBTA and Amtrak use the Grand Junction Branch.) The proposed North\u2013South Rail Link would add a new rail tunnel under downtown Boston to allow through-running service, with new underground stations at South Station, North Station, and possibly a new Central Station. A feasibility study was conducted in 2018.\nThe proposed second phase of the South Coast Rail project would add a more direct routing with five new stations. Two other extensions of existing lines have been studied in the 2020s: extension of the Middleborough/Lakeville Line to or , and extension of the Lowell Line to New Hampshire.\nMBTA Massachusetts Realty Group.\nAs one of the most expansive land owners throughout the Commonwealth, the MBTA established a joint public-private management agency for managing the MBTA's vast inventory of property holdings and land.\nThis allows the transit authority to work with entities to obtain right-of-way (ROW) grant on property which the MBTA administers. The agency assists with the processing of all ROW applications as efficiently and economically as possible, and authorizes these grants at the authorized officer's discretion. Generally, the ROW is granted for an additional stream of revenue to the MBTA outside of normal fare revenue. The agency additionally facilitates persons or organizations wanting to provide concessions, or public advertising potential; or the awardance of property easements.\nOccasionally sale of some surplus under-utilized public space under the MBTA real estate agency's responsibility are disposed of though bidding. This may include lands formerly in use as the state's streetcar network, equipment depots, electric substations, former railroad lines &amp; yards or other properties. Given the vast long-haul rail routes, the MBTA further determined its desire to work with distance providers of telecom or utilities to provide authorization to use pieces of public land for ROW projects, including: renewable energy installs, electric power lines &amp; energy corridors, optical fibre lines, communications sites, road, trail, canal, flume, pipeline or reservoir uses.\nManagement and administration.\nStructure.\nIn 2015, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker signed new legislation creating a financial control board to oversee the MBTA, replacing the Massachusetts Department of Transportation's Board of Directors in the role of overseeing the transit authority. The Fiscal and Management Control Board (FMCB) started meeting in July 2015 and was charged with bringing financial stability to the agency. It reported to Massachusetts Secretary of Transportation Stephanie Pollack. Three of the five members of the MBTA FMCB were also members of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation. The FMCB's term expired at the end of June 2021 and was not extended. It was dissolved and replaced by a new governing body known simply as the MBTA Board of Directors and consisting of seven members.\nThe Massachusetts Secretary of Transportation leads the executive management team of MassDOT in addition to serving in the Governor's Cabinet. The MBTA's executive management team is led by its General Manager, who is currently also serving as the MassDOT Rail and Transit Administrator, overseeing all public transit in the state.\nThe MBTA Advisory Board represents the cities and towns in the MBTA service district. The municipalities are assessed a total of $143M annually (as of FY2008[ [update]]). In return, the advisory board has veto power over the MBTA operating and capital budgets, including the power to reduce the overall amount.\nThe MBTA is headquartered in the State Transportation Building (10 Park Plaza) in Boston, with the operations control center at 45 High Street. The agency operates service from a number of bus garages, rail yards, and maintenance facilities. The MBTA maintains its own police force, the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority Police, which has jurisdiction in MBTA facilities and vehicles.\nBoard of directors.\nThe eight members of the board are as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMassDOT Board of Directors.\nThe eleven members of the committee are as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral managers.\nThe list of MBTA general managers is as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEmployees and unions.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], the MBTA employs 6,346 workers, of which roughly 600 are in part-time jobs.\nMany MBTA employees are represented by unions, with a growing number of full-time non-union contractors. The largest union of the MBTA is the Carmen's Union (Local 589), representing bus and subway operators. This includes full and part-time bus drivers, motorpersons and streetcar motorpersons, full and part-time train attendants, and Customer Service Agents (CSAs). Further unions include the Machinists Union, Local 264; Electrical Workers Union, Local 717; the Welder's Union, Local 651; the Executive Union; the Office and Professional Employees International Union, Local 453; the Professional and Technical Engineers Union, Local 105; and the Office and Professional Employees Union, Local 6.\nWithin the authority, employees are ranked according to seniority (or \"rating\"). This is categorized by an employee's five or six-digit badge number, though some of the longest serving employees still have only three or four-digits. An employee's badge number indicates the relative length of employment with the MBTA; badges are issued in sequential order. The rating structure determines many different things, including the rank in which perks are to be offered to employee, such as: When offering the choice for quarter-annual route assignments (\"picks\"), overtime offerings, and even the rank to transfer new hires from part-time roles to a full-time role.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1951, the growing subway network was the setting of \"A Subway Named Mobius\", a science fiction short story written by the American astronomer Armin Joseph Deutsch. The tale described a Boston subway train which accidentally became a \"phantom\" by becoming lost in the fourth dimension, analogous to a topological Mobius strip. In 2001, a half-century later, the narrative was nominated for a Retro Hugo Award for Best Short Story at the World Science Fiction Convention.\nIn 1959, the satirical song \"M.T.A.\" (informally known as \"Charlie on the MTA\") was a hit single, as performed by the folksingers the Kingston Trio. It tells the absurd story of a passenger named Charlie, who cannot pay a newly imposed 5-cent exit fare, and thus remains trapped in the subway system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19870", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19870", "title": "Meson", "text": "Subatomic particle; made of equal numbers of quarks and antiquarks\nIn particle physics, a meson () is a type of hadronic subatomic particle composed of an equal number of quarks and antiquarks, usually one of each, bound together by the strong interaction. Because mesons are composed of quark subparticles, they have a meaningful physical size, a diameter of roughly one femtometre (10\u221215\u00a0m), which is about 0.6\u00a0times the size of a proton or neutron. All mesons are unstable, with the longest-lived lasting for only a few tenths of a nanosecond. Heavier mesons decay to lighter mesons and ultimately to stable electrons, neutrinos and photons.\nOutside the nucleus, mesons appear in nature only as short-lived products of very high-energy collisions between particles made of quarks, such as cosmic rays (high-energy protons and neutrons) and baryonic matter. Mesons are routinely produced artificially in cyclotrons or other particle accelerators in the collisions of protons, antiprotons, or other particles.\nHigher-energy (more massive) mesons were created momentarily in the Big Bang, but are not thought to play a role in nature today. However, such heavy mesons are regularly created in particle accelerator experiments that explore the nature of the heavier quarks that compose the heavier mesons.\nMesons are part of the hadron particle family, which are defined simply as particles composed of two or more quarks. The other members of the hadron family are the baryons: subatomic particles composed of odd numbers of valence quarks (at least three), and some experiments show evidence of exotic mesons, which do not have the conventional valence quark content of two quarks (one quark and one antiquark), but four or more.\nBecause quarks have a spin , the difference in quark number between mesons and baryons results in conventional two-quark mesons being bosons, whereas baryons are fermions.\nEach type of meson has a corresponding antiparticle (antimeson) in which quarks are replaced by their corresponding antiquarks and vice versa. For example, a positive pion () is made of one up quark and one down antiquark; and its corresponding antiparticle, the negative pion (), is made of one up antiquark and one down quark.\nBecause mesons are composed of quarks, they participate in both the weak interaction and strong interaction. Mesons with net electric charge also participate in the electromagnetic interaction. Mesons are classified according to their quark content, total angular momentum, parity and various other properties, such as C-parity and G-parity. Although no meson is stable, those of lower mass are nonetheless more stable than the more massive, and hence are easier to observe and study in particle accelerators or in cosmic ray experiments. The lightest group of mesons is less massive than the lightest group of baryons, meaning that they are more easily produced in experiments, and thus exhibit certain higher-energy phenomena more readily than do baryons. But mesons can be quite massive: for example, the J/Psi meson () containing the charm quark, first seen 1974, is about three times as massive as a proton, and the upsilon meson () containing the bottom quark, first seen in 1977, is about ten times as massive as a proton.\nHistory.\nFrom theoretical considerations, in 1934 Hideki Yukawa predicted the existence and the approximate mass of the \"meson\" as the carrier of the nuclear force that holds atomic nuclei together. If there were no nuclear force, all nuclei with two or more protons would fly apart due to electromagnetic repulsion. Yukawa called his carrier particle the meson, from \u03bc\u03ad\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2 \"mesos\", the Greek word for \"intermediate\", because its predicted mass was between that of the electron and that of the proton, which has about 1,836\u00a0times the mass of the electron. Yukawa or Carl David Anderson, who discovered the muon, had originally named the particle the \"mesotron\", but he was corrected by the physicist Werner Heisenberg (whose father was a professor of Greek at the University of Munich). Heisenberg pointed out that there is no \"tr\" in the Greek word \"mesos\".\nThe first candidate for Yukawa's meson, in modern terminology known as the muon, was discovered in 1936 by Carl David Anderson and others in the decay products of cosmic ray interactions. The \"mu meson\" had about the right mass to be Yukawa's carrier of the strong nuclear force, but over the course of the next decade, it became evident that it was not the right particle. It was eventually found that the \"mu meson\" did not participate in the strong nuclear interaction at all, but rather behaved like a heavy version of the electron, and was eventually classed as a lepton like the electron, rather than a meson. In making this choice, physicists decided that properties other than particle mass should control their classification.\nThere were years of delays in the subatomic particle research during World War II (1939\u20131945), with most physicists working in applied projects for wartime necessities. When the war ended in August\u00a01945, many physicists gradually returned to peacetime research. The first true meson to be discovered was what would later be called the \"pi meson\" (or pion). During 1939\u20131942, Debendra Mohan Bose and Bibha Chowdhuri exposed Ilford half-tone photographic plates in the high altitude mountainous regions of Darjeeling, and observed long curved ionizing tracks that appeared to be different from the tracks of alpha particles or protons. In a series of articles published in \"Nature\", they identified a cosmic particle having an average mass close to 200 times the mass of electron. This discovery was made in 1947 with improved full-tone photographic emulsion plates, by Cecil Powell, Hugh Muirhead, C\u00e9sar Lattes, and Giuseppe Occhialini, who were investigating cosmic ray products at the University of Bristol in England, based on photographic films placed in the Andes mountains. Some of those mesons had about the same mass as the already-known mu \"meson\", yet seemed to decay into it, leading physicist Robert Marshak to hypothesize in 1947 that it was actually a new and different meson. Over the next few years, more experiments showed that the pion was indeed involved in strong interactions. The pion (as a virtual particle) is also used as force carrier to model the nuclear force in atomic nuclei (between protons and neutrons). This is an approximation, as the actual carrier of the strong force is believed to be the gluon, which is explicitly used to model strong interaction between quarks. Other mesons, such as the virtual rho mesons are used to model this force as well, but to a lesser extent. Following the discovery of the pion, Yukawa was awarded the 1949 Nobel Prize in Physics for his predictions.\nFor a while in the past, the word \"meson\" was sometimes used to mean \"any\" force carrier, such as \"the Z0 meson\", which is involved in mediating the weak interaction. However, this use has fallen out of favor, and mesons are now defined as particles composed of pairs of quarks and antiquarks.\nOverview.\nSpin, orbital angular momentum, and total angular momentum.\nSpin (quantum number S) is a vector quantity that represents the \"intrinsic\" angular momentum of a particle. It comes in increments of \u00a0\u0127.\nQuarks are fermions\u2014specifically in this case, particles having spin . Because spin projections vary in increments of 1 (that is 1\u00a0\u0127), a single quark has a spin vector of length , and has two spin projections, either or . Two quarks can have their spins aligned, in which case the two spin vectors add to make a vector of length , with three possible spin projections and , and their combination is called a \"vector meson\" or spin-1 triplet. If two quarks have oppositely aligned spins, the spin vectors add up to make a vector of length and only one spin projection , called a \"scalar meson\" or spin-0 singlet. Because mesons are made of one quark and one antiquark, they are found in triplet and singlet spin states. The latter are called scalar mesons or pseudoscalar mesons, depending on their parity (see below).\nThere is another quantity of quantized angular momentum, called the orbital angular momentum (quantum number L), that is the angular momentum due to quarks orbiting each other, and also comes in increments of 1\u00a0\u0127. The total angular momentum (quantum number J) of a particle is the combination of the two intrinsic angular momentums (spin) and the orbital angular momentum. It can take any value from \"J\" = |\"L\" \u2212 \"S\"| up to \"J\" = |\"L\" + \"S\"|, in increments of 1.\nParticle physicists are most interested in mesons with no orbital angular momentum (L\u00a0=\u00a00), therefore the two groups of mesons most studied are the S\u00a0=\u00a01; L\u00a0=\u00a00 and S\u00a0=\u00a00; L\u00a0=\u00a00, which corresponds to J\u00a0=\u00a01 and J\u00a0=\u00a00, although they are not the only ones. It is also possible to obtain J\u00a0=\u00a01 particles from S\u00a0=\u00a00 and L\u00a0=\u00a01. How to distinguish between the S\u00a0=\u00a01, L\u00a0=\u00a00 and S\u00a0=\u00a00, L\u00a0=\u00a01 mesons is an active area of research in meson spectroscopy.\nP-parity.\nP-parity is left-right parity, or spatial parity, and was the first of several \"parities\" discovered, and so is often called just \"parity\". If the universe were reflected in a mirror, most laws of physics would be identical\u2014things would behave the same way regardless of what we call \"left\" and what we call \"right\". This concept of mirror reflection is called parity (P). Gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the strong interaction all behave in the same way regardless of whether or not the universe is reflected in a mirror, and thus are said to conserve parity (P-symmetry). However, the weak interaction does\" \"distinguish \"left\" from \"right\", a phenomenon called parity violation (P-violation).\nBased on this, one might think that, if the wavefunction for each particle (more precisely, the quantum field for each particle type) were simultaneously mirror-reversed, then the new set of wavefunctions would perfectly satisfy the laws of physics (apart from the weak interaction). It turns out that this is not quite true: In order for the equations to be satisfied, the wavefunctions of certain types of particles have to be multiplied by \u22121, in addition to being mirror-reversed. Such particle types are said to have \"negative\" or \"odd\" parity (P\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121, or alternatively P\u00a0=\u00a0\u2212), whereas the other particles are said to have \"positive\" or \"even\" parity (P\u00a0=\u00a0+1, or alternatively P\u00a0=\u00a0+).\nFor mesons, parity is related to the orbital angular momentum by the relation:\n formula_1\nwhere the L is a result of the parity of the corresponding spherical harmonic of the wavefunction. The \"+1\" comes from the fact that, according to the Dirac equation, a quark and an antiquark have opposite intrinsic parities. Therefore, the intrinsic parity of a meson is the product of the intrinsic parities of the quark (+1) and antiquark (\u22121). As these are different, their product is \u22121, and so it contributes the \"+1\" that appears in the exponent.\nAs a consequence, all mesons with no orbital angular momentum (L\u00a0=\u00a00) have odd parity (P\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121).\nC-parity.\nC-parity is only defined for mesons that are their own antiparticle (i.e. neutral mesons). It represents whether or not the wavefunction of the meson remains the same under the interchange of their quark with their antiquark. If\n formula_2\nthen, the meson is \"C even\" (C\u00a0=\u00a0+1). On the other hand, if\n formula_3\nthen the meson is \"C odd\" (C\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121).\nC-parity rarely is studied on its own, but more commonly in combination with P-parity into CP-parity. CP-parity was originally thought to be conserved, but was later found to be violated on rare occasions in weak interactions.\nG-parity.\nG-parity is a generalization of the C-parity. Instead of simply comparing the wavefunction after exchanging quarks and antiquarks, it compares the wavefunction after exchanging the meson for the corresponding antimeson, regardless of quark content.\nIf\n formula_4\nthen, the meson is \"G even\" (G\u00a0=\u00a0+1). On the other hand, if\n formula_5\nthen the meson is \"G odd\" (G\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121).\nIsospin and charge.\nOriginal isospin model.\nThe concept of isospin was first proposed by Werner Heisenberg in 1932 to explain the similarities between protons and neutrons under the strong interaction. Although they had different electric charges, their masses were so similar that physicists believed that they were actually the same particle. The different electric charges were explained as being the result of some unknown excitation similar to spin. This unknown excitation was later dubbed \"isospin\" by Eugene Wigner in 1937.\nWhen the first mesons were discovered, they too were seen through the eyes of isospin and so the three pions were believed to be the same particle, but in different isospin states.\nThe mathematics of isospin was modeled after the mathematics of spin. Isospin projections varied in increments of 1 just like those of spin, and to each projection was associated a \"charged state\". Because the \"pion particle\" had three \"charged states\", it was said to be of isospin Its \"charged states\" , , and , corresponded to the isospin projections and respectively. Another example is the \"rho particle\", also with three charged states. Its \"charged states\" , , and , corresponded to the isospin projections and respectively.\nReplacement by the quark model.\nThis belief lasted until Murray Gell-Mann proposed the quark model in 1964 (containing originally only the u, d, and s quarks). The success of the isospin model is now understood to be an artifact of the similar masses of the u and d quarks. Because the u and d quarks have similar masses, particles made of the same number of them also have similar masses.\nThe exact u and d quark composition determines the charge, because u quarks carry charge \u00a0\"e\" whereas d quarks carry charge \u00a0\"e\". For example, the three pions all have different charges\n ( )\n ( )\nbut they all have similar masses (c. ) as they are each composed of a same total number of up and down quarks and antiquarks. Under the isospin model, they were considered a single particle in different charged states.\nAfter the quark model was adopted, physicists noted that the isospin projections were related to the up and down quark content of particles by the relation\n formula_6\nwhere the n-symbols are the count of up and down quarks and antiquarks.\nIn the \"isospin picture\", the three pions and three rhos were thought to be the different states of two particles. However, in the quark model, the rhos are excited states of pions. Isospin, although conveying an inaccurate picture of things, is still used to classify hadrons, leading to unnatural and often confusing nomenclature.\nBecause mesons are hadrons, the isospin classification is also used for them all, with the quantum number calculated by adding for each positively charged up-or-down quark-or-antiquark (up quarks and down antiquarks), and for each negatively charged up-or-down quark-or-antiquark (up antiquarks and down quarks).\nFlavour quantum numbers.\nThe strangeness quantum number \"S\" (not to be confused with spin) was noticed to go up and down along with particle mass. The higher the mass, the lower (more negative) the strangeness (the more s quarks). Particles could be described with isospin projections (related to charge) and strangeness (mass) (see the uds nonet figures). As other quarks were discovered, new quantum numbers were made to have similar description of udc and udb nonets. Because only the u and d mass are similar, this description of particle mass and charge in terms of isospin and flavour quantum numbers only works well for the nonets made of one u, one d and one other quark and breaks down for the other nonets (for example ucb nonet). If the quarks all had the same mass, their behaviour would be called \"symmetric\", because they would all behave in exactly the same way with respect to the strong interaction. However, as quarks do not have the same mass, they do not interact in the same way (exactly like an electron placed in an electric field will accelerate more than a proton placed in the same field because of its lighter mass), and the symmetry is said to be broken.\nIt was noted that charge (\"Q\") was related to the isospin projection (\"I\"3), the baryon number (\"B\") and flavour quantum numbers (\"S\", \"C\", \"B\"\u2032, \"T\") by the Gell-Mann\u2013Nishijima formula:\n formula_7\nwhere \"S\", \"C\", \"B\u2032\", and \"T\" represent the strangeness, charm, bottomness and topness flavour quantum numbers respectively. They are related to the number of strange, charm, bottom, and top quarks and antiquark according to the relations:\n formula_8\nmeaning that the Gell-Mann\u2013Nishijima formula is equivalent to the expression of charge in terms of quark content:\n formula_9\nClassification.\nMesons are classified into groups according to their isospin (\"I\"), total angular momentum (\"J\"), parity (P), G-parity (G) or C-parity (C) when applicable, and quark (q) content. The rules for classification are defined by the Particle Data Group, and are rather convoluted. The rules are presented below, in table form for simplicity.\nTypes of meson.\nMesons are classified into types according to their spin configurations. Some specific configurations are given special names based on the mathematical properties of their spin configuration.\nNomenclature.\nFlavourless mesons.\nFlavourless mesons are mesons made of pair of quark and antiquarks of the same flavour (all their flavour quantum numbers are zero: S = 0, C = 0, = 0, T = 0). The rules for flavourless mesons are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFlavoured mesons.\nFlavoured mesons are mesons made of pair of quark and antiquarks of different flavours. The rules are simpler in this case: The main symbol depends on the heavier quark, the superscript depends on the charge, and the subscript (if any) depends on the lighter quark. In table form, they are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExotic mesons.\nThere is experimental evidence for particles that are hadrons (i.e., are composed of quarks) and are color-neutral with zero baryon number, and thus by conventional definition are mesons. Yet, these particles do not consist of a single quark/antiquark pair, as all the other conventional mesons discussed above do. A tentative category for these particles is exotic mesons.\nThere are at least five exotic meson resonances that have been experimentally confirmed to exist by two or more independent experiments. The most statistically significant of these is the Z(4430), discovered by the Belle experiment in 2007 and confirmed by LHCb in 2014. It is a candidate for being a tetraquark: a particle composed of two quarks and two antiquarks. See the main article above for other particle resonances that are candidates for being exotic mesons.\nList.\nPseudoscalar mesons.\n[a] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Makeup inexact due to non-zero quark masses.\n[b] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ PDG reports the resonance width (\u0393). Here the conversion \"\u03c4\"\u00a0=\u00a0 is given instead.\n[c] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Strong eigenstate. No definite lifetime (see kaon notes below)\n[d] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The mass of the and are given as that of the . However, it is known that a difference between the masses of the and on the order of exists.\n[e] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Weak eigenstate. Makeup is missing small CP\u2013violating term (see notes on neutral kaons below).\nVector mesons.\n[f] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ PDG reports the resonance width (\u0393). Here the conversion \"\u03c4\"\u00a0=\u00a0 is given instead.\n[g] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The exact value depends on the method used. See the given reference for detail.\nNotes on neutral kaons.\nThere are two complications with neutral kaons:\nNote that these issues also exist in principle for other neutral, flavored mesons; however, the weak eigenstates are considered separate particles only for kaons because of their dramatically different lifetimes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19871", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19871", "title": "Marvel Super Heroes (role-playing game)", "text": "Super hero role-playing game\nMarvel Super Heroes (\"MSH\") is a licensed role playing game set in the Marvel Universe, first published by TSR in 1984. The game lets players assume the roles of Marvel superheroes such as Spider-Man, Daredevil, Hulk, Captain America, the Fantastic Four, and the X-Men. The game was designed to be easily understood, and this approach proved popular. TSR published an expanded edition, \"Marvel Superheroes Advanced Game\" in 1986.\nSystem.\nAttributes.\nPlayers resolve most game situations by rolling percentile dice and comparing the results against a column of the colorful \"Universal Results Table\". The attribute used determines which column to use; different tasks map to different attributes. \nAll characters have seven basic attributes:\nFighting determines hit probability in and defense against hand-to-hand attacks.\nAgility determines hit probability in and defense against ranged attacks, feats of agility vs. the environment, and acrobatics.\nStrength determines damage inflicted by hand-to-hand attacks, grappling, or lifting and breaking heavy objects.\nEndurance determines resistance to physical damage (e.g., poison, disease, death). It also determines how long a character can fight and how fast a character can move at top speed.\nReason determines the success of tasks relating to knowledge, puzzle-solving, and advanced technology.\nIntuition determines the success of tasks relating to awareness, perception, and instinct.\nPsyche determines the success of tasks relating to willpower, psionics, and magic.\nPlayers sometimes refer to this set of attributes and the game system as a whole by the acronym \"FASERIP\". Attribute scores for most characters range from 1 to 100, where normal human ability is Typical (6), and peak (non-superheroic) human ability is Excellent (20). The designers minimize use of the numerical figures, instead preferring adjectives like \"Incredible\" (36-45) and \"Amazing\" (46-62). A \"Typical\" (5-7) attribute has a 50% base chance for success at most tasks relating to that attribute. As an attribute increases, the chance of success increases about 5% per 10 points. Thus a character with an \"Amazing\" (50) attribute has a 75% chance of success at tasks relating to that attribute.\nSuperpowers and origins.\nBeyond the seven attributes, characters have superpowers that function on a mostly \"ad hoc\" basis, and each character's description gives considerable space to a description of how their powers work in the game.\nEach character has an origin which puts ceilings on a character's abilities and superpowers. The origins include:\nAltered humans, normal people who acquire powers, such as Spider-Man or the Fantastic Four.\nHigh-tech wonders, normal people whose powers come from devices, such as Iron Man.\nMutants, persons born with superpowers, such as the X-Men.\nRobots, created beings, such as the Vision and Ultron.\nAliens, non-humans, including extra-dimensional beings such as Thor and Hercules.\nTalents.\nThe game also features a simple skill system referred to as Talents. Talents must be learned and cover areas of knowledge from Archery to Zoology. A Talent raises a character's ability by one rank when attempting actions related to that Talent. The GM is free to determine if a character would be unable to attempt an action without the appropriate Talent (such as a character with no medical background attempting to make a pill that can cure a rare disease).\nGame mechanics.\nTwo primary game mechanics drive the game: column shifts and colored results. Both influence the difficulty of an action.\nA column shift is used when a character is trying a hard or easy action. A column shift to the left indicates a penalty, while a shift to the right indicates a bonus.\nThe column for each ability is divided into four colors: white, green, yellow, and red. A white result is always a failure or unfavorable outcome. In most cases, getting a green result is all that is needed to succeed at a particular action. Yellow and red results usually indicate more favorable results that could knock back, stun, or even kill an opponent. However, the GM can determine that succeeding at a hard task might require a yellow or red result.\nAdditional rules in the \"Campaign Book\" of the basic and advanced sets use the same game mechanic to resolve non-violent tasks.\nPublication history.\nThe first super hero role-playing games appeared in the early 1980s with \"Champions\" (1981) by Hero Games and \"Villains and Vigilantes\" (1983) by Fantasy Games Unlimited. Both of these were \"generic\" systems, not tied to any particular line of comics, and players had to create their own super heroes. TSR scored a coup in 1984 when it acquired the game license from Marvel Comics, allowing it to create a role-playing game and characters based on the popular line of comics. The result was \"Marvel Super Heroes\", a boxed set designed by Jeff Grubb and written by Steve Winter. Grubb designed the game to be easily understood, including a bare-bones combat system sufficient to resolve comic book style superhero fights. The game proved popular, and two years later Grubb and Winter created an expanded edition, the \"Marvel Superheroes Advanced Game\".\nTSR game supplements.\nThe original \"Marvel Super Heroes\" game received extensive support from TSR, covering a variety of Marvel Comics characters and settings, including a \"Gamer's Handbook of the Marvel Universe\" patterned after Marvel's \"Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe\". \"MSH\" also got its own column, \"The Marvel-phile\", in TSR's house magazine \"Dragon\"; the column usually spotlighted a character or group of characters that hadn't yet appeared in a published game product.\nSAGA System.\nIn the late 1990s, TSR published \"Marvel Super Heroes Adventure Game\", a card-based game that used their SAGA System game engine. This version, written by Mike Selinker, included a method of converting characters from the old role-playing game to the SAGA System. Though critically praised in various reviews at the time, it never reached a large market. Shortly afterwards, the Marvel Comics game license reverted to Marvel Comics.\nOther games.\nIn 2003, Marvel Comics published their own game, \"Marvel Universe Roleplaying Game\". This game uses a diceless game mechanic that incorporates a Karma-based resolution system of \"stones\" (or tokens) to represent character effort. Subsequently Marvel Comics published a few additional supplements, but stopped supporting the game a little over a year after its initial release, despite going through several printings of the core rulebook.\nIn August 2011, Margaret Weis Productions acquired the licence to publish an RPG based on Marvel superheroes, and \"Marvel Heroic Roleplaying\" was released beginning in 2012. However, the company found that despite critical acclaim and two Origins Awards, \"Marvel Heroic Roleplaying: Civil War\" \"didn't garner the level of sales necessary to sustain the rest of the line.\" so they brought the game to a close at the end of April 2013.\nReception.\nIn the July\u2013August 1984 edition of \"Space Gamer\" (No. 70), Allen Varney wrote that the game was only suited to younger players and Marvel fanatics, saying, \"this is a respectable effort, and an excellent introductory game for a devoted Marvel fan aged 10 to 12; older, more experienced, or less devoted buyers will probably be disappointed. 'Nuff said.\"\nSeven years later, Varney revisited the game in the August 1991 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue #172), reviewing the new basic set edition that had just been released. While Varney appreciated that the game was designed for younger players, he felt that it failed to recreate the excitement of the comics. \"This is the gravest flaw of this system and support line: its apathy about recreating the spirit of Marvel stories. In this new Basic Set edition... you couldn\u2019t find a miracle if you used microscopic vision. Look at this set\u2019s few elementary mini-scenarios: all fight scenes. The four-color grandeur and narrative magic in the best Marvel stories are absent. Is this a good introduction to role-playing?\" Varney instead suggested \"Toon\" by Steve Jackson Games or \"Ghostbusters\" by West End Games as better role-playing alternatives for new and beginning young players.\nPete Tamlyn reviewed \"Marvel Super Heroes\" for \"Imagine\" magazine and stated that \"this game has been produced in collaboration with Marvel and that opportunity itself is probably worth a new game release. However, \"Marvel Superheroes\" is not just another Superhero game. In many ways it is substantially different from other SHrpgs.\"\nIn the January\u2013February 1985 edition of \"Different Worlds\" (Issue #38), Troy Christensen gave it an average rating of 2.5 stars out of 4, saying, \"The \"Marvel Super Heroes\" roleplaying game overall is a basic and simple system which I would recommend for beginning and novice players [...] People who enjoy a fast and uncomplicated game and like a system which is conservative and to the point will like this game.\"\nMarcus L. Rowland reviewed \"Marvel Super Heroes\" for \"White Dwarf\" #62, giving it an overall rating of 8 out of 10, and stated that \"All in all, a useful system which is suitable for beginning players and referees, but should still suit experienced gamers.\"\nIn his 1990 book \"The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games\", game critic Rick Swan called this \"a snap to learn, loaded with action, and nearly captures the anything-goes lunacy that's been a hallmark of Marvel Comics since the early 1960s.\" Swan did note that familiarity with Marvel heroes was a necessity \"and players who've never heard of Captain America or the Fantastic Four (are there any?) won't find much to like.\" Swan concluded by giving the game superior rating of 3.5 out of 4, saying, \"I believe it's more difficult to design a simple game than a complicated one, so \"Marvel Super Heroes\" strikes me as a triumph.\" \n\"Marvel Super Heroes\" was chosen for inclusion in the 2007 book \"\". Writer and game designer Steve Kenson commented that \"it's a testament to the game's longevity that it still has enthusiastic fan support on the Internet and an active play community more than a decade after its last product was published. Even more so that it continues to set a standard by which new superhero roleplaying games are measured. Like modern comic book writers and artists following the greats of the Silver Age, modern RPG designers have a tough act to follow.\"\nIn a retrospective review of \"Marvel Super Heroes\" in \"Black Gate\", Matthew David Surridge said \"you couldn't help but read comics differently when you were helping create super-hero adventures yourself. Which, so often, seemed superior to what was being published by the major publishers, especially in the early 1990s.\" Ty Johnston for \"Black Gate\" later said \"I had the pleasure of playing the game a fair amount in my teen years and even a little later in my twenties, and more recently I lucked into a few online games with friends, and I have to say this game is not only enjoyable, but it's something of a bit of fresh air, mainly because of its relative simplicity and its willingness to be fun. It's worth checking out.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"It's interesting to see the gulf of quality between \"Marvel Super Heroes\" and \"Conan Unchained\" [published the same year by TSR.] Where \"Conan\" feels like the work of a good designer trying desperately to salvage a corporate cash grab, \"Marvel Super Heroes\" is a fun and functional reflection of the source material in roleplaying game form.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19872", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19872", "title": "Measure theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "19873", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19873", "title": "Measure (mathematics)", "text": "Generalization of mass, length, area and volume\nIn mathematics, the concept of a measure is a generalization and formalization of geometrical measures (length, area, volume) and other common notions, such as magnitude, mass, and probability of events. These seemingly distinct concepts have many similarities and can often be treated together in a single mathematical context. Measures are foundational in probability theory, integration theory, and can be generalized to assume negative values, as with electrical charge. Far-reaching generalizations (such as spectral measures and projection-valued measures) of measure are widely used in quantum physics and physics in general.\nThe intuition behind this concept dates back to Ancient Greece, when Archimedes tried to calculate the area of a circle. But it was not until the late 19th and early 20th centuries that measure theory became a branch of mathematics. The foundations of modern measure theory were laid in the works of \u00c9mile Borel, Henri Lebesgue, Nikolai Luzin, Johann Radon, Constantin Carath\u00e9odory, and Maurice Fr\u00e9chet, among others. According to Thomas W. Hawkins Jr., \"It was primarily through the theory of multiple integrals and, in particular the work of Camille Jordan that the importance of the notion of measurability was first recognized.\"\nDefinition.\nLet formula_1 be a set and formula_2 a \u03c3-algebra over formula_1, defining subsets of formula_1 that are \"measurable\". A set function formula_5 from formula_2 to the extended real number line, that is, the real number line together with new (so-called infinite) values formula_7 and formula_8, respectively greater and lower than all other (so-called finite) elements, is called a measure if the following conditions hold:\nIf at least one set formula_14 has finite measure, then the requirement formula_9 is met automatically due to countable additivity:formula_16and therefore formula_17\nNote that any sum involving formula_7 will equal formula_7, that is, formula_20 for all formula_21 in the extended reals.\nIf the condition of non-negativity is dropped, and formula_22 only ever equals one of formula_7, formula_8, i.e. no two distinct sets have measures formula_7, formula_8, respectively, then formula_5 is called a \"signed measure\".\nThe pair formula_28 is called a \"measurable space\", and the members of formula_2 are called measurable sets.\nA triple formula_30 is called a \"measure space\". A probability measure is a measure with total measure one\u2009\u2013\u2009that is, formula_31 A probability space is a measure space with a probability measure.\nFor measure spaces that are also topological spaces various compatibility conditions can be placed for the measure and the topology. Most measures met in practice in analysis (and in many cases also in probability theory) are Radon measures (usually defined on Hausdorff spaces). When working with locally compact Hausdorff spaces, Radon measures have an alternative, equivalent definition in terms of linear functionals on the locally convex topological vector space of continuous functions with compact support. This approach is taken by Bourbaki (2004) and a number of other sources. For more details, see the article on Radon measures.\nInstances.\nSome important measures are listed here.\nOther 'named' measures used in various theories include: Borel measure, Jordan measure, ergodic measure, Gaussian measure, Baire measure, Radon measure, Young measure, and Loeb measure.\nIn physics an example of a measure is spatial distribution of mass (see for example, gravity potential), or another non-negative extensive property, conserved (see conservation law for a list of these) or not. Negative values lead to signed measures, see \"generalizations\" below.\nBasic properties.\nLet formula_5 be a measure.\nMonotonicity.\nIf formula_48 and formula_49 are measurable sets with formula_50 then\nformula_51\nMeasure of countable unions and intersections.\nCountable subadditivity.\nFor any countable sequence formula_52 of (not necessarily disjoint) measurable sets formula_53 in formula_54\nformula_55\nContinuity from below.\nIf formula_52 are measurable sets that are increasing (meaning that formula_57) then the union of the sets formula_53 is measurable and\nformula_59\nContinuity from above.\nIf formula_52 are measurable sets that are decreasing (meaning that formula_61) then the intersection of the sets formula_53 is measurable; furthermore, if at least one of the formula_53 has finite measure then\nformula_64\nThis property is false without the assumption that at least one of the formula_53 has finite measure. For instance, for each formula_66 let formula_67 which all have infinite Lebesgue measure, but the intersection is empty.\nOther properties.\nCompleteness.\nA measurable set formula_1 is called a \"null set\" if formula_69 A subset of a null set is called a \"negligible set\". A negligible set need not be measurable, but every measurable negligible set is automatically a null set. A measure is called \"complete\" if every negligible set is measurable.\nA measure can be extended to a complete one by considering the \u03c3-algebra of subsets formula_70 which differ by a negligible set from a measurable set formula_71 that is, such that the symmetric difference of formula_1 and formula_70 is contained in a null set. One defines formula_74 to equal formula_75\n\"Dropping the Edge\".\nIf formula_76 is formula_77-measurable, then\nformula_78\nfor almost all formula_79 This property is used in connection with Lebesgue integral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt;Proof\nBoth formula_80 and formula_81 are monotonically non-increasing functions of formula_82 so both of them have at most countably many discontinuities and thus they are continuous almost everywhere, relative to the Lebesgue measure. \nIf formula_83 then formula_84 so that formula_85 as desired. \nIf formula_86 is such that formula_87 then monotonicity implies\nformula_88\nso that formula_85 as required. \nIf formula_87 for all formula_86 then we are done, so assume otherwise. Then there is a unique formula_92 such that formula_93 is infinite to the left of formula_86 (which can only happen when formula_95) and finite to the right. \nArguing as above, formula_96 when formula_97 Similarly, if formula_95 and formula_99 then formula_100\nFor formula_101 let formula_102 be a monotonically non-decreasing sequence converging to formula_103 The monotonically non-increasing sequences formula_104 of members of formula_2 has at least one finitely formula_5-measurable component, and\nformula_107\nContinuity from above guarantees that\nformula_108\nThe right-hand side formula_109 then equals formula_110 if formula_86 is a point of continuity of formula_112 Since formula_93 is continuous almost everywhere, this completes the proof.\nAdditivity.\nMeasures are required to be countably additive. However, the condition can be strengthened as follows.\nFor any set formula_114 and any set of nonnegative formula_115 where formula_116 define:\nformula_117\nThat is, we define the sum of the formula_115 to be the supremum of all the sums of finitely many of them.\nA measure formula_5 on formula_2 is formula_121-additive if for any formula_122 and any family of disjoint sets formula_123 the following hold:\nformula_124\nformula_125\nThe second condition is equivalent to the statement that the ideal of null sets is formula_121-complete.\nSigma-finite measures.\nA measure space formula_30 is called finite if formula_128 is a finite real number (rather than formula_129). Nonzero finite measures are analogous to probability measures in the sense that any finite measure formula_5 is proportional to the probability measure formula_131 A measure formula_5 is called \"\u03c3-finite\" if formula_1 can be decomposed into a countable union of measurable sets of finite measure. Analogously, a set in a measure space is said to have a \"\u03c3-finite measure\" if it is a countable union of sets with finite measure.\nFor example, the real numbers with the standard Lebesgue measure are \u03c3-finite but not finite. Consider the closed intervals formula_134 for all integers formula_135 there are countably many such intervals, each has measure 1, and their union is the entire real line. Alternatively, consider the real numbers with the counting measure, which assigns to each finite set of reals the number of points in the set. This measure space is not \u03c3-finite, because every set with finite measure contains only finitely many points, and it would take uncountably many such sets to cover the entire real line. The \u03c3-finite measure spaces have some very convenient properties; \u03c3-finiteness can be compared in this respect to the Lindel\u00f6f property of topological spaces. They can be also thought of as a vague generalization of the idea that a measure space may have 'uncountable measure'.\nSemifinite measures.\nLet formula_1 be a set, let formula_137 be a sigma-algebra on formula_71 and let formula_5 be a measure on formula_140 We say formula_5 is semifinite to mean that for all formula_142 formula_143 \nSemifinite measures generalize sigma-finite measures, in such a way that some big theorems of measure theory that hold for sigma-finite but not arbitrary measures can be extended with little modification to hold for semifinite measures. (To-do: add examples of such theorems; cf. the talk page.)\nInvolved example.\nThe zero measure is sigma-finite and thus semifinite. In addition, the zero measure is clearly less than or equal to formula_175 It can be shown there is a greatest measure with these two properties:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem (semifinite part)\u2014\nFor any measure formula_5 on formula_177 there exists, among semifinite measures on formula_137 that are less than or equal to formula_179 a greatest element formula_180\nWe say the semifinite part of formula_5 to mean the semifinite measure formula_182 defined in the above theorem. We give some nice, explicit formulas, which some authors may take as definition, for the semifinite part:\nSince formula_182 is semifinite, it follows that if formula_187 then formula_5 is semifinite. It is also evident that if formula_5 is semifinite then formula_190\nNon-examples.\nEvery \"formula_191 measure\" that is not the zero measure is not semifinite. (Here, we say \"formula_191 measure\" to mean a measure whose range lies in formula_193: formula_194) Below we give examples of formula_191 measures that are not zero measures.\nInvolved non-example.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Measures that are not semifinite are very wild when restricted to certain sets. Every measure is, in a sense, semifinite once its formula_191 part (the wild part) is taken away.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem (Luther decomposition)\u2014 For any measure formula_5 on formula_177 there exists a formula_191 measure formula_219 on formula_137 such that formula_221 for some semifinite measure formula_222 on formula_140 In fact, among such measures formula_224 there exists a least measure formula_225 Also, we have formula_226\nWe say the formula_227 part of formula_5 to mean the measure formula_229 defined in the above theorem. Here is an explicit formula for formula_229: formula_231\nLocalizable measures.\nLocalizable measures are a special case of semifinite measures and a generalization of sigma-finite measures.\nLet formula_1 be a set, let formula_137 be a sigma-algebra on formula_71 and let formula_5 be a measure on formula_140\ns-finite measures.\nA measure is said to be s-finite if it is a countable sum of finite measures. S-finite measures are more general than sigma-finite ones and have applications in the theory of stochastic processes.\nNon-measurable sets.\nIf the axiom of choice is assumed to be true, it can be proved that not all subsets of Euclidean space are Lebesgue measurable; examples of such sets include the Vitali set, and the non-measurable sets postulated by the Hausdorff paradox and the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox.\nGeneralizations.\nFor certain purposes, it is useful to have a \"measure\" whose values are not restricted to the non-negative reals or infinity. For instance, a countably additive set function with values in the (signed) real numbers is called a \"signed measure\", while such a function with values in the complex numbers is called a \"complex measure\". Observe, however, that complex measure is necessarily of finite variation, hence complex measures include finite signed measures but not, for example, the Lebesgue measure.\nMeasures that take values in Banach spaces have been studied extensively. A measure that takes values in the set of self-adjoint projections on a Hilbert space is called a \"projection-valued measure\"; these are used in functional analysis for the spectral theorem. When it is necessary to distinguish the usual measures which take non-negative values from generalizations, the term positive measure is used. Positive measures are closed under conical combination but not general linear combination, while signed measures are the linear closure of positive measures. More generally see measure theory in topological vector spaces.\nAnother generalization is the \"finitely additive measure\", also known as a content. This is the same as a measure except that instead of requiring \"countable\" additivity we require only \"finite\" additivity. Historically, this definition was used first. It turns out that in general, finitely additive measures are connected with notions such as Banach limits, the dual of formula_278 and the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification. All these are linked in one way or another to the axiom of choice. Contents remain useful in certain technical problems in geometric measure theory; this is the theory of Banach measures.\nA \"charge\" is a generalization in both directions: it is a finitely additive, signed measure. (Cf. ba space for information about \"bounded\" charges, where we say a charge is \"bounded\" to mean its range its a bounded subset of \"R\".)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19874", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19874", "title": "Malmo", "text": ""}
{"id": "19875", "revid": "1219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19875", "title": "Magdelen College, Oxford", "text": ""}
{"id": "19876", "revid": "41131169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19876", "title": "Motorcycle", "text": "Two- or three-wheeled motor vehicle\nA motorcycle (motorbike, bike, or, if three-wheeled, a trike) is a two or three-wheeled motor vehicle steered by a handlebar from a saddle-style seat.\nMotorcycle designs vary greatly to suit a range of different purposes: long-distance travel, commuting, cruising, sport (including racing), and off-road riding. Motorcycling is riding a motorcycle and being involved in other related social activities such as joining a motorcycle club and attending motorcycle rallies.\nThe 1885 Daimler Reitwagen made by Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach in Germany was the first internal combustion petroleum-fueled motorcycle. In 1894, Hildebrand &amp; Wolfm\u00fcller became the first series production motorcycle. \nGlobally, motorcycles are comparable numerically to cars as a method of transport: in 2021, approximately 58.6 million new motorcycles were sold around the world, while 66.7 million cars were sold over the same period.\nIn 2022, the top four motorcycle producers by volume and type were Honda, Yamaha, Kawasaki, and Suzuki. According to the US Department of Transportation, the number of fatalities per vehicle mile traveled was 37 times higher for motorcycles than for cars.\nTypes.\nThe term motorcycle has different legal definitions depending on jurisdiction (see ).\nThere are three major types of motorcycle: street, off-road, and dual purpose. Within these types, there are many sub-types of motorcycles for different purposes. There is often a racing counterpart to each type, such as road racing and street bikes, or motocross including dirt bikes.\nStreet bikes include cruisers, sportbikes, scooters and mopeds, and many other types. Off-road motorcycles include many types designed for dirt-oriented racing classes such as motocross and are not street legal in most areas. Dual purpose machines like the dual-sport style are made to go off-road but include features to make them legal and comfortable on the street as well.\nEach configuration offers either specialised advantage or broad capability, and each design creates a different riding posture.\nIn some countries the use of pillions (rear seats) is restricted.\nHistory.\nExperimentation and invention.\nThe first internal combustion, petroleum fueled motorcycle was the Daimler \"Reitwagen\". It was designed and built by the German inventors Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach in Bad Cannstatt, Germany, in 1885. This vehicle was unlike either the safety bicycles or the boneshaker bicycles of the era in that it had zero degrees of steering axis angle and no fork offset, and thus did not use the principles of bicycle and motorcycle dynamics developed nearly 70 years earlier. Instead, it relied on two outrigger wheels to remain upright while turning.\nThe inventors called their invention the \"Reitwagen\" (\"riding car\"). It was designed as an expedient testbed for their new engine, rather than a true prototype vehicle.\nThe first commercial design for a self-propelled cycle was a three-wheel design called the Butler Petrol Cycle, conceived of Edward Butler in England in 1884. He exhibited his plans for the vehicle at the Stanley Cycle Show in London in 1884. The vehicle was built by the Merryweather Fire Engine company in Greenwich, in 1888.\nThe Butler Petrol Cycle was a three-wheeled vehicle, with the rear wheel directly driven by a , displacement, bore \u00d7 stroke, flat twin four-stroke engine (with magneto ignition replaced by coil and battery) equipped with rotary valves and a float-fed carburettor (five years before Maybach) and Ackermann steering, all of which were state of the art at the time. Starting was by compressed air. The engine was liquid-cooled, with a radiator over the rear driving wheel. Speed was controlled by means of a throttle valve lever. No braking system was fitted; the vehicle was stopped by raising and lowering the rear driving wheel using a foot-operated lever; the weight of the machine was then borne by two small castor wheels. The driver was seated between the front wheels. It was not, however, a success, as Butler failed to find sufficient financial backing.\nMany authorities have excluded steam powered, electric motorcycles or diesel-powered two-wheelers from the definition of a 'motorcycle', and credit the Daimler \"Reitwagen\" as the world's first motorcycle. Given the rapid rise in use of electric motorcycles worldwide, defining only internal-combustion powered two-wheelers as 'motorcycles' is increasingly problematic. The first (petroleum fueled) internal-combustion motorcycles, like the German \"Reitwagen\", were, however, also the first practical motorcycles.\nIf a two-wheeled vehicle with steam propulsion is considered a motorcycle, then the first motorcycles built seem to be the French Michaux-Perreaux steam velocipede which patent application was filed in December 1868, constructed around the same time as the American Roper steam velocipede, built by Sylvester H. Roper of Roxbury, Massachusetts,\nwho had been demonstrating his machine at fairs and circuses in the eastern U.S. since 1867. Roper built about 10 steam cars and cycles from the 1860s until his death in 1896.\nFirst motorcycle companies.\nIn 1894, Hildebrand &amp; Wolfm\u00fcller became the first series production motorcycle, and the first to be called a motorcycle (). Excelsior Motor Company, originally a bicycle manufacturing company based in Coventry, England, began production of their first motorcycle model in 1896.\nThe first production motorcycle in the US was the Orient-Aster, built by Charles Metz in 1898 at his factory in Waltham, Massachusetts.\nIn the early period of motorcycle history, many producers of bicycles adapted their designs to accommodate the new internal combustion engine. As the engines became more powerful and designs outgrew the bicycle origins, the number of motorcycle producers increased. Many of the nineteenth-century inventors who worked on early motorcycles often moved on to other inventions. Daimler and Roper, for example, both went on to develop automobiles.\nAt the end of the 19th century the first major mass-production firms were set up. In 1898, Triumph Motorcycles in England began producing motorbikes, and by 1903 it was producing over 500 bikes. Other British firms were Royal Enfield, Norton, Douglas Motorcycles and Birmingham Small Arms Company who began motorbike production in 1899, 1902, 1907 and 1910, respectively. Indian began production in 1901 and Harley-Davidson was established two years later. By the outbreak of World War I, the largest motorcycle manufacturer in the world was Indian,\nproducing over 20,000 bikes per year.\nFirst World War.\nDuring the First World War, motorbike production was greatly ramped up for the war effort to supply effective communications with front line troops. Messengers on horses were replaced with despatch riders on motorcycles carrying messages, performing reconnaissance and acting as a military police. American company Harley-Davidson was devoting over 50% of its factory output toward military contract by the end of the war. The British company Triumph Motorcycles sold more than 30,000 of its Triumph Type H model to allied forces during the war. With the rear wheel driven by a belt, the Model H was fitted with a air-cooled four-stroke single-cylinder engine. It was also the first Triumph without pedals.\nThe Model H in particular, is regarded by many as having been the first \"modern motorcycle\". Introduced in 1915 it had a 550\u00a0cc side-valve four-stroke engine with a three-speed gearbox and belt transmission. It was so popular with its users that it was nicknamed the \"Trusty Triumph\".\nPostwar.\nBy 1920, Harley-Davidson was the largest manufacturer, with their motorcycles being sold by dealers in 67 countries.\nAmongst many British motorcycle manufacturers, Chater-Lea with its twin-cylinder models followed by its large singles in the 1920s stood out. Initially, using a converted Woodmann-designed OHV Blackburne engine, it became the first 350 cc to exceed , recording over the flying kilometre during April 1924. Later, Chater-Lea set a world record for the flying kilometre for 350 cc and 500 cc motorcycles at for the firm. Chater-Lea produced variants of these world-beating sports models and became popular among racers at the Isle of Man TT. Today, the firm is probably best remembered for its long-term contract to manufacture and supply AA Patrol motorcycles and sidecars.\nBy the late 1920s or early 1930s, DKW in Germany took over as the largest manufacturer.\nIn the 1950s, streamlining began to play an increasing part in the development of racing motorcycles and the \"dustbin fairing\" held out the possibility of radical changes to motorcycle design. NSU and Moto Guzzi were in the vanguard of this development, both producing very radical designs well ahead of their time.\nNSU produced the most advanced design, but after the deaths of four NSU riders in the 1954\u20131956 seasons, they abandoned further development and quit Grand Prix motorcycle racing.\nMoto Guzzi produced competitive race machines, and until the end of 1957 had a succession of victories. The following year, 1958, full enclosure fairings were banned from racing by the FIM in the light of the safety concerns.\nFrom the 1960s through the 1990s, small two-stroke motorcycles were popular worldwide, partly as a result of East German MZs Walter Kaaden's engine work in the 1950s.\nToday.\nIn the 21st century, the motorcycle industry is mainly dominated by Indian and Japanese motorcycle companies. In addition to the large capacity motorcycles, there is a large market in smaller capacity (less than 300\u00a0cc) motorcycles, mostly concentrated in Asian and African countries and produced in China and India. A Japanese example is the 1958 Honda Super Cub, which went on to become the biggest selling vehicle of all time, with its 60 millionth unit produced in April 2008.\nToday, this area is dominated by mostly with Hero MotoCorp emerging as the world's largest manufacturer of two wheelers. Its Splendor model has sold more than 8.5\u00a0million to date. Other major producers are Bajaj and TVS Motors.\nTechnical aspects.\nConstruction.\nMotorcycle construction is the engineering, manufacturing, and assembly of components and systems for a motorcycle which results in the performance, cost, and aesthetics desired by the designer. With some exceptions, construction of modern mass-produced motorcycles has standardised on a steel or aluminium frame, telescopic forks holding the front wheel, and disc brakes. Some other body parts, designed for either aesthetic or performance reasons may be added. A petrol-powered engine typically consisting of between one and four cylinders (and less commonly, up to eight cylinders) coupled to a manual five- or six-speed sequential transmission drives the swingarm-mounted rear wheel by a chain, driveshaft, or belt. The repair can be done using a motorcycle lift.\nFuel economy.\nMotorcycle fuel economy varies greatly with engine displacement and riding style. A streamlined, fully faired Matzu Matsuzawa Honda XL125 achieved in the Craig Vetter Fuel Economy Challenge \"on real highways\u00a0\u2013 in real conditions\".\nDue to low engine displacements (), and high power-to-mass ratios, motorcycles offer good fuel economy. Under conditions of fuel scarcity like 1950s Britain and modern developing nations, motorcycles claim large shares of the vehicle market. In the United States, the average motorcycle fuel economy is 44 miles per US gallon (19\u00a0km per liter).\nElectric motorcycles.\nVery high fuel economy equivalents are often derived by electric motorcycles. Electric motorcycles are nearly silent, zero-emission electric motor-driven vehicles. Operating range and top speed are limited by battery technology. Fuel cells and petroleum-electric hybrids are also under development to extend the range and improve performance of the electric drive system.\nReliability.\nA 2013 survey of 4,424 readers of the US \"Consumer Reports\" magazine collected reliability data on 4,680 motorcycles purchased new from 2009 to 2012. The most common problem areas were accessories, brakes, electrical (including starters, charging, ignition), and fuel systems, and the types of motorcycles with the greatest problems were touring, off-road/dual sport, sport-touring, and cruisers. There were not enough sport bikes in the survey for a statistically significant conclusion, though the data hinted at reliability as good as cruisers. These results may be partially explained by accessories including such equipment as fairings, luggage, and auxiliary lighting, which are frequently added to touring, adventure touring/dual sport and sport touring bikes. Trouble with fuel systems is often the result of improper winter storage, and brake problems may also be due to poor maintenance. Of the five brands with enough data to draw conclusions, Honda, Kawasaki and Yamaha were statistically tied, with 11 to 14% of those bikes in the survey experiencing major repairs. Harley-Davidsons had a rate of 24%, while BMWs did worse, with 30% of those needing major repairs. There were not enough Triumph and Suzuki motorcycles surveyed for a statistically sound conclusion, though it appeared Suzukis were as reliable as the other three Japanese brands while Triumphs were comparable to Harley-Davidson and BMW. Three-fourths of the repairs in the survey cost less than US$200 and two-thirds of the motorcycles were repaired in less than two days. In spite of their relatively worse reliability in this survey, Harley-Davidson and BMW owners showed the greatest owner satisfaction, and three-fourths of them said they would buy the same bike again, followed by 72% of Honda owners and 60 to 63% of Kawasaki and Yamaha owners.\nDynamics.\nTwo-wheeled motorcycles stay upright while rolling due to a physical property known as conservation of angular momentum in the wheels. Angular momentum points along the axle, and it \"wants\" to stay pointing in that direction.\nDifferent types of motorcycles have different dynamics and these play a role in how a motorcycle performs in given conditions. For example, one with a longer wheelbase provides the feeling of more stability by responding less to disturbances. Motorcycle tyres have a large influence over handling.\nMotorcycles must be leaned in order to make turns. This lean is induced by the method known as countersteering, in which the rider momentarily steers the handlebars in the direction opposite of the desired turn. This practice is counterintuitive and therefore often confusing to novices\u00a0\u2013 and even many experienced motorcyclists.\nWith such short wheelbase, motorcycles can generate enough torque at the rear wheel, and enough stopping force at the front wheel, to lift the opposite wheel off the road. These actions, if performed on purpose, are known as wheelies and stoppies (or endos) respectively.\nAccessories.\nVarious features and accessories may be attached to a motorcycle either as OEM (factory-fitted) or aftermarket. Such accessories are selected by the owner to enhance the motorcycle's appearance, safety, performance, or comfort, and may include anything from mobile electronics to sidecars and trailers.\nSafety.\nMotorcycles have a higher rate of fatal accidents than automobiles or trucks and buses. United States Department of Transportation data for 2005 from the Fatality Analysis Reporting System show that for passenger cars, 18.62 fatal crashes occur per 100,000 registered vehicles. For motorcycles this figure is 75.19 per 100,000 registered vehicles\u00a0\u2013 four times higher than for cars.\nThe same data shows that 1.56 fatalities occur per 100 million vehicle miles travelled for passenger cars, whereas for motorcycles the figure is 43.47 which is 28 times higher than for cars (37 times more deaths per mile travelled in 2007). Motorcycle accident rates have increased significantly since the end of the 1990s, while the rates have dropped for passenger cars.\nThe most common scenario for motorcycle accidents in the United States is a motorist pulling out or turning in front of a motorcyclist, violating their right-of-way. This is sometimes called a SMIDSY, an acronym for the motorists' common response of \"Sorry mate, I didn't see you\". Motorcyclists can anticipate and avoid some of these crashes with proper training, increasing their visibility to other traffic, keeping to the speed limits, and not consuming alcohol or other drugs before riding.\nThe United Kingdom has several organisations dedicated to improving motorcycle safety by providing advanced rider training beyond what is necessary to pass the basic motorcycle licence test. These include the Institute of Advanced Motorists (IAM) and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (RoSPA). Along with increased personal safety, riders with these advanced qualifications may benefit from reduced insurance costs.\nIn South Africa, the Think Bike campaign is dedicated to increasing both motorcycle safety and the awareness of motorcycles on the country's roads. The campaign, while strongest in the Gauteng province, has representation in Western Cape, KwaZulu Natal and the Free State. It has dozens of trained marshals available for various events such as cycle races and is deeply involved in numerous other projects such as the annual Motorcycle Toy Run.\nMotorcycle safety education is offered throughout the United States by organisations including state agencies, non-profit organisations, and corporations. Most states use the courses designed by the Motorcycle Safety Foundation (MSF), while Oregon and Idaho developed their own. All of the training programs include a Basic Rider Course, an Intermediate Rider Course and an Advanced Rider Course.\nIn Ireland, since 2010, in the UK and some Australian jurisdictions, such as Victoria, New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory, Tasmania\nand the Northern Territory, it is compulsory to complete a basic rider training course before being issued a Learners Licence, after which they can ride on public roads.\nIn Canada, motorcycle rider training is compulsory in Quebec and Manitoba only, but all provinces and territories have graduated licence programs which place restrictions on new drivers until they have gained experience. Eligibility for a full motorcycle licence or endorsement for completing a Motorcycle Safety course varies by province. Without the Motorcycle Safety Course the chance of getting insurance for the motorcycle is very low. The Canada Safety Council, a non-profit safety organisation, offers the Gearing Up program across Canada and is endorsed by the Motorcycle and Moped Industry Council. Training course graduates may qualify for reduced insurance premiums.\nMotorcyclists and motor scooter riders are also exposed to an increased risk of suffering hearing damage such as hearing loss and tinnitus (ringing ears). The noise is caused by wind noise while riding, rolling noise from the tyres and the engine itself. The helmet only provides insufficient protection against high sound pressure levels. Medicine (as of 2024) is not able to cure hearing damage. Wearing hearing protection, such as special earplugs for motorcyclists, can help prevent hearing damage.\nMotorcycle rider postures.\nThe motorcyclist's riding position depends on rider body-geometry (anthropometry) combined with the geometry of the motorcycle itself. These factors create a set of three basic postures.\nFactors of a motorcycle's ergonomic geometry that determine the seating posture include the height, angle and location of footpegs, seat and handlebars. Factors in a rider's physical geometry that contribute to seating posture include torso, arm, thigh and leg length, and overall rider height.\nCustomized styles and subcultures.\nWhile motorcycles are manufactured in standard styles (sport, cruiser, enduro, etc...), certain styles of motorcycle sub-genres have been both independently created, or manufactured in accordance with a pre-existing cultural style. Styles of note include: Caf\u00e9 racers, Choppers, and Streetfighters.\nCultural influence has directly led to the manufacturing of certain styles of motorcycles such as the Caf\u00e9 racer. The stylistic choices and aerodynamic benefits of these custom bikes garnered a tremendous popularity which lead manufacturers to adopt the visual cues, and attempt to mimic the custom builds of these motorcycles. Notably, Harley-Davidson also leaned into a popular custom motorcycle culture (the Chopper), producing the Harley \"soft-tail\". This design attempted to appear as a hard tail chopper style build, while maintaining rear suspension yet having an aggressive riding angle similar to that of the custom builds.\nLegal definitions and restrictions.\nA motorcycle is broadly defined by law in most countries for the purposes of registration, taxation and rider licensing as a powered two-wheel motor vehicle. Most countries distinguish between mopeds of 49\u00a0cc and the more powerful, larger vehicles, including scooter type motorcycles. Many jurisdictions include some forms of three-wheeled cars as motorcycles.\nIn Nigeria, motorcycles, popularly referred to as \"Okada\" have been subject of many controversies with regards to safety and security followed by restriction of movement in many states. In 2020, it was banned in Lagos, Nigeria's most populous city.\nIn Iran, women are not allowed to ride motorcycles.\nEnvironmental impact.\nMotorcycles and scooters' low fuel consumption has attracted interest in the United States from environmentalists and those affected by increased fuel prices.\nPiaggio Group Americas supported this interest with the launch of a \"Vespanomics\" website and platform, claiming lower per-mile carbon emissions of 0.4\u00a0lb/mile (113\u00a0g/km) less than the average car, a 65% reduction, and better fuel economy.\nHowever, a motorcycle's exhaust emissions may contain 10\u201320 times more oxides of nitrogen (NOx), carbon monoxide, and unburned hydrocarbons than exhaust from a similar-year passenger car or SUV.\nThis is because many motorcycles lack a catalytic converter, and the emission standard is much more permissive for motorcycles than for other vehicles. While catalytic converters have been installed in most gasoline-powered cars and trucks since 1975 in the United States, they can present fitment and heat difficulties in motorcycle applications. \nUnited States Environmental Protection Agency 2007 certification result reports for all vehicles versus on highway motorcycles (which also includes scooters), the average certified emissions level for 12,327 vehicles tested was 0.734. The average \"Nox+Co End-Of-Useful-Life-Emissions\" for 3,863 motorcycles tested was 0.8531. 54% of the tested 2007-model motorcycles were equipped with a catalytic converter.\nUnited States emissions limits.\nThe following table shows maximum acceptable legal emissions of the combination of hydrocarbons, oxides of nitrogen, and carbon monoxide for new motorcycles sold in the United States with 280\u00a0cc or greater piston displacement.\nThe maximum acceptable legal emissions of hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide for new Class I and II motorcycles (50\u00a0cc\u2013169\u00a0cc and 170\u00a0cc\u2013279\u00a0cc respectively) sold in the United States are as follows:\nEurope.\nEuropean emission standards for motorcycles are similar to those for cars. New motorcycles must meet Euro 5 standards, while cars must meet Euro 6D-temp standards. Motorcycle emission controls are being updated and it has been proposed to update to Euro 5+ in 2024.\nAsia.\nIn Asia, motorcycles are a common mode of transportation and are putting significant pressure on the region's environment. With a massive number of motorcycles, they contribute significantly to greenhouse gas emissions and urban air pollution. In India, road transport accounts for about 12% of the country's energy-related CO2 emissions. In Vietnam, motorcycles contribute up to 87% of the CO emissions and 94% of hydrocarbons (HC) released by vehicles in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. Environmental studies show that motorcycles in Vietnam contribute approximately 29% of NOx, 90% of CO, 65% of NMVOC, and nearly 38% of PM dust in total traffic emissions. In Thailand, gasoline-powered motorcycles are reported to emit significantly higher pollution per kilometer compared to gasoline-powered cars, exacerbating urban smog. In Singapore, the NEA reported that while motorcycles account for only 15 percent of vehicles, they contribute to over 53 percent of carbon monoxide emissions from vehicles.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19877", "revid": "503067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19877", "title": "Map", "text": "Symbolic depiction of spatial relationships\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA map is a symbolic depiction of interrelationships, commonly spatial, between things within a space. A map may be annotated with text and graphics. Like any graphic, a map may be fixed to paper or other durable media, or may be displayed on a transitory medium such as a computer screen. Some maps change interactively. Although maps are commonly used to depict geographic elements, they may represent any space, real or fictional. The subject being mapped may be two-dimensional such as Earth's surface, three-dimensional such as Earth's interior, or from an abstract space of any dimension.\nMaps of geographic territory have a very long tradition and have existed from ancient times. The word \"map\" comes from the , wherein \"mappa\" meant 'napkin' or 'cloth' and \"mundi\" 'of the world'. Thus, \"map\" became a shortened term referring to a flat representation of Earth's surface.\nHistory.\nMaps are a widespread invention, having been found in several societies across the world even before the development of other written communication systems. The earliest surviving maps include cave paintings and etchings on tusk and stone. Later came extensive maps produced in ancient Babylon, Greece and Rome, China, and India. In their simplest forms, maps are two-dimensional constructs. Since the Classical Greek period, however, maps also have been projected onto globes. The Mercator Projection, developed by Flemish geographer Gerardus Mercator, was widely used as the standard for two-dimensional world maps until the late 20th century, when more accurate projections were more widely used. Mercator also was the first to use and popularize the concept of the atlas: a collection of maps.\nGeography.\nCartography or \"map-making\" is the study and practice of crafting representations of the Earth upon a flat surface (see History of cartography), and one who makes maps is called a cartographer or mapmaker.\nRoad maps are perhaps the most widely used maps today. They are a subset of navigational maps, which also include aeronautical and nautical charts, railroad network maps, and hiking and bicycling maps. In terms of quantity, the largest number of drawn map sheets is probably made up by local surveys, carried out by municipalities, utilities, tax assessors, emergency services providers, and other local agencies. Many national surveying projects have been carried out by the military, such as the British Ordnance Survey: a civilian government agency, internationally renowned for its comprehensively detailed work.\nThe location information showed by maps may include contour lines, indicating constant values of elevation, temperature, rainfall, \nOrientation.\nThe orientation of a map is the geographical direction toward the top of the map. In the Middle Ages many Eurasian maps, including the T and O maps, were drawn with east at the top (meaning that the direction \"up\" on the map is eastward). The word \"orient\" is derived from Latin , meaning east. The modern cartographic convention is to put north at the top of a map. This convention is only a few hundred years old.\nAs no direction is inherently \"up\" on a spheroidal planet, a variety of orientations have been used on maps both historically and in the present day. Different factors may influence the preferred orientation of a map, depending both on its expected use and cultural factors affecting the perception of each direction. For instance, north and west had historically \"not\" been placed at the top of maps made in the Northern Hemisphere as these were the directions where the sun disappeared.\nMany maps were oriented to place a particularly significant or holy site at the top. Early Islamic maps often placed south at the top because this was the direction of Mecca relative to the map-makers. Similarly, European Christian maps like the T-O map placed east at the top as this was the direction of the Garden of Eden. Early Chinese maps placed north at the top (despite most Chinese compasses pointing south) due to the location of the imperial capital.\nOther examples of maps with non-north orientations include:\nScale and accuracy.\nMany maps are drawn to a scale expressed as a ratio, such as 1:10,000, which means that 1 unit of measurement on the map corresponds to 10,000 of that same unit on the ground. The scale statement can be accurate when the region mapped is small enough for the curvature of the Earth to be neglected, such as a city map. Mapping larger regions, where the curvature cannot be ignored, requires projections to map from the curved surface of the Earth to the plane. The impossibility of flattening the sphere to the plane without distortion means that the map cannot have a constant scale. Rather, on most projections, the best that can be attained is an accurate scale along one or two paths on the projection. Because scale differs everywhere, it can only be measured meaningfully as point scale per location. Most maps strive to keep point scale variation within narrow bounds. Although the scale statement is nominal it is usually accurate enough for most purposes unless the map covers a large fraction of the Earth. At the scope of a world map, scale as a single number is practically meaningless throughout most of the map. Instead, it usually refers to the scale along the equator.\nSome maps, called cartograms, have the scale deliberately distorted to reflect information other than land area or distance.\nAnother example of distorted scale is the famous London Underground map. The geographic structure is respected but the tube lines (and the River Thames) are smoothed to clarify the relationships between stations. Near the center of the map, stations are spaced out more than near the edges of the map.\nFurther inaccuracies may be deliberate. For example, cartographers may simply omit military installations or remove features solely to enhance the clarity of the map. For example, a road map may not show railroads, smaller waterways, or other prominent non-road objects, and even if it does, it may show them less clearly (e.g. dashed or dotted lines/outlines) than the main roads. Known as decluttering, the practice makes the subject matter that the user is interested in easier to read, usually without sacrificing overall accuracy. \nProjection.\nGeographic maps use a projection to translate the three-dimensional real surface of the geoid to a two-dimensional picture. Projection always distorts the surface. There are many ways to apportion the distortion, and so there are many map projections. Which projection to use depends on the purpose of the map.\nSymbols.\nThe various features shown on a map are represented by conventional signs or symbols. For example, colors can be used to indicate a classification of roads. Those signs are usually explained in a map legend on the margin of the map, or on a separately published characteristic sheet.\nSome cartographers prefer to make the map cover practically the entire screen or sheet of paper, leaving no room \"outside\" the map for information about the map as a whole. These cartographers typically place such information in an otherwise \"blank\" region \"inside\" the map\u2014cartouche, map legend, title, compass rose, bar scale, etc.\nIn particular, some maps contain smaller maps inset into otherwise blank areas of the map: for example:\nDesign.\nThe design and production of maps is a craft that has developed over thousands of years, from clay tablets to geographic information systems. As a form of design, particularly closely related to graphic design, map making incorporates scientific knowledge about how maps are used, integrated with principles of artistic expression, to create an aesthetically attractive product, carries an aura of authority, and functionally serves a particular purpose for an intended audience.\nDesigning a map involves bringing together a number of elements and making a large number of decisions. The elements of design fall into several broad topics, each of which has its own theory, its own research agenda, and its own best practices. That said, there are synergistic effects between these elements, meaning that the overall design process is not just working on each element one at a time, but an iterative feedback process of adjusting each to achieve the desired gestalt.\nTypes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral.\nGeneral-purpose maps provide many types of information on one map. Most atlas maps, wall maps, and road maps fall into this category. The following are some features that might be shown on general-purpose maps: bodies of water, roads, railway lines, parks, elevations, towns and cities, political boundaries, latitude and longitude, national and provincial parks. These maps give a broad understanding of the location and features of an area. The reader may gain an understanding of the type of landscape, the location of urban places, and the location of major transportation routes all at once.\nMaps of the world or large areas are often either \"political\" or \"physical\". The most important purpose of the \"political map\" is to show territorial borders and administrative regions; the purpose of the \"physical map\" is to show features of geography such as mountains, soil type, or land use including infrastructures such as roads, railroads, and buildings.\nTopographic maps show elevations and relief with contour lines or shading. Geological maps show not only the physical surface, but characteristics of the underlying rock, fault lines, and subsurface structures.\nElectronic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom the last quarter of the 20th century, the indispensable tool of the cartographer has been the computer. Much of cartography, especially at the data-gathering survey level, has been subsumed by geographic information systems (GIS). The functionality of maps has been greatly advanced by technology simplifying the superimposition of spatially located variables onto existing geographic maps. Having local information such as rainfall level, distribution of wildlife, or demographic data integrated within the map allows more efficient analysis and better decision making. In the pre-electronic age such superimposition of data led Dr. John Snow to identify the location of an outbreak of cholera. Today, it is used by agencies around the world, as diverse as wildlife conservationists and militaries.\nEven when GIS is not involved, most cartographers now use a variety of computer graphics programs to generate new maps.\nInteractive, computerized maps are commercially available, allowing users to \"zoom in\" or \"zoom out\" (respectively meaning to increase or decrease the scale), sometimes by replacing one map with another of different scale, centered where possible on the same point. In-car global navigation satellite systems are computerized maps with route planning and advice facilities that monitor the user's position with the help of satellites. From the computer scientist's point of view, zooming in entails one or more of:\nFor example:\nClimatic.\nThe maps that reflect the territorial distribution of climatic conditions based on the results of long-term observations are called \"climatic maps\". These maps can be compiled both for individual climatic features (temperature, precipitation, humidity) and for combinations of them at the earth's surface and in the upper layers of the atmosphere. Climatic maps show climatic features across a large region and permit values of climatic features to be compared in different parts of the region. When generating the map, spatial interpolation can be used to synthesize values where there are no measurements, under the assumption that conditions change smoothly.\nClimatic maps generally apply to individual months and the year as a whole, sometimes to the four seasons, to the growing period, and so forth. On maps compiled from the observations of ground meteorological stations, atmospheric pressure is converted to sea level. Air temperature maps are compiled both from the actual values observed on the surface of the Earth and from values converted to sea level. The pressure field in the free atmosphere is represented either by maps of the distribution of pressure at different standard altitudes\u2014for example, at every kilometer above sea level\u2014or by maps of baric topography on which altitudes (more precisely geopotentials) of the main isobaric surfaces (for example, 900, 800, and 700 millibars) counted off from sea level are plotted. The temperature, humidity, and wind on aero climatic maps may apply either to standard altitudes or to the main isobaric surfaces.\nIsolines are drawn on maps of such climatic features as the long-term mean values (of atmospheric pressure, temperature, humidity, total precipitation, and so forth) to connect points with equal values of the feature in question\u2014for example, isobars for pressure, isotherms for temperature, and isohyets for precipitation. Isoamplitudes are drawn on maps of amplitudes (for example, annual amplitudes of air temperature\u2014that is, the differences between the mean temperatures of the warmest and coldest month). Isanomals are drawn on maps of anomalies (for example, deviations of the mean temperature of each place from the mean temperature of the entire latitudinal zone). Isolines of frequency are drawn on maps showing the frequency of a particular phenomenon (for example, the annual number of days with a thunderstorm or snow cover). Isochrones are drawn on maps showing the dates of onset of a given phenomenon (for example, the first frost and appearance or disappearance of the snow cover) or the date of a particular value of a meteorological element in the course of a year (for example, passing of the mean daily air temperature through zero). Isolines of the mean numerical value of wind velocity or isotachs are drawn on wind maps (charts); the wind resultants and directions of prevailing winds are indicated by arrows of different lengths or arrows with different plumes; lines of flow are often drawn. Maps of the zonal and meridional components of wind are frequently compiled for the free atmosphere. Atmospheric pressure and wind are usually combined on climatic maps. Wind roses, curves showing the distribution of other meteorological elements, diagrams of the annual course of elements at individual stations, and the like are also plotted on climatic maps.\nMaps of climatic regionalization, that is, division of the earth's surface into climatic zones and regions according to some classification of climates, are a special kind of climatic map.\nClimatic maps are often incorporated into climatic atlases of varying geographic ranges (globe, hemispheres, continents, countries, oceans) or included in comprehensive atlases. Besides general climatic maps, applied climatic maps and atlases have great practical value. Aero climatic maps, aero climatic atlases, and agro climatic maps are the most numerous.\nExtraterrestrial.\nMaps exist of the Solar System, and other cosmological features such as star maps. In addition maps of other bodies such as the Moon and other planets are technically not \"geo\"graphical maps. Floor maps are also spatial but not necessarily geospatial.\nTopological.\nDiagrams such as schematic diagrams and Gantt charts and tree maps display logical relationships between items, rather than geographic relationships. Topological in nature, only the connectivity is significant. The London Underground map and similar subway maps around the world are a common example of these maps.\nExtremely large maps.\nThe Great Polish Map of Scotland.\nPolish general Stanis\u0142aw Maczek had once been shown an impressive outdoor map of land and water in the Netherlands demonstrating the working of the waterways (which had been an obstacle to the Polish forces progress in 1944). This had inspired Maczek and his companions to create Great Polish Map of Scotland as a 70-ton permanent three-dimensional reminder of Scotland's hospitality to his compatriots. In 1974, the coastline and relief of Scotland were laid out by Kazimierz Trafas, a Polish student geographer-planner, based on existing Bartholomew Half-Inch map sheets. Engineering infrastructure was put in place to surround it with a sea of water and at the General's request some of the main rivers were even arranged to flow from headwaters pumped into the mountains. The map was finished in 1979, but had to be restored between 2013 and 2017.\nChallenger Relief Map of British Columbia.\nThe Challenger Relief Map of British Columbia is a hand-built topographic map of the province, 80 feet by 76 feet. Built by George Challenger and his family from 1947 to 1954, it features all of B.C.'s mountains, lakes, rivers and valleys in exact-scaled topographical detail. Residing in the British Columbia Pavilion at the Pacific National Exhibition (PNE) in Vancouver from 1954 to 1997 it was viewed by millions of visitors. The Guinness Book of Records cites the Challenger Map as the largest of its kind in the world. The map in its entirety occupies 6,080 square feet (1,850 square metres) of space. It was disassembled in 1997; there is a project to restore it in a new location.\nRelief map of Guatemala.\nThe Relief map of Guatemala was made by Francisco Vela in 1905 and still exists. This map (horizontal scale 1:10,000; vertical scale 1:2,000) measures 1,800 m2, and was created to educate children in the scape of their country.\nList.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLegal regulation.\nSome countries required that all published maps represent their national claims regarding border disputes. For example:\nSee also.\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMap designing and types.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMap history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "19880", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19880", "title": "Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni", "text": ""}
{"id": "19881", "revid": "39999417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19881", "title": "Management", "text": "Coordinating the efforts of persons\nManagement (or managing) is the administration of organizations, whether businesses, nonprofit organizations, or government bodies through business administration, nonprofit management, or the political science sub-field of public administration respectively. It is the process of managing the resources of businesses, governments, and other organizations.\nLarger organizations generally have three hierarchical levels of managers, organized in a pyramid structure:\nManagement is taught - both as a theoretical subject as well as a practical application - across different disciplines at colleges and universities. Prominent major degree-programs in management include Management, Business Administration and Public Administration. Social scientists study management as an academic discipline, investigating areas such as social organization, organizational adaptation, and organizational leadership. In recent decades, there has been a movement for evidence-based management.\nEtymology.\nThe English verb \"manage\" has its roots in the fifteenth-century French verb , which often referred in equestrian language \"to hold in hand the reins of a horse\". Also the Italian term (to handle, especially tools or a horse) is possible. In Spanish, can also mean to rule the horses. These three terms derive from the two Latin words (hand) and (to act). \nThe word \"management\" dates back to the 1590s, when it was first used to mean \"the act of managing by direction or manipulation,\" formed from manage plus the suffix -ment. By the 1670s, it had also come to describe \"the act of managing by physical manipulation.\" Later, in 1739, the word became increasingly used to refer to \"a governing body\" or \"the directors of an undertaking collectively,\" a sense that originally applied to theaters.\nDefinitions.\nViews on the definition and scope of management include:\nTheoretical scope.\nManagement involves identifying the mission, objective, procedures, rules and manipulation of the human capital of an enterprise to contribute to the success of the enterprise. Scholars have focused on the management of individual, organizational, and inter-organizational relationships. This implies effective communication: an enterprise environment (as opposed to a physical or mechanical mechanism) implies human motivation and implies some sort of successful progress or system outcome. As such, management is not the manipulation of a mechanism (machine or automated program), not the herding of animals, and can occur either in a legal or in an illegal enterprise or environment. From an individual's perspective, management does not need to be seen solely from an enterprise point of view, because management is a function in improving one's life and relationships. Management is seen in various parts of society.Plans, measurements, motivational psychological tools, goals, and economic measures (profit, etc.) may or may not be necessary components for there to be management. At first, one views management functionally, such as measuring quantity, adjusting plans, and meeting goals, but this applies even in situations where planning does not take place. From this perspective, Henri Fayol (1841\u20131925) considers management to consist of five functions:\nIn another way of thinking, Mary Parker Follett (1868\u20131933), allegedly defined management as \"the art of getting things done through people\". She described management as a philosophy.\nSome scholars however find this definition useful but far too narrow. The phrase \"management is what managers do\" occurs widely, suggesting the difficulty of defining management without circularity, the shifting nature of definitions and the connection of managerial practices with the existence of a managerial cadre or of a class.\nOne habit of thought regards management as equivalent to \"business administration\" and thus excludes management in places outside commerce, for example in charities and in the public sector. More broadly, every organization must \"manage\" its work, people, processes, technology, etc. to maximize effectiveness. Nonetheless, many people refer to university departments that teach management as \"business schools\". Some such institutions (such as the Harvard Business School) use that name, while others (such as the Yale School of Management) employ the broader term \"management\".\nEnglish speakers may also use the term \"management\" or \"the management\" as a collective word describing the managers of an organization, for example of a corporation.\nHistorically this use of the term often contrasted with the term \"labor\" \u2013 referring to those being managed.\nLevels.\nTop management.\nThe board of directors is typically primarily composed of non-executives who owe a fiduciary duty to shareholders and are not closely involved in the day-to-day activities of the organization. However, this varies depending on the type (e.g., public versus private), size, and culture of the organization. These directors are theoretically liable for breaches of that duty and are typically insured under directors and officers liability insurance. Fortune 500 directors are estimated to spend 4.4 hours per week on board duties, and median compensation was $212,512 in 2010. The board sets corporate strategy, makes major decisions such as major acquisitions, and hires, evaluates, and fires the top-level manager (chief executive officer or CEO). The CEO typically hires other positions. However, board involvement in the hiring of other positions such as the chief financial officer (CFO) has increased. In 2013, a survey of over 160 CEOs and directors of public and private companies found that the top weaknesses of CEOs were \"mentoring skills\" and \"board engagement\", and 10% of companies never evaluated the CEO. The board may also have certain employees (e.g., internal auditors) report to them or directly hire independent contractors; for example, the board (through the audit committee) typically selects the auditor.\nHelpful skills for top management vary by the type of organization but typically include a broad understanding of competition, world economies, effective planning, and politics. In addition, the CEO is responsible for implementing and determining (within the board's framework) the broad policies of the organization. Executive management accomplishes the day-to-day details, including instructions for the preparation of department budgets, procedures, and schedules; appointment of middle-level executives such as department managers; coordination of departments; media and governmental relations; and shareholder communication.\nLine management.\nLine managers include supervisors, section leaders, forepersons, and team leaders. They focus on controlling and directing regular employees, either in direct service delivery or in back-office areas of work. They are usually responsible for assigning employees tasks, guiding and supervising employees on day-to-day activities, ensuring the quality and quantity of production and/or service, making recommendations and suggestions to employees on their work, and channeling employee concerns that they cannot resolve to mid-level managers or other administrators. Low-level, frontline or \"front-line\" managers also act as role models for their team members. Deficits in frontline management can impact critically on service delivery and customer satisfaction.\nTraining and education.\nColleges and universities worldwide offer bachelor's degrees, graduate programs, diplomas, and professional certificates in management. These are most commonly housed within colleges of business, business schools, or faculties of management, but may also be offered in related departments such as economics, public policy, or the social sciences. \nScholars have argued that higher education played a central role in the so-called \"managerial revolution\" of the 20th century, by formalizing managerial skills and expanding the professionalization of management as a discipline.\nUndergraduate.\nAt the undergraduate level, the most common business programs are the Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) and Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.).\nThese typically comprise a four-year program designed to give students an overview of the role of managers in planning and directing within an organization. \nCourse topics include accounting, financial management, statistics, marketing, strategy, and other related areas.\nMany other undergraduate degrees include the study of management, such as Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science degrees with a major in business administration or management and the Bachelor of Arts (BA) or Bachelor of Science (BS) in political science (PoliSci) with a concentration in public administration or the Bachelor of Public Administration (B.P.A), a degree designed for individuals aiming to work as bureaucrats in the government jobs. \nMany colleges and universities also offer certificates and diplomas in business administration or management, which typically require one to two years of full-time study.\nTo manage technological areas, one often needs an undergraduate degree in a STEM area.\nGraduate.\nAt the graduate level students aiming at careers as managers or executives may choose to specialize in major subareas of management or business administration such as entrepreneurship, human resources, international business, organizational behavior, organizational theory, strategic management, accounting, corporate finance, entertainment, global management, healthcare management, investment management, sustainability and real estate.\nGood practices.\nWhile management trends can change fast, the long-term trend in management has been defined by a market embracing diversity and a rising service industry. Managers are currently being trained to encourage greater equality of opportunities for minorities and women in the workplace, offering increased flexibility in working hours, better retraining, and innovative (and usually industry-specific) performance markers. Managers destined for the service sector are being trained to use unique measurement techniques, better worker support, and more charismatic leadership styles. Promotion prospects can incentivise performance improvements. Human resources finds itself increasingly working with management in a training capacity to help collect management data on the success (or failure) of management actions with employees. \nGood practices identified for managers include \"walking the shop floor\", and, especially for managers who are new in post, identifying and achieving some \"quick wins\" which demonstrate visible success in establishing appropriate objectives. Leadership writer John Kotter uses the phrase \"Short-Term Wins\" to express the same idea. As in all work, achieving an appropriate work-life balance for self and others is an important management practice.\nEvidence-based management.\nEvidence-based management is an emerging movement to use the current, best evidence in management and decision-making. It is part of the larger movement towards evidence-based practices. Evidence-based management entails managerial decisions and organizational practices informed by the best available evidence. As with other evidence-based practice, this is based on the three principles of published peer-reviewed (often in management or social science journals) research evidence that bears on whether and why a particular management practice works; judgment and experience from contextual management practice, to understand the organization and interpersonal dynamics in a situation and determine the risks and benefits of available actions; and the preferences and values of those affected.\nHistory.\nSome see management as a late-modern (in the sense of late modernity) conceptualization. With the changing workplaces of the Industrial Revolution in the 18th and 19th centuries, military theory and practice contributed approaches to managing the newly popular factories.\nEarly writing.\nWritten in 1776 by Adam Smith, a Scottish moral philosopher, \"The Wealth of Nations\" discussed efficient organization of work through division of labour.\nSmith described how changes in processes could boost productivity in the manufacture of pins. While individuals could produce 200 pins per day, Smith analyzed the steps involved in the manufacture and, with 10 specialists, enabled the production of 48,000 pins per day.\n19th century.\nClassical economists such as Adam Smith (1723\u20131790) and John Stuart Mill (1806\u20131873) provided a theoretical background to resource allocation, production (economics), and pricing issues. About the same time, innovators like Eli Whitney (1765\u20131825), James Watt (1736\u20131819), and Matthew Boulton (1728\u20131809) developed elements of technical production such as standardization, quality-control procedures, cost-accounting, interchangeability of parts, and work-planning. Many of these aspects of management existed in the pre-1861 slave-based sector of the US economy. That environment saw 4 million people, as the contemporary usages had it, \"managed\" in profitable quasi-mass production\nbefore wage slavery eclipsed chattel slavery.\nSalaried managers as an identifiable group first became prominent in the late 19th century. As large corporations began to overshadow small family businesses the need for personnel management positions became more necessary. Businesses grew into large corporations and the need for clerks, bookkeepers, secretaries and managers expanded. The demand for trained managers led college and university administrators to consider and move forward with plans to create the first schools of business on their campuses.\n20th century.\nAt the turn of the twentieth century, the need for skilled and trained managers had become increasingly apparent. The demand occurred as personnel departments began to expand rapidly. In 1915, less than one in twenty manufacturing firms had a dedicated personnel department. By 1929 that number had grown to over one-third. Formal management education became standardized at colleges and universities. Colleges and universities capitalized on the needs of corporations by forming business schools and corporate-placement departments. This shift toward formal business education marked the creation of a corporate \u00e9lite in the US.\nBy about 1900 one finds managers trying to place their theories on what they regarded as a thoroughly scientific basis (see scientism for perceived limitations of this belief). Examples include Henry R. Towne's \"Science of management\" in the 1890s, Frederick Winslow Taylor's \"The Principles of Scientific Management\" (1911), Lillian Gilbreth's \"Psychology of Management\" (1914), Frank and Lillian Gilbreth's \"Applied motion study\" (1917), and Henry L. Gantt's charts (1910s). J. Duncan wrote the first college management textbook in 1911. In 1912 Yoichi Ueno introduced Taylorism to Japan and became the first management consultant of the \"Japanese management style\". His son Ichiro Ueno pioneered Japanese quality assurance.\nThe first comprehensive theories of management appeared around 1920. The Harvard Business School offered the first Master of Business Administration degree (MBA) in 1921. People like Henri Fayol (1841\u20131925) and Alexander Church (1866\u20131936) described the various branches of management and their inter-relationships. In the early 20th century, people like Ordway Tead (1891\u20131973), Walter Scott (1869\u20131955) and J. Mooney applied the principles of psychology to management. Other writers, such as Elton Mayo (1880\u20131949), Mary Parker Follett (1868\u20131933), Chester Barnard (1886\u20131961), Max Weber (1864\u20131920, who saw what he called the \"administrator\" as bureaucrat,), Rensis Likert (1903\u20131981), and Chris Argyris (born 1923) approached the phenomenon of management from a sociological perspective.\nPeter Drucker (1909\u20132005) wrote one of the earliest books on applied management: \"Concept of the Corporation\" (published in 1946). It resulted from Alfred Sloan (chairman of General Motors until 1956) commissioning a study of the organization. Drucker went on to write 39 books, many in the same vein.\nH. Dodge, Ronald Fisher (1890\u20131962), and Thornton C. Fry introduced statistical techniques into management studies. In the 1940s, Patrick Blackett worked in the development of the applied-mathematics science of operations research, initially for military operations. Operations research, sometimes known as \"management science\" (but distinct from Taylor's scientific management), attempts to take a scientific approach to solving decision-problems and can apply directly to multiple management problems, particularly in the areas of logistics and operations.\nSome of the later 20th-century developments include the theory of constraints (introduced in 1984), management by objectives (systematized in 1954), the Harzburg Model\n(developed by Reinhard H\u00f6hn in post-war Germany), re-engineering (the early 1990s), Six Sigma (1986), management by walking around (1970s), the Viable system model (1972), and various information-technology-driven theories such as agile software development (so-named from 2001), as well as group-management theories such as Cog's Ladder (1972) and the notion of \"thriving on chaos\" (1987).\nAs the general recognition of managers as a class solidified during the 20th century and gave perceived practitioners of the art/science of management a certain amount of prestige, so the way opened for popularised systems of management ideas to peddle their wares. In this context, many management fads may have had more to do with pop psychology than with scientific theories of management.\nBusiness management includes the following branches:\n21st century.\nBranches of management theory also exist relating to nonprofits and to government: such as public administration, public management, and educational management. Further, management programs related to civil society organizations have also spawned programs in nonprofit management and social entrepreneurship.\nMany of the assumptions made by management have come under attack from business-ethics viewpoints, critical management studies, and anti-corporate activism. This could include violations to a company\u2019s ethics policy. \nAs one consequence, workplace democracy (sometimes referred to as Workers' self-management) has become both more common and more advocated, in some places distributing all management functions among workers, each of whom takes on a portion of the work. However, these models predate any current political issue and may occur more naturally than does a command hierarchy.\nNature of work.\nIn profitable organizations, management's primary function is the satisfaction of a range of stakeholders. This typically involves making a profit (for the shareholders), creating valued products at a reasonable cost (for customers), and providing great employment opportunities for employees. In case of nonprofit management, one of the main functions is, keeping the faith of donors. In most models of management and governance, shareholders vote for the board of directors, and the board then hires senior management. Some organizations have experimented with other methods (such as employee-voting models) of selecting or reviewing managers, but this is rare.\nTopics.\nBasics.\nAccording to Fayol, management operates through five basic functions: planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
