{"id": "13863", "revid": "3644049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13863", "title": "Handloading", "text": "Manual assembly of ammunition\nHandloading, or reloading, is the practice of making firearm cartridges by manually assembling the individual components (metallic/polymer case, primer, propellant and projectile), rather than purchasing mass-assembled, factory-loaded commercial ammunition. (It should not be confused with the reloading of a firearm \"with\" cartridges, such as by swapping detachable magazines, or using a stripper clip or speedloader to quickly insert new cartridges into a magazine.)\nThe term \"handloading\" is the more general term, and refers generically to the manual assembly of ammunition cartridges. \"Reloading\" refers more specifically to handloading using previously fired cases and shotshells. The terms are often used interchangeably however, as the techniques are largely the same, whether the handloader is using new or recycled components. The differences lie in the initial preparation of cases or shells \u2014 new components are generally ready to load straight out of the box, while previously fired components often need additional preparation procedures, such as removal of expended primers (\"depriming\"), case cleaning (to remove any fouling, corrosion and/or to polish the case) and the reshaping (to correct any pre-existing deformations) and resizing of cases to bring them back into specification after firing (or to experiment with custom modifications).\nAdvantages.\nSome consider handloading cartridges or shotshells a hobby, but reloading can save the shooter money, providing a greater quantity of higher quality ammunition within a given budget. However, hobbyists' enjoyment of the reloading process may be a significant benefit.\nEconomy.\nHandloading ammunition avoids the labor costs of commercial production lines, reducing the expenditure to only the cost of purchasing components and equipment. Reloading may not be cost effective for occasional shooters, as it takes time to recoup the cost of needed equipment, but those who shoot more frequently will see cost-savings over time, as the brass cartridge cases and shotgun shell hulls, which are often the most expensive components, can be reused with proper maintenance.\nImproved ballistic performance.\nThere are three aspects to ballistics: internal ballistics, external ballistics, and terminal ballistics. Internal ballistics refers to things that happen inside the firearm during and after firing, but before the bullet leaves the muzzle. The handloading process can realize increased accuracy and precision through improved consistency of manufacture, by selecting the optimal bullet weight and design, and tailoring bullet velocity to the purpose. Each cartridge reloaded can have each component carefully matched to the rest of the cartridges in the batch. Brass cases can be matched by volume, weight, and concentricity, bullets by weight and design, powder charges by weight, type, case filling (amount of total usable case capacity filled by charge), and packing scheme (characteristics of granule packing).\nHandloading is a fundamental prerequisite for success where the most extreme accuracy is demanded, such as in rifle benchrest shooting, but can only be done consistently accurately following load development to determine what cartridge components work best with a specific rifle.\nCustomized performance is a common goal of handloaders. Hunters may desire cartridges with specialized bullets with specific terminal performance. Target shooters often experiment extensively with component combinations in an effort to achieve the best and most consistent bullet trajectories, often using cartridge cases that have been fire formed in order to best fit the chamber of a specific firearm. Shotgun shooters can make specialty rounds unavailable through commercial inventories at any price. Some handloaders even customize cartridges and shotshells to reduce recoil for shooters who might otherwise avoid shooting sports because of the high recoil of certain firearms. Some handloaders make increased-power ammunition (i.e. \"hot loads\") if higher muzzle velocities (hence flatter trajectories) are desired.\nMore versatility over commercial ammunition.\nThe equipment used to assemble the cartridge has an effect on its uniformity/consistency and optimal shape/size. Dies used to size the cartridges can be matched to the chamber of a given gun. Modern handloading equipment enables a firearm owner to tailor fresh ammunition to a specific firearm, and to precisely measured tolerances far improving the comparatively wide tolerances within which commercial ammunition manufacturers must operate.\nRecurring shortages of commercial ammunition are also reasons to reload cartridges and shotshells. Store-bought ammunition may be unavailable when commercial supplies are exhausted, but having the ability to reload one's own cartridges and shotshells allows continue shooting despite shortages.\nHandloaders can also experiment with resizing and create newer-specification cartridges for which no commercial equivalent has ever existed \u2014 so-called wildcat cartridges, some of which can eventually acquire mainstream acceptance if the ballistic performance is proven to be good enough. Once the new cartridge has achieved widespread market adoption, handloading components can also be acquired at discounted prices when purchased in bulk. Examples of such cartridges include the .22-250, 6mm PPC, 7mm-08 and .260 Remington. Some cartridges initially purely designed for handloaded target shooting, such as the 6.5mm Creedmoor and the 6.5mm Grendel, have not only gained mainstream acceptance in the civilian market but also partial adoption by regular military.\nAmmunition for special uses can also be loaded including; For new or recoil sensitive shooters, reduced pressure loads can be assembled. These loads allow for less flinch inducing recoil. Handoading also enables hunters to use the same rifle and caliber to hunt a greater diversity of game. For instance, in the same cartridge/rifle combination, using a light for caliber bullet for varmint and heavy for caliber for large game. Collectors of rare, antique and foreign-made firearms must often turn to handloading because the appropriate cartridges and shotshells are no longer commercially available.\nEquipment.\nInexpensive \"tong\" tools have been used for reloading since the mid-19th century. They resemble a large pair of pliers and can be caliber-specific or have interchangeable dies. However, modern handloading equipment can be sophisticated tools that emphasize precision and reliability. There are also a myriad of various measuring tools and accessory products on the market for use in conjunction with handloading.\nPresses.\nThe quintessential handloading equipment is the press, which uses compound leverage to push the cases into a die that performs the loading operations. Presses vary from simple, inexpensive single-stage models, to complex \"progressive\" models that can perform multiple operations with each pull of the lever, like an assembly line, at rates exceeding 500 rounds per hour.\nLoading presses are often categorized by the letter of the English alphabet that they most resemble in shape: \"O\", \"C\", and \"H\". The sturdiest presses, suitable for bullet swaging functions as well as for normal reloading die usage, are of the \"O\" type, which has a frame that completely encloses the die mechanism. The \"C\" frame, usually a less sturdy press, is suitable for most handloading operations other than bullet swaging. Iron, steel and aluminum construction are seen with all presses. Some users prefer \"C\" style presses over \"O\" presses, as access to the operational area is much more open. Shotshell style presses, intended for non-batch use, for which each shotshell or cartridge is cycled through the dies before commencing onto the next shotshell or cartridge to be reloaded, commonly resemble the letter \"H\".\n\"Single-stage press\", generally of the \"O\" or \"C\" type, is the simplest of press designs. These presses can only hold one die and perform a single procedure on a single case at any time. Each operation, resize, deprime, bullet seating, bullet crimping, etc., requires the user to change the dies or setup. When using a single-stage press, cases are loaded in batches, one step for each cartridge per batch at a time. The batch sizes are usually kept small, usually 100 cases or less at a time. Single-stage presses are commonly used for high-precision rifle cartridge handloading, but may be used for almost any reloading operation. Single stage presses are also popular for load development prior to producing large numbers of cartridges on a progressive press.\n\"Turret presses\", most commonly of the \"C\" type, are similar to a single-stage press, but have a mounting disc (also called a die head) that indexes at each die position. This allows multiple dies to be mounted to the machine and quickly rotated into position. Batch operations are performed similar to a single-stage press, different procedures can be performed by simply rotating the turret to place the appropriate die into position. Although turret presses operate much like single-stage presses, they eliminate much of the setup time required by removing and installing individual dies. There are also automatic indexing turret presses which rotate the turret one position with each pull of the handle. These presses allow the user to quickly change caliber by swapping die heads (turrets) and produce one complete round with 3-6 pulls of the handle.\n\"Progressive presses\" are far more complex in design and operation and initial setup usually takes longer. However, the benefit is increased output. Progressives can handle several cases at once. These presses have a rotating shell holder/plate that indexes at each individual station with each pull of the lever. Progressives can hold 3 or more dies in interchangeable toolhead assemblies. The toolhead assembly allows the user to quickly change calibers with minimal readjustment of the dies. The dies, and sometimes loading modules (which can include case hopper/feeder, primer feeder, powder measure and/or bullet feeder), are mounted to be in alignment with the corresponding index position on the shell holder/plate. Progressives can have 4 or more stations, extra stations allow for the addition of optional equipment such as a powder level checkers. Progressive presses can load hundreds of cartridges an hour with their streamlined efficiency. All the user has to do is pull the lever to produce one finished round per stroke.\nShotshell presses.\nShotshell presses are generally a single unit of the \"H\" configuration that handles all functions, dedicated to reloading just one gauge of shotshell. Shotshell reloading is similar to cartridge reloading, except that, instead of a bullet, a wad and a measure of shot are used, and after loading the shot, the shell is crimped shut. Both 6 and 8 fold crimps are in use, for paper hulls and plastic hulls. Roll crimps can be used for metallic, paper, and plastic hulls. The shotshell loader contains stations to resize and deprime the hull, reprime the hull, measure powder, insert the wad, measure shot, and crimp the shell. \nDue to the low cost of modern plastic shotshells, and the additional complexity of reloading fired shells, shotshell handloading is not as popular as cartridge handloading. For example, unlike when handloading rifle and pistol cartridges, where some of the various components (cases and bullets of the same weight) from different manufacturers are usually interchangeable, shotshell loads are usually restricted to using only the particular brand or design of shotshell hull, a specific brand/style of wad or shot column components, primer and powder that are called for in the recipe. Substitution of components is not considered safe, as changing just one component, such as a brand of primer, can increase pressures by as much as 3500 PSI, which may exceed SAAMI pressure limits. Reloading shotshells is therefore more along the lines of precisely following a recipe with non-fungible components.\nWhere shotshell reloading remains popular is for making specialized shotgun shells, such as for providing lowered recoil, for achieving better shot patterns, to make low-cost \"poppers\" (blanks) used to acclimate hunting dogs to the sound of gunfire without actually shooting projectiles or to manufacture obsolete shotshells that are no longer commercially manufactured. Handloading also allows the loader to make other improvements or features not available in commercially loaded shotshells.\nMetallic reloading presses are not usually dedicated to reloading a single caliber of cartridge, although they can be, but are designed to allow for reloading various cartridge calibers through changing the dies. In contrast, shotshell presses are most often configured for reloading just one gauge of shotshell, e.g., 12 gauge, and are rarely, if ever, reconfigured for reloading other gauges of shotshells, as the cost of tooling and time to switch gauges on a shotshell press often exceeds the cost of buying a new shotshell press outright, as shotshell presses typically come from the factory already set up to reload one gauge or bore of shotshell. Hence, it is common to use a dedicated shotshell press for reloading each gauge or bore of shotshell used.\nThe price of shot for reloading shotshells over the last several years has also risen significantly, such that lead shot that was readily available for around $0.50/lb. (c. 2005) now reaches $2.00 per pound (2013.) Due to this large increase in the price of lead shot, the economy of reloading 12 gauge shotshells vs. just using promotional (low-cost) 12 gauge shotshells only starts to make economic sense for higher volume shooters, who may shoot more than 50,000 rounds a year. In contrast, the reloading of shotshells that are usually not available in low-cost, promotional pricings, such as .410 bore, 12 ga. slugs, 16 ga, 20 ga., and 28 ga., becomes more economical to reload in much smaller quantities, perhaps within only 3-5 boxes of shells per year. Reloading .410 bore, 12 ga. slugs, 16 ga., 20 ga, and 28 ga. shells, therefore, remains relatively common, more so than the reloading of 12 gauge shotshells, for which promotional shotshells are usually readily available from many retailers. These smaller bore and gauge shotshells also require much less lead shot, further lessening the effect of the rapid rises seen in the price of lead shot. The industry change to steel shot, arising from the US and Canadian Federal bans on using lead shotshells while hunting migratory wildfowl, has also affected reloading shotshells, as the shot bar and powder bushing required on a dedicated shotshell press also must be changed for each hull type reloaded, and are different than what would be used for reloading shotshells with lead shot, further complicating the reloading of shotshells.\nWith the recent rampant rise in lead shot prices, though, a major change in handloading shotshells has also occurred. Namely, a transition among high volume 12 gauge shooters from loading traditional 1-1/8 oz. shot loads to 7/8 oz. shot loads or even 24 gm. (so-called International) shot loads have occurred. At 1-1/8 oz. per shotshell, a 25\u00a0lb. bag of lead shot can only reload approximately 355 shotshells. At 7/8 oz. per shotshell, a 25\u00a0lb. of lead shot can reload 457 shotshells. At 24 grams per shotshell, a 25\u00a0lb of lead shot can reload approximately 472 shotshells. Stretching the number of hulls that it is possible to reload from an industry-standard 25\u00a0lb. bag of lead shot by 117 shells has significantly helped mitigate the large increase in the price of lead shot. That this change has also resulted in minimal changes to scores in shooting sports such as skeet and trap has only expedited the switch among high volume shooters to shooting 24 gm. shotshells with their lesser amounts of shot.\nWith the recent shortages over 2012\u20132013 of 12 gauge shotshells in the United States (among all other types of rifle and pistol ammunition), the popularity of reloading 12 gauge shotshells has seen a widespread resurgence. Field use of the International 24 gm. 12 gauge shells has proven them to be effective on small game, while stretching the number of reloads possible from a bag of shot, and they have subsequently become popular for hunting small game. Since shot shells are typically reloaded at least 5 times, although upwards of 15 times are often possible for lightly loaded shells, this transition to field use of 24 gm. loads has helped mitigate ammunition shortages for hunters.\nShotshell presses typically use a charge bar to drop precise amounts of shot and powder. Most commonly, these charge bars are fixed in their capacities, with a single charge bar rated at, say, 1-1/8 oz. of lead shot, with a switchable powder bushing that permits dropping precisely measured fixed amounts of different types of powder repetitively (e.g., MEC.) On the other hand, some charge bars are drilled to accept bushings for dropping different fixed amounts of both shot and powder (e.g. Texan.) For the ultimate in flexibility, though, universal charge bars with micrometers dropping fixed volumes of powder and shot are also available; these are able to select differing fixed amounts of both powder and shot, and are popular for handloaders who load more than just a few published recipes, or, especially, among those who wish to experiment with numerous different published recipes. Fixed charge bars are rated for either lead or steel shot, but not for both. Universal charge bars, on the other hand, are capable of reloading both lead and steel shot, being adjustable.\nLike their pistol and rifle counterparts, shotshell presses are available in both single-stage and progressive varieties. For shooters shooting fewer than approximately 500 shells a month, and especially shooting fewer than 100 shells a month, a single-stage press is often found to be adequate. For shooters shooting larger numbers of shells a month, progressive presses are often chosen. A single-stage press can typically reload 100 hulls in approximately an hour. Progressive presses can typically reload upwards of 400 or 500 hulls an hour.\nShotshell presses are most commonly operated in non-batch modes. That is, a single hull will often be deprimed, reshaped, primed, loaded with powder, have a wad pressed in, be loaded with shot, be pre-crimped, and then be final crimped before being removed and a new hull being placed on the shotshell press at station 1. An alternative, somewhat faster method, often used on a single stage press is to work on 5 hulls in parallel sequentially, with but a single processed hull being located at each of the 5 stations available on a single stage shotshell press, while manually removing the finished shotshell from station 5 and then moving the 4 in-process hulls to the next station (1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4, 4 to 5) before adding a new hull at the deprimer (station 1) location. Both these modes of shotshell reloading are in distinct contrast to the common practice used with reloading pistol and rifle cartridges on a single-stage press, which is most often processed in batch modes, where a common operation will commonly be done on a batch of up to 50 or 100 cartridges at a time, before proceeding to the next processing step. This difference is largely a result of shotshell presses having 5 stations available for use simultaneously, unlike a single-stage cartridge press which typically has but one station available for use.\nIn general, though, shotshell reloading is far more complex than rifle and pistol cartridge reloading, and hence far fewer shotshell presses are therefore used relative to rifle and pistol cartridge reloading presses.\n.50 BMG and larger cartridge presses.\nReloading presses for reloading .50 BMG and larger cartridges are also typically caliber-specific, much like shotshell presses, as standard-size rifle and pistol reloading presses are not capable of being pressed into such exotic reloading service. The reloading of such large cartridges is also much more complex, as developing a load using a specific lot of powder can require nearly all of a 5\u00a0lb. bottle of powder and a load must be developed with a single load of powder for reasons of safety.\nDies.\n Dies are generally sold in sets of two, three or four units, depending on the type and shape of the case. A three-die set is needed for straight cases, while a two-die set is used for bottlenecked cases. The first die of either set performs the sizing and decapping operation, except in some cases in the 3-die set, where decapping may be done by the second die. The middle die in a three-die set is used to flare the case mouth as well as allows powder to be added to the case (and decap in the case where this is not done by the first die), while in a two-die set the entire neck is expanded as the case is extracted from the first die. The second or third die in the set seats the bullet and may apply a crimp. A fourth die is often used to apply crimps after the bullet is seated. Sometimes an additional \"die\" is used to mount powder measures which makes dispensing powder into the case a part of the process. This die usually flares the case mouth to allow easier bullet insertion.\nStandard dies are made from hardened steel, and require that the case be lubricated for the resizing operation, which requires a large amount of force. Bottleneck and longer straight cartridges require lubrication of every case, due to the large amount of force required, while shorter straight wall cartridges (9mm or .45ACP for example) can get away with alternating lubricated and unlubricated cases. Carbide dies have a ring of tungsten carbide, which is far harder and slicker than tool steel, carbide straight wall dies do not require lubrication, however bottle neck dies do.\nModern reloading dies are generally standardized with 7/8-14 (or, for the case of .50 BMG dies, with 1-1/4\u00d712) threads and are interchangeable with all common brands of presses, although older dies may use other threads and be press-specific.\nCrimping Dies.\nSometimes die sets include a separate die for crimping and this is done as an extra operation. There are two types of crimp, roll and taper. Crimping is required for several reasons such as autoloading firearms, firearms with a tubular magazine or pistols with massive recoil (.500 S&amp;W), where the cycling or recoil of the firearm may cause the bullet to move in the case, resulting in poor accuracy, increased pressures or malfunctions. Some reloaders will only crimp only if absolutely necessary.\nRoll crimping is usually appropriate for everything except cartridges that headspace on the case mouth (I.E. 9MM and .45ACP). Magnum straight wall and bottleneck cartridges ar usually roll crimped. Bullets that require roll crimping usually have a cannelure on the bullet, this prevents bullet deformation when crimping.\nCases which headspace on the case mouth, on the other hand, require a taper crimp, because they require a flat surface at the case mouth; roll crimping will cause headspacing problems on these cartridges.\nSpecial Dies.\nThere are also specialty dies. Bump dies are designed to move the shoulder of a bottleneck case back just a bit to facilitate chambering. These are frequently used in conjunction with neck dies, as the bump die itself does not manipulate the neck of the case whatsoever. A bump die can be a very useful tool to anyone who owns a fine shooting rifle with a chamber that is cut to minimum headspace dimensions, as the die allows the case to be fitted to this unique chamber. Another die is the \"hand die\". A hand die has no threads and is operated\u2014as the name suggests\u2014by hand or by use of a hand-operated arbor press. Hand dies are available for most popular cartridges, and although available as full-length resizing dies, they are most commonly seen as neck sizing dies. These use an interchangeable insert to size the neck, and these inserts come in 1/1000-inch steps so that the user can custom fit the neck of the case to his own chamber or have greater control over neck tension on the bullet.\nShellholders.\nA shell holder, generally sold separately, is needed to hold the case in place as it is forced into and out of the dies. The reason shellholders are sold separately is that many cartridges share the same base dimensions, and a single shell holder can service many different cases. While most modern single stage presses use a standard shell holder some older presses may need special holders.\nProgressive presses, however, may use shell holders specific to the press manufacturer, and will generally only fit a certain make and model of reloading press. A different type of shell holder is also required for use with some hand priming tools (e.g., Lee Autoprime tool) as well as trimming tools.\nScale.\nA precision weighing scale is a near necessity for reloading. While it is possible to load using nothing but a powder measure and a weight-to-volume conversion chart, this greatly limits the precision with which a load can be adjusted, increasing the danger of accidentally overloading cartridges with powder for loads near or at the maximum safe load. With a powder scale, an adjustable powder measure can be adjusted to more precisely meter the powder charge. Additionally, periodically checking the powder charge during a reloading session can make sure that the measure is not drifting. With a powder trickler, a charge can be measured directly into the scale, giving the most accurate measure.\nA scale also allows bullets and cases to be sorted by weight, which can further increase consistency. Sorting bullets by weight has obvious benefits, as each set of matched bullets will perform more consistently. Sorting cases by weight is done to group cases by case volume, and match cases with similar interior volumes.\nThere are 3 types of reloading scales:\nPriming tool.\nSingle-stage presses often do not provide an easy way of installing primers to (\"priming\") cases. Various add-on tools can be used for priming the case using the press, or a separate tool can be used. Since cases loaded by a single-stage press are done in steps, with the die being changed between steps, a purpose-made, separate, priming tool is often faster than setting up a press to prime. Also, hand primers can be more consistent in setting primer depth due to being able to \"feel\" what the tool is doing.\nPowder measuring.\nPowder is measured by weight (usually grains or grams) but can dispensed by volume. Beginning reloading kits often include a weight-to-volume conversion chart for a selection of common powders and a set of powder volume measures graduated in small increments. By adding the various measures of powder the desired charge can be measured with a safe degree of accuracy. However, since weighing individual powder charges or using \"dippers\" can be time-consuming, a powder measuring dispensor is often used. A powder measure has a changeable or adjustable cavity to adjust the volume of the charge. A powder measure accurate to is desirable.\nA final type of dispenser is an all in one electronic scale and trickler. These will automatically dispense the next charge after the pan is returned to the scale.\nAdditionally, a powder trickler can be used to slowly add powder to a volumetrically measured charge on a scale to bring the charge up to the desired amount. Tricklers allow vey precise powder charges.\nCase trimmer.\nCases that have been fired and reloaded numerous times will need trimming due to brass flowing forward during firing, especially bottleneck cases. How much a case will grow depends upon load pressure, cartridge design, chamber size, functional cartridge headspace (usually the most important factor), and other variables. Periodically cases need to be trimmed to bring them back to proper specifications. Most reloading manuals list both a \"trim size\" and a \"max length\". Long cases can create a safety hazard through improper headspace and possible increased pressure.\nSeveral kinds of case trimmers are available. Die-based trimmers have an open top and allow the case to be trimmed with a file during the loading process. Manual trimmers usually have a base that has a shellholder at one end and a cutting bit at the opposite end, with a locking mechanism to hold the case tight and in alignment with the axis of the cutter, similar to a small lathe. Typically the device is cranked by hand, but sometimes they have attachments to allow the use of a drill or powered screwdriver. Powered case trimmers are also available. They usually consist of a motor (electric drills are sometimes used) and special dies or fittings that hold the case to be trimmed at the appropriate length, letting the motor do the work of trimming.\nCase cleaning.\nCase cleaning is needed if the cartridge cases used are recycled from previous firings, and is done mainly to remove internal fouling as well as to polish the case exterior for a more cosmetically pleasing finish. It can be done with an ultrasonic cleaner, or more commonly with a mass finishing device known as a \"case tumbler\". Case tumblers use abrasive granules known as \"tumbling media\" (which can be stone or ceramic granules, fragments of corncob or walnut/coconut shells, or small segments of stainless steel wire often called \"pins\") to burnish the cases, and can be either a vibratory type (\"dry tumbling\"), which resembles a hot pot; or a water/detergent-based rotary type (\"wet tumbling\"), which resembles the drum of a front-loading washing machine. In either type, when the cleaning is completed, a \"media separator\" is needed to sieve out and remove the abrasive media. In the \"wet\" rotary tumbling, a food dehydrator-like convection dryer is sometimes used to eliminate moisture retention that might later interfere with handloading. Cases should be inspected both before and after cleaning and any cases with serious problems (corrosion, case head sepparation, torn rims, split necks, etc) should be discarded.\nPrimer pocket tools.\nPrimer pocket cleaning tools are used to remove residual combustion debris remaining in the primer pocket; both brush designs and single blade designs are commonly used. Dirty primer pockets can prevent setting primers at, or below, the cartridge head. Primer pocket reamers or swagers are used to remove military crimps in primer pockets.\nPrimer pocket uniformer tools are used to achieve a uniform primer pocket depth. These are small endmills with a fixed depth-spacing ring attached, and are mounted either in a handle for use as a handtool, or are sometimes mounted in a battery-operated screwdriver. Some commercial cartridges (notably Sellier &amp; Bellot) use large rifle primers that are thinner than the SAAMI standards common in the United States, and will not permit seating a Boxer primer manufactured to U.S. standards; the use of a primer pocket uniformer tool on such brass avoids setting Boxer primers high when reloading, which would be a safety issue. Two sizes of primer pocket uniformer tools exist, the larger one is for large rifle (0.130-inch nominal depth) primer pockets and the smaller one is used for uniforming small rifle/pistol primer pockets.\nPrimer pocket swages can be either standalone, bench-mounted, specialized presses, or, alternatively, a special swage anvil die that can be mounted into a standard \"O\" style loading press, along with a special shell holder insert with either a large or a small primer pocket insert swage that is then inserted into the position on the \"O\" press where a normal shell holder is usually clicked into position. This way, both small and large primer pockets on different types of military cases can be properly processed to remove primer pocket crimps. Both types of presses can be used to remove either ring crimps or stab crimps found on military cartridges when reloading them. Reamers for removing primer pocket crimps are not associated with presses, being an alternative to using a press to remove military case primer pocket crimps.\nFlash hole uniforming tools are used to remove any burrs, which are residual brass remaining from the manufacturing punching operation used in creating flash holes. These tools resemble primer pocket uniformer tools, except being thinner, and commonly include deburring, chamfering, and uniforming functions. The purpose of these tools is to achieve a more equal distribution of flame from the primer to ignite the powder charge, resulting in consistent ignition from case to case.\nHeadspace gauges and modified case gauges.\nBottleneck rifle cartridges are particularly prone to encounter incipient head separations if they are full-length re-sized and re-trimmed to their maximum permitted case lengths each time they are reloaded. In some such cartridges, such as the .303 British when used in Enfield rifles, as few as 1 or 2 reloadings can be the limit before the head of the cartridge will physically separate from the body of the cartridge when fired. The solution to this problem, of avoiding overstretching of the brass case, and thereby avoiding the excessive thinning of the wall thickness of the brass case due to case stretching, is to use what is called a \"headspace gauge\". Contrary to its name, it does not actually measure a rifle's headspace. Rather, it measures the distance from the head of the cartridge to the middle of the shoulder of the bottleneck cartridge case. For semi-automatic and automatic rifles, the customary practice is to move the midpoint of this shoulder back by no more than 0.005 inches, for reliable operation, when resizing the case. For bolt-action rifles, with their additional camming action, the customary practice is to move this shoulder back by only 0.001 to 0.002 inches when resizing the case. In contrast to full-length resizing of bottleneck rifle cartridges, which can rapidly thin out the wall thickness of bottleneck rifle cartridges due to case stretching that occurs each time when fired, partial length re-sizing of the bottleneck case pushes shoulders back only a few thousandths of an inch will often permit a case to be safely reloaded 5 times or more, even up to 10 times, or more for very light loads.\nSimilarly, by using modified case gauges, it is possible to measure precisely the distance from a bullet ogive to the start of rifling in a particular rifle for a given bottleneck cartridge. Maximum accuracy for a rifle is often found to occur for only one particular fixed distance from the start of rifling in a bore to a datum line on a bullet ogive. Measuring the overall cartridge length does not permit setting such fixed distances accurately, as different bullets from different manufacturers will often have a different ogive shape. It is only by measuring from a fixed diameter point on a bullet ogive to the start of a bore's rifling that proper spacing can be determined to maximize accuracy. A modified case gauge can provide the means by which to achieve an improvement in accuracy with precision handloads.\nSuch head space gauges and modified case gauges can, respectively, permit greatly increasing the number of times a rifle bottleneck case can be reloaded safely, as well as improve greatly the accuracy of such handloads. Unlike the situation with using expensive factory ammunition, handloaded match ammunition can be made that is vastly more accurate, and, through reloading, that can be much more affordable than anything that can be purchased, being customized for a particular rifle.\nBullet puller.\nLike any complex process, mistakes in handloading are easy to make, and a bullet puller device allows the handloader to disassemble mistakes. Most pullers use inertia to pull the bullet, and are often shaped like hammers. When in use, the case is locked in place in a head-down fashion inside the far end of the \"hammer\", and then the device is swung and struck against a firm surface. The sharp impact will suddenly decelerate the case, but the inertia exerted by the heavier mass of the bullet will keep it moving and thus pull it free from the case in a few blows, while the powder and bullet will get caught by a trapping container within the puller after the separation. Collet-type pullers are also available, which use a caliber-specific clamp to grip the bullet, while a loading press is used to pull the case downwards. It is essential that the collet be a good match for the bullet diameter because a poor match can result in significant deformation of the bullet.\nMaterials required.\nThe following materials are needed for handloading ammunition:\nCase lubrication may also be needed depending on the dies used. Carbide pistol dies do not require case lubricant. For this reason, they are preferred by many, being inherently less messy in operation. In contrast, all dies for bottleneck cartridges, whether made of high-strength steel or carbide, and steel dies for pistols do require the use of a case lubricant to prevent a case become stuck in a die. (In the event that a case does ever become stuck in a die, there are stuck case remover tools that are available to remove a stuck case from the die, albeit at the loss of the particular case that became stuck.) Powder should always be stored in original containers since they are designed to split open at low pressure to prevent a dangerous pressure buildup, and any cabinet they are stored in should similarly prevent pressure buildup by allowing venting and expansion.\nReloading process.\nPistol/rifle cartridges.\nThe operations performed when handloading cartridges are:\nWhen previously fired cases are used, they must be inspected before loading. Cases that are dirty or tarnished are often polished in a tumbler to remove oxidation and allow easier inspection of the case. Cleaning in a tumbler will also clean the interior of cases, which is often considered important for handloading high-precision target rounds. Cracked necks, non-reloadable cases (steel, aluminum, or Berdan primed cases), and signs of head separation are all reasons to reject a case. Cases are measured for length, and any that are over the recommended length is trimmed down to the minimum length. Competition shooters will also sort cases by brand and weight to ensure consistency.\nRemoval of the primer, called \"decapping\" or \"depriming\", is usually done with a die containing a steel pin that punches out the primer from inside the case. Berdan primed cases require a different technique, either a hydraulic ram or a hook that punctures the primer cup and levers it out from the bottom. Military cases often have crimped-in primers, and decapping them leaves a slightly indented ring (most common) or, for some military cartridges, a set of stabbed ridges located on the edge of the primer pocket opening that inhibits or prevents seating a new primer into a decapped case. A reamer or a swage is used to remove both these styles of crimp, whether ring crimps or stab crimps. The purpose of all such primer crimps is to make military ammunition more reliable under more extreme environmental conditions. Some military cartridges also have sealants placed around primers, in addition to crimps, to provide additional protection against moisture intrusion that could deactivate the primer for any ammunition exposed to water under battlefield conditions. Decapping dies, though, easily overcome the additional resistance of sealed primers, with no significant difficulty beyond that encountered when removing non-sealed primers.\nWhen a cartridge is fired, the internal pressure expands the case to fit the chamber in a process called obturation. To allow ease of chambering the cartridge when it is reloaded, the case is swaged back to size. Competition shooters, using bolt-action rifles that are capable of camming a tight case into place, often resize only the neck of the cartridge, called \"neck sizing\", as opposed to the normal full-length resizing process. Neck sizing is only useful for cartridges to be re-fired in the same firearm, as the brass may be slightly oversized in some dimensions for other chambers, but the precise fit of the case to the chamber will allow greater consistency and therefore greater potential accuracy. Some believe that neck sizing will permit a larger number of reloads with a given case in contrast to full-size resizing, although this is controversial. Semi-automatic rifles and rifles with SAAMI minimum chamber dimensions often require a special \"small base\" resizing die, that sizes further down the case than normal dies, and allows for more reliable feeding.\nOnce the case is sized down, the inside of the neck of the case will actually be slightly smaller than the bullet's diameter. To allow the bullet to be seated, the end of the neck is slightly expanded to allow the bullet to start into the case. Boattailed bullets need very little expansion, while unjacketed lead bullets require more expansion to prevent shaving of lead when the bullet is seated.\nPriming the case is the most dangerous step of the loading process since the primers are pressure-sensitive. The use of safety glasses or goggles during priming operations can provide valuable protection in the rare event that an accidental detonation takes place. Seating a Boxer primer not only places the primer in the case, but it also seats the anvil of the primer down onto the priming compound, in effect arming the primer. A correctly seated primer will sit slightly below the surface of the case. A primer that protrudes from the case may cause a number of problems, including what is known as a \"slam fire,\" which is the firing of a case before the action is properly locked when chambering a round. This may either damage the gun and/or injure the shooter. A protruding primer will also tend to hang when feeding, and the anvil will not be seated correctly so the primer may not fire when hit by the firing pin. Primer pockets may need to be cleaned with a primer pocket brush to remove deposits that prevent the primer from being properly seated. Berdan primers must also be seated carefully, and since the anvil is part of the case, the anvil must be inspected before the primer is seated. For reloading cartridges intended for use in military-surplus firearms, rifles especially, \"hard\" primers are most commonly used instead of commercial \"soft\" primers. The use of \"hard\" primers avoids slamfires when loading finished cartridges in the military-surplus firearm. Such primers are available to handloaders commercially.\nThe quantity of gunpowder is specified by weight, but almost always measured by volume, especially in larger-scale operations. A powder scale is needed to determine the correct mass thrown by the powder measure, as loads are specified with a precision of 0.10 grain (6.5\u00a0mg). One grain is 1/7000 of a pound. Competition shooters will generally throw a slightly underweight charge, and use a \"powder trickler\" to add a few granules of powder at a time to the charge to bring it to the exact weight desired for maximum consistency. Special care is needed when charging large-capacity cases with fast-burning, low-volume powders. In this instance, it is possible to put two charges of powder in a case without overflowing the case, which can lead to dangerously high pressures and a significant chance of bursting the chamber of the firearm. Non-magnum revolver cartridges are the easiest to do this with, as they generally have relatively large cases, and tend to perform well with small charges of fast powders. Some powders meter (measured by volume) better than others due to the shape of each granule. When using volume to meter each charge, it is important to regularly check the charge weight on a scale throughout the process.\nCompetition shooters also often sort bullets by weight, often down to 0.10 grain (6.5\u00a0mg) increments. The bullet is placed in the case mouth by hand and then seated with the press. At this point, the expanded case mouth is also sized back down. A crimp can optionally be added, either by the seating die or with a separate die. Taper crimps are used for cases that are held in the chamber by the case mouth, while roll crimps may be used for cases that have headspace on a rim or on the cartridge neck. Roll crimps hold the bullet far more securely, and are preferred in situations, such as magnum revolvers, where recoil velocities are significant. A tight crimp also helps to delay the start of the bullet's motion, which can increase chamber pressures, and help develop full power from slower burning powders (see internal ballistics).\nShotgun shells.\nUnlike the presses used for reloading metallic cartridges, the presses used for reloading shotgun shells have become standardized to contain 5 stations, with the exact configuration of these 5 stations arranged either in a circle or in a straight row. Nonetheless, the operations performed using the industry-standard 5 station shotshell presses when handloading shotshells with birdshot, although slightly different, are very similar as to when reloading metallic cartridges:\nThe exact details for accomplishing these steps on particular shotshell presses vary depending on the brand of the press, although the presence of 5 stations is standard among all modern presses.\nThe use of safety glasses or goggles while reloading shotshells can provide valuable protection in the rare event that an accidental detonation takes place during priming operations.\nThe quantities of both gunpowder and shot are specified by weight when loading shotshells, but almost always measured solely by volume. A powder scale is therefore needed to determine the correct mass thrown by the powder measure, and by the shot measure, as powder loads are specified with a precision of 0.10 grain (6.5\u00a0mg), but are usually thrown with a tolerance of 0.2 to 0.3 grains in most shotshell presses. Similarly, shot payloads in shells are generally held to within a tolerance of plus or minus 3-5 grains. One grain is 1/7000 of a pound.\nShotshell reloading for specialty purposes, such as for buckshot or slugs, or other specialty rounds, is often practiced but varies significantly from the process steps discussed previously for handloading birdshot shotshells. The primary difference is that large shot cannot be metered in a charge bar, and so must be manually dropped, a ball at a time, in a specific configuration. Likewise, the need for specialty wads or extra wads, in order to achieve the desired stackup distance to achieve a full and proper crimp for a fixed shell length, say 2-3/4\", causes the steps to differ slightly when handloading such shells.\nModern shotshells are all uniformly sized for Type 209 primers. However, reloaders should be aware that older shotshells were sometimes primed with a Type 57 or Type 69 primer (now obsolete), meaning that shotgun shell reloading tends to be done only with modern (or recently produced) components. Being essentially \"published recipe\" dependent, antique shotshell reloading is not widely practiced, being more of a specialty, or niche, activity. Of course, when reloading for very old shotguns, such as those with Damascus barrels, special shotshell recipes that limit pressures to less than 4500 psi are still available, and these \"recipes\" are reloaded by some shotgunning enthusiasts. Typical shotshell pressures for handloads intended for modern shotguns range from approximately 4700 psi to 10,000 psi.\nBrass shotshells are also reloaded, occasionally, but typically these are reloaded using standard rifle/pistol reloading presses with specialty dies, rather than with modern shotshell presses. Rather than plastic wads, traditional felt and paperboard wads are also generally used (both over powder and over shot) when reloading brass shotgun shells. Reloading brass shotshells is not widely practiced.\nShotguns, in general, operate at much lower pressures than pistols and rifles, typically operating at pressures of 10,000 psi, or less, for 12 gauge shells, whereas rifles and pistols routinely are operated at pressures in excess of 35,000 psi, and sometimes upwards of 50,000 psi. The SAAMI maximum permitted pressure limit is only 11,500 psi for 12 gauge 2-3/4 inch shells, so the typical operating pressures for many shotgun shells are only slightly below the maximum permitted pressures allowed for safe ammunition. Because of this small difference in typical operating vs. maximum industry allowed pressures and the fact that even small changes in components can cause pressure variances in excess of 4,000 psi, the components used in shotshell reloading must not be varied from published recipes, as the margin of safety relative to operating pressures for shotguns is much lower than for pistols and rifles. This lower operating pressure for shotguns and shells is also the reason why shotgun barrels have noticeably thinner walls than rifle and pistol barrels.\nLegal aspects.\nSince many countries heavily restrict the civilian possession of ammunition and ammunition components, including primers and smokeless powder, handloading may be explicitly or implicitly illegal in certain countries. Even without specific restrictions on powder and primers, they may be covered under other laws governing explosive materials. Handloading may require study and passing an exam to acquire a handloading permit prior to being allowed to handload ammunition in some jurisdictions. This is done to avoid catastrophic accidents caused by lack of knowledge/skill as much as possible, and also allows the government to maintain information on who reloads their own cartridges. The standards organization C.I.P. rules that the products of handloaders that do not comply with the C.I.P. ammunition approval rules for commercial ammunition manufacturers cannot be legally sold in C.I.P. member states.\nMany firearms manufacturers explicitly advise against the use of handloaded ammunition. Generally, this means that the maker's warranty is void, and the manufacturer is not liable for any damage to the gun or personal injury if handloaded ammunition is used that exceeded established limits for a particular arm. This arises because firearm manufacturers point out that while they have some influence and scope for redress with ammunition manufacturers, they have no such influence over the actions of incompetent or overly ambitious individuals who assemble ammunition.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, handloading is not only legal and requires no permit, but is also quite popular. Experts point to potential legal liabilities (depending on the jurisdiction) that the shooter may incur if using handloaded ammunition for defense, such as an implied malice on the part of the shooter, as the use of handloaded ammunition may give the impression that \"regular bullets weren't deadly enough\". Additionally, forensic reconstruction of a shooting relies on using identical ammunition from the manufacturer, where handloaded ammunition cannot be guaranteed identical to the ammunition used in the shooting, since \"the defendant literally manufactured the evidence\". In particular, powder residue patterning is used by law enforcement to validate the distance between the firearm and the person shot using known facts from the manufacturer about powder type, content, and other factors.\nCanada.\nHandloading is legal in Canada. The Explosives Act places limits on the amount of powder (either smokeless or black) that may be stored in a building, on the manner in which it is stored, and on how much powder may be available for use at any time. The Act is the responsibility of Natural Resources Canada. If the quantity of powder stored for personal use exceeds 75\u00a0kg, then a Propellant Magazine Licence (Type P) is required. There is no limit on the number of primers that may be stored for non-commercial use.\nGermany.\nAs an example of a European country, handloading in Germany requires a course, terminated in an exam, in handloading and handling of explosive propellants; often, this is offered in combination with a course and exam in muzzle-loading and black powder-shooting. The State's Ministry of the Interior conducts the exam. When passed and the reloader can provide a reason for his will to reload (\"Bed\u00fcrfnispr\u00fcfung\"), he can apply for a permit to a quota of propellant for five years (after which time he has to extend the permit). Every propellant is recorded in the permit. Primers, cartridges, bullets, and reloading equipment are available without a permit.\nAs German law gives maximum pressures for every commercial caliber, the handloader is allowed to non-commercially give away his ammunition. He is liable for incorrect loading. His references are data books by propellant manufacturers (like RWS), bullet manufacturers (like Speer), reloading tool manufacturers (like Lyman) or neutral manufacturers institutions like the DEVA. Firearms manufacturers give guarantees as long as the handloaded ammunition is within the correct parameters.\nThe relevant rules for non-commercial application can be found in \u00a727 of the Explosives Act (\"Sprengstoffgesetz\").\nIn order to investigate gun destruction \u2013 material fault or incorrectly loaded ammunition \u2013 and for handloaders to get data for new loads, gun and/or handloaded cartridges can be sent to the DEVA institute (German institute for testing and examining of hunting and sporting guns); the DEVA returns a pressure diagram and a report whether this load is within legal range for this ammunition.\nSouth Africa.\nHandloading or reloading is allowed in South Africa as long as you are in possession of a competency certificate to possess a firearm as well as a license to possess such a firearm. Sport shooters load to make shooting sports more affordable and hunters load to obtain greater accuracy. Powder and primers are strictly controlled by law and can not exceed for 2\u00a0kg for powder and 2400 primers. The amount of ammunition you may have in your possession is also limited to 200 rounds per chambering. If you are a registered dedicated sportsman, the quantities are unlimited. Although the powder's quantity is unlimited if you are a dedicated sportsman, storage of excess amounts of powder is dangerous due to the potential of fire occurring from accidental ignition. A manual from a South African powder manufacturer Rheinmetall Denel Munition (previously Somchem) is available for reloaders with adequate information and guidelines.\nAtypical handloading.\nBerdan primers, with their off-center flash holes and lack of self-contained anvil, are more difficult to work with than the easily removed Boxer primers. The primers may be punctured and pried out from the rear, or extracted with hydraulic pressure. Primers must be selected carefully, as there are more sizes of Berdan primers than the standard large and small pistol, large and small rifle of Boxer primers. The case must also be inspected carefully to make sure the anvil has not been damaged because this could result in a failure to fire.\nRimfire cartridges (e.g. 22 Long Rifle) are not generally hand-loaded in modern times, although there are some shooters that unload commercial rimfire cartridges, and use the primed case to make their own loads or to generate special rimfire wildcat cartridges. These cartridges are highly labor-intensive to produce. Historically, liquid priming material was available for reloading rimfire ammunition, but the extreme explosive hazard of bulk primer compound and complexity of the process (including \"ironing out\" the firing pin strike) caused the practice to decline.\nSome shooters desiring to reload for obsolete rimfire cartridges alter the firearm in question to function as a centerfire, which allows them to reload. Often it is possible to reform cases from similarly sized ammunition which is in production, and this is the most economical way of obtaining brass for obscure or out-of-production calibers. Even if custom brass must be manufactured, this is often far less expensive than purchasing rare, out-of-production ammunition. Cartridges like the 56-50 Spencer, for example, are not readily obtainable in rimfire form, but can be made from shortened 50-70 cartridges or even purchased in loaded form from specialty dealers.\nAn unusual solution to the problem of obtaining ammunition for the very old pinfire cartridges is even available. This solution uses specialized cartridges that use a removable pin and anvil which hold a percussion cap of the type use in caplock firearms. To reload a fired case, the pin is removed, allowing the anvil to slide out; a percussion cap is placed in the anvil, it is re-inserted, and the pin serves to lock the anvil in place, as well as to ignite the percussion cap.\nShotshell reloading is sometimes done for scattershot loads, consisting of multiple wads separating groups of shot, which are intended for use at short-distance hunting of birds. Similarly, shotshell reloading for buckshot loads and non-lethal \"bean bag\" loads are sometimes handloaded. These types of shotshells are rarely handloaded.\nAccuracy considerations.\nPrecision and consistency are key to developing accurate ammunition. Various methods are used to ensure that ammunition components are as consistent as possible. Since the firearm is also a variable in the accuracy equation, careful tuning of the load to a particular firearm can yield significant\naccuracy improvements.\nCases.\nThe internal volume of the cartridge case, or case capacity, significantly affects the pressure developed during ignition, which significantly affects the velocity of the bullet. Cases from different manufacturers can vary in wall thickness, and as cases are repeatedly fired and reloaded the brass flows up to the neck and is trimmed off, increasing capacity as well as weakening the case. The first step to ensuring consistent case capacity is sorting the cases by headstamp, so each lot of cases is from the same manufacturer and/or year. A further step would be to then weigh these cases, and sort by case weight.\nThe neck of the case is another variable since this determines how tightly the bullet is held in place during ignition. Inconsistent neck thickness and neck tension will result in variations in pressure during ignition. These variables can be addressed by annealing and thinning the neck, as well as by careful control of the crimping operation.\nBullets.\nBullets must be well balanced and consistent in weight, shape, and seating depth to ensure that they correctly engage the rifling, exit the barrel at a consistent velocity, and fly straight. Buying bullets from a high-quality source will help ensure quality, but for ultimate accuracy, some shooters will measure even the best bullets, and reject all but the most consistent. Measurement of the weight is the easiest, and bullets that are out of round can be detected by rotating the bullet while measuring with a micrometer. There is even a device available that will detect changes in jacket thickness and internal voids in jacketed rifle bullets, though its high cost makes it prohibitively expensive for all but the most dedicated shooters.\nThe transition from the case to the barrel is also very important. If the bullets have to travel a varying distance from the case to the point where they engage the rifling, then this can result in variations in pressure and velocity. The bearing surface of the bullet should ideally be seated as close as possible to the rifling. Since it is the bearing surface that matters here, it is important that the bullets have a consistent bearing surface.\nLoad tuning.\nTuning load to a gun can also yield great increases in accuracy, especially for standard, non-accurized rifles. Different rifles, even of the same make and model, will often react to the same ammunition in different ways. The handloader is afforded a wider selection of bullet weights than can readily be found in commercially loaded ammunition, and there are many different powders that can be used for any given cartridge. Trying a range of bullets and a variety of powders will determine what combination of bullet and powder gives the most consistent velocities and accuracies. Careful adjustment of the amount of powder can give the velocity that best fits the natural harmonics of the barrel (see accurize and internal ballistics). For ultimate accuracy and performance, the handloader also has the option of using a wildcat cartridge; wildcats are the result of shaping the cartridge and chamber themselves to a specific end, and the results push the envelope of velocity, energy, and accuracy. Most, but not all, reloads perform best when the powder selected fills 95% or more of the case (by volume).\nCost considerations.\nThose who reload with the primary goal of maximizing accuracy or terminal performance may end up paying more per reloaded round than for commercial ammunition\u2014this is especially true for military calibers which are commonly available as surplus. Maximum performance, however, requires the highest quality components, which are usually the most expensive. Reloaders who reload with the primary goal of saving money on ammunition, however, can make a few tradeoffs to realize significant cost savings with a minimal sacrifice in quality.\nCase life maximization.\nSince the case is the single most expensive part of a loaded round, the more times a case can be re-used, the better. Cases that are loaded to a moderate pressure will generally last longer, as they will not be work hardened or flow under pressure as much as cases loaded to higher pressures. Use of moderate pressure loads extends the life of the case significantly, not to mention saving quite a bit of wear and tear on the barrel. Work hardening can cause cracks to occur in the neck as the hardened brass loses its malleability, and is unable to survive swaging back into shape during the resizing operation. Rifle brass tends to flow towards the neck (this is why rifle brass must be trimmed periodically) and this takes brass away from the rear of the case. Eventually, this will show as a bright ring near the base of the cartridge, just in front of the thick web of brass at the base. If brass is used after this ring appears, it risks a crack, or worse, a complete head separation, which will leave the forward portion of the brass lodged in the chamber of the gun. This generally requires a special stuck case removal tool to extract, so it is very undesirable to have a head separation.\nWith bottlenecked cartridge cases, choosing the right sizing die can also be important. Full-length sizing of cartridges is often thought to greatly shorten case life by work hardening the full length of the case, which can cause the case neck to split, although some studies show that the number of reloads possible with a case is essentially the same for either full length sizing as for neck sizing only if the issue is one of neck hardening. If the reloaded cartridges are going to be used in the same firearm in which they were previously fired, though, and if that firearm has a bolt action or other action with a strong camming action on closing, then full-length resizing may not be needed. A collet neck sizing die can be used to size just the case neck enough to hold the bullet and leave the rest of the case unsized. The resulting cartridge will chamber into the specific rifle that previously fired it, though the fit might be tight and require more force to chamber than a full-length resized case. The use of a neck-sizing die in conjunction with moderate pressure loads may extend the life of the case significantly by minimizing the amount of case that is work hardened or stretched. This is especially true for reloads intended for military rifles with intentionally large chambers such as the Lee\u2013Enfield in .303 British. The use of partial length or neck sizing for cartridges used in such large chambers permits effectively switching the headspacing from relying on the rim of a rimmed cartridge to the shoulder of the bottleneck transition instead, increasing the number of times a rimmed military cartridge can be reloaded from once to perhaps 5 or more times, all while avoiding dangerous incipient head separations. One final form of limiting case wear is limited strictly to benchrest shooters with custom-cut chambers. The chamber of these rifles is cut so that there is just enough room, typically just a few thousandths of an inch, in the neck area. The result of using this type of chamber is that fired rounds do not require any resizing whatsoever once the case is fired. The brass will 'spring back' a bit after firing, and will properly hold a new bullet without further manipulation. Some refer to this as a 'fitted' neck, however, it is a function of both the carefully cut precision neck and the case adjusted to fit with very little clearance.\nWork hardening happens to all cases, even low-pressure handgun cases. The sudden increase in pressure upon firing hits the brass like a hammer, changing its crystalline structure and making it more brittle. The neck of the case, if it becomes too brittle, will be incapable of standing the strain of resizing, expanding, crimping, and firing, and will split during loading or firing. Since the case neck remains in tension while holding the bullet in place, aging ammunition may develop split necks in storage. While a neck split during firing is not a significant danger, a split neck will render the case incapable of holding the bullet in place, so the case must be discarded or recycled as a wildcat cartridge of shorter overall length, allowing the split section to be removed. The simplest way to decrease the effects of work hardening is to decrease the pressure in the case. Loading to the minimum power level listed in the reloading manual, instead of the maximum, can significantly increase case life. Slower powders generally also have lower pressure peaks and may be a good choice.\nAnnealing brass to make it softer and less brittle is fairly easy, but annealing cartridge cases is a more complex matter. Since the base of the case must be hard, it cannot be annealed. What is needed is a form of heat treatment called differential hardening, where heat is carefully applied to part of the case until the desired softness is reached, and then the heat treatment process is halted by rapidly cooling the case. Since annealing brass requires heating it to about 660\u00a0\u00b0F (350\u00a0\u00b0C), the heating must be done in such a way as to heat the neck to that temperature, while preventing the base of the case from being heated and losing its hardness. The traditional way is to stand the cases in a shallow pan full of water, then heat the necks of the cases with a torch, but this method makes it difficult to get an even heating of the entire case neck. A temperature-sensitive crayon can be used at the point to which it is to be annealed, which is just behind the shoulder for bottlenecked cartridges, or at the bottom of the bullet seating depth for straight-wall cartridges. The neck of the case is placed in a propane torch flame and heated it until the crayon mark changes color, indicating the correct temperature. Once the correct temperature is reached the case is completely quenched in water to stop the annealing process at the desired hardness. Failing to keep the base of the case cool can anneal the case near the head, where it must remain hard to function properly. Another approach is to immerse the case mouth in a molten alloy of lead that is at the desired annealing temperature for a few seconds, then quickly shake off the lead and quench the case.\nCases that have small cracks at the neck may not be a complete loss. Many cartridges, both commercial and wildcats, can be made by shortening a longer cartridge. For example, a 223 Remington can be shortened to become a .222 Remington, which can further be shortened to become a .221 Fireball. Similarly, .30-06 Springfield can become .308 Winchester, which can become any number of specialized benchrest shooting cartridges. Since the cracking is likely due to a brittle neck, the cases should be annealed before attempting to reform them, or the crack may propagate and ruin the newly formed shorter case as well.\nPowder cost minimization.\nPowder is another significant cost of reloading, and one over which the handloader has significant control. In addition to the obvious step of using a minimum charge, rather than a full power one, significant cost savings may be obtained through careful powder choice. Given the same bullet and cartridge, a faster burning powder will generally use a smaller charge of powder than required with a slower powder. For example, a 44 Magnum firing a 240-grain lead semi-wadcutter could be loaded with either Accurate Arms #2, a very fast pistol powder, or #9, a very slow pistol powder. When using the minimum loads, 9.0 grains (0.58 g) of AA #2 yield a velocity of 1126\u00a0ft/s (343\u00a0m/s), and 19.5 grains (1.26 g) of #9 yield 1364\u00a0ft/s (416\u00a0m/s). For the same amount of powder, AA #2 can produce approximately twice as many rounds, yet both powders cost the same per weight.\nThe tradeoff comes in terms of power and accuracy; AA #2 is designed for small cases and will burn inconsistently in the large 44 Magnum case. AA #9, however, will fill the case much better, and the slow burn rate of AA #9 is ideal for magnum handgun rounds, producing 20% higher velocities (at maximum levels) while still producing less pressure than the fast-burning AA #2. A medium-burning powder might actually be a better choice, as it could split the difference in powder weights while delivering more power and accuracy than the fastest powder.\nOne solution that is applicable to revolvers, in particular, is the possibility of using a reduced-volume case. Cartridges such as 357 Magnum and 44 Magnum are just longer versions of their parent rounds of .38 Special and .44 Special, and the shorter rounds will fire in the longer chambers with no problems. The reduced case capacity allows greater accuracy with even lighter loads. A 44 Special loaded with a minimum load of AA #2 uses only 4.2 grains (0.27 g) of powder, and produces a modest 771\u00a0ft/s (235\u00a0m/s).\nWhen reloading .38 Special and .44 Special, extreme care must be exercised to not exceed maximum powder specifications - i.e. a 357 Magnum load must never be used in a .38 special case, as even though the powder charge may fit, the difference in case volumes will likely create an overpressure scenario resulting in unsafe conditions.\nBullets.\nWhile the case is usually the most expensive component of a cartridge, the bullet is usually the most expensive part of the \"reloaded\" round, especially with handgun ammunition. It is also the best place to save money with handgun ammunition. This is because the bullets are used one time, and the case lasts for many reloadings.\nOther advantages of casting or swaging bullets from lead wire (which is pricier but avoids many quality-control issues of casting) is the ability to precisely control many attributes of the resulting bullet. Custom bullet molds are available from a number of sources, allowing the handloader to pick the exact weight, shape, and diameter of the bullet to fit the cartridge, firearm, and intended use. A good example of where this is useful is for shooters of older military surplus firearms, which often exhibit widely varying bore and groove diameters; by making bullets specifically intended for the firearm in question, the accuracy of the resulting cartridges can be significantly increased.\nCasting.\nFor the truly frugal, the cheapest method of obtaining bullets, buckshot, and slugs intended for reloading use at low to moderate velocities is casting them.\nThis requires a set of bullet, buckshot, or slug molds, which are available from a number of sources, and a source of known quality lead. Linotype and automotive wheelweights are often used as sources of lead that are blended together in a molten state to achieve the desired Brinell hardness. Other sources of scrap lead, such as recovered bullets, lead cable sheathing, lead pipe, or even lead\u2013acid battery plates (EXTREME caution should be used as modern battery components, when melted, can yield hazardous, even deadly gases), can yield usable lead with some degree of effort, including purification and measuring of hardness.\nCast bullets are also the cheapest bullets to buy, though generally only handgun bullets are available in this form. Some firearms manufacturers, such as those using polygonal rifling like Glock and H&amp;K, advise against the use of cast bullets. For shooters who would like to shoot cast bullets, aftermarket barrels are generally available for these models with conventional rifling, and the cost of the barrel can generally be recouped in ammunition savings after a few thousand rounds.\nSoft lead bullets are generally used in handguns with velocities of 1000\u00a0ft/s (300\u00a0m/s) or lower, while harder cast bullets may be used, with careful powder selection, in rifles with velocities of 2000\u00a0ft/s (600\u00a0m/s) or slightly more. A modern solution to velocity limitations of cast projectiles is to powder coat the projectile, encasing it in a protective skin allowing higher velocities to be achieved with softer lead alloys with no lead build up in the firearm. The limit is the point at which the powder gas temperature and pressure starts to melt the base of the bullet, and leave a thin coating of molten and re-solidified lead in the bore of the gun\u2014a process called leading the bore. Cast lead bullets may also be fired in full power magnum handgun rounds like the 44 Magnum with the addition of a gas check, which is a thin aluminum, zinc or copper washer or cup that is crimped over a tiny heel on the base of appropriate cast bullets. This provides protection for the base of the bullet, and allows velocities of over 1500\u00a0ft/s (450\u00a0m/s) in handguns, with little or no leading of the bore.\nSuch cast lead bullets, intended for use with a gas check, will have a reduced diameter at the rear of the cast lead bullet, onto which the gas check can be swaged using a lubricating/resizing press. All cast lead bullets, whether with or without a gas check, must still be lubricated, to prevent leading of the rifling of the barrel. A lubricating/resizing press, which is a special purpose bullet processing press, can be either a standalone press dedicated to lubricating and resizing bullets, or can be an add-on to a reloading press, at the option of the handloader. Not all handloaders resize cast lead bullets, although all handloaders do lubricate cast lead bullets. An option to using a lubricating press is simply to coat the bullets with bullet lube, which can be done either with a spray, in a tumbler, in a plastic bowel with a liquid lube, in a tray with melted bullet lube, or even with a manual lubricating process.\nSlugs for shotgun shells are also commonly cast from pure lead by handloaders, for subsequent reloading into shotgun shells. Although roll crimps of shotgun hull cases are commonly used for handloading these cast lead slugs, in place of the fold crimps that are used when reloading shot into shotgun shells, some published recipes specifically do include fold crimps. For published recipes using fold crimps and shot wads used as sabots, slugs can be easily reloaded using standard shotshell presses and techniques, without requiring any roll crimp tools. Whether roll crimps or fold crimps are used, cast lead slugs are commonly used in jurisdictions where rifles are banned for hunting, under the reasoning that fired slugs will not travel but over short distances, unlike rifle bullets which can travel up to several miles when fired. Use of cast lead slugs is therefore very common when hunting large game near populated areas.\nSimilarly, cast lead buckshot is often cast by handloaders, for reloading into shotgun shells for hunting larger game animals. Such buckshot is then placed by hand into shotgun shells when handloaded, due to the necessity of having to stack the buckshot balls into specific configurations depending on the gauge of shotgun shell being reloaded, the choice of wad, the volume of powder, and the size of the buckshot (e.g., 00, 000, 0000 buckshot). Such cast lead buckshot is never simply dropped from a shotshell press charge bar into a shotgun shell when reloading.\nSwaging.\nMost shooters prefer jacketed bullets, especially in rifles and pistols. The hard jacket material, generally copper or brass, resists deformation and handles far higher pressures and temperatures than lead. Several companies offer swaging presses (both manual and hydraulic) that will manufacture on a small scale jacketed bullets that can rival or surpass the quality of commercial jacketed bullets. Two swaging equipment manufacturers offer equipment and dies designed to turn 22 Long Rifle cases into brass jackets for 22 caliber (5.56\u00a0mm) bullets.\nExample variants of swage dies include:\nEvery bullet diameter, and most of the bullet types, need special dies, making swaging a rather investment-intensive enterprise.\nPurchased Bullets.\nHandloaders have the choice to swage but most choose to purchase pre-made jacketed bullets, due to the obscure nature of swaging and the specialized, expensive equipment. The process of manufacturing a jacketed bullet is far more complex than for a cast bullet; first, the jacket must be punched from a metal sheet of precise thickness, filled with a premeasured lead core, and then swaged into shape with a high pressure press in multiple steps. This involved process makes jacketed bullets far more expensive on average than cast bullets. Further complicating this are the requirements for controlled expansion bullets (see terminal ballistics), which require a tight bond between the jacket and the core. Premium expanding bullets are, with match grade bullets, at the top tier in expense.\nPlated Bullets.\nA more economical alternative was made available to the handloader in the 1980s, the copper-plated bullet. Copper-plated bullets are lead bullets that are electroplated with a copper jacket. While thinner than a swaged bullet jacket, the plated jacket is far thicker than normal electroplate, and provides significant structural integrity to the bullet. Since the jacket provides the strength, soft lead can be used, which allows bullets to be swaged or cast into shape before plating. While not strong enough for most rifle cartridges, plated bullets work well in many handgun rounds, with a recommended maximum velocity of 1250\u00a0ft/s (375\u00a0m/s). Plated bullets fall between cast and traditional jacketed bullets in price.\nWhile originally sold only to handloaders as an inexpensive substitute for jacketed bullets, the plated bullet has come far. The ammunition manufacturer Speer now offers the Gold Dot line, commercially loaded premium handgun ammunition using copper-plated hollow point bullets. The strong bond between jacket and core created by the electroplating process makes expanding bullets hold together very well, and the Gold Dot line is now in use by many police departments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13864", "revid": "39999250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13864", "title": "Houston Texans", "text": "National Football League franchise in Houston, Texas\nThe Houston Texans are a professional American football team based in Houston. The Texans compete in the National Football League as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) South division. The team plays its home games at NRG Stadium.\nThe Texans were founded in 1999, replacing the city's previous NFL franchise, the Houston Oilers, who played from 1960 to 1996 before moving to Nashville and eventually becoming the Tennessee Titans. The Texans began play as an expansion team in 2002, making them the youngest franchise currently competing in the NFL.\nWhile the Texans suffered from growing pains in the 2000s, their fortunes would take a turn for the better in the 2010s when they won their first division championship in 2011, clinching their first playoff berth. The Texans have gone on to win seven more AFC South division championships in 2012, 2015, 2016, 2018, 2019, 2023, and 2024. They are the only franchise to have never won a road playoff game along with the only one to have never appeared in a conference championship game; they are also one of four franchises to have never appeared in a Super Bowl, alongside the Cleveland Browns, Detroit Lions, and division rival Jacksonville Jaguars.\nBob McNair owned the Texans until his death in 2018, after which the majority ownership of the team went to his wife, Janice. The McNairs' son, Cal, became operating head of the franchise upon his father's death, and became principal owner when his mother transferred ownership to him in 2024. According to an article by \"Forbes,\" the Houston Texans are the eleventh richest team in the NFL with a value of $4.7 billion in August 2022.\nAfter the Texas Rangers won the 2023 World Series, the Houston Texans became the only big four professional sports franchise currently based in Texas without a championship.\nAfter the Baltimore Ravens lost to the Cincinnati Bengals on Thanksgiving, the Texans became the only team in the NFL with at least two wins on Thanksgiving without a loss.\nHistory.\nIn 1997, Houston entrepreneur Bob McNair had a failed bid to bring a National Hockey League (NHL) expansion team to the city, and Bud Adams moved the city's NFL team, the Houston Oilers, to Nashville, Tennessee, where they were renamed the Tennessee Titans in 1999. In 1996, the Cleveland Browns had controversially moved to become the Baltimore Ravens. As part of the settlement between the NFL, the city of Cleveland, and the team owned by Art Modell, the league promised to return football to Cleveland within the next three years.\nIn order to even out the franchises to 32, the NFL contemplated adding another expansion franchise. As Houston was one of the favorites for the extra franchise, along with Toronto and Los Angeles (the latter of whom had lost the Rams and the Raiders in 1995), McNair then decided to join the football project and founded Houston NFL Holdings with partner Steve Patterson. With Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, they would push for a domed stadium as part of the bid to lure the NFL back to Houston. On October 6, 1999, the NFL awarded the 32nd team to Houston at a cost of $700 million.\nMcNair family era (2002\u2013present).\nThe Houston Texans joined the NFL in the 2002 season, playing at the newly opened Reliant Stadium under head coach Dom Capers. With their opening game victory over the Dallas Cowboys on September 8, 2002, the Texans became the first expansion team to win its opening game since the Minnesota Vikings beat the Chicago Bears in 1961. The Texans went 4\u201312 and finished last in the AFC South in their debut season. The team improved to a 5\u201311 mark in the 2003 season. The team continued to make progress with a 7\u20139 record in the 2004 season. In the 2005 season, the Texans fell to a 2\u201314 record for the worst mark in the league. After the season, the team fired Capers as head coach. They earned the top pick in the 2006 NFL Draft.\nGary Kubiak years (2006\u20132013).\nWhile the team struggled in its early seasons, results began to improve when native Houstonian Gary Kubiak became the head coach in 2006. The Texans finished with a .500 season (8\u20138) in 2007 and 2008, and nearly qualified for the 2009\u201310 playoffs with a 9\u20137 result in 2009. The Texans started the 2010 season on a 4\u20132 record going into a Week 7 bye week, but promptly collapsed 2\u20138 in the second half of the season, finishing 6\u201310. In the 2011 NFL draft, the Texans acquired Wisconsin star defensive end J. J. Watt 11th overall. The following season, former Cowboys head coach Wade Phillips was hired as the defensive coordinator for the Texans, and the improved defense led to them finishing 10\u20136, winning their first AFC South title. The Texans then beat wild card Cincinnati Bengals 31\u201310 in the first round of the 2011\u201312 playoffs, before a 20\u201313 defeat by the Ravens in the Divisional Round.\nThe Texans surged as the team to beat in the AFC South in 2012, starting 5\u20130 and holding an 11\u20131 record by week 14. However, they lost three of their last four games to finish 12\u20134; beating the rival Indianapolis Colts in that four-game stretch allowing them to clinch their 2nd AFC South title. The Texans beat the Bengals again in the wild-card round, but they lost in the Divisional Round to the New England Patriots.\nIn the 2013 NFL draft, the Texans acquired Clemson wide receiver DeAndre Hopkins 27th overall. In 2013, the Texans started 2\u20130 but went into a tailspin and lost every game afterwards. Kubiak was fired as head coach after being swept by the rival Jacksonville Jaguars, who themselves started 0\u20138. Wade Phillips filled in as head coach, but the Texans' poor play did not change, and they finished 2\u201314, tying, with 2005, their worst record in franchise history. The 14-game losing streak is the worst in franchise history.\nBill O'Brien years (2014\u20132020).\nThe Texans entered the 2014 season with a 14-game losing streak. Former Penn State head coach Bill O'Brien became the Texans' new head coach, and the third in franchise history, during the offseason. In 2014, the Texans won three of their first four games, defeating the Redskins in the season opener while ending the losing streak, the Raiders, and the Bills, losing to the New York Giants. They lost three of their next four games, losing to the Dallas Cowboys, the Indianapolis Colts, and the Pittsburgh Steelers, respectively. The Texans went on to finish 9\u20137 in the 2014 season and barely missed the playoffs.\nIn the 2015 season, they were featured on HBO, on the show \"Hard Knocks\". That year, the Texans started with a 2\u20135 record. Quarterback Ryan Mallett was released amidst controversy regarding his benching in favor of Brian Hoyer during a loss against the Indianapolis Colts. After a poor start, the Texans finished with a 9\u20137 record and won their third AFC South title. However, they were shut out by the Kansas City Chiefs in the Wild Card round 30\u20130, ending their championship hopes for the year.\nOn March 9, 2016, the Texans signed former Denver Broncos quarterback Brock Osweiler to a 4-year, $72 million deal. Despite Osweiler's lucrative deal, he struggled significantly during the 2016 season. After throwing two interceptions in Week 15 against the Jaguars, coach Bill O'Brien benched the offseason acquisition in favor of backup quarterback Tom Savage. Savage led a comeback effort against the Jaguars, and was named the starter for the remainder of the season. The Texans clinched their fourth AFC South division title in six years in Savage's first career start against the Bengals in Week 16. They defeated the wildcard Oakland Raiders 27\u201314 in the opening round of the playoffs with Osweiler as the starting quarterback due to Savage being out with a concussion. Osweiler started in the Divisional Playoffs game against the New England Patriots, throwing three interceptions in the second half. The Texans lost 34\u201316.\nIn the 2017 NFL draft, the Texans traded up to the 12th overall selection to select Clemson star quarterback Deshaun Watson. Watson started six games his rookie year, going 3\u20133 and having arguably the greatest and most decorated rookie season by a quarterback in NFL history, eventually rising up to become the Texans' franchise quarterback. However, his success would come up very short, after a Week 8 41\u201338 loss to the Seattle Seahawks, Watson tore his ACL in practice and was ruled out the remainder of the season, which caused the Texans to have one of their worst seasons. Plagued by a series of unexpected injuries (including an injury to J. J. Watt) and controversy involving the team's suspected violation of the league's concussion protocol, after backup quarterback Tom Savage suffered a seizure after the Week 14 game against the San Francisco 49ers, the Texans went 1\u20139 the rest of the season and eventually finish 4\u201312 and last in the AFC South in 2017, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2014 and giving Bill O'Brien his first losing season as Texans head coach.\nIn 2018, the Texans started the season 0\u20133, losing by a combined 15 points to the New England Patriots, Tennessee Titans, and New York Giants, before winning a 37\u201334 overtime shootout on the road in Indianapolis. This win sparked a nine-game winning streak for the Texans, their first since starting 5\u20130 in 2012, which included a Week 8 win against the Miami Dolphins that included five touchdown passes from Deshaun Watson. This streak was the longest ever for a team that started the season 0\u20133; the previous record was a seven-game win-streak set by the New York Giants in 1918 after starting out 0\u20133.\nOn November 23, 2018, the owner of the Houston Texans, Bob McNair, died from skin cancer. On November 26, 2018, McNair's wife, Janice McNair, became the principal owner and Senior Chair of the Houston Texans, while their son, D. Cal McNair, became the chairman and Chief Operating Officer.\nThe Texans finished the season 11\u20135, and won another AFC South division championship under Bill O'Brien. They lost 21\u20137 in the first round of the playoffs to their AFC South division rival Indianapolis Colts.\nIn 2019, the Texans won the AFC South division championship and qualified for the NFL playoffs on the back of a 10\u20136 record. They went on to defeat the Buffalo Bills by a score of 22\u201319 in overtime in the AFC wild-card round. However, the Texans' 2019 season came to an end the following week, as they lost to the eventual Super Bowl champion Kansas City Chiefs by a score of 51\u201331 in the AFC divisional round. The Texans had a 24\u20130 lead in the game before the Chiefs came back.\nOn March 22, 2020, the Texans traded away all-pro wide receiver DeAndre Hopkins and a fourth-round pick in the 2020 NFL draft to the Arizona Cardinals. In return, Houston received running back David Johnson, a 2020 second-round pick, and a 2021 fourth-round pick. The move was confusing and controversial among fans and sportswriters alike, as many claimed that the Texans should have received more valuable assets for Hopkins, who was among the best receivers in the NFL.\nThe Texans began the 2020 NFL season with a record of 0\u20134, and Bill O'Brien was consequentially fired after a disappointing loss to the Minnesota Vikings in Week 4. Romeo Crennel, who was the head coach of the Cleveland Browns from 2005 to 2008 and of the Kansas City Chiefs in 2011\u201312, was named the interim head coach for the remainder of the season. Crennel managed to win more than half of his first 7 games as Houston's head coach, giving Houston a record of 4\u20137. However, the Texans ended the season on a five-game losing streak. With a final record of 4\u201312, the Texans were unable to make the playoffs.\nRebuilding years (2021\u20132022).\nOn January 27, 2021, the Texans hired David Culley as the team's head coach. Culley most recently worked as the Baltimore Ravens assistant head coach, wide receivers coach and passing game coordinator. On February 12, 2021, the Texans released all-pro defensive end J.J. Watt. It was confirmed that Watt personally requested owner Cal McNair for his release.\nOn January 13, 2022, the Texans fired David Culley after posting a 4\u201313 record as the team's head coach and promoted defensive coordinator Lovie Smith as the team's fifth head coach on February 7, 2022. The team traded away their starting quarterback Deshaun Watson to the Cleveland Browns and a 2024 fifth round pick for three 1st round picks, a 3rd round pick and a 4th round pick on March 20, 2022, due to sexual misconduct lawsuits toward Watson. The Texans opened their 2022 season in a tie game against the Indianapolis Colts, the franchise's first tie in their 20-year existence. On January 9, 2023, the Texans announced that they were going in a different direction by firing Lovie Smith after a 3\u201313\u20131 season.\nRyans and Stroud era (2023\u2013present).\nOn January 31, 2023, the Texans hired former player and 49ers defensive coordinator DeMeco Ryans as their new head coach, making him the sixth head coach in franchise history. In the 2023 NFL draft the Texans selected Ohio State quarterback C. J. Stroud and traded up to the third pick to select Defensive End Will Anderson Jr.. Under Ryans and Stroud, the team saw improved fortunes as they made the playoffs while winning the AFC South for the first time since the 2019 season with a 10\u20137 record, becoming the first NFL team to win their division under a rookie head coach and quarterback. The team defeated the Cleveland Browns 45\u201314 in the Wild Card Round. The Texans saw their season end in the Divisional Round with a 34\u201310 loss to the Baltimore Ravens. Stroud would later be named NFL offensive Rookie of the Year, and Anderson Jr. would be named NFL defensive Rookie of the Year Award. Ryans also finished in a tie in total votes for NFL Coach of the Year with Browns head coach Kevin Stefanski though he lost the award in a tiebreaker due to having one less first place vote. The 2024 season saw the Texans repeat as AFC South champions with a 10\u20137 record and make the playoffs. They defeated the Los Angeles Chargers in the wildcard round with a 32-12 win and lost to the Chiefs in the divisional round.\nRivalries.\nThe Texans are the youngest expansion team in the NFL, having only been competing in the NFL for 23 seasons since 2002 and have had limited regular season and postseason success. For that reason, they have not had the history or the reputation on which to build classic rivalries like the ones that often exist between older franchises. Despite this, the team has developed some rivalries. Its natural rivals are its fellow AFC South teams, which are the Tennessee Titans, Jacksonville Jaguars, and Indianapolis Colts.\nDivisional.\nTennessee Titans.\nMany Houston fans view the Tennessee Titans, who were the Houston Oilers before their move in 1996, as the Texans' chief rival, both as members of the AFC South and because former Titans owner Bud Adams and his family kept the rights to the Oilers name and colors. Many Houston fans argue that the history of the Oilers belong to the City of Houston, relating in and out of sports; For example, Houston Police cars used don the Columbia blue and red colors associated with the Oilers, and the \u201cOilers\u201d namesake alludes to Houston\u2019s role in the oil and gas Industry. In 2023, Tennessee unveiled Oilers throwback uniforms, which they wore to play the Texans. As of 2025, the Titans still occasionally use these uniforms. As of the 2023 season, the Titans lead the all-time series 23\u201321.\nIndianapolis Colts.\nSince the early 2000s, the Texans also have an AFC South Division rivalry with the Indianapolis Colts, whom the Texans had not defeated until the 2006 season. The Texans first swept the Colts in the 2016 NFL season, four years after the Colts drafted Houston native Andrew Luck. In 2019 the two teams met in the ; the Colts won 21\u20137.\nJacksonville Jaguars.\nHaving begun play in 1995 and 2002, respectively, the Jaguars and Texans are among two of the newer NFL teams. The Jaguars moved from the AFC Central to the newly created AFC South where the Texans were placed into and have competed as division rivals since. The Jaguars are the only division rival the Texans have a winning record against as the Texans lead the series 29\u201315.\nConference.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nThough not division rivals, the Bengals and Texans had big matchups in the 2010s, such as the 2011 and 2012 Wild Card Round, both of which the Texans won. The two teams also played on prime time in 2015, 2016, and 2017 with the Texans giving the Bengals their first loss after an 8\u20130 start in the latter game.\nInterconference.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Texans also have an intrastate/interconference rivalry with the Dallas Cowboys, with whom they contest the so-called Governor's Cup every year (a tradition started between the cities before the Oilers moved) either in the preseason or the regular season for bragging rights in the state of Texas. In 2017, the destruction and flooding caused during Hurricane Harvey a few days before their Week 4 preseason match up time scheduled caused the game to be moved to AT&amp;T Stadium in Arlington, Texas. However, out of concern for the safety of the fans and the condition of the player's families &amp; communities, the game was canceled. As of the 2024 season, the Cowboys lead the all-time series 4\u20133.\nCulture.\nSome former Oilers fans have become Texans fans. Some celebrities are fans, including Ryan Trahan, George Foreman, Paul Wall, Rico Rodriguez, and Raini Rodriguez. \nDuring the 2010s, the team adopted the moniker \"Bulls on Parade\" in honor of the Rage Against the Machine song, regularly used in the team's pregame introduction.\nTeam identity.\nName.\nIn the process of naming the new franchise, leadership conducted an extensive review and research process; the final list of names was determined after several months of research conducted jointly by Houston NFL 2002 and NFL Properties. This included an online survey asking fans and the community to weigh in, which received more than 65,000 responses in one week. On March 2, 2000, it was announced that the team name search had been narrowed down to five choices: Apollos, Bobcats, Stallions, Texans, and Wildcatters.\nOn September 6, 2000, the NFL's 32nd franchise was officially christened the Houston Texans before thousands at a downtown rally in Houston. McNair explained that the name and logo were chosen to \"embody the pride, strength, independence and achievement that make the people of Houston and our area special.\" The name \"Texans\" had been used by several now-defunct football teams, including the Canadian Football League franchise in San Antonio; the World Football League franchise in Houston, which moved to Louisiana to become the Shreveport Steamer; the Dallas Texans of the NFL which played in only the 1952 season; and by the precursor of the present-day Kansas City Chiefs, when they were the second incarnation of the Dallas Texans in the American Football League (AFL). Owner Bob McNair received permission from Chiefs' owner Lamar Hunt to use the Texans name for his new team. It is also a subtle homage to the naming style of the NHL team the Montreal Canadiens who also named their team after their respective demonym.\nLogo and uniforms.\nAlong with the team name, McNair unveiled the team logo, an abstract depiction of a bull's head, split in such a way to resemble the flag of Texas and the state of Texas, including a lone star to stand for the eye, the five points of which representing pride, courage, strength, tradition and independence. McNair described the colors as \"Deep Steel Blue\", \"Battle Red\" and \"Liberty White\". A year later the Texans unveiled their uniforms during another downtown rally. The bull is used to signify the state's cattle ranching economy that helped in its early settlement in the 19th century. \nThe Texans' helmet is dark blue with the Texans bull logo. The helmet was initially white when the team name and logo were unveiled, but was later changed to dark blue. The uniform design consists of red trim and either dark blue or white jerseys. The team typically wears white pants with its blue jerseys and blue pants with its white jerseys. Starting with the 2006 season, the Texans wore all-white for their home opener, and the team began to wear an all-blue combination for home games vs. the Indianapolis Colts. In 2003, the Texans introduced an alternative red jersey with blue trim; they wear this jersey at one home game each year, usually against a division rival. In 2007, the Texans introduced red pants for the first time, pairing them with the red jerseys for an all-red look. They would wear this look until 2010, but was brought back in 2023. In October 2008 the Texans paired blue socks (instead of the traditional red) with their blue pants and white jerseys, eventually becoming the team's primary road uniform combination. In 2016, the Texans unveiled a new uniform combo against the Jacksonville Jaguars, pairing the red jersey with blue pants and red socks. In 2017, the Texans unveiled a Color Rush uniform, using an all-blue uniform but with minimal white elements. In 2021, the Texans began sporting all-white socks on select home and road games. In 2022, the Texans began using a red alternate helmet with the red uniform. In 2023, the red alternate helmet was worn with the Color Rush uniform in a 21\u201316 victory against the Arizona Cardinals.\nIn 2002, the team wore a patch commemorating their inaugural season. Also, they celebrated 10 years as a franchise by wearing an anniversary patch throughout 2012. From 2018 to 2019, the Texans wore a memorial patch to honor Bob McNair after his death.\nIn April 2024, the Texans unveiled redesigned uniforms. The primary dark blue helmets remained, but the home blue uniforms were updated to include the Texans primary crest on the sleeve and new collar stripes, while the road white uniform featured blue and red horn stripes on the sleeves, along with blue numbers with red trim. The white uniform's design also served as the basis for the red alternate uniform, which is paired with a red helmet containing the blue horn stripes. A second alternate uniform is a navy blue base with \"H-Town blue\" accents; numbers are red with \"H-Town blue\" trim. This set is paired with a navy blue alternate helmet containing the \"H-Star\" decal in \"H-Town blue\" with red trim. The inclusion of a second alternate helmet is due to the NFL allowing teams with new uniforms to unveil these helmets in advance this season.\nPlayers of note.\nNFL draft history.\nFirst-round draft picks by year.\nThe Texans have had the top-overall pick in the NFL Draft three times.\nRing of Honor.\nOn November 19, 2017, Andre Johnson was the first-ever inductee into the Texans Ring of Honor. On October 6, 2019, Bob McNair was posthumously the second inductee into the Texans Ring of Honor. On October 1, 2023, J. J. Watt was the third inductee into the Texans Ring of Honor. On November 2, 2025, Janice McNair was the fourth inductee into the Texans Ring of Honor.\nPro Football Hall of Fame.\nOnly two members of the Pro Football Hall of Fame have spent any portion of their career with Texans, due in part to the requirements to be inducted and the Texans only having been established in 2002. In 2024, Andre Johnson became the first player to be inducted into the Hall of Fame primarily for his time with the Texans.\nStaff and head coaches.\nHead coaches.\nThe Texans have had six full-time head coaches in their franchise history. The team has had two interim head coaches.\nCommunity.\nMascots and cheerleaders.\nThe team's official mascot is Toro, an anthropomorphic blue bull. The team also has a cheerleading squad named the Houston Texans Cheerleaders.\nCommunity outreach.\nCommunity outreach by the Houston Texans is primarily operated by the Houston Texans Foundation, which works with community partners. The Houston Texans organization supports the character education program, http://. In 2017, the 15th annual Houston Texans Charity Golf Classic raised more than $380,000 for the Foundation. More than $27.2 million has been raised for the Foundation since its creation in 2002.\nFormer Texans DE J. J. Watt raised $41.6 million in relief funds for Hurricane Harvey after the storm devastated the city in 2017. Watt won the Walter Payton Man of the Year Award that season.\nRadio and television.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the Texans' flagship radio stations were KILT SportsRadio 610AM and KILT 100.3FM. The AM station has an all-sports format, while the FM station plays contemporary country music. Both are owned by Audacy. Marc Vandermeer is the play-by-play announcer. Heisman Trophy winner Andre Ware provides color commentary, and SportsRadio 610 host Rich Lord serves as the sideline reporter. Preseason and regular season Monday night and Thursday night games from ESPN, Prime Video, and YouTube are telecast by KTRK, an ABC owned and operated station. Kevin Kugler calls the preseason games on TV, with former Texans defensive end N. D. Kalu providing color commentary.Most Regular season games (including Christmas games through Netflix) are aired over CBS affiliate KHOU, Fox affiliate KRIV if the Texans host an NFC team, and NBC affiliate KPRC for Sunday night games.\nSpanish-language radio broadcasts of the team's games are aired on KGOL ESPN Deportes 1180AM. Enrique V\u00e1squez is the play-by-play announcer. Jos\u00e9 Jojo Padr\u00f3n provides color commentary, and Fernando Hern\u00e1ndez serves as sideline reporter.\nRadio affiliates.\nhttps:// \nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13865", "revid": "27564898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13865", "title": "Heart of Oak", "text": "British patriotic military song\n\"Heart of Oak\" is the official march of the Royal Navy. It is also the official march of several Commonwealth navies, including the Royal Canadian Navy and the Royal New Zealand Navy.\nThe music of 'Heart of Oak' was written in 1759 by composer William Boyce, and the lyrics by actor David Garrick, for Garrick's pantomime \"Harlequin's Invasion\", to which others contributed as well. The pantomime was first performed on New Year's Eve of that year at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, with Handel soloist Samuel Thomas Champnes singing \"Heart of Oak\".\nThe \"wonderful year\" referenced in the first verse was the Annus Mirabilis of 1759, during which British forces were victorious in several significant battles: the Battle of Minden on 1 August 1759; the Battle of Lagos on 19 August 1759; the Battle of the Plains of Abraham (outside Quebec City) on 13 September 1759; and the Battle of Quiberon Bay on 20 November 1759. The last battle foiled a French invasion project planned by the Duc de Choiseul to defeat Britain during the Seven Years' War, hence the reference in the song to 'flat-bottom' invasion barges. These victories were followed a few months later by the Battle of Wandiwash in India on 22 January 1760. Britain's continued success in the war boosted the song's popularity.\nThe oak in the song's title refers to the wood from which British warships were generally made during the age of sail. The \"Heart of oak\" is the strongest central wood of the tree. The reference to \"freemen not slaves\" echoes the refrain (\"Britons never will be slaves!\") of 'Rule, Britannia!', written and composed two decades earlier.\nThe first verse and chorus of this version of the song is heard in \" (Season 3, Episode 18 \"), sung in Ten Forward by Patrick Stewart, in-character as an alien doppelg\u00e4nger of Captain Jean-Luc Picard. Both are also sung by Peter Ustinov and Dean Jones in the 1968 Disney movie \"Blackbeard's Ghost\".\nIn late 2024, the Royal Canadian Navy was mulling replacing 'Heart of Oak' with a new composition.\nLyrics.\nOriginal.\nThe song was written for the London stage in 1759 by William Boyce with words by David Garrick:\nCome cheer up, my lads! 'tis to glory we steer,\nTo add something more to this wonderful year;\nTo honour we call you, as free men not slaves,\nFor who are so free as the sons of the waves?\n\"Chorus\":\nHeart of oak are our ships, heart of oak are our men;\nWe always are ready, steady, boys, steady!\nWe'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.\nAmended words.\nCome, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,\nTo add something new to this wonderful year;\nTo honour we call you, as freemen not slaves,\nFor who are so free as the sons of the waves?\n\"Chorus\":\nHeart of Oak are our ships, \nJolly Tars are our men, \nWe always are ready: Steady, boys, Steady! \nWe'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.\nWe ne'er see our foes but we wish them to stay,\nThey never see us but they wish us away;\nIf they run, why we follow, and run them ashore,\nFor if they won't fight us, what can we do more?\nThey say they'll invade us, these terrible foes,\nThey frighten our women, our children, our beaus,\nBut if they in their flat-bottoms, in darkness set oar,\nStill Britons they'll find to receive them on shore.\nWe still make them fear and we still make them flee,\nAnd drub them ashore as we drub them at sea,\nThen cheer up me lads with one heart let us sing,\nOur soldiers and sailors, our statesmen and king.\nAlternative first verse:\nCome, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,\nWith heads carried high, we will banish all fear;\nTo honour we call you, as freemen not slaves,\nFor who are so free as the sons of the waves?\nAlternative last verse:\nBritannia triumphant her ships rule the seas,\nHer watchword is 'Justice' her password is 'Free',\nSo come cheer up my lads, with one heart let us sing,\nOur soldiers, our sailors, our statesmen, our King [Queen].\nRoyal Canadian Navy.\nCome, cheer up, my lads, 'tis to glory we steer,\nTo add something new to this wonderful year;\nTo honour we call you, not press you like slaves,\nFor who are so free as the sons of the waves?\n\"Chorus\":\nHeart of Oak are our ships, \nJolly Tars are our men, \nWe always are ready: Steady, boys, steady! \nWe'll fight and we'll conquer again and again.\nFrench lyrics (Royal Canadian Sea Cadets).\nDebout mes gaillards, pointons-nous vers la gloire,\nFleurons ajoutons \u00e0 ces heures sans d\u00e9boire[#endnote_]\nSans carcans et sans joug,\nTout l'honneur nous attend,\nPour nous qui sommes les fils libres de l'oc\u00e9an.\nCoeur de ch\u00eane nos navires \nGais lurons nos marins \nToujours fid\u00e8les au poste,\nHardis, gars, hardis! \nL'avenir est \u00e0 nous les vrais!\nCoeur de ch\u00eane nos navires, \nGais lurons nos marins, \nToujours fid\u00e8les au poste,\nHardis, gars, hardis! \nL'avenir est \u00e0 nous les vrais conqu\u00e9rants!\n1.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ Some cadet units use instead \"Fleurons ajoutons \u00e0 cet an sans d\u00e9boire\".\nNew lyrics.\nA new version was presented on 16 April 1809 and published by Reverend Rylance.\nWhen Alfred, our King, drove the Dane from this land,\nHe planted an oak with his own royal hand;\nAnd he pray'd for Heaven's blessing to hallow the tree,\nAs a sceptre for England, the queen of the sea.\nChorus:\nHeart of oak are our ships,\nHearts of oak are our men,\nWe always are ready, steady boys, steady,\nTo charge and to conquer again and again.\nThe sapling shot up and stuck firm to the ground;\nIt defied every tempest that bellow'd around;\nAnd still was it seen with fresh vigour to shoot,\nWhen the blood of our martyrs had moisten'd its root.\nBut the worms of corruption had eaten their way\nThrough its bark; till a Wardle has swept them away,\nHe has sworn, no such reptiles our tree shall infest,\nAnd our patriots soon shall extirpate the nest.\nYon tyrant, whose rule abject Europe bemoans\u00a0\u2014\nYon brood of usurpers who sit on her thrones\u00a0\u2014\nShall look on our country, and tremble with awe,\n\"Where a son of the Monarch has bow'd to the law\",\nNow long live the \"Briton\", who dar'd to revive\nThe spirit which Britons scarce felt was alive;\nHis name shall be carv'd, while of freedom we sing,\nOn the oak that was planted by Alfred our King.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13867", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13867", "title": "Harold Holt", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia from 1966 to 1967\nHarold Edward Holt (5 August 1908\u00a0\u2013 17 December 1967) was an Australian politician who served as the 17th prime minister of Australia from 1966 until his disappearance and presumed death in 1967. He held office as leader of the Liberal Party of Australia and held various ministerial positions from 1949 to 1966 in the governments of Robert Menzies and Arthur Fadden.\nHolt was born in Sydney and moved to Melbourne in childhood, studying law at the University of Melbourne. Before entering politics he practised law and was a lobbyist for cinema operators. He was first elected to the House of Representatives at the 1935 Fawkner by-election, aged 27, as a member of the United Australia Party (UAP). Holt was made a minister without portfolio in 1939, when his mentor Robert Menzies became prime minister. His tenure in the ministry was interrupted by a brief stint in the Australian Army, which ended when he was recalled to cabinet following the deaths of three ministers in the 1940 Canberra air disaster. The government was defeated in 1941, sending the UAP into opposition, and he joined the new Liberal Party upon its creation in 1945.\nWhen the Liberals came to office in 1949, Holt became a senior figure in the new government. As Minister for Immigration (1949\u20131956), he expanded the post-war immigration scheme and relaxed the White Australia policy for the first time. He was also influential as Minister for Labour and National Service (1949\u20131958), where he handled several industrial relations disputes. Holt was elected deputy leader of the Liberal Party in 1956, and after the 1958 election replaced Arthur Fadden as Treasurer. He oversaw the creation of the Reserve Bank of Australia and the decimal Australian dollar, but was blamed for a credit crunch that almost cost the Coalition the 1961 election. However, the economy soon rebounded and Holt retained his place as Menzies' heir apparent.\nHolt became prime minister in January 1966, elected unopposed as Liberal leader following Menzies' retirement. He fought a general election later that year, winning a landslide victory. The Holt government continued the dismantling of the White Australia policy, amended the constitution to give the federal government responsibility for indigenous affairs, and took Australia out of the sterling area. Holt promoted greater engagement with Asia and the Pacific, and made visits to a number of East Asian countries. His government expanded Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War, and maintained close ties with the United States under President Lyndon B. Johnson. While visiting the White House, Holt proclaimed that he was \"all the way with LBJ\", a remark which was poorly received at home.\nIn December 1967, Holt disappeared while swimming in rough conditions at Cheviot Beach, Victoria. He was presumed dead, although his body was never recovered; his disappearance spawned a number of conspiracy theories. Holt was the third Australian prime minister to die in office. He was succeeded by Country Party leader John McEwen on an interim basis and then by John Gorton. His death was commemorated in a number of ways, among them by the establishment of the Harold Holt Memorial Swimming Centre in Melbourne, and the Harold E. Holt Naval Communication Station in Exmouth (Western Australia).\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nHolt was born on 5 August 1908 at his parents' home in Stanmore, New South Wales, a suburb of Sydney. He was the first of two sons born to Olive May (n\u00e9e Williams; formerly Pearce) and Thomas James Holt; his younger brother Clifford was born in 1910. His parents had married seven months before his birth, in January 1908.\nHolt's mother was born in Eudunda, South Australia, and had Cornish, English, German, and Irish ancestry; her sister was the actress Vera Pearce. Holt's father had trained as a schoolteacher in Sydney and was working as a physical education teacher at the Cleveland Street School in Surry Hills at the time of his son's birth. His paternal grandfather Thomas Holt Sr. owned a large farming property in Nubba, and was twice elected mayor of nearby Wallendbeen. He was more distantly descended from James Holt, a cobbler from Birmingham, England, who arrived in New South Wales in 1829.\nEducation.\nIn 1914, Holt's parents moved to Adelaide, where his father became the licensee of a hotel in Payneham. He and his brother stayed behind in Sydney, living with an uncle and attending Randwick Public School. In late 1916, Holt was sent to live with grandparents in the country, where he briefly attended the Nubba State School. He returned to Sydney the following year, and for three years was enrolled at Abbotsholme College, a private school in Killara; his parents separated around that time. In 1920, Holt began boarding at Wesley College, Melbourne. He was a popular and talented student, winning a scholarship in his final year and graduating second in his class. Holt generally spent school holidays with his relatives in Nubba or with schoolmates, rather than with his parents\u00a0\u2013 his father had begun working as a talent agent, touring the country on the Tivoli circuit, while his mother died in 1925. He was 16 at the time, and was unable to attend the funeral.\nIn 1927, Holt began studying law at the University of Melbourne, living at Queen's College on a scholarship. He represented the university in cricket and football, and was also active in various student organisations, serving as president of the Law Students' Society and of the Queen's College social club. Holt won prizes for oratory and essay-writing, and was a member of the inter-university debating team. He graduated with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1930. Holt's father\u00a0\u2013 living in London\u00a0\u2013 invited him to continue his studies in England, but he declined the offer.\nLegal career.\nHolt served his articles of clerkship with the firm of Fink, Best &amp; Miller. He was admitted to the Victorian Bar in late 1932, and opened his own legal practice the following year. However, clients during the Depression were scarce and frequently underpaid, so Holt lived in a boardinghouse and often relied upon the hospitality of friends. Drawing on his family connections in show business, he eventually accepted an offer to become secretary of the Victorian Cinematograph Exhibitors' Association, a film industry lobby group. In this capacity he appeared several times before the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration. This had a positive effect on his own practice, and he eventually took on two partners, first Jack Graham and later James Newman. The firm of Holt, Graham, &amp; Newman was dissolved in 1963, following a financial dispute and subsequently reconstituted as Holt, Newman, &amp; Holt, with Holt's son Sam as the new addition. Holt's involvement in the practice declined once he entered politics and ceased altogether in 1949, although he did not formally retire until assuming the prime ministership.\nEarly political career.\nIn 1933, Holt joined the Young Nationalists, the youth wing of the United Australia Party. He cultivated a friendship with Mabel Brookes, and through Brookes became acquainted with senior members of the influential Australian Women's National League (AWNL). He also secured the patronage of Robert Menzies, with whom he shared a similar background and political views. At the 1934 federal election, Holt stood for the UAP in the Division of Yarra. It was a safe seat for the Labor Party, held by the party's leader (and former prime minister) James Scullin. Holt lost heavily, as was expected, but was praised for his campaigning. Early the following year, he contested Clifton Hill\u00a0\u2013 another safe Labor seat\u00a0\u2013 at the Victorian state election, losing to Bert Cremean. Holt was eventually elected to parliament on his third attempt, winning a federal by-election for the seat of Fawkner in August 1935; his predecessor, George Maxwell, had died in office. He won UAP preselection against five other candidates, a victory which \"Smith's Weekly\" attributed to his \"political godmothers\" in the AWNL. His new seat was centred on Melbourne's wealthy inner-eastern suburbs.\nHolt was twenty-seven years old when he entered parliament, making him its youngest member. He kept a relatively low profile in his first few years, but spoke on a wide range of topics. When Robert Menzies became prime minister in April 1939, he made Holt one of four ministers without portfolio. His inclusion was made possible by the collapse of the coalition with the Country Party\u00a0\u2013 previously a certain number of positions had been reserved for Country MPs, but the new ministry was composed solely of UAP members. Although Holt officially had no portfolio, he effectively was an assistant minister to Richard Casey, who headed the Department of Supply &amp; Development. He was given responsibility for the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), and also acted for periods as Minister for Trade and Customs and Minister for Civil Aviation and Air while the incumbents were overseas. Holt's first stint as a government minister came to an end in March 1940, when the coalition with the Country Party was reinstituted. His replacement was Arthur Fadden, another future prime minister.\nWorld War II.\nMilitary service.\nHolt enlisted in the Militia in February 1939, joining a part-time artillery unit for businessmen and professionals. He was given indefinite leave during his ministerial service. In May 1940, without resigning his seat, Holt enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force with the intent of becoming a full-time soldier. Several of his parliamentary colleagues did likewise at various points in the war. Holt was posted to the 2/4th Field Regiment, holding the rank of gunner. He had been offered a commission as an officer in the Royal Australian Air Force, but declined due to his lack of experience. In a press statement, Holt said \"as the youngest member of the House, I could not feel happy in my position if I were not prepared to make some sacrifice and take an active part\". He was sent to Puckapunyal for training, and expected to be posted to North Africa or Palestine.\nReturn to the ministry, 1940\u20131941.\nHolt's brief military career came to an end as a result of the Canberra air disaster on 13 August, which killed three senior government ministers. Menzies called an early general election for 21 September, which resulted in a hung parliament and a UAP\u2013Country minority government. Holt was given leave from the army to campaign, and won re-election with a large majority. Menzies subsequently asked him to return to cabinet, to which he agreed. Holt was sworn in as Minister for Labour and National Service on 28 October, and formally resigned from the army the same day. He was placed in charge of the new Department of Labour and National Service, which took over most of the responsibilities of the previous Department of Industry. He also became a member of the bipartisan Advisory War Council, although he personally favoured the establishment of a national unity government with the Labor Party.\nAs labour minister, Holt's foremost task was to prevent industrial disputes from disrupting the war effort. He met with union leaders and employer groups, and secured their agreement to a streamlining of the arbitration process while the war was underway. He had also been made Minister in charge of Scientific and Industrial Research, which gave him responsibility for the CSIR and its wartime efforts. In April 1941, Holt sponsored and oversaw the passage of the \"Child Endowment Act\", which introduced a universal child endowment scheme; newspapers labelled him \"the godfather to a million Australian children\". When leadership troubles hit the Coalition later in the year, Holt initially supported Menzies. However, he and five cabinet colleagues eventually transferred their allegiance to Arthur Fadden, the leader of the Country Party, believing this way the only to ensure stable government. Menzies felt he had been betrayed, but forgave Holt and accepted his assurances that he had been acting in the best interests of the country. He retained his portfolios in the Fadden government, which lasted only 40 days before being defeated on a confidence motion in October 1941.\nOpposition, 1941\u20131949.\nAfter going into opposition, Holt kept a reasonably low profile for the remainder of the war, except for his membership of the Joint Committee on War Expenditure. He was criticised by some for not re-joining the army, and at the 1943 election was opposed by Brigadier William Cremor, whose campaign was funded by Sydney businessmen (including Keith Murdoch). He lost a significant portion of his primary vote, but suffered only a small swing on the two-party-preferred count. Menzies returned as leader of the UAP in September 1943, and Holt was initially a candidate for the deputy leadership; he withdrew once former prime minister Billy Hughes entered the race. Holt was in favour of the creation of the Liberal Party as a successor to the UAP, but played little role in the practical aspects of its establishment. He became an official member of the new party in February 1945.\nMenzies government, 1949\u20131966.\nHolt transferred to the newly created seat of Higgins at the 1949 federal election, which saw the ALP government defeated in a landslide. In the new government he was re-appointed to his former post of Minister for Labour and National Service and was also made Minister for Immigration, with Menzies returning as prime minister at the head of a coalition between the Liberal Party and Country Party.\nHolt's portfolios gave him a high public profile, along with his extra role as minister responsible for the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne. He also served as chairman of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association from 1952 to 1955, which allowed him to travel frequently and develop a reputation overseas. In 1956, Holt was elected deputy leader of the Liberal Party after Eric Harrison's retirement, defeating Richard Casey and William Spooner. He was also appointed Leader of the House. By this time he was already seen as Menzies' heir apparent, although he was apparently content to wait for Menzies to retire and never considered challenging his leadership.\nDuring the 1955 election campaign, Holt was hospitalised with head injuries for two weeks after a single-car accident which killed his driver, Gustav Heilster.\nImmigration minister, 1949\u20131956.\nHolt oversaw the continued expansion of the post-war immigration scheme begun by the Chifley government and was said to favour a \"big, virile population\". He continued the policy of giving preference to British migrants, but did expand the Assisted Passage Migration Scheme to include other countries. Immigration policy initially focused on family migration, but from the early 1950s targeted skilled workers for the Snowy Mountains Scheme and other public infrastructure projects. In 1955, Holt publicly welcomed Australia's one millionth post-war migrant and said he was \"looking forward to our second million\". The following year, following the Soviet invasion of Hungary, he secured cabinet approval for 10,000 Hungarian refugees to settle in Australia.\nHolt and the government did not break from the White Australia policy, but he believed it needed to be administered more tactfully to avoid offending Australia's Asian neighbours. He allowed 800 non-European refugees to remain in Australia, stopping the enforcement of Calwell's \"War-time Refugees Removal Act 1949\", and in the early 1950s allowed Japanese war brides to join their Australian husbands. As opposition spokesman for immigration, Holt had been critical of previous immigration minister Arthur Calwell's treatment of Lorenzo Gamboa, a Filipino man with an Australian wife and children who had been denied entry by Calwell due to his race. One of his first acts as minister was to allow Gamboa to enter Australia and reunite with his family.\nLabour and national service minister, 1949\u20131958.\nAs labour minister, Holt was credited with reducing industrial conflict, with working hours lost to strikes reducing significantly during his tenure. He had a close relationship with Albert Monk, the president of the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU), which led to criticism from Monk's colleagues in the labour movement and led Calwell to speak of a \"Holt-Monk axis\". In 1950, at Monk's suggestion, Holt commissioned the first national inquiry into vocational education and training, with a particular focus on apprenticeship schemes. He also had a good working relationship with Jim Healy, the general secretary of the Waterside Workers' Federation which had been the source of several industrial disputes.\nHolt introduced legislation in 1951 to mandate the use of secret ballots in union elections. After the High Court's ruling in the Boilermakers' case in 1956, he also oversaw the replacement of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration with a separate Commonwealth Industrial Court, \"thus establishing the modern form of the federal arbitration system\". When Australia became involved in the Korean War, Holt became responsible for administered the reintroduced conscription scheme under the \"National Service Act 1951\".\nTreasurer, 1958\u20131966.\nIn December 1958, following the retirement of Arthur Fadden, Holt succeeded him as Treasurer. Holt had little knowledge or interest in economics, but the job cemented his position as Menzies' likely successor. As Treasurer, Holt relied strongly on the advice of Treasury secretary Roland Wilson. His achievements included major reforms to the banking system (originated by Fadden)\u00a0\u2013 including the establishment of the Reserve Bank of Australia\u00a0\u2013 and the planning and preparation for the introduction of decimal currency. It was Holt who convinced Cabinet to call the new currency the \"dollar\" rather than the \"royal\".\nThe economy Holt inherited was growing strongly, aided by the opening of new iron ore mines. However, in 1959, inflation was running at 4.5% and Treasury was alarmed. Holt was reluctant to act, but in November 1960 introduced a deflationary package of tax changes. He also reluctantly agreed to an interest rate rise by the Reserve Bank. The credit squeeze was nicknamed the \"Holt jolt\". The economy went into recession, and unemployment rose to three percent, which was considered high for the time and contrary to the government's policy of full employment.\nThe credit squeeze brought the Coalition dangerously close to losing the 1961 election, with the Coalition being returned with a precarious one-seat majority. There were calls for Holt to be sacked, but he retained Menzies' support. He later described 1960\u201361 as \"my most difficult year in public life\". Most of the deflationary measures were reversed in 1962, and unemployment dropped down to 1.5 percent by August 1963. In later budgets, Holt retreated to his Queensland holiday home while it was being prepared. He said that the 1965 budget \"has had the best reception yet of any in the series I have presented\".\nPrime Minister (1966\u20131967).\nHolt was sworn in as prime minister on 26 January 1966, following the retirement of Robert Menzies six days earlier. He won the leadership election unopposed, with William McMahon elected as his deputy. His swearing in was delayed by the death of Defence Minister Shane Paltridge; he and Menzies were both pallbearers at Paltridge's state funeral on 25 January. Holt was the first Australian prime minister born in the 20th century and the first born after federation. He was almost fourteen years younger than his predecessor, but, at the age of 57, was still the fourth-oldest man to assume the office.\nHe had been an MP for over 30 years before becoming prime minister, still the longest wait for any non-caretaker Prime Minister. The only person who had a longer wait was his caretaker successor John McEwen, who had served 33 years before ascending to the post. Stylistically, Holt was more informal and contemporary than Menzies, and his wife accompanied him into the political spotlight. He gave the media an unprecedented level of access, and was the first prime minister to conduct regular press conferences and grant regular television interviews. His press secretary, Tony Eggleton, accompanied him virtually every time he travelled.\nHolt's initial cabinet was virtually unchanged from that of his predecessor. John Gorton and Les Bury were promoted to replace Menzies and Paltridge, but there were no other changes in composition. There were also no major changes in portfolio, outside of McMahon's promotion to Treasurer in place of Holt. A notable addition to the outer ministry was Senator Annabelle Rankin as Minister for Housing\u00a0\u2013 the first woman to hold a ministerial portfolio. A minor reshuffle occurred after the 1966 election, with Doug Anthony and Ian Sinclair added to cabinet and Charles Barnes demoted to the outer ministry. The only new government department created during Holt's tenure was the Department of Education and Science, established in December 1966, which was the first federal department specific to either of those areas. The Country Party leader and de facto Deputy Prime Minister, John McEwen, was effectively given veto power over government policy by virtue of being the longest-tenured member of the government.\nElections.\nOn 26 November 1966, Holt fought his first and only general election as prime minister, winning a somewhat unexpected landslide victory. The Coalition secured 56.9 percent of the two-party-preferred vote, gaining 10 seats and bringing its total number of seats in the House of Representatives to 82 out of 124, the largest majority government in Australian history at the time. The Liberals finished only two seats away from forming majority government in its own right. It was a higher margin of victory than Menzies had achieved in eight elections as Liberal leader, and was the Labor Party's worst electoral defeat in 31 years.\nHolt received little credit for the Coalition's election victory, even from within his own party. It was generally held that the Labor Party's poor campaign had been the major factor in its defeat. Arthur Calwell, the Leader of the Opposition, was 70 years old and had limited personal popularity\u00a0\u2013 a Gallup poll before the election placed his personal approval rating at 24 percent, compared with Holt's 60 percent. Calwell had suffered a damaging rift with his deputy Gough Whitlam earlier in the year, and the general public still perceived the party as divided. In an election where the Vietnam War was a major campaign issue, he and Whitlam publicly contradicted each other on major policy decisions. Labor ran on an anti-war platform, but struggled to appeal to voters concerned about national security; combined with Calwell's dedication to the White Australia policy, this allowed the party to be portrayed as isolationist and naive about external affairs. Calwell was far less telegenic than his opponent, and was seen as gruff and antagonistic where Holt was suave and easy-going. At a rally in Adelaide a week before the election, Calwell accused Holt of having \"chickened out of World War II\u00a0\u2013 just as his three stepsons are chickening out of the war in Vietnam today\". His attack on Holt's family\u00a0\u2013 which he refused to withdraw\u00a0\u2013 was viewed as desperate and undignified, and it was pointed out that, unlike Holt, Calwell had performed no military service in World War II.\nIn early 1967, Calwell retired as ALP leader. Whitlam succeeded him, and proved a far more effective opponent than Calwell had been, consistently getting the better of Holt both in the media and in parliament. Labor soon began to recover from its losses and gain ground. By this time, the long-suppressed tensions between the Coalition partners over economic and trade policies were also beginning to emerge. Throughout his reign as Liberal leader, Menzies had enforced strict party discipline but, once he was gone, dissension began to surface. Some Liberals soon became dissatisfied by what they saw as Holt's weak leadership. Alan Reid asserts that Holt was being increasingly criticised within the party in the months before his death, that he was perceived as being \"vague, imprecise and evasive\" and \"nice to the point that his essential decency was viewed as weakness\".\nDomestic policy.\nAccording to his biographer Tom Frame, \"Holt's inclinations and sympathies were those of the political centre [...] he was a pragmatist rather than a philosopher, but he nonetheless claimed a philosophical lineage connecting him with Alfred Deakin and approvingly quoted his statement that 'we are liberal always, radical often, and reactionary never'.\"\nEconomy.\nHolt as prime minister was sometimes criticised for a failure to be assertive on economic matters. A major drought in 1965 had led to slowdown in growth, but he was unwilling to increase public spending in case it increased inflation. The Australian dollar\u00a0\u2013 a legacy of Holt's period as Treasurer\u00a0\u2013 came into circulation on 14 February 1966, less than a month after his prime ministership began. In November 1967, the British government unexpectedly announced that it would be devaluing the pound sterling by 14 percent. Holt announced that the Australian government would not follow suit, effectively withdrawing Australia from the sterling area. The decision was strongly opposed by the Country Party, who feared it would disadvantage primary industry. McEwen went as far as to issue a public statement criticising the decision, which Holt considered a breach of cabinet solidarity. The dispute caused a breakdown in Holt and McEwen's relationship and nearly brought down the Coalition; at one point, Holt made preparations for the Liberals to govern as a minority government the event McEwen tore up the Coalition agreement. Ultimately, the dispute was resolved in Holt's favour. \"The Bulletin\" said that the withdrawal was \"quite certain to mean the end of any remaining special relationship between Australia and Britain\". There were no other important economic policy reforms made by the Holt government, although Australia did become a founding member of the Asian Development Bank in 1966.\nImmigration.\nAs prime minister, Holt continued the liberalisation of immigration law that he had begun as Minister for Immigration. When he came to office, what remained of the White Australia policy was upheld by ministerial decree rather than by explicit legislation. In March 1966, the residency requirement for naturalisation was changed to a uniform five years; it had previously been 15 years for non-whites. Discriminatory provisions relating to family reunification were also removed. As a result, in the two years after March 1966 around 3,000 Asian immigrants were granted Australian citizenship, compared with 4,100 in the preceding two decades. Additionally, Immigration Minister Hubert Opperman announced that potential immigrants to Australia would be assessed solely \"on the basis of their suitability as settlers, their ability to integrate readily, and their possession of qualifications which are in fact positively useful to Australia\"; non-whites had previously had to demonstrate that they were \"highly qualified and distinguished\" to gain entry.\nKeith Wilson believed that the Holt government's reforms ensured that \"from now on there will not be in any of our laws or in any of our regulations anything that discriminates against migrants on the grounds of colour or race\". However, there would not be a practical change in the composition of Australia's immigration intake for many more years. Holt maintained that \"every country reserves to itself the right to decide what the composition of its people shall be\", and promised \"a community life free from serious minority and racial problems\". He was careful to frame his changes as simply a modification of existing policy, in order to avoid alienating organised labour (historically the greatest supporters of restricting non-white immigration). The Labor Party had only removed \"White Australia\" from its platform in 1965, and Opposition Leader Arthur Calwell stated he was \"determined to continue to oppose, for many obvious reasons, any attempt to create a multi-racial society in our midst\". However, Holt was less circumspect outside Australia, telling British journalists that no White Australia policy existed and ordering Australian embassies to promote the changes to Asian governments and media outlets.\nConstitutional reform.\nIn 1967, the Holt government amended the constitution to alter section 51 (xxvi) and remove section 127. This gave the federal government the power to legislate specifically for Indigenous Australians, and also mandated counting Indigenous people in the census. The constitutional amendments required a referendum before they could be enacted, which passed with over 90 percent of the vote; it remains the largest referendum majority in Australian history. Holt personally considered the amendments unnecessary and mostly symbolic, but thought they would be well received by the international community (particularly Asia). According to Barrie Dexter, he was privately shocked by the referendum result, having been uncertain whether it would even pass.\nHolt came to regard the referendum as indicative of a shift in the national mood. In the following months, he toured Aboriginal communities and consulted with indigenous leaders, including Charles Perkins and Kath Walker. Despite opposition from state governments, he created a new Office of Aboriginal Affairs within the Prime Minister's Department, as well as a new advisory body called the Council of Aboriginal Affairs (chaired by H. C. Coombs). According to Coombs and Paul Hasluck, Holt had little interest in indigenous affairs before becoming prime minister. Despite this, he brought about a fundamental shift in the way policy was handled, paving the way for the federal government to assume many of the powers and responsibilities that had previously been the preserve of the states. Indigenous academic Gary Foley has said that Holt's death was a setback for Aboriginal people, as his successors did not show the same commitment to the framework that he established.\nThe Holt government also unsuccessfully attempted to remove section 24 of the constitution (the so-called \"nexus clause\"), which requires the number of members in the House of Representatives to be \"as nearly as practicable, twice the number of senators\". The resulting referendum did not come close to passing, with only 40 percent voting in favour nationwide and only one state (New South Wales) recording a majority. All three major-party leaders campaigned for the \"Yes\" vote, while opposition came mainly from Coalition backbenchers and Democratic Labor Party senators. Supporters of the \"No\" vote successfully argued that section 24 protected the influence of the Senate, and thus the interests of less populous states and rural areas. Holt did make one other significant legal reform, albeit one that did not require a constitutional amendment. In September 1967, he announced that his government would use section 74 of the constitution to remove the potential for High Court cases to be appealed to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. The necessary legislation was not passed until after his death.\nThe arts.\nIn November 1967, in one of his last major policy statements, Holt announced the establishment of the National Gallery of Australia and the Australia Council for the Arts. The National Gallery, which did not open until 1982, was the first arts-related major infrastructure project to be funded by the federal government; previous projects had been funded by state governments or by private subscription. Holt said it would \"add significantly to the cultural life of Australia and the national capital\". The other element of his announcement, the Australia Council for the Arts, was the first national arts council, intended to provide arms-length advice to the Prime Minister's Department on arts funding. Rupert Myer has suggested that \"Holt's legacy ought to be a core belief in, and broad public demand for, the sustained support of cultural activity from all three tiers of government\".\nForeign policy.\nHolt believed it was his responsibility as prime minister \"to reflect the modern Australia to my fellow countrymen, to our allies and the outside world at large\". His approach to national security emphasised opposition to international communism and the need to engage more with Asia. Holt said that the \"great central fact of modern history\" was \"the tremendous power conflict between the communist world and the free world\". He was a strong believer in the domino theory and containment, holding that communism had to be fought wherever it occurred in order to prevent it spreading to neighbouring countries. In April 1967, Holt told parliament that \"geographically we are part of Asia, and increasingly we have become aware of our involvement in the affairs of Asia\u00a0\u2013 our greatest dangers and our highest hopes are centred in Asia's tomorrows\". Gough Whitlam said that Holt \"made Australia better known in Asia and he made Australians more aware of Asia than ever before [...] this I believe was his most important contribution to our future\".\nPersonal diplomacy was Holt's strong point\u00a0\u2013 he believed diplomatic ties could be strengthened by making intimate connections with other world leaders. This approach was disliked by his external affairs minister, Paul Hasluck, who in his memoirs accused him of believing in \"instant diplomacy\" and crediting his personal charms for advances made by diplomatic officials. As prime minister, Holt's first overseas trip was to South-East Asia in April 1966, where he visited Malaysia, Singapore, South Vietnam, and Thailand. He toured Cambodia, Laos, South Korea, and Taiwan in March and April 1967, and had planned to visit Burma, India, Indonesia, Japan, and Pakistan in 1968. Most of those countries had never before been visited by an Australian prime minister. There were also a number of reciprocal visits from East Asian leaders, including Eisaku Sat\u014d of Japan, Souvanna Phouma of Laos, and Thanom Kittikachorn of Thailand. The most controversial of those occurred in January 1967, when Prime Minister Nguy\u1ec5n Cao K\u1ef3 of South Vietnam visited on Holt's personal invitation\u00a0\u2013 issued without consulting cabinet. Public sentiment was beginning to turn against the war, and Ky's visit was met with large demonstrations; opposition leader Arthur Calwell issued a statement calling him a \"miserable little butcher\". Ky nonetheless handled himself well, and \"The Bulletin\" called his visit a \"personal triumph\".\nVietnam War.\nThe Vietnam War was the dominant foreign policy issue during Holt's term in office. He was a strong supporter of Australian involvement in the war, which had begun in 1962, and accused its critics of adopting a \"Lotus Land\" attitude. As well as citing Australia's SEATO obligations to South Vietnam, Holt justified the war on the grounds that Australia was morally obligated to \"resist communist subversion and aggression\" and \"defend the right of every people to choose their own social and economic order\". He held that \"unless there is security for all small nations, there cannot be security for any small nation\".\nIn March 1966, Holt announced that the 1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, would be withdrawn and replaced by the 1st Australian Task Force, a self-contained brigade-sized unit based at Nui Dat. This effectively tripled the number of Australian troops in Vietnam to around 4,500, and also included 1,500 national servicemen\u00a0\u2013 the first conscripts to serve in the conflict. By the final months of Holt's prime ministership, Australia had over 8,000 personnel stationed in South Vietnam, drawn from all three branches of the Australian Defence Force; the final troop increase was announced in October 1967. Holt \"never deviated from his whole-hearted support for American bombing of North Vietnam and the hope that steadily increasing the number of foreign troops deployed to South Vietnam would lead to military victory and a solution to the crisis\". John Gorton later said it was \"ironical that, being a man of peace, he should have presided over one of the greatest build-ups of military power that Australia has found itself engaged in\".\nThe government's handling of the war initially enjoyed broad public support, and was considered a key contributor to the landslide election victory in 1966\u00a0\u2013 referred to by some as a \"khaki election\". By the end of the following year, however, opinion polls were showing that public sentiment had turned against the war, and previously supportive media outlets had begun to criticised Holt's decision-making. He did not live long enough to see the mass demonstrations experienced by his successors. Political opposition to the war was initially led by Opposition Leader Arthur Calwell, who promised a total withdrawal from the conflict and labelled it a \"cruel, unwinnable civil war\". His replacement, Gough Whitlam, adopted a more pragmatic approach, focusing on policy specifics (particularly the government's apparent lack of an exit strategy) rather than the validity of the war itself.\n\"All the way with LBJ\".\nHolt cultivated a close relationship with the United States under President Lyndon B. Johnson. He believed that \"without the American shield most of us who live in Asia and the South Pacific would have a continuing sense of insecurity\". Cooperation between the two countries extended beyond the Vietnam War. Holt approved the construction of several Earth stations for use by NASA and American intelligence agencies, including Pine Gap, Honeysuckle Creek, and Tidbinbilla. This made Australia \"the most substantial centre for American missile and space operations outside the continental United States\".\nHolt and Johnson developed a personal friendship. They were the same age, and had first met in 1942, when Johnson visited Melbourne as a naval officer; afterwards they shared a similar career trajectory. Holt visited the U.S. twice while in office, in June and July 1966, and on the latter visit was invited to stay at Camp David. He and Johnson reportedly played tennis, lounged by the pool, and watched movies together. In October 1966, Johnson made the first visit to Australia by an incumbent American president; Vice President Hubert Humphrey had visited in February of that year. He toured five cities, and was greeted by large crowds as well as a number of anti-war demonstrators, who disrupted the presidential motorcade. The opposition criticised the visit as a publicity stunt. Johnson later returned to Australia for Holt's memorial service, and invited his widow Zara to stay with him when she visited the United States in 1969.\nOn his first visit to the U.S., Holt made what was widely viewed as a \"faux pas\" while delivering a ceremonial address at the White House. Departing from his prepared remarks, he said: \"And so, sir, in the lonelier and perhaps even more disheartening moments which come to any national leader, I hope there will be a corner of your mind and heart which takes cheer from the fact that you have an admiring friend, a staunch friend that will be \"all the way with LBJ\".\" Holt had meant it to be a \"light-hearted gesture of goodwill towards a generous host\", referencing the slogan used in Johnson's 1964 presidential campaign. It was interpreted as such by his immediate audience, but once it was reported back in Australia it came to be viewed as a \"foolish, sycophantic and dangerous statement\" that was indicative of Australian subservience. Bill Hayden said Holt's remarks \"shocked and insulted many Australians [...] its seeming servility was an embarrassment and a worry\". Newspaper editorials generally agreed with Holt's assertion that he had been misinterpreted, but still criticised him for making an error in judgment. His comments intensified anti-war sentiments among those who were already opposed to the war, but had little electoral impact. Nonetheless, \"all the way with LBJ\" is still remembered as Holt's \"best-known utterance\".\nBritain and the Commonwealth.\nHolt was a strong supporter of the Commonwealth of Nations, and believed its member states had moral obligations to one another\u00a0\u2013 particularly Britain, as the former \"mother country\". However, his relationship with Harold Wilson, the British prime minister, was somewhat frosty. He repeatedly lobbied Wilson to maintain a strong British presence \"East of Suez\", in order to complement American efforts, and in early 1967 received assurances that no reduction was being contemplated. However, by the middle of the year Wilson had announced that Britain intended to close all of its bases in Asia by the early 1970s (except for Hong Kong). In response to Holt's concerns, it was suggested by Wilson that a British naval base could be established in Cockburn Sound. Holt rejected this outright, and felt that Wilson had deliberately misled him as to his intentions.\nControversies.\nHolt's popularity and political standing was damaged by his perceived poor handling of a series of controversies that emerged during 1967. In April, the ABC's new nightly current affairs program \"This Day Tonight\" ran a story which criticised the government's decision not to reappoint the Chair of the ABC Board, Sir James Darling. Holt responded rashly, questioning the impartiality of the ABC and implying political bias on the part of journalist Mike Willesee (whose father Don Willesee was an ALP Senator and future Whitlam government minister), and his statement drew strong protests from both Willesee and the Australian Journalists' Association.\nIn May, increasing pressure from the media and within the Liberal Party forced Holt to announce a parliamentary debate on the question of a second inquiry into the 1964 sinking of to be held on 16 May. The debate included the maiden speech by newly elected NSW Liberal MP Edward St John QC, who used the opportunity to criticise the government's attitude to new evidence about the disaster. An enraged Holt interrupted St John's speech, in defiance of the parliamentary convention that maiden speeches are heard in silence; his blunder embarrassed the government and further undermined Holt's support in the Liberal Party. A few days later, Holt announced a new Royal Commission into the disaster.\nIn October the government became embroiled in another embarrassing controversy over the alleged misuse of VIP aircraft, which came to a head when John Gorton (Government Leader in the Senate) tabled documents that showed that Holt had unintentionally misled Parliament in his earlier answers on the matter. Support for his leadership was eroded even further by his refusal to sack the Minister for Air, Peter Howson, in order to defuse the scandal, fuelling criticism from within the party that Holt was \"weak\" and lacked Menzies' ruthlessness. Much of the blame for the episode within the Public Service was visited upon Sir John Bunting, Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, although other figures such as the Deputy Secretary Peter Lawler were able to protect themselves. One of John Gorton's first acts upon becoming prime minister in January 1968 was to sideline Bunting by creating a separate Department of the Cabinet Office with Bunting as its head, and replaced him with Lenox Hewitt.\nIn November 1967, the government suffered a serious setback in the senate election, winning just 42.8 per cent of the vote against Labor's 45 per cent. The coalition also lost the seats of Corio and Dawson to Labor in by-elections. Alan Reid says that, within the party, the reversal was blamed on Holt's mishandling of the V.I.P. planes scandal. Disquiet was growing about his leadership style and possible health problems.\nDisappearance.\nHolt loved the ocean, particularly spearfishing, and had holiday homes at Portsea, Victoria, and Bingil Bay, Queensland. On 17 December 1967, while Holt was spending the weekend at Portsea, he and four companions decided to drive to Point Nepean to watch sailor Alec Rose pass through The Rip on his solo circumnavigation attempt. On their way back to Portsea, Holt convinced the group to stop at remote Cheviot Beach for a swim before lunch\u00a0\u2013 he had spearfished there on many previous occasions, and claimed to \"know this beach like the back of my hand\". Because of the rough conditions, only one other person, Alan Stewart, joined Holt in the water. Stewart kept close to shore, but Holt swam out into deeper water and was seemingly caught up in a rip, eventually disappearing from view. One of the witnesses, Marjorie Gillespie, described it as \"like a leaf being taken out [...] so quick and final\".\nHolt's disappearance sparked \"one of the largest search operations in Australian history\", but no trace of his body was ever found. At 10 p.m. on 18 December, Governor-General Lord Casey announced he had terminated Holt's commission as prime minister upon his presumed death. A police report released in early 1968 made no definitive findings about Holt's death, while a coronial inquest in 2005 returned a verdict of accidental drowning. It is generally accepted that Holt overestimated his swimming ability. Some have alleged that Holt committed suicide, but those close to him rejected this as uncharacteristic of his personality. Conspiracy theories have included suggestions that Holt faked his own death, was assassinated by the CIA, or was collected by a submarine so that he could defect to China.\nA memorial service for Holt was held at St Paul's Cathedral, Melbourne, on 22 December, and attended by numerous world leaders. Aged 59 at the time of his death, Holt became the third Australian prime minister to die in office, after Joseph Lyons (1939) and John Curtin (1945). John McEwen, the leader of the Country Party, was sworn in as caretaker prime minister on 19 December. The Liberal Party held a leadership election on 9 January 1968, in which John Gorton defeated Paul Hasluck, Billy Snedden, and Les Bury. Gorton was a member of the Senate, and in line with constitutional convention sought and gained election to the House of Representatives at the by-election caused by Holt's death.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nWhile at university, Holt met Zara Dickins, the daughter of a Melbourne businessman; there was an \"instant mutual attraction\". They made plans to marry once Holt had graduated, but after a financial dispute chose to separate. Zara went on a trip to Britain, where she was introduced to James Fell, a British Indian Army officer. She accompanied Fell to India, and then in early 1935 returned to Australia where Holt again proposed marriage. She declined his offer, and married Fell a short time later, going to live with him in Jabalpur. Holt had entered parliament by that time, and was soon being profiled as \"the most eligible bachelor in parliament\". He briefly dated Lola Thring, the daughter of his father's business partner, F. W. Thring, but his widowed father Tom was also interested in her (to his son's \"disgust\"). Tom Holt married Lola in 1936, and their daughter Frances (Harold's half-sister) was born in 1940; Tom Holt died in 1945.\nIn 1937, Zara returned to Australia to give birth to her first child, Nicholas. She had two more children, twins Sam and Andrew, in 1939. Her marriage with Fell broke down a short time later, and in late 1940 she returned to Australia permanently and resumed a relationship with Holt. Their relationship did not become public for some time, in order to avoid Holt's being implicated in Zara's divorce proceedings. They eventually married on 8 October 1946, at Zara's parents' home on St Georges Road, Toorak. They initially lived on nearby Washington Street, but in 1954 bought the St Georges Road house. Holt legally adopted Zara's three children, and as young men they changed their surname to his. According to biographer Tom Frame, it was an \"open secret\" that Holt was the biological father of the twins, as they shared his physical appearance and had been conceived at a time when Zara was known to have been in Melbourne.\nZara Holt was a successful businesswoman, owning a chain of dress shops, and out-earned her husband even as prime minister. It was her success that allowed the couple to purchase two holiday homes, one at Portsea, Victoria, and the other at Bingil Bay, Queensland. She nonetheless made sacrifices for her husband's political career, accompanying him on all but one of his overseas trips, which could last for weeks.\nAfter her husband's death, Zara remarried in 1969 to one of his Liberal Party colleagues, Jeff Bate. She was widowed a second time in 1984, and died in 1989. In a 1988 interview with \"The Sydney Morning Herald\", Zara stated that her husband Harold had carried on \"dozens\" of extramarital affairs. In his biography of Holt, Tom Frame wrote: \"I have not included the names of women with whom Holt allegedly had a sexual relationship because I was unable to confirm or deny that most of these relationships took place [\u2026] by their very nature they were always illicit and Holt was very discreet.\"\nPersonality.\nHolt was the first Australian Prime Minister born in the twentieth century. He was an enthusiastic sportsman and avid swimmer, in stark contrast to Menzies and the majority of his predecessors and colleagues. Like later successor Bob Hawke, this resonated with positive effect within the electorate. His oratory skills were vastly superior to that of Arthur Calwell, whom Holt resoundingly beat in 1966. Holt's rhetoric was, however, considered a match to that of new Labor leader Gough Whitlam. Whitlam himself later said of Holt:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(his) ability to establish relationships with men of different backgrounds, attitudes and interests was his essential decency. He was tolerant, humane and broadminded. His suavity of manner was no pose. It was the outward reflection of a truly civilised human being. He was in a very real sense a gentleman.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13869", "revid": "45201205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13869", "title": "Heavy metal music", "text": "Genre of rock music\nHeavy metal (or simply metal) is a genre of rock music that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s, largely in the United Kingdom and United States. With roots in blues rock, psychedelic rock and acid rock, heavy metal bands developed a thick, monumental sound characterized by distorted guitars, extended guitar solos, emphatic beats and loudness.\nIn 1968, three of the genre's most famous pioneers \u2013 British bands Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple \u2013 were founded. Though they came to attract wide audiences, they were often derided by critics. Several American bands modified heavy metal into more accessible forms during the 1970s: the raw, sleazy sound and shock rock of Alice Cooper and Kiss; the blues-rooted rock of Aerosmith; and the flashy guitar leads and party rock of Van Halen. During the mid-1970s, Judas Priest helped spur the genre's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence, while Mot\u00f6rhead introduced a punk rock sensibility and an increasing emphasis on speed. Beginning in the late 1970s, bands in the new wave of British heavy metal such as Iron Maiden and Saxon followed in a similar vein. By the end of the decade, heavy metal fans became known as \"metalheads\" or \"headbangers\". The lyrics of some metal genres became associated with aggression and machismo, an issue that has at times led to accusations of misogyny.\nDuring the 1980s, glam metal became popular with groups such as Bon Jovi, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and Poison. Meanwhile, however, underground scenes produced an array of more aggressive styles: thrash metal broke into the mainstream with bands such as Metallica, Slayer, Megadeth and Anthrax, while other extreme subgenres such as death metal and black metal became \u2013 and remain \u2013 subcultural phenomena. Since the mid-1990s, popular styles have expanded the definition of the genre. These include groove metal and nu metal, the latter of which often incorporates elements of grunge and hip-hop.\nCharacteristics.\nHeavy metal is traditionally characterized by loud distorted guitars, emphatic rhythms, dense bass-and-drum sound and vigorous vocals. Heavy metal subgenres variously emphasize, alter or omit one or more of these attributes. In a 1988 article, \"The New York Times\" critic Jon Pareles wrote, \"In the taxonomy of popular music, heavy metal is a major subspecies of hard-rock\u2014the breed with less syncopation, less blues, more showmanship and more brute force.\" The typical band lineup includes a drummer, a bassist, a rhythm guitarist, a lead guitarist and a singer, who may or may not be an instrumentalist. Keyboard instruments are sometimes used to enhance the fullness of the sound. Deep Purple's Jon Lord played an overdriven Hammond organ. In 1970, John Paul Jones used a Moog synthesizer on \"Led Zeppelin III\"; by the 1990s, synthesizers were used in \"almost every subgenre of heavy metal\".\nThe electric guitar and the sonic power that it projects through amplification has historically been the key element in heavy metal. The heavy metal guitar sound comes from a combined use of high volumes and heavy fuzz. For classic heavy metal guitar tone, guitarists maintain gain at moderate levels, without excessive preamp or pedal distortion, to retain open spaces and air in the music; the guitar amplifier is turned up loud to produce the \"punch and grind\" characteristic. Thrash metal guitar tone has scooped mid-frequencies and tightly compressed sound with multiple bass frequencies. Guitar solos are \"an essential element of the heavy metal code\u00a0... that underscores the significance of the guitar\" to the genre. Most heavy metal songs \"feature at least one guitar solo\", which is \"a primary means through which the heavy metal performer expresses virtuosity\". Some exceptions are nu metal and grindcore bands, which tend to omit guitar solos. With rhythm guitar parts, the \"heavy crunch sound in heavy metal\u00a0... [is created by] palm muting\" the strings with the picking hand and using distortion. Palm muting creates a tighter, more precise sound and it emphasizes the low end.\nThe lead role of the guitar in heavy metal often collides with the traditional \"frontman\" or bandleader role of the vocalist, creating a musical tension as the two \"contend for dominance\" in a spirit of \"affectionate rivalry\". Heavy metal \"demands the subordination of the voice\" to the overall sound of the band. Reflecting metal's roots in the 1960s counterculture, an \"explicit display of emotion\" is required from the vocals as a sign of authenticity. Critic Simon Frith claims that the metal singer's \"tone of voice\" is more important than the lyrics.\nThe prominent role of the bass \u200dis also key to the metal sound, and the interplay of bass and guitar is a central element. The bass provides the low-end sound crucial to making the music \"heavy\". The bass plays a \"more important role in heavy metal than in any other genre of rock\". Metal basslines vary widely in complexity, from holding down a low pedal point as a foundation to doubling complex riffs and licks along with the lead or rhythm guitars. Some bands feature the bass as a lead instrument, an approach popularized by Metallica's Cliff Burton with his heavy emphasis on bass \u200dsolos and use of chords while playing the \u200dbass in the early 1980s. Lemmy of Mot\u00f6rhead often played overdriven power chords in his bass lines.\nHeavy metal drumming is defined by a loud, consistent beat that drives the band, relying on the \"trifecta of speed, power, and precision.\" Heavy metal drumming \"requires an exceptional amount of endurance\", and drummers have to develop \"considerable speed, coordination, and dexterity\u00a0... to play the intricate patterns\" used in heavy metal. A characteristic metal drumming technique is the cymbal choke, which consists of striking a cymbal and then immediately silencing it by grabbing it with the other hand (or, in some cases, the same striking hand), producing a burst of sound. The metal drum setup is generally much larger than those employed in other forms of rock music. Black metal, death metal and some \"mainstream metal\" bands \"all depend upon double-kicks and blast beats\".\nIn live performance, loudness \u2013 an \"onslaught of sound\", in sociologist Deena Weinstein's description \u2013 is considered vital. In his book, \"Metalheads\", psychologist Jeffrey Arnett refers to heavy metal concerts as \"the sensory equivalent of war\". Following the lead set by Jimi Hendrix, Cream and the Who, early heavy metal acts such as Blue Cheer set new benchmarks for volume. As Blue Cheer's Dick Peterson put it, \"All we knew was we wanted more power.\" A 1977 review of a Mot\u00f6rhead concert noted how \"excessive volume in particular figured into the band's impact\". Weinstein makes the case that in the same way that melody is the main element of pop and rhythm is the main focus of house music, powerful sound, timbre and volume are the key elements of metal. She argues that the loudness is designed to \"sweep the listener into the sound\" and to provide a \"shot of youthful vitality\".\nHeavy metal performers tended to be almost exclusively male until at least the mid-1980s, with some exceptions such as Girlschool. However, by the 2010s, women were making more of an impact, and PopMatters' Craig Hayes argues that metal \"clearly empowers women\". In the power metal and symphonic metal subgenres, there has been a sizable number of bands that have had women as the lead singers, such as Nightwish, Delain and Within Temptation.\nMusical language.\nRhythm and tempo.\nThe rhythm in metal songs is emphatic, with deliberate stresses. Weinstein observes that the wide array of sonic effects available to metal drummers enables the \"rhythmic pattern to take on a complexity within its elemental drive and insistency\". In many heavy metal songs, the main groove is characterized by short, two- or three-note rhythmic figures \u2013 generally made up of eighth or 16th notes. These rhythmic figures are usually performed with a staccato attack created by using a palm-muted technique on the rhythm guitar.\nBrief, abrupt and detached rhythmic cells are joined into rhythmic phrases with a distinctive, often jerky texture. These phrases are used to create rhythmic accompaniment and melodic figures called riffs, which help to establish thematic hooks. Heavy metal songs also use longer rhythmic figures such as whole note- or dotted quarter note-length chords in slow-tempo power ballads. The tempos in early heavy metal music tended to be \"slow, even ponderous\". By the late 1970s, however, metal bands were employing a wide variety of tempos, and as recently as the 2000s, metal tempos range from slow ballad tempos (quarter note = 60 beats per minute) to extremely fast blast beat tempos (quarter note = 350 beats per minute).\nHarmony.\nOne of the signatures of the genre is the guitar power chord. In technical terms, the power chord is relatively simple: it involves just one main interval, generally the perfect fifth, though an octave may be added as a doubling of the root. When power chords are played on the lower strings at high volumes and with distortion, additional low-frequency sounds are created, which add to the \"weight of the sound\" and create an effect of \"overwhelming power\". Although the perfect fifth interval is the most common basis for the power chord, power chords are also based on different intervals such as the minor third, major third, perfect fourth, diminished fifth or minor sixth. Most power chords are also played with a consistent finger arrangement that can be slid easily up and down the fretboard.\nTypical harmonic structures.\nHeavy metal is usually based on riffs created with three main harmonic traits: modal scale progressions, tritone and chromatic progressions, and the use of pedal points. Traditional heavy metal tends to employ modal scales, in particular the Aeolian and Phrygian modes. Harmonically speaking, this means the genre typically incorporates modal chord progressions such as the Aeolian progressions I-\u266dVI-\u266dVII, I-\u266dVII-(\u266dVI), or I-\u266dVI-IV-\u266dVII and Phrygian progressions implying the relation between I and \u266dII (I-\u266dII-I, I-\u266dII-III, or I-\u266dII-VII for example). Tense-sounding chromatic or tritone relationships are used in a number of metal chord progressions. In addition to using modal harmonic relationships, heavy metal also uses \"pentatonic and blues-derived features\".\nThe tritone, an interval spanning three whole tones \u2013 such as C to F# \u2013 was considered extremely dissonant and unstable by medieval and Renaissance music theorists. It was nicknamed the \"diabolus in musica \u2013\" \"the devil in music\".\nHeavy metal songs often make extensive use of pedal point as a harmonic basis. A pedal point is a sustained tone, typically in the bass range, during which at least one foreign (i.e., dissonant) harmony is sounded in the other parts. According to Robert Walser, heavy metal harmonic relationships are \"often quite complex\" and the harmonic analysis done by metal players and teachers is \"often very sophisticated\". In the study of heavy metal chord structures, it has been concluded that \"heavy metal music has proved to be far more complicated\" than other music researchers had realized.\nRelationship with classical music.\nRobert Walser stated that, alongside blues and R&amp;B, the \"assemblage of disparate musical styles known\u00a0... as 'classical music'\" has been a major influence on heavy metal since the genre's earliest days, and that metal's \"most influential musicians have been guitar players who have also studied classical music. Their appropriation and adaptation of classical models sparked the development of a new kind of guitar virtuosity [and] changes in the harmonic and melodic language of heavy metal.\"\nIn an article written for \"Grove Music Online\", Walser stated that the \"1980s brought on\u00a0... the widespread adaptation of chord progressions and virtuosic practices from 18th-century European models, especially Bach and Antonio Vivaldi, by influential guitarists such as Ritchie Blackmore, Marty Friedman, Jason Becker, Uli Jon Roth, Eddie Van Halen, Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen.\" Kurt Bachmann of Believer has stated that \"if done correctly, metal and classical fit quite well together. Classical and metal are probably the two genres that have the most in common when it comes to feel, texture, creativity.\"\nAlthough a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration, classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices \u2013 classical in the art music tradition, metal in the popular music tradition. As musicologists Nicolas Cook and Nicola Dibben note: \"Analyses of popular music also sometimes reveal the influence of 'art traditions.' An example is Walser's linkage of heavy metal music with the ideologies and even some of the performance practices of nineteenth-century Romanticism. However, it would be clearly wrong to claim that traditions such as blues, rock, heavy metal, rap or dance music derive primarily from \"art music.'\"\nLyrical themes.\nAccording to David Hatch and Stephen Millward, Black Sabbath and the numerous heavy metal bands that they inspired have concentrated lyrically \"on dark and depressing subject matter to an extent hitherto unprecedented in any form of pop music.\" They take as an example Black Sabbath's second album, \"Paranoid\" (1970), which \"included songs dealing with personal trauma\u2014'Paranoid' and 'Fairies Wear Boots' (which described the unsavoury side effects of drug-taking)\u2014as well as those confronting wider issues, such as the self-explanatory 'War Pigs' and 'Hand of Doom.'\" Deriving from the genre's roots in blues music, sex is another important topic \u2013 a thread running from Led Zeppelin's suggestive lyrics to the more explicit references of glam metal and nu metal bands.\nThe thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism. According to Jon Pareles, \"Heavy metal's main subject matter is simple and virtually universal. With grunts, moans and subliterary lyrics, it celebrates\u00a0... a party without limits\u00a0... [T]he bulk of the music is stylized and formulaic.\" Music critics have often deemed metal lyrics juvenile and banal, and others have objected to what they see as advocacy of misogyny and the occult. During the 1980s, the Parents Music Resource Center petitioned the U.S. Congress to regulate the popular music industry due to what the group asserted were objectionable lyrics, particularly those in heavy metal songs. Andrew Cope stated that claims that heavy metal lyrics are misogynistic are \"clearly misguided\" as these critics have \"overlook[ed] the overwhelming evidence that suggests otherwise\". Music critic Robert Christgau called metal \"an expressive mode [that] it sometimes seems will be with us for as long as ordinary white boys fear girls, pity themselves, and are permitted to rage against a world they'll never beat\".\nHeavy metal artists have had to defend their lyrics in front of the U.S. Senate and in court. In 1985, Twisted Sister frontman Dee Snider was asked to defend his song \"Under the Blade\" at a U.S. Senate hearing. At the hearing, the PMRC alleged that the song was about sadomasochism and rape; Snider stated that the song was about his bandmate's throat surgery. In 1986, Ozzy Osbourne was sued over the lyrics of his song \"Suicide Solution\". A lawsuit against Osbourne was filed by the parents of John McCollum, a depressed teenager who committed suicide allegedly after listening to Osbourne's song. Osbourne was not found to be responsible for the teen's death. In 1990, Judas Priest was sued in American court by the parents of two young men who had shot themselves five years earlier, allegedly after hearing the subliminal statement \"do it\" in the band's cover of the song \"Better by You, Better than Me\". While the case attracted a great deal of media attention, it was ultimately dismissed. In 1991, U.K. police seized death metal records from the British record label Earache Records, in an \"unsuccessful attempt to prosecute the label for obscenity\".\nIn some predominantly Muslim countries, heavy metal has been officially denounced as a threat to traditional values, and in countries such as Morocco, Egypt, Lebanon and Malaysia, there have been incidents of heavy metal musicians and fans being arrested and incarcerated. In 1997, the Egyptian police jailed many young metal fans, and they were accused of \"devil worship\" and blasphemy after police found metal recordings during searches of their homes. In 2013, Malaysia banned Lamb of God from performing in their country, on the grounds that the \"band's lyrics could be interpreted as being religiously insensitive\" and blasphemous. Some people consider heavy metal music to be a leading factor for mental health disorders, and that heavy metal fans are more likely to suffer poor mental health, but a study from 2009 suggests that this is not true and that fans of heavy metal music suffer from poor mental health at a similar or lower rate compared to the general population.\nImage and fashion.\nFor many artists and bands, visual imagery plays a large role in heavy metal. In addition to its sound and lyrics, a heavy metal band's image is expressed in album cover art, logos, stage sets, clothing, design of instruments and music videos.\nDown-the-back long hair is the \"most crucial distinguishing feature of metal fashion\". Originally adopted from the hippie subculture, by the 1980s and 1990s, heavy metal hair \"symbolised the hate, angst and disenchantment of a generation that seemingly never felt at home\", according to journalist Nader Rahman. Long hair gave members of the metal community \"the power they needed to rebel against nothing in general\".\nThe classic uniform of heavy metal fans consists of light-colored, ripped, frayed or torn blue jeans, black T-shirts, boots, and black leather or denim jackets. Deena Weinstein wrote, \"T-shirts are generally emblazoned with the logos or other visual representations of favorite metal bands.\" In the 1980s, a range of sources \u2013 from punk rock and goth music to horror films \u2013 influenced metal fashion. Many metal performers of the 1970s and 1980s used radically shaped and brightly colored instruments to enhance their stage appearance.\nFashion and personal style was especially important for glam metal bands of the era. Performers typically wore long, dyed, hairspray-teased hair (hence the nickname \"hair metal\"); makeup such as lipstick and eyeliner; gaudy clothing, including leopard-skin-printed shirts or vests and tight denim, leather or spandex pants; and accessories such as headbands and jewelry. Pioneered by the heavy metal act X Japan in the late 1980s, bands in the Japanese movement known as visual kei, which includes many non-metal groups, emphasize elaborate costumes, hair and makeup.\nPhysical gestures.\nWhen performing live, many metal musicians \u2013 as well as the audience for whom they're playing \u2013 engage in headbanging, which involves rhythmically beating time with the head, often emphasized by long hair. The sign of the horns hand gesture was popularized by vocalist Ronnie James Dio during his time with the bands Black Sabbath and Dio. Although Gene Simmons of Kiss claims to have been the first to make the gesture on the 1977 \"Love Gun\" album cover, there is speculation as to who started the phenomenon.\nAttendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense. Two primary body movements used are headbanging and an arm thrust that is both a sign of appreciation and a rhythmic gesture. The performance of air guitar is popular among metal fans both at concerts and listening to records at home. According to Deena Weinstein, thrash metal concerts have two elements that are not part of the other metal genres: moshing and stage diving, which \"were imported from the punk/hardcore subculture\". Weinstein states that moshing participants bump and jostle each other as they move in a circle in an area called the \"pit\" near the stage. Stage divers climb onto the stage with the band and then jump \"back into the audience\".\nFan subculture.\nIt has been argued that heavy metal has outlasted many other rock genres largely due to the emergence of an intense, exclusionary and strongly masculine subculture. While the metal fan base is largely young, white, male and blue-collar, the group is \"tolerant of those outside its core demographic base who follow its codes of dress, appearance, and behavior\". Identification with the subculture is strengthened not only by the group experience of concert-going and shared elements of fashion, but also by contributing to metal magazines and, more recently, websites. Attending live concerts in particular has been called the \"holiest of heavy metal communions\".\nThe metal scene has been characterized as a \"subculture of alienation\" with its own code of authenticity. This code puts several demands on performers: they must appear both completely devoted to their music and loyal to the subculture that supports it; they must appear uninterested in mainstream appeal and radio hits; and they must never \"sell out\". Deena Weinstein stated that for the fans themselves, the code promotes \"opposition to established authority, and separateness from the rest of society\".\nMusician and filmmaker Rob Zombie observed, \"Most of the kids who come to my shows seem like really imaginative kids with a lot of creative energy they don't know what to do with\" and that metal is \"outsider music for outsiders. Nobody wants to be the weird kid; you just somehow end up being the weird kid. It's kind of like that, but with metal you have all the weird kids in one place.\" Scholars of metal have noted the tendency of fans to classify and reject some performers (and some other fans) as \"poseurs\" \"who pretended to be part of the subculture, but who were deemed to lack authenticity and sincerity\".\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the term \"heavy metal\" in a musical context is uncertain. The phrase has been used for centuries in chemistry and metallurgy, where the periodic table organizes elements of both light and heavy metals (e.g., uranium). An early use of the term in modern popular culture was by countercultural writer William S. Burroughs. His 1961 novel \"The Soft Machine\" includes a character known as \"Uranian Willy, the Heavy Metal Kid\". Burroughs' next novel, \"Nova Express\" (1964), develops the theme, using \"heavy metal\" as a metaphor for addictive drugs: \"With their diseases and orgasm drugs and their sexless parasite life forms\u2014Heavy Metal People of Uranus wrapped in cool blue mist of vaporized bank notes\u2014And The Insect People of Minraud with metal music.\" Inspired by Burroughs' novels, the term was used in the title of the 1967 album \"Featuring the Human Host and the Heavy Metal Kids\" by Hapshash and the Coloured Coat, which has been claimed to be its first use in the context of music. The phrase was later lifted by Sandy Pearlman, who used the term to describe the Byrds for their supposed \"aluminium style of context and effect\", particularly on their album \"The Notorious Byrd Brothers\" (1968).\nMetal historian Ian Christe describes what the components of the term mean in \"hippiespeak\": \"heavy\" is roughly synonymous with \"potent\" or \"profound\", and \"metal\" designates a certain type of mood, grinding and weighted as with metal. The word \"heavy\" in this sense was a basic element of beatnik and later countercultural hippie slang, and references to \"heavy music\" \u2013 typically slower, more amplified variations of standard pop fare \u2013 were already common by the mid-1960s, such as in reference to Vanilla Fudge. Iron Butterfly's debut album, which was released in early 1968, was titled \"Heavy\". The first use of \"heavy metal\" in a song lyric is in reference to a motorcycle in the Steppenwolf song \"Born to Be Wild\", also released that year: \"I like smoke and lightning / Heavy metal thunder / Racin' with the wind / And the feelin' that I'm under\".\nAn early documented use of the phrase in rock criticism appears in Sandy Pearlman's February 1967 \"Crawdaddy\" review of the Rolling Stones' \"Got Live If You Want It\" (1966), albeit as a description of the sound rather than as a genre: \"On this album the Stones go metal. Technology is in the saddle\u2014as an ideal and as a method.\" Another appears in the 11 May 1968 issue of \"Rolling Stone\", in which Barry Gifford wrote about the album \"A Long Time Comin\"' by U.S. band Electric Flag: \"Nobody who's been listening to Mike Bloomfield\u2014either talking or playing\u2014in the last few years could have expected this. This is the new soul music, the synthesis of white blues and heavy metal rock.\" In the 7 September 1968 edition of the \"Seattle Daily Times\", reviewer Susan Schwartz wrote that the Jimi Hendrix Experience \"has a heavy-metals blues sound\". In January 1970, Lucian K. Truscott IV, reviewing \"Led Zeppelin II\" for the \"Village Voice\", described the sound as \"heavy\" and made comparisons with Blue Cheer and Vanilla Fudge.\nOther early documented uses of the phrase are from reviews by critic Metal Mike Saunders. In the 12 November 1970 issue of \"Rolling Stone\", he commented on an album put out the previous year by the British band Humble Pie: \"\"Safe as Yesterday Is,\" their first American release, proved that Humble Pie could be boring in lots of different ways. Here they were a noisy, unmelodic, heavy metal-leaden shit-rock band with the loud and noisy parts beyond doubt. There were a couple of nice songs\u00a0... and one monumental pile of refuse.\" He described the band's latest, self-titled release as \"more of the same 27th-rate heavy metal crap\".\nIn a review of Sir Lord Baltimore's \"Kingdom Come\" in the May 1971 edition of \"Creem\", Saunders wrote, \"Sir Lord Baltimore seems to have down pat most all the best heavy metal tricks in the book.\" \"Creem\" critic Lester Bangs is credited with popularizing the term via his early 1970s essays on bands such as Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath. Through the decade, \"heavy metal\" was used by certain critics as a virtually automatic putdown. In 1979, lead \"New York Times\" popular music critic John Rockwell described what he called \"heavy-metal rock\" as \"brutally aggressive music played mostly for minds clouded by drugs\" and, in a different article, as \"a crude exaggeration of rock basics that appeals to white teenagers\".\nCoined by Black Sabbath drummer Bill Ward, \"downer rock\" was one of the earliest terms used to describe this style of music and was applied to acts such as Sabbath and Bloodrock. \"Classic Rock\" magazine described the downer rock culture revolving around the use of Quaaludes and the drinking of wine. The term would later be replaced by \"heavy metal\".\nEarlier on, as \"heavy metal\" emerged partially from heavy psychedelic rock, also known as acid rock, \"acid rock\" was often used interchangeably with \"heavy metal\" and \"hard rock\". \"Acid rock\" generally describes heavy, hard or raw psychedelic rock. Musicologist Steve Waksman stated that \"the distinction between acid rock, hard rock, and heavy metal can at some point never be more than tenuous\", while percussionist John Beck defined \"acid rock\" as synonymous with hard rock and heavy metal.\nApart from \"acid rock\", the terms \"heavy metal\" and \"hard rock\" have often been used interchangeably, particularly in discussing bands of the 1970s, a period when the terms were largely synonymous. For example, the 1983 edition of the \"Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock &amp; Roll\" includes the following passage: \"Known for its aggressive blues-based hard-rock style, Aerosmith was the top American heavy-metal band of the mid-Seventies\".\n\"The term 'heavy metal' is self-defeating,\" remarked Kiss bassist Gene Simmons. \"When I think of heavy metal, I've always thought of elves and evil dwarves and evil princes and princesses. A lot of the Maiden and Priest records were real metal records. I sure as hell don't think Metallica's metal, or Guns N' Roses is metal, or Kiss is metal. It just doesn't deal with the ground opening up and little dwarves coming out riding dragons! You know, like bad Dio records.\"\nHistory.\nAntecedents: 1950s to late 1960s.\nHeavy metal's quintessential guitar style, which is built around distortion-heavy riffs and power chords, traces its roots to early 1950s Memphis blues guitarists such as Joe Hill Louis, Willie Johnson and particularly Pat Hare, who captured a \"grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound\" on records such as James Cotton's \"Cotton Crop Blues\" (1954). Other early influences include the late 1950s instrumentals of Link Wray, particularly \"Rumble\" (1958); the early 1960s surf rock of Dick Dale, including \"Let's Go Trippin'\" (1961) and \"Misirlou\" (1962); and the Kingsmen's version of \"Louie Louie\" (1963), which became a garage rock standard.\nHowever, the genre's direct lineage begins in the mid-1960s. American blues music was a major influence on the early British rockers of the era. Bands like the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds developed blues rock by recording covers of classic blues songs, often speeding up the tempos. As they experimented with the music, the UK blues-based bands \u2013 and in turn the U.S. acts they influenced \u2013 developed what would become the hallmarks of heavy metal (in particular, the loud, distorted guitar sound). The Kinks played a major role in popularising this sound with their 1964 hit \"You Really Got Me\".\nIn addition to the Kinks' Dave Davies, other guitarists such as the Who's Pete Townshend and the Yardbirds' Jeff Beck were experimenting with feedback. Where the blues rock drumming style started out largely as simple shuffle beats on small kits, drummers began using a more muscular, complex and amplified approach to match and be heard against the increasingly loud guitar. Vocalists similarly modified their technique and increased their reliance on amplification, often becoming more stylized and dramatic. In terms of sheer volume, especially in live performance, the Who's \"bigger-louder-wall-of-Marshalls\" approach was seminal to the development of the later heavy metal sound.\nThe combination of this loud and heavy blues rock with psychedelic rock and acid rock formed much of the original basis for heavy metal. The variant or subgenre of psychedelic rock often known as \"acid rock\" was particularly influential on heavy metal and its development; acid rock is often defined as a heavier, louder, or harder variant of psychedelic rock, or the more extreme side of the psychedelic rock genre, frequently containing a loud, improvised, and heavily distorted, guitar-centered sound. Acid rock has been described as psychedelic rock at its \"rawest and most intense\", emphasizing the heavier qualities associated with both the positive and negative extremes of the psychedelic experience rather than only the idyllic side of psychedelia. In contrast to more idyllic or whimsical pop psychedelic rock, American acid rock garage bands such as the 13th Floor Elevators epitomized the frenetic, heavier, darker, and more psychotic psychedelic rock sound known as acid rock, a sound characterized by droning guitar riffs, amplified feedback, and guitar distortion, while the 13th Floor Elevators' sound in particular featured yelping vocals and \"occasionally demented\" lyrics. Frank Hoffman noted that \"[Psychedelic rock] was sometimes referred to as 'acid rock'. The latter label was applied to a pounding, hard rock variant that evolved out of the mid-1960s garage-punk movement... When rock began turning back to softer, roots-oriented sounds in late 1968, acid-rock bands mutated into heavy metal acts.\"\nOne of the most influential bands in forging the merger of psychedelic rock and acid rock with the blues rock genre was the British power trio Cream, who derived a massive, heavy sound from unison riffing between guitarist Eric Clapton and bassist Jack Bruce, as well as Ginger Baker's double bass drumming. Their first two LPs \u2013 \"Fresh Cream\" (1966) and \"Disraeli Gears\" (1967) \u2013 are regarded as essential prototypes for the future style of heavy metal. The Jimi Hendrix Experience's debut album, \"Are You Experienced\" (1967), was also highly influential. Hendrix's virtuosic technique would be emulated by many metal guitarists, and the album's most successful single, \"Purple Haze\", is identified by some as the first heavy metal hit. Vanilla Fudge, whose first album also came out in 1967, has been called \"one of the few American links between psychedelia and what soon became heavy metal,\" and the band has been cited as an early American heavy metal group. On their self-titled debut album, Vanilla Fudge created \"loud, heavy, slowed-down arrangements\" of contemporary hit songs, blowing these songs up to \"epic proportions\" and \"bathing them in a trippy, distorted haze\".\nDuring the late 1960s, many psychedelic singers, such as Arthur Brown, began to create outlandish, theatrical, and often macabre performances that influenced many metal acts. The American psychedelic rock band Coven, who opened for early heavy metal influencers such as Vanilla Fudge and the Yardbirds, portrayed themselves as practitioners of witchcraft or black magic, using dark \u2013 Satanic or occult \u2013 imagery in their lyrics, album art and live performances, which consisted of elaborate, theatrical \"Satanic rites\". Coven's 1969 debut album, \"Witchcraft Destroys Minds &amp; Reaps Souls\", featured imagery of skulls, black masses, inverted crosses, and Satan worship, and both the album artwork and the band's live performances marked the first appearances in rock music of the sign of the horns, which would later become an important gesture in heavy metal culture. Coven's lyrical and thematic influences on heavy metal were quickly overshadowed by the darker and heavier sounds of Black Sabbath.\nOrigins: late 1960s and early 1970s.\nCritics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band. Most credit the British bands Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, with American commentators tending to favour Led Zeppelin and British commentators tending to favour Black Sabbath, though many give equal credit to both. Deep Purple, the third band in what is sometimes considered the \"unholy trinity\" of heavy metal along with Led Zeppelin and Black Sabbath, fluctuated between many rock styles until late 1969 when they took a heavy metal direction. A few commentators \u2013 mainly American \u2013 argue for other groups, including Iron Butterfly, Steppenwolf, Blue Cheer, or Vanilla Fudge, as the first to play heavy metal.\nIn 1968, the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce. That January, San Francisco band Blue Cheer released a cover of Eddie Cochran's classic \"Summertime Blues\" as a part of their debut album, \"Vincebus Eruptum\", and many consider it to be the first true heavy metal recording. The same month, Steppenwolf released their self-titled debut album, on which the track \"Born to Be Wild\" refers to \"heavy metal thunder\" in describing a motorcycle. In July, the Jeff Beck Group, whose leader had preceded Page as the Yardbirds' guitarist, released its debut record, \"Truth\", which featured some of the \"most molten, barbed, downright funny noises of all time\", breaking ground for generations of metal guitarists. In September, Page's new band, Led Zeppelin, made its live debut in Denmark (but were billed as the New Yardbirds). The Beatles' double album \"The Beatles\", released in November, included \"Helter Skelter\", one of the heaviest-sounding songs released by a major band at that time. The Pretty Things' rock opera \"S.F. Sorrow\", released in December, featured \"proto heavy metal\" songs such as \"Old Man Going\" and \"I See You\". Iron Butterfly's 1968 song \"In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida\" is sometimes described as an example of the transition between acid rock and heavy metal or the turning point in which acid rock became \"heavy metal\", and both Iron Butterfly's 1968 album \"In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida\" and Blue Cheer's 1968 album \"Vincebus Eruptum\" have been described as laying the foundation of heavy metal and greatly influential in the transformation of acid rock into heavy metal.\nIn this counterculture period, MC5, who began as part of the Detroit garage rock scene, developed a raw, distorted style that has been seen as a major influence on the future sound of both heavy metal and later punk music. The Stooges also began to establish and influence a heavy metal and later punk sound, with songs such as \"I Wanna Be Your Dog\", featuring pounding and distorted heavy guitar power chord riffs. Pink Floyd released two of their heaviest and loudest songs to date, \"Ibiza Bar\" and \"The Nile Song\", the latter of which being regarded as \"one of the heaviest songs the band recorded.\" King Crimson's debut album started with \"21st Century Schizoid Man\", which was considered heavy metal by several critics.\nIn January 1969, Led Zeppelin's self-titled debut album was released and reached No. 10 on the \"Billboard\" album chart. In July, Led Zeppelin and a power trio with a Cream-inspired, but cruder sound, called Grand Funk Railroad played the Atlanta Pop Festival. That same month, another Cream-rooted trio led by Leslie West released \"Mountain\", an album filled with heavy blues rock guitar and roaring vocals. In August, the group \u2013 now itself dubbed Mountain \u2013 played an hour-long set at the Woodstock Festival, exposing the crowd of 300,000 people to the emerging sound of heavy metal. Mountain's proto-metal or early heavy metal hit song \"Mississippi Queen\" from the album \"Climbing!\" is especially credited with paving the way for heavy metal and was one of the first heavy guitar songs to receive regular play on radio. In September 1969, the Beatles released the album \"Abbey Road\" containing the track \"I Want You (She's So Heavy)\", which has been credited as an early example of or influence on heavy metal or doom metal. In October 1969, British band High Tide debuted with the heavy, proto-metal album \"Sea Shanties\".\nLed Zeppelin defined central aspects of the emerging genre, with Page's highly distorted guitar style and singer Robert Plant's dramatic, wailing vocals. Other bands, with a more consistently heavy, \"purely\" metal sound, would prove equally important in codifying the genre. The 1970 releases by Black Sabbath (\"Black Sabbath\", which is generally accepted as the first heavy metal album, and \"Paranoid\") and Deep Purple (\"Deep Purple in Rock\") were crucial in this regard.\nBirmingham's Black Sabbath had developed a particularly heavy sound in part due to a work accident in which guitarist Tony Iommi lost the ends of two fingers. Unable to play normally, Iommi had to tune his guitar down for easier fretting and rely on power chords with their relatively simple fingering. The bleak, industrial, working-class environment of Birmingham, a manufacturing city full of noisy factories and metalworking, has itself been credited with influencing Black Sabbath's heavy, chugging, metallic sound \u2013 and the sound of heavy metal in general.\nDeep Purple had fluctuated between styles in its early years, but by 1969, vocalist Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore had led the band toward the developing heavy metal style. In 1970, Black Sabbath and Deep Purple scored major U.K. chart hits with \"Paranoid\" and \"Black Night\", respectively. That same year, two other British bands released debut albums in a heavy metal mode: Uriah Heep with \"...Very 'Eavy... Very 'Umble\" and UFO with \"UFO 1\". Bloodrock released their self-titled debut album, a collection of heavy guitar riffs, gruff style vocals and sadistic and macabre lyrics. The influential Budgie brought the new metal sound into a power trio context, creating some of the heaviest music of the time. The occult lyrics and imagery employed by Black Sabbath and Uriah Heep would prove particularly influential; Led Zeppelin also began foregrounding such elements with its fourth album, released in 1971. In 1973, Deep Purple released the song \"Smoke on the Water\", whose iconic riff is usually considered as the most recognizable one in \"heavy rock\" history, as a single of the classic live album \"Made in Japan\".\nOn the other side of the Atlantic, the trendsetting group was Grand Funk Railroad, who was described as \"the most commercially successful American heavy-metal band from 1970 until they disbanded in 1976, [they] established the Seventies success formula: continuous touring.\" Other influential bands identified with metal emerged in the U.S. such as Sir Lord Baltimore (\"Kingdom Come,\" 1970), Blue \u00d6yster Cult (\"Blue \u00d6yster Cult\", 1972), Aerosmith (\"Aerosmith\", 1973) and Kiss (\"Kiss\", 1974). Sir Lord Baltimore's 1970 debut album and both Humble Pie's debut and self-titled third album were among the first albums to be described in print as \"heavy metal\", with \"As Safe As Yesterday Is\" referred to by the term \"heavy metal\" in a 1970 review in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine. In Germany, Scorpions debuted with \"Lonesome Crow\" in 1972. Blackmore, who had emerged as a virtuoso soloist with Deep Purple's highly influential album \"Machine Head\" (1972), left the band in 1975 to form Rainbow with Ronnie James Dio, singer and bassist for blues rock band Elf and future vocalist for Black Sabbath and heavy metal band Dio. Rainbow with Ronnie James Dio would expand on the mystical and fantasy-based lyrics and themes sometimes found in heavy metal, pioneering both power metal and neoclassical metal. These bands also built audiences via constant touring and increasingly elaborate stage shows.\nThere are arguments about whether these and other early bands truly qualify as \"heavy metal\" or simply as \"hard rock\". Those closer to the music's blues roots or placing greater emphasis on melody are now commonly ascribed the latter label. AC/DC, which debuted with \"High Voltage\" in 1975, is a prime example. The 1983 \"Rolling Stone\" encyclopedia entry begins, \"Australian heavy-metal band AC/DC ...\" Rock historian Clinton Walker wrote, \"Calling AC/DC a heavy metal band in the seventies was as inaccurate as it is today... [They] were a rock 'n' roll band that just happened to be heavy enough for metal.\" The issue is not only one of shifting definitions, but also a persistent distinction between musical style and audience identification; Ian Christe describes how the band \"became the stepping-stone that led huge numbers of hard rock fans into heavy metal perdition\".\nIn certain cases, there is little debate. After Black Sabbath, the next major example is Britain's Judas Priest, which debuted with \"Rocka Rolla\" in 1974. In Christe's description,\nBlack Sabbath's audience was... left to scavenge for sounds with similar impact. By the mid-1970s, heavy metal aesthetic could be spotted, like a mythical beast, in the moody bass and complex dual guitars of Thin Lizzy, in the stagecraft of Alice Cooper, in the sizzling guitar and showy vocals of Queen, and in the thundering medieval questions of Rainbow... Judas Priest arrived to unify and amplify these diverse highlights from hard rock's sonic palette. For the first time, heavy metal became a true genre unto itself.\nThough Judas Priest did not have a top 40 album in the United States until 1980, for many it was the definitive post-Sabbath heavy metal band; its twin-guitar attack, featuring rapid tempos and a non-bluesy, more cleanly metallic sound, was a major influence on later acts. While heavy metal was growing in popularity, most critics were not enamored of the music. Objections were raised to metal's adoption of visual spectacle and other trappings of commercial artifice, but the main offense was its perceived musical and lyrical vacuity: reviewing a Black Sabbath album in the early 1970s, Robert Christgau described it as \"dull and decadent... dim-witted, amoral exploitation.\"\nMainstream: late 1970s and 1980s.\nPunk rock emerged in the mid-1970s as a reaction against contemporary social conditions as well as what was perceived as the overindulgent, overproduced rock music of the time, including heavy metal. Sales of heavy metal records declined sharply in the late 1970s in the face of punk, disco and more mainstream rock. With the major labels fixated on punk, many newer British heavy metal bands were inspired by the movement's aggressive, high-energy sound and \"lo-fi\", do it yourself ethos. Underground metal bands began putting out cheaply recorded releases independently to small, devoted audiences.\nMot\u00f6rhead, founded in 1975, was the first important band to straddle the punk/metal divide. With the explosion of punk in 1977, others followed. British music magazines such as the \"NME\" and \"Sounds\" took notice, with \"Sounds\" writer Geoff Barton christening the movement the \"New Wave of British Heavy Metal\". NWOBHM bands including Iron Maiden, Saxon and Def Leppard re-energized the heavy metal genre. Following the lead set by Judas Priest and Mot\u00f6rhead, they toughened up the sound, reduced its blues elements and emphasized increasingly fast tempos.\n\"This seemed to be the resurgence of heavy metal,\" noted Ronnie James Dio, who joined Black Sabbath in 1979. \"I've never thought there was a \"desurgence\" of heavy metal \u2013 if that's a word! \u2013 but it was important to me that, yet again \"[after Rainbow]\", I could be involved in something that was paving the way for those who are going to come after me.\"\nBy 1980, the NWOBHM had broken into the mainstream, as albums by Iron Maiden and Saxon, as well as Mot\u00f6rhead, reached the British top 10. Though less commercially successful, NWOBHM bands such as Venom and Diamond Head would have a significant influence on metal's development. In 1981, Mot\u00f6rhead became the first of this new breed of metal bands to top the U.K. charts with the live album \"No Sleep 'til Hammersmith\".\nThe first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight. Deep Purple broke up soon after Blackmore's departure in 1975, and Led Zeppelin split following drummer John Bonham's death in 1980. Black Sabbath were plagued with infighting and substance abuse, while facing fierce competition from their opening band, Van Halen. Eddie Van Halen established himself as one of the leading metal guitarists of the era. His solo on \"Eruption\", from the band's self-titled 1978 album, is considered a milestone. Eddie Van Halen's sound even crossed over into pop music when his guitar solo was featured on the track \"Beat It\" by Michael Jackson, which reached No. 1 in the U.S. in February 1983.\nInspired by Van Halen's success, a metal scene began to develop in Southern California during the late 1970s. Based on the clubs of L.A.'s Sunset Strip, bands such as M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce, Quiet Riot, Ratt and W.A.S.P. were influenced by traditional heavy metal of the 1970s. These acts incorporated the theatrics (and sometimes makeup) of glam metal or \"hair metal\" bands such as Alice Cooper and Kiss. Glam metal bands were often visually distinguished by long, overworked hairstyles accompanied by wardrobes which were sometimes considered cross-gender. The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized hedonism and wild behavior, including lyrics that involved sexual expletives and the use of narcotics.\nIn the wake of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal and Judas Priest's breakthrough with \"British Steel\" (1980), heavy metal became increasingly popular in the early 1980s. Many metal artists benefited from the exposure they received on MTV, which began airing in 1981; sales often soared if a band's videos screened on the channel. Def Leppard's videos for \"Pyromania\" (1983) made them superstars in America, and Quiet Riot became the first domestic heavy metal band to top the \"Billboard\" chart with \"Metal Health\" (1983). One of the seminal events in metal's growing popularity was the 1983 US Festival in California, where the \"heavy metal day\" featuring Ozzy Osbourne, Van Halen, Scorpions, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce, Judas Priest and others drew the largest audiences of the three-day event.\nBetween 1983 and 1984, heavy metal's share of all recordings sold in the U.S. increased from 8% to 20%. Several major professional magazines devoted to the genre were launched, including \"Kerrang!\" in 1981 and \"Metal Hammer\" in 1984, as well as a host of fan journals. In 1985, \"Billboard\" declared: \"Metal has broadened its audience base. Metal music is no longer the exclusive domain of male teenagers. The metal audience has become older (college-aged), younger (pre-teen), and more female.\"\nBy the mid-1980s, glam metal was a dominant presence on the U.S. charts, music television and the arena concert circuit. New bands such as L.A.'s Warrant and acts from the East Coast like Poison and Cinderella became major draws, while M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and Ratt remained very popular. Bridging the stylistic gap between hard rock and glam metal, New Jersey's Bon Jovi became enormously successful with its third album, \"Slippery When Wet\" (1986). The similarly styled Swedish band Europe became international stars with \"The Final Countdown\" (1986), whose title track hit No. 1 in 25 countries. In 1987, MTV launched \"Headbangers Ball\", a show devoted exclusively to heavy metal videos. However, the metal audience had begun to factionalize, with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as \"light metal\" or \"hair metal\".\nOne band that reached diverse audiences was Guns N' Roses. With the release of their chart-topping album \"Appetite for Destruction\" in 1987, they \"recharged and almost single-handedly sustained the Sunset Strip sleaze system for several years\". The following year, Jane's Addiction emerged from the same L.A. hard-rock club scene with their major-label debut, \"Nothing's Shocking\". Reviewing the album, Steve Pond of \"Rolling Stone\" declared, \"As much as any band in existence, Jane's Addiction is the true heir to Led Zeppelin.\" The group was one of the first to be identified with the \"alternative metal\" trend that would come to the fore in the next decade. Meanwhile, new bands like New York City's Winger and New Jersey's Skid Row sustained the popularity of the glam metal style.\nOther heavy metal genres: 1980s, 1990s and 2000s.\nMany subgenres of heavy metal developed outside of the commercial mainstream during the 1980s, such as crossover thrash. Several attempts have been made to map the complex world of underground metal, most notably by the editors of AllMusic, as well as critic Garry Sharpe-Young. Sharpe-Young's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major categories: thrash metal, death metal, black metal, power metal and the related subgenres of doom and gothic metal.\nIn 1990, a review in \"Rolling Stone\" suggested retiring the term \"heavy metal\" as the genre was \"ridiculously vague\". The article stated that the term only fueled \"misperceptions of rock &amp; roll bigots who still assume that five bands as different as Ratt, Extreme, Anthrax, Danzig and Mother Love Bone\" sound the same.\nThrash metal.\nThrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the New Wave of British Heavy Metal, particularly songs in the revved-up style known as speed metal. The movement began in the United States, with Bay Area thrash metal being the leading scene. The sound developed by thrash groups was faster and more aggressive than that of the original metal bands and their glam metal successors. Low-register guitar riffs are typically overlaid with shredding leads. Lyrics often express nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral, gory language. Thrash has been described as a form of \"urban blight music\" and \"a palefaced cousin of rap\".\nThe subgenre was popularized by the \"Big Four of Thrash\": Metallica, Anthrax, Megadeth and Slayer. Three German bands, Kreator, Sodom and Destruction, played a central role in bringing the style to Europe. Others, including the San Francisco Bay Area's Testament and Exodus, New Jersey's Overkill, and Brazil's Sepultura and Sarc\u00f3fago, also had a significant impact. Although thrash metal began as an underground movement, and remained largely that for almost a decade, the leading bands of the scene began to reach a wider audience. Metallica brought the sound into the top 40 of the \"Billboard\" album chart in 1986 with \"Master of Puppets\", the genre's first Platinum record. Two years later, the band's album \"...And Justice for All\" hit No. 6, while Megadeth and Anthrax also had top 40 records on the American charts.\nThough less commercially successful than the rest of the Big Four, Slayer released one of the genre's definitive records: \"Reign in Blood\" (1986) was credited for incorporating heavier guitar timbres and including explicit depictions of death, suffering, violence and occult into thrash metal's lyricism. Slayer attracted a following among far-right skinheads, and accusations of promoting violence and Nazi themes have dogged the band. Even though Slayer did not receive substantial media exposure, their music played a key role in the development of extreme metal.\nIn the early 1990s, bands that got their start in thrash metal achieved breakout success, challenging and redefining the metal mainstream. Metallica's self-titled 1991 album topped the \"Billboard\" chart, as the band established an international following. Megadeth's \"Countdown to Extinction\" (1992) debuted at No. 2, Anthrax and Slayer cracked the top 10, and albums by regional bands such as Testament and Sepultura entered the top 100.\nDeath metal.\nThrash metal soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres. \"Slayer's music was directly responsible for the rise of death metal,\" according to MTV News. The NWOBHM band Venom was also an important progenitor. The death metal movement in both North America and Europe adopted and emphasized the elements of blasphemy and diabolism employed by such acts. Florida's Death, San Francisco Bay Area's Possessed and Ohio's Necrophagia are recognized as seminal bands in the style. All three have been credited with inspiring the subgenre's name. Possessed in particular did so via their 1984 demo, \"Death Metal\", and their song \"Death Metal\", which came from their 1985 debut album, \"Seven Churches\". In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal were created.\nDeath metal utilizes the speed and aggression of both thrash and hardcore, fused with lyrics preoccupied with Z-grade slasher movie violence and Satanism. Death metal vocals are typically bleak, involving guttural \"death growls\", high-pitched screaming, the \"death rasp\" and other uncommon techniques.&lt;ref name=\"Genre\u2014Death Metal/Black Metal\"&gt;https://. AllMusic. Retrieved on 27 February 2007&lt;/ref&gt; Complementing the deep, aggressive vocal style are down-tuned, heavily distorted guitars and extremely fast percussion, often with rapid double bass drumming and \"wall of sound\"\u2013style blast beats. Frequent tempo and time signature changes and syncopation are also typical.\nDeath metal, like thrash metal, generally rejects the theatrics of earlier metal styles, opting instead for an everyday look of ripped jeans and plain leather jackets. One major exception to this rule was Deicide's Glen Benton, who branded an inverted cross on his forehead and wore armor on stage. Morbid Angel adopted neo-fascist imagery. These two bands, along with Death and Obituary, were leaders of the major death metal scene that emerged in Florida in the mid-1980s. In the U.K., the related style of grindcore, led by bands such as Napalm Death and Extreme Noise Terror, emerged from the anarcho-punk movement.\nBlack metal.\nThe first wave of black metal emerged in Europe in the early and mid-1980s, led by the United Kingdom's Venom, Denmark's Mercyful Fate, Switzerland's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost, and Sweden's Bathory. By the late 1980s, Norwegian bands such as Mayhem and Burzum were heading a second wave. Black metal varies considerably in style and production quality, although most bands emphasize shrieked and growled vocals, highly distorted guitars frequently played with rapid tremolo picking, a dark atmosphere and intentionally lo-fi production, often with ambient noise and background hiss.\nSatanic themes are common in black metal, though many bands take inspiration from ancient paganism, promoting a return to supposed pre-Christian values. Numerous black metal bands also \"experiment with sounds from all possible forms of metal, folk, classical music, electronica and avant-garde\". Darkthrone drummer Fenriz explained: \"It had something to do with production, lyrics, the way they dressed and a commitment to making ugly, raw, grim stuff. There wasn't a generic sound.\"\nAlthough bands such as Sarc\u00f3fago had been donning corpsepaint, by 1990, Mayhem was regularly wearing it; many other black metal acts also adopted the look. Bathory inspired the Viking metal and folk metal movements, and Immortal brought blast beats to the fore. Some bands in the Scandinavian black metal scene became associated with considerable violence in the early 1990s, with Mayhem and Burzum linked to church burnings. Growing commercial hype around death metal generated a backlash; beginning in Norway, much of the Scandinavian metal underground shifted to support a black metal scene that resisted being co-opted by the commercial metal industry.\nBy 1992, black metal scenes had begun to emerge in areas outside Scandinavia, including Germany, France and Poland. The 1993 murder of Mayhem's Euronymous by Burzum's Varg Vikernes provoked intensive media coverage. Around 1996, when many in the scene felt the genre was stagnating, several key bands, including Burzum and Finland's Beherit, moved toward an ambient style, while symphonic black metal was explored by Sweden's Tiamat and Switzerland's Samael. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Norway's Dimmu Borgir and England's Cradle of Filth brought black metal closer to the mainstream.\nPower metal.\nDuring the late 1980s, the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the harshness of death and black metal. Though a relatively underground style in North America, it enjoys wide popularity in Europe, Japan and South America. Power metal focuses on upbeat, epic melodies and themes that \"appeal to the listener's sense of valor and loveliness\". The prototype for the sound was established in the mid- to late 1980s by Germany's Helloween, who, in their 1987 and 1988 \"Keeper of the Seven Keys\" albums, combined the power riffs, melodic approach and a high-pitched, \"clean\" singing style of bands like Judas Priest and Iron Maiden with thrash's speed and energy, \"crystalliz[ing] the sonic ingredients of what is now known as power metal\".\nTraditional power metal bands like Sweden's HammerFall, England's DragonForce and the U.S.'s Iced Earth have a sound clearly indebted to the classic NWOBHM style. Many power metal bands such as the U.S.'s Kamelot, Finland's Nightwish, Stratovarius and Sonata Arctica, Italy's Rhapsody of Fire and Russia's Catharsis feature a keyboard-based \"symphonic\" sound, sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers. Power metal has built a strong fanbase in Japan and South America, where bands like Brazil's Angra and Argentina's Rata Blanca are popular.\nClosely related to power metal is progressive metal, which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like Rush and King Crimson. This style emerged in the United States in the early and mid-1980s, with innovators such as Queensr\u00ffche, Fates Warning and Dream Theater. The mix of the progressive and power metal sounds is typified by New Jersey's Symphony X, whose guitarist Michael Romeo is among the most recognized of latter-day shredders.\nDoom metal.\nEmerging in the mid-1980s with such bands as California's Saint Vitus, Maryland's the Obsessed, Chicago's Trouble and Sweden's Candlemass, the doom metal movement rejected other metal styles' emphasis on speed, slowing its music to a crawl. Doom metal traces its roots to the lyrical themes and musical approach of early Black Sabbath. The Melvins have also been a significant influence on doom metal and a number of its subgenres. Doom metal emphasizes melody, melancholy tempos and a sepulchral mood relative to many other varieties of metal.\nThe 1991 release of \"Forest of Equilibrium\", the debut album by U.K. band Cathedral, helped spark a new wave of doom metal. During the same period, the doom-death fusion style of British bands Paradise Lost, My Dying Bride and Anathema gave rise to European gothic metal. with its signature dual-vocalist arrangements, exemplified by Norway's Theatre of Tragedy and Tristania. New York's Type O Negative introduced an American take on the style.\nIn the United States, sludge metal, which mixes doom metal and hardcore punk, emerged in the late 1980s; Eyehategod and Crowbar were leaders in a major Louisiana sludge scene. Early in the next decade, California's Kyuss and Sleep, inspired by the earlier doom metal bands, spearheaded the rise of stoner metal, while Seattle's Earth helped develop the drone metal subgenre. The late 1990s saw new bands form such as the Los Angeles\u2013based Goatsnake, with a classic stoner/doom sound, and Sunn O))), which crosses lines between doom, drone and dark ambient metal; the \"New York Times\" has compared their sound to an \"Indian raga in the middle of an earthquake\".\n1990s and early 2000s subgenres and fusions.\nGlam metal fell out of favor with the popular breakthrough of grunge and alternative rock, but as well as the growing popularity of the more aggressive sound typified by Metallica and the post-thrash groove metal of Pantera and White Zombie.\nGrunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound, but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands, such as their \"flashy and virtuosic solos\" and \"appearance-driven\" MTV orientation. In 1991, Metallica released their album \"Metallica\", also known as \"The Black Album\", which moved the band's sound out of the thrash metal genre and into standard heavy metal. The album was certified 16\u00d7 Platinum by the RIAA. A few new, unambiguously metal bands had commercial success during the first half of the decade \u2013 Pantera's \"Far Beyond Driven\" topped the \"Billboard\" chart in 1994 \u2013 but, \"In the dull eyes of the mainstream, metal was dead.\" Some bands tried to adapt to the new musical landscape. Metallica revamped its image: the band members cut their hair and, in 1996, headlined the alternative music festival Lollapalooza, which was founded by Jane's Addiction singer Perry Farrell. While this prompted a backlash among some longtime fans, Metallica remained one of the most successful bands in the world into the new century.\nLike Jane's Addiction, many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term \"alternative metal\". Bands in Seattle's grunge scene such as Soundgarden are credited for making a \"place for heavy metal in alternative rock\", and Alice in Chains were at the center of the alternative metal movement. The label was applied to a wide spectrum of other acts that fused metal with different styles: Faith No More combined their alternative rock sound with punk, funk, metal and hip-hop; Primus joined elements of funk, punk, thrash metal and experimental music; Tool mixed metal and progressive rock; bands such as Fear Factory, Ministry and Nine Inch Nails began incorporating metal into their industrial sound (and vice versa); and Marilyn Manson went down a similar route, while also employing shock effects of the sort popularized by Alice Cooper. Alternative metal artists, though they did not represent a cohesive scene, were united by their willingness to experiment with the metal genre and their rejection of glam metal aesthetics (with the stagecraft of Marilyn Manson and White Zombie \u2013 also identified with alt metal \u2013 significant, if partial, exceptions). Alternative metal's mix of styles and sounds represented \"the colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world\".\nIn the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of U.S. metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres. Dubbed \"nu metal\", bands such as Slipknot, Linkin Park, Limp Bizkit, Papa Roach, P.O.D., Korn and Disturbed incorporated elements ranging from death metal to hip-hop, often including DJs and rap-style vocals. The mix demonstrated that \"pancultural metal could pay off\". Nu metal gained mainstream success through heavy MTV rotation and Ozzy Osbourne's 1996 introduction of Ozzfest, which led the media to talk of a resurgence of heavy metal. In 1999, \"Billboard\" noted that there were more than 500 specialty metal radio shows in the U.S., nearly three times as many as 10 years before. While nu metal was widely popular, traditional metal fans did not fully embrace the style. By early 2003, the movement's popularity was on the wane, though several nu metal acts such as Korn or Limp Bizkit retained substantial followings.\nRecent styles: mid- to late 2000s, 2010s and 2020s.\nMetalcore, a hybrid of extreme metal and hardcore punk, emerged as a commercial force in the mid-2000s, having mostly been an underground phenomenon throughout the 1980s and 1990s; pioneering bands include Earth Crisis, Converge, Hatebreed and Shai Hulud. By 2004, melodic metalcore \u2013 influenced by melodic death metal as well \u2013 was popular enough that Killswitch Engage's \"The End of Heartache\" and Shadows Fall's \"The War Within\" debuted at No. 21 and No. 20, respectively, on the \"Billboard\" album chart.\nEvolving even further from metalcore came mathcore, a more rhythmically complicated and progressive style brought to light by bands such as the Dillinger Escape Plan, Converge and Protest the Hero. Mathcore's main defining quality is the use of odd time signatures, and has been described to possess rhythmic comparability to free jazz.\nHeavy metal remained popular in the 2000s, particularly in continental Europe. By the new millennium, Scandinavia had emerged as one of the areas producing innovative and successful bands, while Belgium, the Netherlands and especially Germany were the most significant markets. Metal music is more favorably embraced in Scandinavia and Northern Europe than other regions due to social and political openness in these regions; Finland in particular has been often called the \"Promised Land of Heavy Metal\", as there are more than 50 metal bands for every 100,000 inhabitants \u2013 more than any other nation in the world. Established continental metal bands that placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 2003 and 2008 include Finland's Children of Bodom, Norway's Dimmu Borgir, Germany's Blind Guardian and Sweden's HammerFall.\nIn the 2000s, an extreme metal fusion genre known as deathcore emerged. Deathcore incorporates elements of death metal, hardcore punk and metalcore. Deathcore features characteristics such as death metal riffs, hardcore punk breakdowns, death growling, \"pig squeal\"-sounding vocals and screaming. Deathcore bands include Whitechapel, Suicide Silence, Despised Icon and Carnifex.\nThe term \"retro-metal\" has been used to describe bands such as Texas-based the Sword, California's High on Fire, Sweden's Witchcraft and Australia's Wolfmother. The Sword's \"Age of Winters\" (2006) drew heavily on the work of Black Sabbath and Pentagram, Witchcraft added elements of folk rock and psychedelic rock, and Wolfmother's self-titled 2005 debut album had \"Deep Purple-ish organs\" and \"Jimmy Page-worthy chordal riffing\". Mastodon, which plays a progressive/sludge style of metal, has inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States, dubbed by some critics the \"New Wave of American Heavy Metal\".\nBy the early 2010s, metalcore was evolving to more frequently incorporate synthesizers and elements from genres beyond rock and metal. The album \"Reckless &amp; Relentless\" by British band Asking Alexandria, which sold 31,000 copies in its first week, and the Devil Wears Prada's 2011 album \"Dead Throne\", which sold 32,400 in its first week, reached No. 9 and No. 10, respectively, on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart. In 2013, British band Bring Me the Horizon released their fourth studio album, \"Sempiternal\", to critical acclaim. The album debuted at No. 3 on the U.K. Album Chart and at No. 1 in Australia. The album sold 27,522 copies in the U.S. and charted at No. 11 on the \"Billboard\" Chart, making it their highest-charting release in America until their follow-up album, \"That's the Spirit\", which debuted at No. 2 in 2015.\nAlso in the 2010s, a metal style called \"djent\" developed as a spinoff of standard progressive metal. Djent music uses rhythmic and technical complexity, heavily distorted, palm-muted guitar chords, syncopated riffs and polyrhythms alongside virtuoso soloing. Another typical characteristic is the use of extended range seven-, eight- and nine-string guitars. \nFusion of nu metal with electropop by singer-songwriters Poppy, Grimes and Rina Sawayama saw a popular and critical revival of the former genre in the late 2010s and 2020s, particular on their respective albums \"I Disagree,\" \"Miss Anthropocene\" and \"Sawayama\".\nGlobal reach.\nMetal has been recognized as a global music genre, being listened to and performed around the world. Laina Dawes explored the multidimensional components of racism in her book \"What Are You Doing Here?\", including the perspectives of black women musicians and fans, in the heavy metal scene in North America and the United Kingdom. She also grounded her doctoral thesis \"'Freedom Ain't Free': Race and Representation(s) in Extreme Heavy Metal\" on her own experiences, laying out some of the nuances of a community that can be both a site of exclusionism and at the same time also a place for greater freedom of expression compared to mainstream genres. The band Alien Weaponry from the M\u0101ori people of New Zealand promotes heavy metal music as one way of combating racism.\nWomen in heavy metal.\nWomen have been involved in heavy metal since its very conception, given the role played by Esther \"Jinx\" Dawson, vocalist and leader of Coven, in introducing the \"sign of the horns\" to metal culture in the late 1960s, alongside their early usage of Satanic themes in rock music. The next milestone took place in the 1970s when Genesis, the forerunner of Vixen, formed in 1973. In 1978, during the rise of the New Wave of British Heavy Metal, the band Girlschool was founded and, in 1980, collaborated with Mot\u00f6rhead under the pseudonym Headgirl. Starting in 1982, Doro Pesch, dubbed \"the Metal Queen\", reached success across Europe (inspiring the formation of other woman-fronted metal bands, such as Spain's Santa in 1983), leading the German band Warlock before starting her solo career. In 1983 another pioneering heavy metal singer, Mari Hamada, made her debut, achieving great success in Japan from the 1980s until well into the 21st century. Also that year, Lita Ford embarked on a successful metal solo career, following her tenure in the short-lived all-female rock band the Runaways in the mid-to-late 1970s. Debuting as the female lead singer of the American band Chastain in 1985, Leather Leone was a pioneer in power metal vocals. In 1986, the German thrash band Holy Moses, fronted by pioneer growler Sabina Classen, issued their first album. \nBolt Thrower's bassist Jo Bench, since joining the band in 1987, has inspired female musicians to play metal. Other women who have played instruments in otherwise male-dominated metal bands include Shirley Temple's daughter Lori Black (Melvins), Kate Reddy of Krishnacore band 108 and Kim Deal (Pixies). \nIn 1994, Liv Kristine joined Norwegian gothic metal band Theatre of Tragedy, providing \"angelic\" clean female vocals to contrast with male death growls. In 1996, Finnish band Nightwish was founded and featured Tarja Turunen's vocals. This was followed by more women fronting heavy metal bands, such as Halestorm, In This Moment, Within Temptation, Arch Enemy and Epica among others. Liv Kristine was featured on the title track of Cradle of Filth's 2004 album, \"Nymphetamine\", which was nominated for the 2004 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance. In 2013, Halestorm won the Grammy in the combined category of Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance for \"Love Bites (So Do I)\". In 2021, In This Moment, Code Orange and Poppy were all nominated in the Best Metal Performance category.\nThe most notable of these 1990s/2000s female-fronted groups was the American band Evanescence, headed by vocalist Amy Lee and featuring a musical style usually described as gothic alternative metal and hard rock with classical elements. Their first album \"Fallen\", released in 2003, broke into the popular music scene and was a worldwide phenomenon; it earned the band two Grammy Awards and briefly catapulted Lee to a level of fame similar to that of contemporary popstars such as Christina Aguilera, Avril Lavigne, and Beyonc\u00e9. Although their later albums have not had a similar impact, Evanescence are still one of the most commercially successful metal groups of the 21st century, having sold over 30 million records.\nIn Japan, the 2010s saw a boom of all-female metal bands, including Destrose, Aldious, Mary's Blood, Cyntia and Lovebites, as well as the mainstream success of Babymetal.\nWomen such as Gaby Hoffmann and Sharon Osbourne have held important managerial roles behind the scenes. In 1981, Hoffmann helped Don Dokken acquire his first record deal, as well as became the manager of Accept in 1981 and wrote songs under the pseudonym of \"Deaffy\" for many of band's studio albums. Vocalist Mark Tornillo stated that Hoffmann still had some influence in songwriting on their later albums. Osbourne, the wife and manager of Ozzy Osbourne, founded the Ozzfest music festival and managed several bands and artists, including Mot\u00f6rhead, Coal Chamber, the Smashing Pumpkins, Electric Light Orchestra, Lita Ford and Queen.\nAllegations of sexism.\nThe popular media and academia have long charged heavy metal with sexism and misogyny. In the 1980s, American conservative groups like the Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC) and the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) co-opted feminist views on anti-woman violence to form attacks on metal's rhetoric and imagery. According to Robert Christgau in 2001, metal, along with hip-hop, has made \"reflexive and violent sexism... current in the music\".\nIn response to such claims, debates in the metal press have centered on defining and contextualizing sexism. Hill claims that \"understanding what counts as sexism is complex and requires critical work by fans when sexism is normalised.\" Citing her own research, including interviews of British female fans, she found that metal offers them an opportunity to feel liberated and genderless, albeit if assimilated into a culture that is largely neglectful of women.\nIn 2018, \"Metal Hammer\" editor Eleanor Goodman published an article titled \"Does Metal Have a Sexism Problem?\" interviewing veteran industry people and artists about the plight of women in metal. Some talked about a history of difficulty receiving professional respect from male counterparts. Among those interviewed was Wendy Dio, who had worked in label, booking and legal capacities in the music industry before her marriage to and management of metal artist Ronnie James Dio. She said that after marrying Dio, her professional reputation became reduced to her marital role as his wife, and her competency was questioned. Gloria Cavalera, former manager of Sepultura and wife of the band's former frontman Max Cavalera, said that since 1996, she had received misogynistic hate mail and death threats from fans and that \"women take a lot of crap. This whole #MeToo thing, do they think it just started? That has gone on since the pictures of the cavemen pulling girls by their hair.\"\nPersecution.\nEast Germany.\nIn socialist East Germany, heavy metal and other music scenes were becoming increasingly popular in the early 1980\u2019s. Heavy metal fans were widely seen as being \u2018negative decadent\u2019 by the Stasi secret police because their standards of dress and behaviour were not in keeping with socialist standards of respectability as promoted by the ruling SED party. Along with punk, heavy metal culture was considered to represent a relatively severe threat. It was thought by the Stasi that metallers could become increasingly politically-incorrect and liaise with human rights and peace groups in a political manner. In conjunction with this, they may also be used by the imperialist Western \u2018enemy\u2019 as an internal \u2018hostile-negative\u2019 force which undermined \u2018the communist upbringing of young people; encouraging immorality and decadence; and weakening economic performance.\u2019 This meant that \u2018a broad spectrum of young people\u2019 became of \u2018operative interest\u2019 to the Stasi. Unofficial collaborators were deployed in order to counteract the influence of heavy metal groupings and prominent individuals. This could involve surveillance and \u2018silent repression\u2019 such as decomposition which involved the use of counterespionage methods against everyday civilians. The use of such methods allowed for large scale repression while avoiding international condemnation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13870", "revid": "1293961844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13870", "title": "Helvetii", "text": "Celtic tribal group in Switzerland\n \n px;\n left: px; \"&gt;\n px;\n top: -px;\"&gt;\n Map of Gaul with tribes, 1st century BC; the Helvetii are circled.\nThe Helvetii (, , Gaulish: *\"Helu\u0113t\u012b\"), anglicized as Helvetians, were a Celtic tribe or tribal confederation occupying most of the Swiss plateau at the time of their contact with the Roman Republic in the 1st century BC. According to Julius Caesar, the Helvetians were divided into four subgroups or \"pagi.\" Of these, Caesar names only the Verbigeni and the Tigurini, while Posidonius mentions the Tigurini and the Tougeni (). They feature prominently in the \"Commentaries on the Gallic War,\" with their failed migration attempt to southwestern Gaul (58 BC) serving as a catalyst for Caesar's conquest of Gaul.\nThe Helvetians were subjugated after 52 BC, and under Augustus, Celtic oppida, such as Vindonissa or Basilea, were re-purposed as garrisons. In AD 68, a Helvetian uprising was crushed by Aulus Caecina Alienus.\nThe Swiss plateau was at first incorporated into the Roman province of Gallia Belgica (22 BC), later into Germania Superior (AD 83).\nThe Helvetians, like the rest of Gaul, were largely Romanized by the 2nd century. \nIn the later 3rd century, Roman control over the region waned, and the Swiss plateau was exposed to the invading Alemanni. The Alemanni and Burgundians established permanent settlements in the Swiss plateau in the 5th and 6th centuries, resulting in the early medieval territories of Alemannia (Swabia) and Upper Burgundy. The Helvetii were largely assimilated by their new rulers, contributing to the ethnogenesis of modern Swiss people.\nName.\nThey are mentioned as \"Helvetii\" by Cicero (mid-1st c. BC), Caesar (mid-1st c. BC) and Tacitus (early 2nd c. AD), in the genitive case as \"Helvetiorum\" by Livy (late 1st c. BC), as \"Helveti\" by Pliny (mid-1st c. AD), and as \"Elou\u1e17tioi\" (\u1f18\u03bb\u03bf\u03c5\u03ae\u03c4\u03b9\u03bf\u03b9) by Ptolemy (2nd c. AD).\nThe Gaulish ethnic name \"Helvetii\" is generally interpreted as \"(h)elu-\u0113tioi\" ('rich in land'), from \"elu\"- ('numerous', cf. OIr. \"il\") attached to \"etu\"- ('grassland'; cf. OIr. \"iath\"). The presence of the initial \"h\"-, remnant of a previous \"p\"- (PIE \"*pelh1u-\" &gt; Celt. \"helu-\" &gt; \"elu-\"), attests of an archaic formation.\nThe earliest attestation of the name is found in a \"graffito\" on a vessel from Mantua, dated to c. 300 BC. The inscription in Etruscan letters reads \"eluveitie,\" which has been interpreted as the Etruscan form of the Celtic \"elu\u032feti\u032fos\" (\"the Helvetian\"), presumably referring to a man of Helvetian descent living in Mantua.\nTribal organisation.\nOf the four Helvetian \"pagi\" or sub-tribes, Caesar names only the Verbigeni (\"Bell.\u00a0Gall.\" 1.27) and the Tigurini (1.12), Posidonius the Tigurini and the Tougeni (). \nThere has been substantial debate in Swiss historiography (beginning with Felix St\u00e4helin 1927) on whether the Tougeni may or may not be identified with the Teutones mentioned by Titus Livius.\nAccording to Caesar, the territory abandoned by the Helvetii had comprised 400 villages and 12 \"oppida\" (fortified settlements). His tally of the total population taken from captured Helvetian records written in Greek is 263,000 people, including fighting men, old men, women and children. However, the figures are generally dismissed as too high by modern scholars (see hereafter).\nLike many other tribes, the Helvetii did not have kings at the time of their clash with Rome but instead seem to have been governed by a class of noblemen (Lat. \"equites\"). When Orgetorix, one of their most prominent and ambitious noblemen, was making plans to establish himself as their king, he faced execution at the stake if found guilty. Caesar does not explicitly name the tribal authorities prosecuting the case and gathering men to apprehend Orgetorix, but he refers to them by the Latin terms \"civitas\" (\"state\" or \"tribe\") and \"magistratus\" (\"officials\").\nHistory.\nEarliest historical sources and settlement.\nIn his \"Natural History\" (c. 77 AD), Pliny provides a foundation myth for the Celtic settlement of Cisalpine Gaul in which a Helvetian named Helico plays the role of culture hero. Helico had worked in Rome as a craftsman and then returned to his home north of the Alps with a dried fig, a grape, and some oil and wine, the desirability of which caused his countrymen to invade northern Italy.\nThe Greek historian Posidonius (c. 135\u201350 BC), whose work is preserved only in fragments by other writers, offers the earliest historical record of the Helvetii. Posidonius described the Helvetians of the late 2nd century BC as \"rich in gold but peaceful,\" without giving clear indication to the location of their territory. His reference to gold washing in rivers has been taken as evidence for an early presence of the Helvetii in the Swiss plateau, with the Emme as being one of the gold-yielding rivers mentioned by Posidonius. This interpretation is now generally discarded, as Posidonius' narrative makes it more likely that the country some of the Helvetians left in order to join in the raids of the Teutones, Cimbri, and Ambrones was in fact southern Germany and not Switzerland.\nThat the Helvetians originally lived in southern Germany is confirmed by the Alexandrian geographer Claudius Ptolemaios (c. 90\u2013168 AD), who tells us of an \u1f18\u03bb\u03bf\u03c5\u03b7\u03c4\u03af\u03c9\u03bd \u1f14\u03c1\u03b7\u03bc\u03bf\u03c2 (i.e. \"Helvetic deserted lands\") north of the Rhine. Tacitus knows that the Helvetians once settled in the swath between Rhine, Main, and the Hercynian forest. The abandonment of this northern territory is now usually placed in the late 2nd century BC, around the time of the first Germanic incursions into the Roman world, when the Tigurini and Toygenoi/Toutonoi are mentioned as participants in the great raids.\nAt the later Vicus \"Turicum\", probably in the first 1st century BC or even much earlier, the Celts settled at the Lindenhof Oppidium. In 1890, so-called \"Potin lumps\" were found, whose largest weights at the Prehistoric pile dwelling settlement \"Alpenquai\" in Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland. The pieces consist of a large number of fused Celtic coins, which are mixed with charcoal remnants. Some of the 18,000 coins originate from the \"Eastern Gaul\", others are of the \"Z\u00fcrich\" type, that were assigned to the local \"Helvetii\", which date to around 100 BC. The find is so far unique, and the scientific research assumes that the melting down of the lump was not completed, therefore the aim was to form cultic offerings. The site of the find was at that time at least from the lake shore, and probably to three meters deep in the water. There's also an island sanctuary of the Helvetii in connection with the settlement at the preceding Oppidi Uetliberg on the former \"Grosser Hafner\" island, as well as the settlement \"Kleiner Hafner\" at the \"Sechsel\u00e4uten square\" on the effluence of the Limmat on Z\u00fcrichsee lake shore.\nFirst contact with the Romans.\nThe Germanic tribes of the Cimbri and Ambrones probably reached southern Germany around the year 111 BC, where they were joined by the Tigurini, and, probably the Teutoni-Toutonoi-Toygenoi. (The precise identity of the latter group is unclear).\nThe tribes began a joint invasion of Gaul, including the Roman Provincia Narbonensis. A Roman army under the consul L. Cassius Longinus opposed them. At the Battle of Burdigala near Agendicum in 107 BC, the Tigurini killed Longinus and captured many of his soldiers. According to Caesar, the captured Roman soldiers were ordered to pass under a yoke set up by the triumphant Gauls, a dishonour that called for both public as well as private vengeance. Caesar is the only narrative source for this episode, as the corresponding books of Livy's histories are preserved only in the \"Periochae\", short summarising lists of contents, in which hostages given by the Romans, but no yoke, are mentioned.\nIn 105 BC, the allies defeated another Roman army near Arausio and went on to harry Spain, Gaul, Noricum, and northern Italy. They split up in two groups in 103 BC, with the Teutones and Ambrones marching on a western route through the \"Provincia\" and the Cimbri and Tigurini crossing the eastern Alps (probably by the Brenner Pass). While the Teutones and Ambrones were slaughtered in 102 BC by Gaius Marius near Aquae Sextiae, the Cimbri and the Tigurini wintered in the Padan plain. The following year, Marius virtually destroyed the Cimbri in the battle of Vercellae. The Tigurini, who had planned on following the Cimbri, turned back over the Alps with their booty and joined those of the Helvetians who had not participated in the raids.\nCaesar and the Helvetian campaign of 58 BC.\nPrelude.\nThe Helvetii were the first Gallic tribe of the campaign to be confronted by Caesar. He narrates the events of the conflict in the opening sections of \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\". Due to the political nature of the \"Commentarii\", Caesar's purpose in publicizing his own achievements may have distorted the significance of events and the motives of those who participated.\nThe nobleman Orgetorix is presented as the instigator of a new Helvetian migration, in which the entire tribe was to leave their territory and, according to Caesar, to establish a supremacy over all of Gaul. This exodus was planned over three years, in the course of which Orgetorix conspired with two noblemen from neighbouring tribes, Casticus of the Sequani and Dumnorix of the Aedui, that each should accomplish a coup d'\u00e9tat in his own country, after which the three new kings would collaborate. When word of his aspirations to make himself king reached the Helvetii, Orgetorix was summoned to stand trial, facing execution on the pyre should he be found guilty. For the time being, he averted a verdict by arriving at the hearing set for him with ten thousand followers and bondsmen; yet before the large force mustered by the authorities could apprehend him, he died under unexplained circumstances, the Helvetii believed by his own hand.\nNevertheless, the Helvetii did not give up their planned emigration, but burned their homes in 58 BC. They were joined by a number of tribal groups from neighbouring regions: the Raurici, the Latobrigi, the Tulingi and a group of Boii, who had besieged Noreia. They abandoned their homes completely with the intention of settling among the Santones (Saintonge). The easiest route would take them through the Rh\u00f4ne valley, and thus through the Roman \"Provincia Narbonensis\".\nBattle of the Sa\u00f4ne.\nWhen they reached the boundaries of the Allobroges, the northernmost tribe of the \"Provincia\", they found that Caesar had already dismantled the bridge of Geneva to stop their advance. The Helvetians sent \"the most illustrious men of their state\" to negotiate, promising a peaceful passage through the \"Provincia\". Caesar stalled them by asking for some time for consideration, which he used to assemble reinforcements and to fortify the southern banks of the Rh\u00f4ne. When the embassy returned on the agreed-upon date, he was strong enough to bluntly reject their offer. The Helvetii now chose the more difficult northern route through the Sequani territory, which traversed the Jura Mountains via a very narrow pass at the site of the modern Fort l'\u00c9cluse, but bypassed the \"Provincia\". After ravaging the lands of the Aedui tribe, who called upon Caesar to help them, they began the crossing of the Sa\u00f4ne, which took them several days. As only a quarter of their forces were left on the eastern banks, Caesar attacked and routed them. According to Caesar, those killed had been the Tigurini, on whom he had now taken revenge in the name of the Republic and his family.\nAfter the battle, the Romans quickly bridged the river, thereby prompting the Helvetii to once again send an embassy, this time led by Divico, another figure whom Caesar links to the ignominious defeat of 107 BC by calling him \"bello Cassio dux Helvetiorum\" (i.e. \"leader of the Helvetii in the Cassian campaign\"). What Divico had to offer was almost a surrender, namely to have the Helvetii settle wherever Caesar wished them to, although it was combined with the threat of an open battle if Caesar should refuse. Caesar demanded hostages to be given to him and reparations to the Aedui and Allobroges. Divico responded by saying that \"they were accustomed to receive, not to give hostages; a fact the Roman people could testify to\", this once again being an allusion to the giving of hostages by the defeated Romans at Agen.\nBattle of Bibracte.\nIn the cavalry battle that followed, the Helvetii prevailed over Caesar's Aedui allies under Dumnorix' command, and continued their journey, while Caesar's army was being detained by delays in his grain supplies, caused by the Aedui on the instigations of Dumnorix, who had married Orgetorix' daughter. A few days later, however, near the Aeduan \"oppidum\" Bibracte, Caesar caught up with the Helvetii and faced them in a major battle, which ended in the Helvetii's retreat and the capture of most of their baggage by the Romans.\nLeaving the largest part of their supplies behind, the Helvetii covered around 60\u00a0km in four days, eventually reaching the lands of the Lingones (the modern Langres plateau). Caesar did not pursue them until three days after the battle, while still sending messengers to the Lingones warning them not to assist the Helvetii in any way. The Helvetii then offered their immediate surrender and agreed both to providing hostages and to giving up their weapons the next day. In the course of the night, 6000 of the Verbigeni fled from the camp out of fear of being massacred once they were defenceless. Caesar sent riders after them and ordered those who were brought back to be \"counted as enemies\", which probably meant being sold into slavery.\nReturn of the migrants.\nIn order for them to defend the Rhine frontier against the Germans, he then allowed the Helvetii, Tulingi and Latobrigi to return to their territories and to rebuild their homes, instructing the Allobroges to supply them with a sufficient supply of grain. Caesar does not mention the Raurici, who seem to have built a new \"oppidum\" at Basel-M\u00fcnsterh\u00fcgel upon their return. The Aedui were granted their wish that the Boii who had accompanied the Helvetii would settle on their own territory as allies in the \"oppidum\" Gorgobina. The nature of Caesar's arrangement with the Helvetii and the other tribes is not further specified by the consul himself, but in his speech \"http://\" of 56 BC, Cicero mentions the Helvetii as one among several tribes of \"foederati\", i.e. allied nations who were neither citizens of the Republic nor her subjects, but obliged by treaty to support the Romans with a certain number of fighting men.\nCaesar's report of the numbers.\nAccording to the victor, tablets with lists in Greek characters were found at the Helvetian camp, listing in detail all men able to bear arms with their names and giving a total number for the women, children and elderly who accompanied them. The numbers added up to a total of 263,000 Helvetii, 36,000 Tulingi, 14,000 Latobrigi, 23,000 Rauraci, and 32,000 Boii, all in all 368,000 heads, 92,000 of whom were warriors. A census of those who had returned to their homes listed 110,000 survivors, which meant that only about 30 percent of the emigrants had survived the war.\nCaesar's report has been partly confirmed by excavations near Geneva and Bibracte. However, much of his account has not yet been corroborated by archaeology, whilst his narrative must in wide parts be considered as biased and, in some points, unlikely. For a start, only one out of the fifteen Celtic \"oppida\" in the Helvetii territory so far has yielded evidence for destruction by fire. Many other sites, for example the sanctuary at Mormont, do not exhibit any signs of damage for the period in question, and Celtic life continued seemingly undisturbed for the rest of the 1st century BC up to the beginning of the Roman era, with an accent rather on an increase in prosperity than on a \"Helvetic twilight\". With the honourable status as \"foederati\" taken into account, it is hard to believe that the Helvetii ever sustained casualties quite as heavy as those given by the Roman military leader.\nIn general, numbers written down by ancient military authors have to be taken as gross exaggerations. What Caesar claims to have been 368,000 people is estimated by other sources to be rather around 300,000 (Plutarch), or 200,000 (Appian); in the light of a critical analysis, even these numbers seem far too high. Furger-Gunti considers an army of more than 60,000 fighting men extremely unlikely in the view of the tactics described, and assumes the actual numbers to have been around 40,000 warriors out of a total of 160,000 emigrants. Delbr\u00fcck suggests an even lower number of 100,000 people, out of which only 16,000 were fighters, which would make the Celtic force about half the size of the Roman body of c. 30,000 men. The real numbers will never be determined exactly. Caesar's specifications can at least be doubted by looking at the size of the baggage train that an exodus of 368,000 people would have required: Even for the reduced numbers that Furger-Gunti uses for his calculations, the baggage train would have stretched for at least 40\u00a0km, perhaps even as far as 100\u00a0km.\nIn spite of the now much more balanced numerical weight we have to assume for the two opposing armies, the battle seems far less glorious a victory than Caesar presented it to be. The main body of the Helvetii withdrew from the battle at nightfall, abandoning, as it seemed, most of their wagons, which they had drawn up into a wagon fort; they retreated northwards in a forced night march and reached the territory of the Lingones four days after the battle. What Caesar implies to have been a desperate flight without stopping could actually have been an ordered retreat of moderate speed, covering less than 40\u00a0km a day. Caesar himself does not appear as a triumphant victor in turn, being unable to pursue the Helvetii for three days, \"both on account of the wounds of the soldiers and the burial of the slain\". However, it is clear that Caesar's warning to the Lingones not to supply his enemies was quite enough to make the Helvetii leaders once again offer peace. On what terms this peace was made is debatable, but as said before, the conclusion of a \"foedus\" casts some doubt on the totality of the defeat.\nQuestions of motive.\nAs Caesar's account is heavily influenced by his political agenda, it is difficult to determine the actual motive of the Helvetii movement of 58 BC. One might see the movement in the light of a Celtic retreat from areas which were later to become Germanic; it can be debated whether they ever had plans to settle in the Saintonge, as Caesar claims (Bell. Gall. 1,10.). It was certainly in the latter's personal interest to emphasise any kind of parallel between the traumatic experience of the Cimbrian and Teutonic incursions and the alleged threat that the Helvetii were to the Roman world. The Tigurini's part in the destruction of L. Cassius Longinus and his army was a welcome pretext to engage in an offensive war in Gaul whose proceeds permitted Caesar not only to fulfil his obligations to the numerous creditors he owed money to, but also to further strengthen his position within the late Republic. In this sense, even the character of Divico, who makes his appearance in the \"Commentarii\" half a century after his victory over L. Cassius Longinus, seems more like another hackneyed argument stressing Caesar's justification to attack, than like an actual historical figure. That the victor of Agen was still alive in 58 BC or, if yes, that he was physically still capable of undertaking such a journey at all, seems more than doubtful.\nThe Helvetii as Roman subjects.\nThe Helvetii and Rauraci most likely lost their status as \"foederati\" only six years after the battle of Bibracte, when they supported Vercingetorix in 52 BC with 8,000 and 2,000 men, respectively. Sometime between 50 and 45 BC, the Romans founded the \"Colonia Iulia Equestris\" at the site of the Helvetian settlement \"Noviodunum\" (modern Nyon), and around 44 BC the \"Colonia Raurica\" on Rauracan territory. These colonies were probably established as a means of controlling the two most important military access routes between the Helvetian territory and the rest of Gaul, blocking the passage through the Rh\u00f4ne valley and Sundgau.\nIn the course of Augustus' reign, Roman dominance became more concrete. Some of the traditional Celtic oppida were now used as legionary garrisons, such as Vindonissa or Basilea (modern Basel); others were relocated, such as the hill-fort on the Bois de Ch\u00e2tel, whose inhabitants founded the new \"capital\" of the civitas at nearby Aventicum. First incorporated into the Roman province of Gallia Belgica, later into the Germania Superior and finally into the Diocletian province of Maxima Sequanorum, the former territories of the Helvetii and their inhabitants were as thoroughly romanised as the rest of Gaul.\nThe rising of 68/69 AD.\nWhat seems to have been the last action of the Helvetii as a tribal entity happened shortly after the death of emperor Nero in 68 AD. Like the other Gallic tribes, the Helvetii were organised as a \"civitas\"; they even retained their traditional grouping into four \"pagi\" and enjoyed a certain inner autonomy, including the defence of certain strongholds by their own troops. In the civil war which followed Nero's death, the \"civitas Helvetiorum\" supported Galba; unaware of his death, they refused to accept the authority of his rival, Vitellius. The Legio XXI Rapax, stationed in Vindonissa and favouring Vitellius, stole the pay of a Helvetian garrison, which prompted the Helvetians to intercept Vitellian messengers and detain a Roman detachment. Aulus Caecina Alienus, a former supporter of Galba who was now at the head of a Vitellian invasion of Italy, launched a massive punitive campaign, crushing the Helvetii under their commander Claudius Severus and routing the remnants of their forces at Mount Vocetius, killing and enslaving thousands. The capital Aventicum surrendered, and Julius Alpinus, head of what was now seen as a Helvetian uprising, was executed. In spite of the extensive damage and devastations the \"civitas\" had already sustained, according to Tacitus the Helvetii were saved from total annihilation owing to the pleas of one Claudius Cossus, a Helvetian envoy to Vitellius, and, as Tacitus puts it, \"of well-known eloquence\".\nLegacy.\nRoman occupation in the aftermath of the Gallic Wars had pacified the Celtic-Germanic contact zone along the Rhine. The Suebi and Marcomanni who under Ariovistus had planned to invade Gaul were pushed back beyond the Black Forest, where they amalgamated into the future Alemanni.\nThe Romans allowed Germanic tribes such as the Ubii, Triboci, Nemetes and Vangiones to settle in the deserted areas left of the Rhine. On the right bank of the Upper Rhine, which according to the testimony of Tacitus (\"Germania\" 28) had formerly also been occupied by the Helvetians, both the historical and archaeological records are sparse. \nPtolemy (2.4.11) in the 2nd century uses the term \"Eremus Helvetiorum\" (also rendered \"Heremus Helvetiorum\") \"desolation of the Helvetians\" to refer to this area (largely corresponding to modern Baden). The term was adopted by Aegidius Tschudi in the 16th century, and remains in use in modern historiography (German: \"\").\nIt has been proposed that the area inhabited by the Helvetians had extended beyond the Swiss plateau, far into what is now Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, but had been displaced in the course of the Cimbrian War, some two generations prior to Caesar's invasion of Gaul.\nThe Swiss plateau was gradually romanized during the 1st to 3rd centuries.\nThe principal Roman settlements were the cities of Iulia Equestris (Nyon), Aventicum (Avenches), Augusta Raurica (Augst) and Vindonissa (Windisch). Evidence has also been found of almost twenty Roman villages (\"vici\") and hundreds of villas.\nIn the course of Romanization, the Celtic polytheism of the Helvetians was syncretized with Roman religion. The Celtic deities came to be worshiped under the names of their Roman counterparts, and Roman gods acquired the names of local gods, such as \"Mars Caturix\", \"Mercurius Cissonius\" and \"Jupiter Poeninus\".\nA major cultic center of Gallo-Roman religion, consisting of eight chapels or small temples, was found in Allmendingen near Thun. Deities worshipped at the site included Mars (presumably in lieu of Caturix) and Rosmerta as well as Mithras.\nAlthough the Gaulish language had mostly been ousted by Latin by the 3rd century, many Celtic toponyms have survived in Switzerland. Of the ten largest present-day Swiss cities, at least six have Celtic placename etymologies,\nand most major Swiss rivers have either Celtic or pre-Celtic names.\nThe order and prosperity of the \"Pax Romana\" ended with the Crisis of the Third Century. In 260, when the Gallic Empire briefly seceded from Rome, emperor Gallienus withdrew the legions from the Rhine to fight the usurper Ingenuus, allowing the Alemanni to invade the Swiss plateau. There, cities, villages and most \"villae\" were raided or sacked by marauding bands. The numerous caches of coins recovered from the period between 250 and 280 attest to the severity of the crisis.\nThe Helvetii were re-discovered as the forebears of the Swiss in the early historiography of Switzerland, in the late 15th to early 16th century. Their name was adopted as the Latin equivalent of the designation \"Switzer\", and the Swiss Confederacy was given the Latin name of \"Republica Helvetiorum\". The name of the national personification of Switzerland, \"Helvetia\", and the country's contemporary Neo-Latin name, \"Confoederatio Helvetica\" (abbreviated CH), are derived from this tradition.\nIn 2015, the star 51 Pegasi, the first main-sequence star found to have an exoplanet, was named Helvetios after the Helvetii as part of the IAU's NameExoWorlds contest.\nCeltic oppida in Switzerland.\nThe distribution of La T\u00e8ne culture burials in Switzerland indicates that the Swiss plateau between Lausanne and Winterthur was relatively densely populated. Settlement centres existed in the Aare valley between Thun and Bern, and between Lake Zurich and the river Reuss. The Valais and the regions around Bellinzona and Lugano also seem to have been well-populated; however, those lay outside the Helvetian borders.\nAlmost all the Helvetic \"oppida\" were built in the vicinity of the larger rivers of the Swiss midlands. Not all of them existed at the same time. For most of them, we do not have any idea as to what their Gaulish names might have been, with one or two possible exceptions. \nWhere a pre-Roman name is preserved, it is added in brackets. Those marked with an asterisk (*) were most likely occupied by neighbouring tribes (Raurici, Veragri, etc.) rather than the Helvetii.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13871", "revid": "22833103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13871", "title": "Heretics of Dune", "text": "1984 novel by Frank Herbert\nHeretics of Dune is a 1984 science fiction novel by Frank Herbert, the fifth in his \"Dune\" series of six novels.\nSet 1,500 years after the events of \"God Emperor of Dune\" (1981), the novel finds humanity on the path set for them by the tyrant Leto II Atreides to guarantee their survival. But a new threat arrives in the form of the Honored Matres, a brutal matriarchy from beyond the known universe whose only goals are conquest and destruction.\n\"Heretics of Dune\" was ranked as the No. 13 hardcover fiction best seller of 1984 by \"The New York Times\".\nPlot summary.\nFifteen hundred years after the 3,500-year reign of the God Emperor Leto II Atreides ended with his assassination, humanity is firmly on the Golden Path, Leto's plan to save humanity from destruction. By crushing the aspirations of humans for over three thousand years and dismantling the complex economic system dependent on the spice melange, Leto caused the Scattering, an explosion of humanity into the rest of the universe upon his death.\nSandworms have reappeared on Arrakis (now called Rakis), and have renewed the flow of the all-important spice to the galaxy. A new civilization has risen, with three dominant powers: the Ixians, whose no-ships are capable of piloting between the stars and are invisible to outside detection; the Bene Tleilax, who have learned to manufacture spice in their axlotl tanks and have created a new breed of Face Dancers; and the Bene Gesserit, a matriarchal order of subtle political manipulators who possess superhuman abilities. However, people from the Scattering are returning with their own peculiar powers. The most powerful of these forces are the Honored Matres, a violent society of women bred and trained for combat and the sexual control of men.\nThe Bene Gesserit leader, Mother Superior Taraza, brings Mentat and former Supreme Bashar Miles Teg out of retirement to oversee the protection of their latest Tleilaxu-provided Duncan Idaho ghola on the planet Gammu, the former Giedi Prime. She also sends Bene Gesserit Imprinter Lucilla to instruct Duncan, and eventually bind his loyalty to the Sisterhood with her sexual talents. At the same time, Teg's biological daughter, Reverend Mother Darwi Odrade, is put in command of the Bene Gesserit keep on Rakis. The Bene Gesserit discover Sheeana, an orphan girl who can control the giant sandworms, and hope to gain control of her and the religion that will inevitably form around her. Soon the Bene Gesserit thwart an attack on Sheeana, and Odrade begins training her in the ways of the Sisterhood. The two discover a huge hoard of spice that Leto left, along with a message from Leto, saying the Bene Gesserit should find noble purpose.\nWhen an assassination attempt is made on Duncan, Lucilla and Teg flee with him into the countryside, finding refuge in an old Harkonnen no-globe. Teg awakens Duncan's original memories, but does so before Lucilla can imprint Duncan and thus tie him to the Sisterhood. Teg is captured by the Honored Matres while Lucilla and Duncan escape. Teg is tortured by a T-Probe, but under pressure discovers new abilities: drastically increased physical capabilities and an uncertain type of prescience, which he uses to escape easily and capture a no-ship with some of his old battle comrades. Duncan is subdued by a young Honored Matre named Murbella, who attempts to enslave him sexually. However, hidden Tleilaxu conditioning kicks in, and Duncan responds with an equal technique that overwhelms Murbella. The experience restores in him the entire memories of all of the hundreds of previous Duncan gholas.\nTaraza meets with the Tleilaxu Master Waff and compels him to tell her what he knows about the Honored Matres. He also reveals that the Bene Tleilax have conditioned their own agenda into Duncan. Taraza gleans the Tleilaxu's secret religious beliefs from their conversation, and uses them to manipulate an alliance with the Bene Tleilax that better serves the Bene Gesserit. Odrade realizes that Taraza's plan is to destroy Rakis (which will help destroy Leto's tyrannical grip on history) just as the Honored Matres invade, killing Taraza and Waff. Odrade becomes Mother Superior of the Bene Gesserit and escapes with Sheeana into the desert on a worm.\nTeg finds that his prescient powers allow him to \"see\" shielded no-ships, enabling him to locate Duncan and Lucilla. They flee to Rakis with a captive, pregnant Murbella, intercepting Odrade and Sheeana and their giant worm. Teg leads his troops in a suicidal defense of Rakis designed to enrage the Honored Matres and goad them into using their planet-destroying Obliterators. They do so, incinerating Rakis' surface and killing all sandworms, save the one with which Odrade and Sheeana have escaped. They intend to use it to create a new sandworm ecosystem on the secret Bene Gesserit planet Chapterhouse.\nPublication history.\nFrank Herbert wrote much of the initial draft of \"Heretics of Dune\" in Hawaii, using a Compaq word processor. According to his son Brian, Herbert's time spent writing the draft would be \"exceedingly arduous and much slower for him [Herbert] than usual, because of all the time he had to spend out of his study tending to the medical crises of my mother, Beverly Herbert.\"\nReception.\n\"Kirkus Reviews\" described this fifth installment of the \"Dune\" series as \"another uneven entry, slow to start and hastily, rather abruptly concluded\u2014but more exciting and adventurous than any since the original \"Dune\", with a gratifying influx of new ideas.\"\n\"Heretics of Dune\" was ranked as the No. 13 hardcover fiction best seller of 1984 by \"The New York Times\"."}
{"id": "13872", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13872", "title": "Highways of Michigan", "text": ""}
{"id": "13873", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13873", "title": "Halakha", "text": "Jewish rabbinical law\nHalakha ( ; , Sephardic: ), is the collective body of Jewish religious laws that are derived from the Written and Oral Torah. \"Halakha\" is based on biblical commandments (\"mitzvot\"), subsequent Talmudic and rabbinic laws, and the customs and traditions which were compiled in the many books such as the \"Shulchan Aruch\" or \"Mishneh Torah\". \"Halakha\" is often translated as \"Jewish law\", although a more literal translation might be \"the way to go\" or \"the way of walking\". The word is derived from the root \u05d4\u2013\u05dc\u2013\u05db, which refers to concepts related to \"to go\", \"to walk\". \"Halakha\" not only guides religious practices and beliefs; it also guides numerous aspects of day-to-day life.\nHistorically, widespread observance of the laws of the Torah is first in evidence beginning in the second century BCE, and some say that the first evidence was even earlier. In the Jewish diaspora, \"halakha\" served many Jewish communities as an enforceable avenue of law \u2014 both civil and religious, since no differentiation of them exists in classical Judaism. Since the Jewish Enlightenment (\"Haskalah\") and Jewish emancipation, some have come to view the \"halakha\" as less binding in day-to-day life, because it relies on rabbinic interpretation, as opposed to the authoritative, canonical text which is recorded in the Hebrew Bible. Under contemporary Israeli law, certain areas of Israeli family and personal status law are, for Jews, under the authority of the rabbinic courts, so they are treated according to \"halakha\". Some minor differences in \"halakha\" are found among Ashkenazi Jews, Mizrahi Jews, Sephardi Jews, Yemenite, Ethiopian and other Jewish communities which historically lived in isolation.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe word \"halakha\" is derived from the Hebrew root \"halakh\" \u2013 \"to walk\" or \"to go\". Taken literally, therefore, \"halakha\" translates as \"the way to walk\", rather than \"law\". The word \"halakha\" refers to the corpus of rabbinic legal texts, or to the overall system of religious law. The term may also be related to Akkadian , a property tax, rendered in Aramaic as , designating one or several obligations. It may be descended from hypothetical reconstructed Proto-Semitic root \"*halakh-\" meaning \"to go\", which also has descendants in Akkadian, Arabic, Aramaic, and Ugaritic.\n\"Halakha\" is often contrasted with \"aggadah\" (\"the telling\"), the diverse corpus of rabbinic exegetical, narrative, philosophical, mystical, and other \"non-legal\" texts. At the same time, since writers of \"halakha\" may draw upon the aggadic and even mystical literature, a dynamic interchange occurs between the genres. \"Halakha\" also does not include the parts of the Torah not related to commandments.\n\"Halakha\" constitutes the practical application of the 613 \"mitzvot\" (\"commandments\") in the Torah, as developed through discussion and debate in the classical rabbinic literature, especially the Mishnah and the Talmud (the \"Oral Torah\"), and as codified in the \"Mishneh Torah\" and \"Shulchan Aruch\". Because \"halakha\" is developed and applied by various halakhic authorities rather than one sole \"official voice\", different individuals and communities may well have different answers to halakhic questions. With few exceptions, controversies are not settled through authoritative structures because during the Jewish diaspora, Jews lacked a single judicial hierarchy or appellate review process for \"halakha\".\nAccording to some scholars, the words \"halakha\" and sharia both mean literally \"the path to follow\". The fiqh literature parallels rabbinical law developed in the Talmud, with fatwas being analogous to rabbinic \"responsa\".\nCommandments (mitzvot).\nAccording to the Talmud (\"Tractate Makot\"), 613 \"mitzvot\" are in the Torah, 248 positive (\"thou shalt\") \"mitzvot\" and 365 negative (\"thou shalt not\") \"mitzvot\", supplemented by seven \"mitzvot\" legislated by the rabbis of antiquity. Currently, many of the 613 commandments cannot be performed until the building of the Temple in Jerusalem and the universal resettlement of the Jewish people in the Land of Israel by the Messiah. According to one count, only 369 can be kept, meaning that 40% of mitzvot are not possible to perform. Of these 369, 77 of these are positive \"mitzvot\" and 194 are negative.\nRabbinic Judaism divides laws into categories:\nThis division between revealed and rabbinic commandments may influence the importance of a rule, its enforcement and the nature of its ongoing interpretation. Halakhic authorities may disagree on which laws fall into which categories or the circumstances (if any) under which prior rabbinic rulings can be re-examined by contemporary rabbis, but all Halakhic Jews hold that both categories exist and that the first category is immutable, with exceptions only for life-saving and similar emergency circumstances.\nA second classical distinction is between the Written Law, laws written in the Hebrew Bible, and the Oral Law, laws which are believed to have been transmitted orally prior to their later compilation in texts such as the Mishnah, Talmud, and rabbinic codes.\nCommandments are divided into positive and negative commands, which are treated differently in terms of divine and human punishment. Positive commandments \"require\" an action to be performed and are considered to bring the performer closer to God. Negative commandments (traditionally 365 in number) \"forbid\" a specific action, and violations create a distance from God.\nA further division is made between \"chukim\" (\"decrees\" \u2013 laws without obvious explanation, such as \"shatnez\", the law prohibiting wearing clothing made of mixtures of linen and wool), \"mishpatim\" (\"judgements\" \u2013 laws with obvious social implications) and \"eduyot\" (\"testimonies\" or \"commemorations\", such as the Shabbat and holidays). Through the ages, various rabbinical authorities have classified some of the 613 commandments in many ways.\nA different approach divides the laws into a different set of categories:\nSources and process.\nEras of Jewish law\nThe development of \"halakha\" in the period before the Maccabees, which has been described as the formative period in the history of its development, is shrouded in obscurity. Historian Yitzhak Baer argued that there was little pure academic legal activity at this period and that many of the laws originating at this time were produced by a means of neighbourly good conduct rules in a similar way as carried out by Greeks in the age of Solon. For example, the first chapter of \"Bava Kamma\", contains a formulation of the law of torts worded in the first person.\nThe boundaries of Jewish law are determined through the Halakhic process, a religious-ethical system of legal reasoning. Rabbis generally base their opinions on the primary sources of \"halakha\" as well as on precedent set by previous rabbinic opinions. The major sources and genre of \"halakha\" consulted include:\nIn antiquity, the \"Sanhedrin\" functioned essentially as the Supreme Court and legislature (in the US judicial system) for Judaism, and had the power to administer binding law, including both received law and its own rabbinic decrees, on all Jews\u2014rulings of the Sanhedrin became \"halakha\"; see Oral law. That court ceased to function in its full mode in 40\u00a0CE. Today, the authoritative application of Jewish law is left to the local rabbi, and the local rabbinical courts, with only local applicability. In branches of Judaism that follow \"halakha\", lay individuals make numerous ad-hoc decisions but are regarded as not having authority to decide certain issues definitively.\nSince the days of the Sanhedrin, however, no body or authority has been generally regarded as having the authority to create universally recognized precedents. As a result, \"halakha\" has developed in a somewhat different fashion from Anglo-American legal systems with a Supreme Court able to provide universally accepted precedents. Generally, Halakhic arguments are effectively, yet unofficially, peer-reviewed. When a rabbinic \"posek\" (\"he who makes a statement\", \"decisor\") proposes an additional interpretation of a law, that interpretation may be considered binding for the posek's questioner or immediate community. Depending on the stature of the posek and the quality of the decision, an interpretation may also be gradually accepted by other rabbis and members of other Jewish communities.\nUnder this system there is a tension between the relevance of earlier and later authorities in constraining Halakhic interpretation and innovation. On the one hand, there is a principle in \"halakha\" not to overrule a specific law from an earlier era, after it is accepted by the community as a law or vow, unless supported by another, relevant earlier precedent; see list below. On the other hand, another principle recognizes the responsibility and authority of later authorities, and especially the \"posek\" handling a then-current question. In addition, the \"halakha\" embodies a wide range of principles that permit judicial discretion and deviation (Ben-Menahem).\nNotwithstanding the potential for innovation, rabbis and Jewish communities differ greatly on how they make changes in \"halakha\". Notably, \"poskim\" frequently extend the application of a law to new situations, but do not consider such applications as constituting a \"change\" in \"halakha\". For example, many Orthodox rulings concerning electricity are derived from rulings concerning fire, as closing an electrical circuit may cause a spark. In contrast, Conservative \"poskim\" consider that switching on electrical equipment is physically and chemically more like turning on a water tap (which is permissible by \"halakha\") than lighting a fire (which is not permissible), and therefore permitted on Shabbat. The reformative Judaism in some cases explicitly interprets \"halakha\" to take into account its view of contemporary society. For instance, most Conservative rabbis extend the application of certain Jewish obligations and permissible activities to women (see below).\nWithin certain Jewish communities, formal organized bodies do exist. Within Modern Orthodox Judaism, there is no one committee or leader, but Modern US-based Orthodox rabbis generally agree with the views set by consensus by the leaders of the Rabbinical Council of America. Within Conservative Judaism, the Rabbinical Assembly has an official Committee on Jewish Law and Standards.\nNote that \"takkanot\" (plural of \"takkanah\") in general do not affect or restrict observance of Torah \"mitzvot\". (Sometimes \"takkanah\" refers to either \"gezeirot\" or \"takkanot\".) However, the Talmud states that in exceptional cases, the Sages had the authority to \"uproot matters from the Torah\". In Talmudic and classical Halakhic literature, this authority refers to the authority to prohibit some things that would otherwise be Biblically sanctioned (\"shev v'al ta'aseh\", \"thou shall stay seated and not do\"). Rabbis may rule that a specific mitzvah from the Torah should not be performed, e. g., blowing the \"shofar\" on Shabbat, or taking the \"lulav and etrog\" on Shabbat. These examples of takkanot which may be executed out of caution lest some might otherwise carry the mentioned items between home and the synagogue, thus inadvertently violating a Sabbath \"melakha\". Another rare and limited form of takkanah involved overriding Torah prohibitions. In some cases, the Sages allowed the temporary violation of a prohibition in order to maintain the Jewish system as a whole. This was part of the basis for Esther's relationship with Ahasuerus (Xeres). For general usage of takkanaot in Jewish history see the article Takkanah. For examples of this being used in Conservative Judaism, see Conservative halakha.\nHistorical analysis.\nThe antiquity of the rules can be determined only by the dates of the authorities who quote them; in general, they cannot safely be declared older than the tanna (\"repeater\") to whom they are first ascribed. It is certain, however, that the seven middot (\"measurements\", and referring to [good] behavior) of Hillel and the thirteen of Ishmael are earlier than the time of Hillel himself, who was the first to transmit them.\nThe Talmud gives no information concerning the origin of the middot, although the Geonim (\"Sages\") regarded them as Sinaitic (Law given to Moses at Sinai).\nThe middot seem to have been first laid down as abstract rules by the teachers of Hillel, though they were not immediately recognized by all as valid and binding. Different schools interpreted and modified them, restricted or expanded them, in various ways. Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Ishmael and their scholars especially contributed to the development or establishment of these rules. \"It must be borne in mind, however, that neither Hillel, Ishmael, nor [a contemporary of theirs named] Eliezer ben Jose sought to give a complete enumeration of the rules of interpretation current in his day, but that they omitted from their collections many rules which were then followed.\"\nAkiva devoted his attention particularly to the grammatical and exegetical rules, while Ishmael developed the logical. The rules laid down by one school were frequently rejected by another because the principles that guided them in their respective formulations were essentially different. According to Akiva, the divine language of the Torah is distinguished from the speech of men by the fact that in the former no word or sound is superfluous.\nSome scholars have observed a similarity between these rabbinic rules of interpretation and the hermeneutics of ancient Hellenistic culture. For example, Saul Lieberman argues that the names of rabbi Ishmael's \"middot\" (e. g., \"kal vahomer\", a combination of the archaic form of the word for \"straw\" and the word for \"clay\" \u2013 \"straw and clay\", referring to the obvious [means of making a mud brick]) are Hebrew translations of Greek terms, although the methods of those \"middot\" are not Greek in origin.\nViews today.\nOrthodox Judaism holds that \"halakha\" is divine law laid down in the Torah, rabbinical laws, rabbinical decrees, and customs combined. The rabbis, who made many additions and interpretations of Jewish law, did so only in accordance with regulations they believed, as Orthodox Jews still believe, were given for this purpose to Moses on Mount Sinai.\nConservative Judaism holds that \"halakha\" is normative and binding and is developed as a partnership between people and God based on the Sinaitic Torah. While there is a wide variety of Conservative views, a common belief is that \"halakha\" is, and has always been, an evolving process subject to interpretation by rabbis in every time period.\nReconstructionist Judaism asserts that \"halakha\" is normative and binding; however, it also views \"halakha\" as an evolving concept. The traditional halakhic system, according to this perspective, cannot produce a code of conduct that is meaningful and acceptable to the majority of contemporary Jews. Reconstructionism's founder, Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan, believed that \"Jewish life [is] meaningless without Jewish law.\" One of the planks of the Society for the Jewish Renascence, of which Kaplan was a founder, stated: \"We accept the halakha, which is rooted in the Talmud, as the norm of Jewish life, availing ourselves, at the same time, of the method implicit therein to interpret and develop the body of Jewish Law in accordance with the actual conditions and spiritual needs of modern life.\"\nReform Judaism holds that modern views of how the Torah and rabbinic law developed imply that the body of rabbinic Jewish law is no longer normative (seen as binding) on Jews today. Those in the \"traditionalist\" wing believe that the \"halakha\" represents a personal starting point, holding that each Jew is obligated to interpret the Torah, Talmud, and other Jewish works for themselves, and this interpretation will create separate commandments for each person. Those in the liberal and classical wings of Reform believe that in this day and era, most Jewish religious rituals are no longer necessary, and many hold that following most Jewish laws is actually counter-productive. They propose that Judaism has entered a phase of ethical monotheism and that the laws of Judaism are only remnants of an earlier stage of religious evolution and need not be followed. This is considered wrong, and even heretical, by Orthodox and Conservative Judaism.\nHumanistic Judaism values the Torah as a historical, political, and sociological text written by their ancestors. They do not believe \"that every word of the Torah is true, or even morally correct, just because the Torah is old\". The Torah is both disagreed with and questioned. Humanistic Jews believe that the entire Jewish experience, and not only the Torah, should be studied as a source for Jewish behavior and ethical values.\nSome Jews believe that gentiles are bound by a subset of \"halakha\" called the Seven Laws of Noah, also referred to as the Noahide Laws. According to the Talmud, they are a set of imperatives given by God to the \"children of Noah\" \u2013 that is, all of humanity.\nFlexibility.\nDespite its internal rigidity, \"halakha\" has a degree of flexibility in finding solutions to modern problems not explicitly mentioned in the Torah. From the very beginnings of Rabbinic Judaism, halakhic inquiry allowed for a \"sense of continuity between past and present, a self-evident trust that their pattern of life and belief now conformed to the sacred patterns and beliefs presented by scripture and tradition\". According to an analysis by Jewish scholar Jeffrey Rubenstein of Michael Berger's book \"Rabbinic Authority\", the authority that rabbis hold \"derives not from the institutional or personal authority of the sages but from a \"communal\" decision to recognize that authority, much as a community recognizes a certain judicial system to resolve its disputes and interpret its laws.\" Given this covenantal relationship, rabbis are charged with connecting their contemporary community with the traditions and precedents of the past.\nWhen presented with contemporary issues, rabbis go through a halakhic process to find an answer. The classical approach has permitted new rulings regarding modern technology. For example, some of these rulings guide Jewish observers about the proper use of electricity on the Sabbath and holidays. Often, as to the applicability of the law in any given situation, the proviso is to \"consult your local rabbi or posek\". This notion lends rabbis a certain degree of local authority; however, for more complex questions, the issue is passed on to higher rabbis, who will then issue a \"teshuva\", which is a \"responsum\" that is binding. Indeed, rabbis will continuously issue different opinions and will constantly review each other's work so as to maintain the truest sense of \"halakha\". This process allows rabbis to maintain a connection of traditional Jewish law to modern life. Of course, the degree of flexibility depends on the sect of Judaism, with Reform being the most flexible, Conservative somewhat in the middle, and Orthodox being much more stringent and rigid. Modern critics, however, have charged that with the rise of movements that challenge the \"divine\" authority of \"halakha\", traditional Jews have greater reluctance to change not only the laws themselves but also other customs and habits than traditional Rabbinical Judaism did before the advent of Reform in the 19th century.\nDenominational approaches.\nOrthodox Judaism.\nOrthodox Jews believe that \"halakha\" is a religious system whose core represents the revealed will of God. Although Orthodox Judaism acknowledges that rabbis have made many decisions and decrees regarding Jewish Law where the written Torah itself is nonspecific, they did so only in accordance with regulations received by Moses on Mount Sinai (see ). These regulations were transmitted orally until shortly after the destruction of the Second Temple. They were then recorded in the Mishnah, and explained in the Talmud and commentaries throughout history up until the present day. Orthodox Judaism believes that subsequent interpretations have been derived with the utmost accuracy and care. The most widely accepted codes of Jewish law are known as Mishneh Torah and the \"Shulchan Aruch\".\nOrthodox Judaism has a range of opinions on the circumstances and extent to which change is permissible. Haredi Jews generally hold that even \"minhagim\" (customs) must be retained, and existing precedents cannot be reconsidered. Modern Orthodox authorities are more inclined to permit limited changes in customs and some reconsideration of precedent.\nDespite the Orthodox views that \"halakha\" was given at Sinai, Orthodox thought (and especially modern Orthodox thought) encourages debate, allows for disagreement, and encourages rabbis to enact decisions based on contemporary needs. Rabbi Moshe Feinstein says in his introduction to his collection of responsa that a rabbi who studies the texts carefully is required to provide a halakhic decision. That decision is considered to be a true teaching, even if it is not the true teaching in according to the heavens. For instance, Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik believes that the job of a halakhic decisor is to apply \"halakha\" \u2212 which exists in an ideal realm\u2212to people's lived experiences. Moshe Shmuel Glasner, the chief rabbi of Cluj (\"Klausenberg\" in German or \"\u05e7\u05dc\u05d5\u05d9\u05d6\u05e0\u05d1\u05d5\u05e8\u05d2\" in Yiddish) stated that the Oral Torah was an oral tradition by design, to allow for the creative application of halakha to each time period, and even enabling halakha to evolve. He writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus, whoever has due regard for the truth will conclude that the reason the [proper] interpretation of the Torah was transmitted orally and forbidden to be written down was not to make [the Torah] unchanging and not to tie the hands of the sages of every generation from interpreting Scripture according to their understanding. Only in this way can the eternity of Torah be understood [properly], for the changes in the generations and their opinions, situation and material and moral condition requires changes in their laws, decrees and improvements.\nConservative Judaism.\nThe view held by Conservative Judaism is that the Torah is not the word of God in a literal sense. However, the Torah is still held as mankind's record of its understanding of God's revelation, and thus still has divine authority. Therefore, \"halakha\" is still seen as binding. Conservative Jews use modern methods of historical study to learn how Jewish law has changed over time, and are, in some cases, willing to change Jewish law in the present.\nA key practical difference between Conservative and Orthodox approaches is that Conservative Judaism holds that its rabbinical body's powers are not limited to reconsidering later precedents based on earlier sources, but the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS) is empowered to override Biblical and Taanitic prohibitions by \"takkanah\" (decree) when perceived to be inconsistent with modern requirements or views of ethics. The CJLS has used this power on a number of occasions, most famously in the \"driving teshuva\", which says that if someone is unable to walk to any synagogue on the Sabbath, and their commitment to observance is so loose that not attending synagogue may lead them to drop it altogether, their rabbi may give them a dispensation to drive there and back; and more recently in its decision prohibiting the taking of evidence on \"mamzer\" status on the grounds that implementing such a status is immoral. The CJLS has also held that the Talmudic concept of \"Kavod HaBriyot\" permits lifting rabbinic decrees (as distinct from carving narrow exceptions) on grounds of human dignity, and used this principle in a December 2006 opinion lifting all rabbinic prohibitions on homosexual conduct (the opinion held that only male-male anal sex was forbidden by the Bible and that this remained prohibited). Conservative Judaism also made a number of changes to the role of women in Judaism including counting women in a minyan, permitting women to chant from the Torah, and ordaining women as rabbis.\nThe Conservative approach to halakhic interpretation can be seen in the CJLS's acceptance of Rabbi Elie Kaplan Spitz's responsum decreeing the biblical category of \"mamzer\" as \"inoperative.\" The CJLS adopted the responsum's view that the \"morality which we learn through the larger, unfolding narrative of our tradition\" informs the application of Mosaic law. The responsum cited several examples of how the rabbinic sages declined to enforce punishments explicitly mandated by Torah law. The examples include the trial of the accused adulteress (\"sotah\"), the \"law of breaking the neck of the heifer,\" and the application of the death penalty for the \"rebellious child.\" Kaplan Spitz argues that the punishment of the \"mamzer\" has been effectively inoperative for nearly two thousand years due to deliberate rabbinic inaction. Further he suggested that the rabbis have long regarded the punishment declared by the Torah as immoral, and came to the conclusion that no court should agree to hear testimony on \"mamzerut\".\nCodes of Jewish law.\nThe most important codifications of Jewish law include the following; for complementary discussion, see also History of responsa in Judaism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nFull-text resources of major halakhic works"}
{"id": "13876", "revid": "16163452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13876", "title": "History of ancient Israel and Judah", "text": "The history of ancient Israel and Judah spans from the early appearance of the Israelites in Canaan's hill country during the late second millennium BCE, to the establishment and subsequent downfall of the two Israelite kingdoms in the mid-first millennium BCE. This history unfolds within the Southern Levant during the Iron Age. The earliest documented mention of \"Israel\" as a people appears on the Merneptah Stele, an ancient Egyptian inscription dating back to around 1208 BCE. Archaeological evidence suggests that ancient Israelite culture evolved from the pre-existing Canaanite civilization. During the Iron Age II period, two Israelite kingdoms emerged, covering much of Canaan: the Kingdom of Israel in the north and the Kingdom of Judah in the south.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, a \"United Monarchy\" consisting of Israel and Judah existed as early as the 11th century BCE, under the reigns of Saul, David, and Solomon; the great kingdom later was separated into two smaller kingdoms: Israel, containing the cities of Shechem and Samaria, in the north, and Judah, containing Jerusalem and Solomon's Temple, in the south. The historicity of the United Monarchy is debated\u2014as there are no archaeological remains of it that are accepted as consensus\u2014but historians and archaeologists agree that Israel and Judah existed as separate kingdoms by c.\u2009900 BCE and c.\u2009850 BCE, respectively. The kingdoms' history is known in greater detail than that of other kingdoms in the Levant, primarily due to the selective narratives in the Books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, which were included in the Bible.\nThe northern Kingdom of Israel was destroyed around 720 BCE, when it was conquered by the Neo-Assyrian Empire. While the Kingdom of Judah remained intact during this time, it became a client state of first the Neo-Assyrian Empire and then the Neo-Babylonian Empire. However, Jewish revolts against the Babylonians led to the destruction of Judah in 586\u00a0BCE, under the rule of Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II. According to the biblical account, the armies of Nebuchadnezzar II besieged Jerusalem between 589 and 586 BCE, which led to the destruction of Solomon's Temple and the exile of the Jews to Babylon; this event was also recorded in the Babylonian Chronicles. The exilic period saw the development of the Israelite religion towards a monotheistic Judaism.\nThe exile ended with the fall of Babylon to the Achaemenid Empire c.. Subsequently, the Achaemenid king Cyrus the Great issued a proclamation known as the Edict of Cyrus, which authorized and encouraged exiled Jews to return to Judah. Cyrus' proclamation began the exiles' return to Zion, inaugurating the formative period in which a more distinctive Jewish identity developed in the Persian province of Yehud. During this time, the destroyed Solomon's Temple was replaced by the Second Temple, marking the beginning of the Second Temple period.\nPeriods.\nIn archaeological terms, the history covered in this article falls within the Iron Age, which is commonly divided into two main phases (noting that precise dates are subject to scholarly debate):\nAlternate terminology for this timeframe includes:\nThese periods correspond to the emergence, development, and eventual fall of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The Iron Age II ends with the Babylonian conquest of Judah in 587/6\u202fBCE. Following Iron Age II, periods are often named after dominant imperial powers. For example, the Babylonian period (586\u2013539\u202fBCE) is named for the Neo-Babylonian Empire, which conquered Judah and exiled much of its population. The return to Zion and the construction of the Second Temple marked the beginning of the Second Temple period (c.\u00a0\u2013 70 CE).\nBackground.\nGeography.\nThe eastern Mediterranean seaboard stretches north to south from the Taurus Mountains to the Sinai Peninsula, and east to west between the sea and the Arabian Desert. The coastal plain of the southern Levant, broad in the south and narrowing to the north, is backed in its southernmost portion by a zone of foothills, the Shfela; like the plain this narrows as it goes northwards, ending in the promontory of Mount Carmel. East of the plain and the Shfela is a mountainous ridge, the \"hill country of Judea\" in the south, the \"hill country of Ephraim\" north of that, then Galilee and Mount Lebanon. To the east again lie the steep-sided valley occupied by the Jordan River, the Dead Sea, and the wadi of the Arabah, which continues down to the eastern arm of the Red Sea. Beyond the plateau is the Syrian desert, separating the Levant from Mesopotamia. To the southwest is Egypt, to the northeast Mesopotamia. The location and geographical characteristics of the narrow Levant made the area a battleground among the powerful entities that surrounded it.\nLate Bronze Age Canaan.\nAncient Israel emerged during the late second millennium BCE. Canaan, as the region was known in the Late Bronze Age (c. 1500\u20131200\u202fBCE), was then a patchwork of city-states under the imperial domination of the New Kingdom of Egypt. During this period, Canaan was a shadow of what it had been centuries earlier: many cities were abandoned, others shrank in size, and the total settled population was probably not much more than a hundred thousand. Settlement was concentrated in cities along the coastal plain and along major communication routes; the central and northern hill country which would later become the biblical kingdom of Israel was only sparsely inhabited. The Amarna letters, discovered in Egypt, offer insight into regional politics and mention cities such as Ashkelon, Hazor, Gezer, Shechem, Jerusalem, and Megiddo. Several of these city-states were embroiled in rivalries and territorial disputes, with local rulers like Abdi-Heba of Jerusalem and Lab'ayu of Shechem appealing to the pharaoh for assistance against neighboring leaders.\nAlongside the city-states, Late Bronze Age texts mention other groups inhabiting the region. The 'Apiru were a marginalized social class that included migrants, mercenaries, and others living on the fringes of society. As the word 'Apiru is possibly related linguistically to the term \"Hebrew,\" early scholars equated them with the Israelites, but most now view any connection as indirect: while some early Israelites may have come from Apiru-like backgrounds, the term \"Hebrew\" later developed into a distinct ethnic identity. The Shasu, often associated with pastoralist groups east of the Dead Sea, are sometimes linked to early Israel\u2014particularly due to an Egyptian reference that names them alongside a term resembling Yahweh, which some scholars see as a reference to the Israelite deity. Some texts describe these groups as tribal or settled communities, possibly indicating ethnic identities and suggesting that the Egyptians may have grouped diverse populations under a single label.\nLate Bronze Age collapse.\nAround 1200 BCE, the entire Eastern Mediterranean was impacted by the Late Bronze Age collapse, a period of widespread upheaval marked by population movements, invasions, urban destruction, and the fall of major powers, including the Mycenaean kingdoms, the Hittite Empire, and Egypt's New Kingdom. Scholars attribute these disruptions to war, famine, plague, climate change, invasions, or a combination of factors. Canaan was affected too, its large cities were devastated, setting the stage for a new era in the region's history. The process was gradual, and some Canaanite cities survived into Iron Age I.\nAround 1140 BCE, Egypt lost control over Canaan, and various groups of Sea Peoples settled along its coastal regions. Among them were the Peleset, who are widely considered to be the biblical Philistines, settling in the southern coastal plain, west of Judah. Their material culture, genetic evidence, and the biblical narrative all point to an Aegean or Cypriot origin. It is in this later part of the Late Bronze Age that a people called Israel are first attested.\nOrigins of ancient Israel.\nBiblical account.\nThe Hebrew Bible chronicles the descent of the Israelites from the Patriarchs. The Book of Genesis describes how Abraham, under God's guidance, migrated from Mesopotamia to Canaan and entered into a covenant with God, who promised to make his descendants a chosen people and grant them the land of Canaan as an eternal inheritance. The narrative continues with the lives of his son Isaac and grandson Jacob, who was renamed Israel after wrestling with an angel. The twelve sons of Israel moved to Egypt during a famine, and their descendants, the Twelve Tribes of Israel, were enslaved by the pharaoh. After generations of bondage, Moses, an Israelite from the Tribe of Levi raised in the Egyptian court, led the Israelites out during The Exodus\u2014their deliverance from slavery in Egypt. Following a miraculous crossing of the Red Sea, the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, and forty years of wandering in the wilderness, Moses died as the Israelites reached the threshold of Canaan. Under his successor Joshua, the Israelites crossed the Jordan River and began the conquest of Canaan. The land was allotted among the tribes and distributed to families as inheritance, but in the absence of centralized authority, the tribes were left to confront local populations on their own. During the era of the Judges (as the Bible calls it), the Israelites existed as a loose tribal confederation in the hill country, without a centralized government, but with judges. The Book of Judges is thought to reflect early Israelite tribal society.\nArchaeological and scholarly perspectives.\nModern scholarship generally views ancient Israel's origins as emerging primarily from the indigenous population of Canaan. According to this view, the early Israelites likely consisted of diverse elements drawn from Late Bronze Age society, including rural villagers, former settled peoples, displaced peasants, and pastoralist groups. These were joined by marginal segments of society, such as the 'Apiru and Shasu, who lived on the fringes of settled areas. Additional external elements may have included fugitive or runaway Semitic slaves from Egypt, who likely constituted at least part of the emerging Israelite population.\nAt the same time, scholars argue that the Exodus story may preserve a kernel of historical truth, though it has been reshaped over time. Various Semitic peoples lived in Egypt at different periods, and the biblical narrative could reflect the experiences of a particular group which was later expanded into a national saga. The Egyptian origin of Moses's name, as well as the presence of other Egyptian names within the Levite tribe (including Hophni and Phinehas), suggests an authentic Egyptian connection. Additionally, the story's references to brickmaking, the mention of city of Ramesses (linked to Ramesses II) and the route taken by the Israelites align with the reality of the Late Bronze Age. Some scholars propose that multiple groups left Egypt at different times, while others suggest the Exodus traditions reflect the memories of refugees displaced during Egypt's withdrawal from Canaan. The conquest story under Joshua, particularly regarding Jericho, et-Tell (identified with the biblical Ai), and Gibeon, is often described as being contradicted by archaeological evidence, as these cities were unoccupied during the relevant periods, though Hazor's destruction layer does align with the biblical account.\nWhile biblical texts often portray Israel as opponents of the Canaanites, scholars note that much of Israel's heritage was deeply Canaanite in character\u2014culturally, linguistically, and religiously. Some of the Bible's earliest compositions, such as the Song of the Sea and the Song of Deborah, seem to have Canaanite roots. The Hebrew language is referred to in the Book of Isaiah as the \"lip of Canaan\", and was closely related to neighboring dialects like Phoenician and Moabite. Alongside material continuity with Late Bronze Age Canaan\u2014albeit with some distinctive developments\u2014the early Israelite religion also mirrored typical Canaanite traditions. Other scholars dispute the idea of a purely Canaanite origin for the Israelites, pointing to distinctive practices that set them apart. These include the settlement of small, unwalled hill villages, in contrast to the larger, walled towns typically found in the plains during the Canaanite period. The Israelites also displayed unique pottery styles, characterized by the absence of painted or imported pottery in the hills. Additionally, the Israelites avoided consuming pig meat, unlike the Canaanites and Philistines, and their religious practices lacked Canaanite-style temples, with limited evidence of organized cultic activity.\nIron Age I (13th\u201311th centuries BCE).\nThe Merneptah Stele.\nThe earliest extra-biblical reference to Israel appears on the Merneptah Stele, also known as the \"Israel stele\", an Egyptian inscription dated to c. 1208 BCE. It records Israel among Pharaoh Merneptah's military victories in Canaan, stating, \"Israel is laid waste, his seed is not.\" A hieroglyphic marker classifies Israel as a semi-nomadic or rural people, distinguishing it from the fortified cities also listed in the inscription. The inclusion of Israel among notable defeated enemies suggests that the group was already an entity of significance in Canaan by the late 13th century BCE.\nHighland settlement and material culture.\nBy the 13th\u201312th centuries BCE, new villages began to appear in the central hill country, particularly in the region between Jerusalem and Shechem, which scholars identify as the earliest Israelite settlements. These villages were typically unwalled, and contained only a few hundred inhabitants each. The sites exhibit continuity with Late Bronze Age culture, including in most pottery forms, while also displaying changes: the usage of collared-rim jars, the absence of pig bones (possibly reflecting dietary practices), and the development of four-room house architecture, a feature unique to Israelite settlements. Many of these settlements were established on hilltops, with economies based on terraced agriculture adapted to the slopes.\nAround this period, substantial settlement is attested archaeologically in the highlands of central Canaan. In the Late Bronze Age there were no more than about 25 villages in the highlands, but this increased to over 300 by the end of Iron Age I, while the settled population doubled from 20,000 to 40,000. The villages were more numerous and larger in the north, and probably shared the highlands with pastoral nomads, who left no remains. Archaeologists and historians attempting to trace the origins of these villagers have found it impossible to identify any distinctive features that could define them as specifically Israelite\u00a0\u2013 collared-rim jars and four-room houses have been identified outside the highlands and thus cannot be used to distinguish Israelite sites, and while the pottery of the highland villages is far more limited than that of lowland Canaanite sites, it develops typologically out of Canaanite pottery that came before. Israel Finkelstein proposed that the oval or circular layout that distinguishes some of the earliest highland sites, and the notable absence of pig bones from hill sites, could be taken as markers of ethnicity, but others have cautioned that these can be a \"common-sense\" adaptation to highland life and not necessarily revelatory of origins. Other Aramaean sites also demonstrate a contemporary absence of pig remains at that time, unlike earlier Canaanite and later Philistine excavations.\nDaily life in the highlands.\nExtensive archaeological excavations have provided a picture of Israelite society during the early Iron Age period. The archaeological evidence indicates a society of village-like centres, but with more limited resources and a small population. During this period, Israelites lived primarily in small villages, the largest of which had populations of up to 300 or 400. Their villages were built on hilltops. Their houses were built in clusters around a common courtyard. They built three- or four-room houses out of mudbrick with a stone foundation and sometimes with a second story made of wood. The inhabitants lived by farming and herding. They built terraces to farm on hillsides, planting various crops and maintaining orchards. The villages were largely economically self-sufficient and economic interchange was prevalent. According to the Bible, prior to the rise of the Israelite monarchy the early Israelites were led by the Biblical judges, or chieftains who served as military leaders in times of crisis. Scholars are divided over the historicity of this account. However, it is likely that regional chiefdoms and polities provided security. The small villages were unwalled but were likely subjects of the major town in the area. Writing was known and available for recording, even at small sites.\nEarly Israelite organization.\nUnlike the city-state model, Israelite society was organized around kinship-based tribes that controlled parcels of land and operated independently, though they could unite when faced with external threats. Early biblical texts, such as the Song of Deborah, indeed depict Israel as a confederation of loosely allied tribes. The tribal structure appears fluid, with varying lists of tribes and occasional absences\u2014most notably Judah, which seems to have maintained a distinct identity at this time. A shared sense of kinship among the tribes appears to have shaped how they related to others and likely served as one motivating force behind their eventual unification. In parallel, clashes with the Philistines may have pushed the tribes to cooperate more closely, contributing to the formation of a collective identity and ultimately a state.\nThe United Monarchy.\nBiblical account.\nAccording to biblical tradition, the Israelite tribes eventually united under a centralized monarchy in the late 11th to 10th century BCE, forming what is often called the United Monarchy. The first king was Saul, from the tribe of Benjamin, who led Israel in battle against enemies in the region. After Saul died by suicide following a defeat against the Philistines, King David, a Judahite from Bethlehem, ascended to the throne (c. 1005 BCE). David captured Jerusalem, establishing it as his capital and bringing the Ark of the Covenant there. Under his rule, Jerusalem was likely a royal enclave rather than a large city, strategically located between Israel and Judah. The Bible credits David with major military victories \u2013 defeating the Philistines as well as the Transjordanian kingdoms of Ammon, Moab and Edom. According to the Bible, he greatly expanded the kingdom's territory, forging a more cohesive state out of the tribes.\nUnder David and his son Solomon, who succeeded him around 970 BCE, Israel purportedly enjoyed a golden age of unity and prosperity. The Bible credits Solomon with wisdom, wealth, the establishment of administrative districts, and the commissioning of grand building projects. Solomon is said to have built the First Temple in Jerusalem as a permanent house of worship to Israel's God. This Temple, completed in the mid-10th century BCE, centralized the sacrificial cult and became the spiritual center of the nation. During Solomon's reign, the united kingdom of Israel reportedly extended its influence from the Euphrates River in the north to Egypt's border in the south, controlling key trade routes and enjoying regional prestige. He also reportedly established political and economic alliances, marrying foreign princesses and securing a trade partnership with Hiram of Tyre. In exchange for wheat and oil, Solomon received Lebanese cedar to build the Temple and his palace, while also developing a Red Sea port at Ezion-Geber (possibly modern Tell el-Kheleifeh) to import luxury goods like gold, silver, and ivory.\nIn modern scholarship.\nThe historical reality of the United Monarchy is a subject of debate. Since the 1980s, an approach increasingly skeptical of the biblical account of a united monarchy has emerged. New methods in literary criticism state that the biblical texts were shaped by later theological and political agendas, raising doubts about their historical reliability. Archaeological studies also challenged older interpretations: several structures once attributed to Solomon\u2014like gates at Hazor, Megiddo, and Gezer\u2014were redated or shown to lack clear ties to a centralized monarchy. Some noted that Jerusalem appears to have been a small and modest settlement during the 10th century BCE. Others have rejected the entire biblical narrative as a myth.Later discoveries have supported parts of the biblical account. In 1993, archaeologists at Tel Dan in northern Israel found the Tel Dan Stele, a fragmentary Aramaic inscription that references a \"House of David,\" indicating that a dynasty of David was recognized by the 9th century BCE. This indicates that just over a century after David's presumed lifetime, he was already seen as the founder of Judah's royal lineage. For example, archaeologist Eilat Mazar has argued that the so-called \"Large Stone Structure\" uncovered in Jerusalem belong to a 10th-century BCE royal complex, possibly King David's palace. However, this interpretation is debated, especially regarding the dating and whether the structures form a single unified complex. Elsewhere, excavations at Khirbet en-Nahas in biblical Edom uncovered remains of a fortified copper production center, which some suggest points to centralized control\u2014possibly linked to Solomon's reign\u2014though the dating is disputed and may be later.\nA relatively recent piece of evidence that has influenced the debate comes from Khirbet Qeiyafa, a newly excavated fortified city overlooking the Elah Valley\u2014the site of the biblical battle between David and Goliath. Excavations conducted between 2007 and 2013 revealed a well-planned urban layout, administrative architecture, and a casemate wall, and radiocarbon dating places the site in the early 10th century BCE, during the period traditionally associated with King David. The material culture and dietary restrictions (evidenced by the absence of pig bones) were found to be closest to Judahite sites. According to its excavators, led by Yosef Garfinkel, the findings suggest the existence of a centralized state in Judah in the 11th century BCE. Inscriptions found there, as well as at Tel Zayit, including what may be early examples of Hebrew writing, have been cited as evidence for literacy and administrative activity in the 10th century BCE, possibly reflecting a centralized political structure.\nLiterary analysis also supports the traditional view of an early, unified kingdom. As Benedikt Isserlin notes, if Israel and Judah were truly separate kingdoms, it would be difficult to understand why Judahites would refer to themselves as Israelites, especially considering that the northern kingdom was often Judah's enemy and condemned for its religious practices. More significantly, the frequent reference to the deity worshipped in Jerusalem as \"the God of Israel,\" rather than the god of Judah, suggests a shared heritage, which is most coherently explained by the biblical account of an early unified Israel.Some scholars, like Amihai Mazar, defend a more modest but real united monarchy, proposing that a unified Israelite kingdom likely did form in the 10th century BCE, but it may have been smaller and less centralized than the Bible depicts. Mazar further notes that Pharaoh Shoshenq's campaign to the region c. 930 BCE, recorded by both the Bible and inscriptions in Egypt, indicates a significant political power in that area at the time, with the most reasonable candidate being a kingdom established by David and Solomon. Others, like Israel Finkelstein, argue that state-level structures and territorial control only emerged in later centuries. Instead, Finkelstein proposed the \"Low Chronology\" model, which reassigns many architectural remains to the 9th century, during the Omride dynasty in the northern kingdom. Finkelstein also argues that Shoshenk's campaign was directed at a tribal confederacy led by Saul in the Benjaminite area. According to this view, David and Solomon were local hill-country chieftains than the leaders of a kingdom. On the other hand, Yosef Garfinkel notes that the evidence from Khirbet Qeiyafa, Beth Shemesh, Tell en-Nasbeh, Khirbet ed-Dawwara and Lachish allows for the reconstruction of 10th-century Judah as a centralized polity with urban centers and a territorial reach that extended up to a two-day walk from Jerusalem by the end of the century. This model suggests that an organized kingdom, though smaller in scale, already existed during David's time. Most agree that the biblical texts contain a blend of early memories and later elaborations, and while a large imperial kingdom is unlikely, a smaller political entity in the 10th century remains plausible.\nThe Kingdoms of Israel and Judah (10th and 9th centuries BCE).\nPolitical division and structure.\nAccording to the Bible, upon Solomon's death (c. 930\u202fBCE), the northern tribes refused to accept his son Rehoboam as king, resulting in the division of the monarchy into two kingdoms. There is firm evidence that by the 9th century BCE, two distinct successor states existed\u2014though scholars debate whether they split from a previously united monarchy, as the biblical account suggests, or arose independently alongside one another. In either case, from this point forward, the history of Ancient Israel becomes the history of two kingdoms: the Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Judah. The larger Kingdom of Israel in the north consisted of ten tribes (with Joseph's tribes often dominant), and the smaller Kingdom of Judah in the south was comprised mainly the tribes of Judah and Benjamin. In Israel, a former rebel against Solomon named Jeroboam led the secession and became the first king of the northern realm, while Rehoboam continued to rule Judah in the south. For roughly two centuries, Israel and Judah co-existed as separate states \u2013 sometimes allied against common foes, but often rivals who even fought each other. Each kingdom had its own lineage of kings: Israel saw fast-changing dynasties and several coups, whereas Judah's throne remained in the hands of the Davidic dynasty based in Jerusalem.\nThe Kingdom of Israel (also called Samaria, after its capital) was the more populous and economically robust of the two. It initially established its capital at Shechem, later moved to Tirzah and Mahanaim, and finally settled at Samaria. The kingdom emerged as a regional power and often clashed with its neighbors: it fought against the kingdom of Aram-Damascus to the northeast and with the Moabites and Ammonites to the east. Its ruling dynasty, however, was replaced frequently. Meanwhile, the southern Kingdom of Judah was smaller and more geographically confined, centered on Jerusalem and the Judaean Mountains. It was often overshadowed by its northern kin but had the advantage of dynastic stability under the house of David. The kingdom generally had fewer resources and a smaller army than Israel, but Jerusalem's fortified position gave it a strong defensive edge. Judah retained the First Temple in Jerusalem as the center of Yahweh worship, which gave the Judahite kings and priests a unifying institution. However, high places and local shrines coexisted in Judah for much of this period, until reforms sought to centralize worship. By the mid-8th century BCE, Israel's population is estimated at 350,000, while Judah had approximately 110,000 inhabitants. \nAs early as Israel's second king, Nadab, the ruling house was overthrown, and Baasha seized power. His son also reigned for only a short time. After a series of coup d'\u00e9tats, Omri (c. 880 BCE), an army commander, took power and established a more stable dynasty. He was succeeded by his son Ahab, under whom Israel reached a peak of military strength and economic prosperity. Ahab forged regional alliances, including through his marriage to Jezebel, a Phoenician princess. Jehoshaphat of Judah, also allied with Ahab through a marriage alliance, appears to have reasserted control over Edom and attempted to revive maritime trade from Ezion-geber, though his fleet was wrecked in a storm. He also joined Israel in a joint military campaign against Moab. After Ahab's death, the Moabites, led by Mesha, revolted and regained their independence. Jehoram of Israel, allied with Judah and Edom, attempted to reconquer Moab but was eventually forced to retreat. The Mesha Stele, erected c. 840 BCE, recounts Moab's revolt against Israelite domination \u2013 it boasts of Moab throwing off the yoke of the \"House of Omri\" of Israel and contains what is likely the earliest non-biblical reference to the Israelite God, Yahweh. The stele, discovered in Transjordan, matches the general timeframe of conflicts described in 2 Kings 3.\nBoth Israel and Judah also had to contend with the expanding empires around them. By the 9th century BCE, the Neo-Assyrian Empire (based in Mesopotamia) began asserting its influence westward into the Levant. The biblical and Assyrian records together detail how the Israelite kingdoms navigated this threat. During Ahab's time, Israel joined a regional coalition to confront the Assyrian king Shalmaneser III at the Battle of Qarqar in 853 BCE. The Kurkh Monolith, an Assyrian inscription, lists \"Ahab the Israelite\" among the combatants, showing Israel was a significant regional player. Based on the inscription, Ahab led the second-largest army in the coalition, and commanded a chariot force larger than those of the other allies. Around 841 BCE, Jehu overthrew Jehoram, ending Omri's dynasty (though the Assyrians continued referring to Israel as the House of Omri). During this coup d'\u00e9tat, Ahaziah, king of Judah, was also killed, likely the background for the Tel Dan Inscription, in which the king of Aram boasts of killing both the kings of Israel and Judah. Jehu chose a different approach to Assyria: he paid tribute to Shalmaneser III. This event is immortalized on the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser \u2013 a carved pillar from Assyria that actually depicts Jehu (or his emissary) bowing and presenting tribute to the Assyrian king. It is the only known pictorial representation of an Israelite king and confirms Israel's submission to Assyrian overlordship in the mid-9th century BCE. During this period, the usurper King Hazael of Aram Damascus successfully repelled the Assyrians, conquered parts of Israel, and brought both the kingdom of Israel and Judah, along with the Philistines, under Aramean hegemony.\nFall of the kingdom of Israel (8th century BCE).\nDuring the long reign of Jeroboam II (788\u2013747 BCE), Israel experienced renewed prosperity and reached a territorial high point. However, Assyria soon resumed its expansion into the Levant. According to the Bible, King Pekah of Israel, allied with Rezin of Aram-Damascus, invaded Judah in an attempt to replace King Ahaz with a ruler who would join a regional alliance against Assyria. This prompted Ahaz to seek Assyrian assistance, leading Tiglath-Pileser III to intervene. In 733\u2013732 BCE, Assyrian king Tiglath-Pileser III conquered Aram-Damascus and seized much of northern Israel's territory, reducing it to a rump state. The Assyrian king captured Galilee and Gilead and the northern coastal regions, and deported their Israelite population. Archaeological evidence confirms widespread destruction and significant depopulation in these areas. Tiglath-Pileser III installed Hoshea as a puppet king in what remained of Israel. Hoshea, however, rebelled by allying with Egypt, which brought the wrath of Assyria.\nThe Assyrian king Shalmaneser V launched a siege against Samaria, the capital of Israel, which lasted three years. In 722\u2013720 BCE, the city fell to Shalmaneser or his successor Sargon II. The northern Kingdom of Israel ceased to exist as an independent state \u2013 its territories were divided into Assyrian provinces, and a large portion of its population was deported. Assyrian policy, as recorded in their annals, was to exile conquered peoples and resettle foreign populations in their place. Indeed, Assyrian records and the Bible concur that Israelites were carried off to Assyria and peoples from elsewhere were brought into Samaria. Sargon's annals record the deportation of 27,290 people from Samaria to Assyria and note the resettlement of foreign populations in the region, including settlers from Arabia. According to the Bible (2 Kings 17), the deported Israelites were settled in \"Halah, by the [River] Habur, [by] the River Gozan, and [among] the cities of the Medes\", while foreign settlers were brought from \"Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and from Hamath and Sepharvaim.\" The Assyrian captivity of the northern tribes gave rise to the legend of the \"Lost Tribes of Israel\" \u2013 although many northern Israelites likely fled to Judah. Others stayed in the land and intermarried with imported groups, producing the mixed Samaritan population of later history.\nJudah between Hezekiah and Josiah (720\u2013609 BCE).\nHezekiah's revolt and the Assyrian invasion.\nJudah, having outlasted its northern counterpart, now stood alone, though this reprieve lasted for about a century and a half. For a time, Judah became a vassal of Assyria, largely spared from destruction by submitting to Assyrian rule and paying tribute. The kingdom experienced a dramatic population increase, growing by two- or even threefold, likely driven by a major influx of Israelite refugees following the fall of the northern kingdom. This growth was especially evident in Jerusalem, which became the largest city in the country. Judah, Philistia and Edom experienced economic growth, and these regions appear to have been closely linked to Judah through shared trade networks. Some scholars attribute this prosperity to the so-called Assyrian Peace (\"Pax Assyriaca\") and to deliberate Assyrian policies aimed at promoting regional development. Others contend that the prosperity resulted not from Assyrian efforts, but from the semi-autonomous status of these local kingdoms, which enabled them to develop their economies independently and participate in international trade.\nIn the late 8th century, during the reign of King Hezekiah (c. 727\u2013697 BCE), Judah attempted to throw off Assyrian domination. Encouraged by Assyria's temporary weakness and possibly by Egyptian diplomacy, Hezekiah joined a revolt against King Sennacherib of Assyria. Anticipating an Assyrian siege, he fortified Jerusalem's suburbs with a broad defensive wall, and the underground Siloam tunnel, known for the Hebrew inscription found inside, which was used to channel Gihon spring water into the city's walls. Hezekiah also sought to centralize worship by making the Jerusalem Temple the sole authorized place of religious practice, banning the use of other shrines, altars, and high places throughout the kingdom.\nThe Assyrian response was swift and brutal: in 701 BCE, Sennacherib invaded Judah, laying waste to the countryside and capturing many fortified cities. The most famous episode of this campaign is the Siege of Lachish. Lachish was Judah's second largest city, yet Sennacherib's army conquered it after a siege, an event corroborated by archaeological findings, including a siege ramp and physical evidence of intense combat. The Assyrian king commemorated this victory in elaborate palace reliefs at Nineveh, which graphically depict the assault on the city, the deportation of its inhabitants, and the king enthroned as he receives their surrender. These Lachish reliefs (now in the British Museum) provide an artistic record of the Assyrian invasion and confirm the biblical account of Lachish's fall (2 Kings 18:13-14, as well as references in Isaiah and 2 Chronicles).\nSennacherib then turned to Jerusalem. The Bible recounts that Jerusalem was miraculously saved: an angel of the Lord struck down the Assyrian troops, or the Assyrians withdrew upon rumors of Pharaoh's approach. Assyrian records do state that Sennacherib failed to capture Jerusalem, noting only that he trapped Hezekiah in the city \"like a caged bird\" before accepting a hefty tribute and departing. The Bible also notes Hezekiah surrendered and paid a heavy tribute. Sennacherib's emphasis on the conquest of Lachish, prominently depicted in his palace reliefs, may have served to divert attention from his failure to take Jerusalem. Thus, Jerusalem survived the 701 BCE siege, likely by paying off the invaders. Hezekiah's revolt led to Judah's renewed subjugation, widespread destruction, the loss of the fertile Shephelah, and the deportation of tens of thousands. Still, other parts of the kingdom recovered, experiencing population growth and expanding settlement into the Negev and the Judaean Desert. Above all, the survival of Jerusalem bolstered a national sense of divine favor and protection, fostering a belief in the city's invincibility\u2014a conviction later challenged by the prophet Jeremiah.\nUpon Hezekiah's death, his son Manasseh succeeded him and remained a loyal Assyrian vassal throughout his reign. His long rule, from around 697 to 642 BCE, saw the restoration of idolatrous practices and the rebuilding of high places, actions condemned in the Bible. After Manasseh's death, his son Amon briefly ruled from around 642 to 640 BCE before being assassinated. Amon's death led to the ascension of his young son, Josiah, who began his reign at the age of eight.\nJosiah's reign and reforms.\nIn the 7th century BCE, Assyria's power waned and finally collapsed with the fall of Nineveh in 612 BCE. During the power vacuum, Josiah (reigned 640\u2013609 BCE) asserted greater independence. Josiah is renowned for his religious reforms: after an old scroll at the Jerusalem Temple, he purged Judah of idolatry and local shrines, centralizing all worship at the Temple and enforcing exclusive devotion to Yahweh. Scholars link Josiah's reform (around 622 BCE) with the composition of a core of the Torah (widely believed to be an early version of the Book of Deuteronomy), as part of a movement toward strict monotheism. Josiah's reign was a bright spot for Judah, as he also extended his authority into the former territory of Israel, taking advantage of Assyria's retreat. However, Judah was not the only power to exploit the Assyrian collapse\u2014Egypt also moved in, seizing control of parts of the southern Levant. In 609 BCE, Josiah was killed at Megiddo by Pharaoh Necho II of Egypt, possibly due to suspicions of disloyalty. His successors became entangled in the rivalry between Egypt and Babylon. Ultimately, Judah could not escape the fate that had befallen Israel.\nFall of Judah (609\u2013587 BCE).\nBy the early 6th century BCE, the Neo-Babylonian Empire, having replaced Assyria as the dominant power in the ancient Near East, set its sights on the Levant. Babylon's policy in the region was even more ruthless than that of Assyria. In response to revolts, the Babylonians devastated rebellious territories and carried out one-way deportations to Mesopotamia. In 604 BCE, they conducted a campaign against Philistia, destroying all the Philistine cities and exiling or killing their inhabitants; within 150 years, the distinct Philistine identity ultimately disappeared.\nThe last decades of Judah were tumultuous: one king, Jehoiakim, rebelled against Babylon; he died and was succeeded by his young son Jeconiah, who soon surrendered to Nebuchadnezzar II of Babylon in 597 BCE. The Babylonians exiled Jeconiah, the royal family, and many of Judah's elites to Babylon in that year. They installed Zedekiah (Jehoiachin's uncle) as a puppet king in Jerusalem. But Zedekiah too eventually rebelled, encouraged by Egyptian promises. This led Nebuchadnezzar to march on Judah once more, determined to crush it for good. In 588 BCE, Babylon laid siege to Jerusalem. The siege lasted perhaps 18 months, and in 587/586 BCE the Babylonians breached Jerusalem's walls. King Zedekiah attempted to flee but was captured; his sons were killed before him and he was blinded and taken in chains to Babylon. The Babylonians then burned Jerusalem to the ground, destroying the Temple of Solomon and the royal palace, and tearing down the city walls. The destruction, overseen by Nebuzaradan, was deliberate and systematic\u2014intended to eliminate Jerusalem's political and religious significance.\nThe year 587 BCE mark the fall of Judah and the start of the Babylonian captivity. Fortified towns in the kingdom's western region, including Lachish and Azekah, were destroyed, and the settlement system throughout the kingdom experienced a widespread collapse. In a letter found in Lachish from this period, the writer urgently calls for help, adding that the fire signal from Azekah is no longer visible. Nebuchadnezzar's forces deported a large number of Judah's population to Babylon in several waves. Only a small portion of the population was left behind to tend the land, and they soon fell under the governance of Babylonian-appointed officials based in Mizpah in Benjamin. Some fled to Egypt after Gedaliah, one of these officials, was assassinated.\nAftermath: Babylonian captivity and the return to Zion.\nThe fall of Judah in 587 BCE marks the end point of the First Temple period of Jewish history. It was an unprecedented crisis for the people of Judah: their holy city lay in ruins and the First Temple, center of their worship, was gone. The question of how this could happen despite the covenant with Yahweh led to profound soul-searching among the exiled priests, prophets, and scribes. Biblical writers interpreted the catastrophe as divine punishment for Judah's violations of the covenant, particularly the lapse into idolatry. This theological reflection during the Babylonian exile (587\u2013538 BCE) was pivotal in shaping Judaism.\nThe Babylonian conquest entailed not just the destruction of Jerusalem and its temple, but the liquidation of the entire infrastructure which had sustained Judah for centuries. The most significant casualty was the state ideology of \"Zion theology,\" the idea that the god of Israel had chosen Jerusalem for his dwelling-place and that the Davidic dynasty would reign there forever. The fall of the city and the end of Davidic kingship forced the leaders of the exile community\u00a0\u2013 kings, priests, scribes and prophets\u00a0\u2013 to reformulate the concepts of community, faith and politics. The exile community in Babylon thus became the source of significant portions of the Hebrew Bible: Isaiah 40\u201355; Ezekiel; the final version of Jeremiah; the work of the hypothesized priestly source in the Pentateuch; and the final form of the history of Israel from Deuteronomy to 2 Kings. Theologically, the Babylonian exiles were responsible for the doctrines of individual responsibility and universalism (the concept that one god controls the entire world) and for the increased emphasis on purity and holiness. Most significantly, the trauma of the exile experience led to the development of a strong sense of Hebrew identity distinct from other peoples, with increased emphasis on symbols such as circumcision and Sabbath-observance to sustain that distinction.\nBabylonian Judah suffered a steep decline in both economy and population and lost the Negev, the Shephelah, and part of the Judean hill country, including Hebron, to encroachments from Edom and other neighbours. Jerusalem, destroyed but probably not totally abandoned, was much smaller than previously, and the settlements surrounding it, as well as the towns in the former kingdom's western borders, were all devastated as a result of the Babylonian campaign. The town of Mizpah in Benjamin in the relatively unscathed northern section of the kingdom became the capital of the new Babylonian province of Yehud. This was standard Babylonian practice: when the Philistine city of Ashkalon was conquered in 604, the political, religious and economic elite (but not the bulk of the population) was banished and the administrative centre shifted to a new location. There is also a strong probability that for most or all of the period the temple at Bethel in Benjamin replaced that at Jerusalem, boosting the prestige of Bethel's priests (the Aaronites) against those of Jerusalem (the Zadokites), now in exile in Babylon.\nHans M. Barstad writes that the concentration of the biblical literature on the experience of the exiles in Babylon disguises that the great majority of the population remained in Judah; for them, life after the fall of Jerusalem probably went on much as it had before. It may even have improved, as they were rewarded with the land and property of the deportees, much to the anger of the community of exiles remaining in Babylon. Conversely, Avraham Faust writes that archaeological and demographic surveys show that the population of Judah was significantly reduced to barely 10% of what it had been in the time before the exile. The assassination around 582 of the Babylonian governor by a disaffected member of the former royal House of David provoked a Babylonian crackdown, possibly reflected in the Book of Lamentations, but the situation seems to have soon stabilized again. Nevertheless, those unwalled cities and towns that remained were subject to slave raids by the Phoenicians and intervention in their internal affairs by Samaritans, Arabs, and Ammonites.\nThe exiles, such as the prophet Ezekiel, encouraged the community that their identity could survive without a land or Temple \u2013 through adherence to God's law and trust in His mercy. In Babylon, the Jewish exiles gathered and likely began compiling and editing their national traditions and sacred scriptures (the Torah and the historical books), solidifying their religion in written form. The exile also reinforced a trend toward full monotheism: by the end of the 6th century BCE, many Jews came to believe Yahweh was not just their national god but the only true God of all.\nLater in the 6th century BCE, Babylon fell to a rising power that soon became the largest empire known at the time\u2014the Persian Empire, founded by Cyrus the Great, the first king of the Achaemenid dynasty. Cyrus issued a proclamation allowing the Jews to return to their homeland and rebuild their Temple. Under Persian patronage, the Return to Zion saw some exiles return in the late 6th century BCE and rebuild the Temple, marking the beginning of the Second Temple period in Jewish history.\nReligion.\nAlthough the specific process by which the Israelites adopted monotheism is unknown, it is certain that the transition was a gradual one and was not totally accomplished during the First Temple period. More is known about this period, as during this time writing was widespread. The number of gods that the Israelites worshipped decreased, and figurative images vanished from their shrines. Yahwism, as some scholars name this belief system, is often described as a form of henotheism or monolatry. Over the same time, a folk religion continued to be practised across Israel and Judah. These practices were influenced by the polytheistic beliefs of the surrounding ethnicities, and were denounced by the prophets.\nIn addition to the Temple in Jerusalem, there was public worship practised all over Israel and Judah in shrines and sanctuaries, outdoors, and close to city gates. In the 8th and 7th centuries BCE, the kings Hezekiah and Josiah of Judah implemented a number of significant religious reforms that aimed to centre worship of the God of Israel in Jerusalem and eliminate foreign customs.\nHenotheism.\nHenotheism is the act of worshipping a single god, without denying the existence of other deities. Many scholars believe that before monotheism in ancient Israel, there came a transitional period; in this transitional period many followers of the Israelite religion worshipped the god Yahweh, but did not deny the existence of other deities accepted throughout the region. Henotheistic worship was not uncommon in the Ancient Near East, as many Iron Age nation states worshipped an elevated national god which was nonetheless only part of a wider pantheon; examples include Chemosh in Moab, Qos in Edom, Milkom in Ammon, and Ashur in Assyria.\nCanaanite religion syncretized elements from neighbouring cultures, largely from Mesopotamian religious traditions. Using Canaanite religion as a base was natural due to the fact that the Canaanite culture inhabited the same region prior to the emergence of Israelite culture. Israelite religion was no exception, as during the transitional period, Yahweh and El were syncretized in the Israelite pantheon. El already occupied a reasonably important place in the Israelite religion. Even the name \"Israel\" is based on the name El, rather than Yahweh. It was this initial harmonization of Israelite and Canaanite religious thought that led to Yahweh gradually absorbing several characteristics from Canaanite deities, in turn strengthening his own position as an all-powerful \"One.\" Even still, monotheism in the region of ancient Israel and Judah did not take hold overnight, and during the intermediate stages most people are believed to have remained henotheistic.\nDuring this intermediate period of henotheism many families worshipped different gods. Religion was very much centred around the family, as opposed to the community. The region of Israel and Judah was sparsely populated during the time of Moses. As such many different areas worshipped different gods, due to social isolation. It was not until later on in Israelite history that people started to worship Yahweh alone and fully convert to monotheistic values. That switch occurred with the growth of power and influence of the Israelite kingdom and its rulers. Further details of this are contained in the Iron Age Yahwism section below. Evidence from the Bible suggests that henotheism did exist: \"They [the Hebrews] went and served alien gods and paid homage to them, gods of whom they had no experience and whom he [Yahweh] did not allot to them\" (Deut. 29.26). Many believe that this quote demonstrates that the early Israelite kingdom followed traditions similar to ancient Mesopotamia, where each major urban centre had a supreme god. Each culture embraced their patron god but did not deny the existence of other cultures' patron gods. In Assyria, the patron god was Ashur, and in ancient Israel, it was Yahweh; however, both Israelite and Assyrian cultures recognized each other's deities during this period. Some scholars have used the Bible as evidence to argue that most of the people alive during the events recounted in the Hebrew Bible, including Moses, were most likely henotheists. There are many quotes from the Hebrew Bible that are used to support this view. One such quote from Jewish tradition is the first commandment which in its entirety reads \"I am the LORD your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: You shall have no other gods before me.\" This quote does not deny the existence of other gods; it merely states that Jews should consider Yahweh or God the supreme god, incomparable to other supernatural beings. Some scholars attribute the concept of angels and demons found in Judaism and Christianity to the tradition of henotheism. Instead of completely getting rid of the concept of other supernatural beings, these religions changed former deities into angels and demons.\nIron Age Yahwism.\nThe religion of the Israelites of Iron Age I, like the Ancient Canaanite religion from which it evolved and other religions of the ancient Near East, was based on a cult of ancestors and worship of family gods (the \"gods of the fathers\"). With the emergence of the monarchy at the beginning of Iron Age II the kings promoted their family god, Yahweh, as the god of the kingdom, but beyond the royal court, religion continued to be both polytheistic and family-centred. The major deities were not numerous\u00a0\u2013 El, Asherah, and Yahweh, with Baal as a fourth god, and perhaps Shamash (the sun) in the early period. At an early stage El and Yahweh became fused and Asherah did not continue as a separate state cult, although she continued to be popular at a community level until Persian times.\nYahweh, the national god of both Israel and Judah, seems to have originated in Edom and Midian in southern Canaan and may have been brought to Israel by the Kenites and Midianites at an early stage.\nIn the 10th\u20139th centuries BCE, the Kingdom of Israel featured a decentralized religious landscape, with local shrines found in cities like Megiddo, Tel Amal, and Ta'anach. These modest cult sites served different quarters and rural communities. However, by the early 8th century BCE, these shrines disappeared, and a shift toward centralized or state-controlled worship took place. Around this time, major sanctuaries at Dan and Bethel emerged. According to the Bible, these sites were built by Jeroboam I and housed statues of young bulls. Inscriptions such as the reference to \"YHWH of Samaria\" at Kuntillet 'Ajrud suggest that the capital also hosted a royal shrine.\nThere is a general consensus among scholars that the first formative event in the emergence of the distinctive religion described in the Bible was triggered by the destruction of Israel by Assyria in c.. Refugees from the northern kingdom fled to Judah, bringing with them laws and a prophetic tradition of Yahweh. This religion was subsequently adopted by the landowners of Judah, who in 640\u00a0BCE placed the eight-year-old Josiah on the throne. Judah at this time was a vassal state of Assyria, but Assyrian power collapsed in the 630s, and around 622 Josiah and his supporters launched a bid for independence expressed as loyalty to \"Yahweh alone\".\nThe Babylonian exile and Second Temple Judaism.\nAccording to the Deuteronomists, as scholars call these Judean nationalists, the treaty with Yahweh would enable Israel's god to preserve both the city and the king in return for the people's worship and obedience. The destruction of Jerusalem, its Temple, and the Davidic dynasty by Babylon in 587/586\u00a0BCE was deeply traumatic and led to revisions of the national mythos during the Babylonian exile. This revision was expressed in the Deuteronomistic history, the books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings, which interpreted the Babylonian destruction as divinely-ordained punishment for the failure of Israel's kings to worship Yahweh to the exclusion of all other deities.\nThe Second Temple period (520\u00a0BCE\u00a0\u2013 70\u00a0CE) differed in significant ways from what had gone before. Strict monotheism emerged among the priests of the Temple establishment during the seventh and sixth centuries\u00a0BCE, as did beliefs regarding angels and demons. At this time, circumcision, dietary laws, and Sabbath-observance gained more significance as symbols of Jewish identity, and the institution of the synagogue became increasingly important, and most of the biblical literature, including the Torah, was substantially revised during this time.\nEconomy.\nArchaeological evidence points to large-scale olive oil and wine production in the highlands. Additional support comes from the Samaria ostraca\u2014inscribed pottery shards from the 8th century BCE, likely dating to the reign of Jeroboam II. These inscriptions record administrative transactions involving olive oil and wine, along with the names of officials, and places near the Israelite capital of Samaria. Archaeological evidence indicates that during the reign of Jeroboam II (786\u2013746 BCE), the central government in Samaria initiated large-scale economic projects. Sites such as Qla', Hudash, and Kurnat Bir et-Tell appear to have functioned as royal production centers for the industrialized processing of oil and wine. Israel likely became a major supplier of olive oil to neighboring powers such as Egypt and Assyria\u2014regions whose arid climates made them less suitable for extensive olive cultivation. Israel also benefited from its strategic position in regional trade, particularly through access to copper from Khirbet en-Nahas\u2014the largest known copper production site in the southern Levant\u2014which supplied the high demand for military equipment such as weapons and chariot fittings. However, the site declined in the 8th century BCE. Israel also acted as an intermediary in the export of Egyptian horses to northern powers like Assyria. The large training facility at Megiddo and the kingdom's sizable chariot force reflect the scale of this industry.\nJudah's economy initially followed a traditional Mediterranean subsistence model. Under Assyrian influence, it shifted to a system where each region specialized in specific agricultural products. The highlands were known for viticulture (wine production). Gibeon, located in the Benjamin Plateau to the north of Jerusalem, is particularly noted for its large concentration of wine storage cellars, with 63 cellars found, which were used for aging wine. The Shephelah was focused on olive oil production, alongside dry farming. The Beersheba Valley for services related to Arabian trade, the Judaean Desert on animal husbandry, and the areas of Jericho and Ein Gedi for date and exotic plant groves.\nAdministrative and judicial structure.\nAs was customary in the ancient Near East, a king () ruled over the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The national god Yahweh, who selects those to rule his realm and his people, is depicted in the Hebrew Bible as having a hand in the establishment of the royal institution. In this sense, the true king is God, and the king serves as his earthly envoy and is tasked with ruling his realm. In some Psalms that appear to be related to the coronation of kings, they are referred to as \"sons of Yahweh\". The kings actually had to succeed one another according to a dynastic principle, even though the succession was occasionally decided through coups d'\u00e9tat. The coronation seemed to take place in a sacred place, and was marked by the anointing of the king who then becomes the \"anointed one (m\u0101\u0161\u00eea\u1e25, the origin of the word Messiah) of Yahweh\"; the end of the ritual seems marked by an acclamation by the people (or at least their representatives, the Elders), followed by a banquet.\nThe Bible's descriptions of the lists of dignitaries from the reigns of David and Solomon show that the king is supported by a group of high dignitaries. Those include the chief of the army (), the great scribe () who was in charge of the management of the royal chancellery, the herald (), as well as the high priest () and the master of the palace (), who has a function of stewardship of the household of the king at the beginning and seems to become a real prime minister of Judah during the later periods. The attributions of most of these dignitaries remain debated, as illustrated in particular by the much-discussed case of the \u201cking's friend\u201d mentioned under Solomon.\nCulture.\nAncient Israel was part of a mutually intelligible Levantine \"koin\u00e9\".\nMusic.\nIn ancient Israel and Judah, music played a significant role in liturgies and rituals, as evidenced by several passages in the Hebrew Bible. Music, both vocal and instrumental, was an integral part of worship and religious ceremonies, often used in conjunction with sacrifices and offerings. The Hebrew Bible mentions various musical instruments and practices, such as the use of trumpets in Numbers 10:1\u201310 during sacrifices (with Aaronite priests specifically tasked with playing the trumpets), and the association of lyres and stringed instruments with offerings in Amos 5:21\u201324. The term \"ZMR\" in Hebrew, which refers to singing and making music, suggests that both vocal and instrumental music were likely combined in these rituals. The use of music in religious contexts is further reflected in the book of Psalms, with several psalms providing clear evidence of music in the Jerusalem Temple, such as Psalms 66 and 68, which describe sacrificial and liturgical contexts. In Psalm 95 and 144, music is again associated with worship at the Temple, where singing and playing instruments, including lyres, would have been performed.\nMusic in ancient Israel and Judah played a key role in ceremonial processions, blending music, movement, and a transition from the mundane to the sacred. In 1 Samuel 10:5, a \"band of prophets\" descends from a shrine, playing instruments like the harp (\"nebel\"), tambourine (\"tof\"), flute (\"\u1e25aliyl\"), and lyre (\"kinn\u00f4r\") in a prophetic frenzy. Similarly, 2 Samuel 6 describes musical processions accompanying the Ark of the Covenant to Jerusalem, featuring dance, shouts, and instruments such as lyres, harps, hand drums, rattles, cymbals, and trumpets (\"shofar\"), with King David dancing before the Ark. Musical processions also marked significant events, like Solomon's anointing (1 Kings 1:40), where the sound was so loud it \"quaked the earth,\" and Isaiah 30:29, where the flute accompanies movement to the Temple. Psalm 68:24\u201325 describes temple processions with singers, lyre players, and girls with hand drums. These processions, featuring an organized, structured musical aspect, served to reinforce communal identity, express devotion, and potentially project political power.\nLegacy.\nThe religious concepts and scriptures of ancient Israel have had an enduring impact on Western civilization, surpassing its geopolitical importance during its period of existence.\nAncient Israel is notable for preserving accounts of its origins, which have shaped much of the Judeo-Christian tradition and remain known throughout the Western world today. The histories of Israel and Judah are known in greater detail than those of other kingdoms in the Levant, primarily due to the narratives in the Books of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, which were preserved in the Bible.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13877", "revid": "32891178", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13877", "title": "List of monarchs of Iran", "text": " \nThe monarchs of Iran ruled for over two and a half millennia, beginning as early as the 8th century BC and enduring until the 20th century AD. The earliest Iranian monarch is generally considered to have been either Deioces of the Median dynasty (c.\u2009727\u2013550 BC) or Cyrus the Great of the Achaemenid dynasty (550\u2013330 BC). The last Iranian monarch was Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of the Pahlavi dynasty (1925\u20131979), who was overthrown in the Iranian Revolution. Since then, Iran has been governed by theocratic supreme leaders.\nIn classical antiquity, Iran reached the peak of its power and prestige under the Achaemenid Empire, which stretched from Egypt and parts of Southeast Europe in the west to the Indus Valley and parts of Central Asia in the east. By 323 BC, the Achaemenid Empire's territories had been conquered by the Macedonian Empire during the Wars of Alexander the Great, bringing Iran into the Hellenistic sphere. In the Wars of the Diadochi, the Seleucid Empire (305\u2013129 BC) assumed control of Iran. Native Iranian rule was revived with the establishment and expansion of the Parthian Empire (247 BC\u2013224 AD) and then the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651), which existed until the Arab conquest of Iran.\nMedieval Iran alternated between being ruled by large foreign empires and being divided into several smaller kingdoms. Most of the Sasanian lands were annexed by the Rashidun Caliphate (638\u2013661), which was succeeded by the Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750) and then by the Abbasid Caliphate (749\u2013861). Under the Abbasids, many Iranian figures took part in shaping the Islamic Golden Age, while also leveraging the decline of Arab power to establish independent dynasties and kingdoms, thus allowing their native languages to flourish and reviving Sasanian royal iconography and ideology in what became known as the Iranian Intermezzo. In the 11th century, Iran was conquered by the Seljuk Empire (1038\u20131194), which was Turkic in origin, but culturally Persianate. Further conquests by entities coming from Central Asia occurred over the course of the next five centuries, most notably including the Turkic Khwarazmian Empire (1097\u20131220/1221), the Mongol Empire (1220\u20131259), the post-Mongol Ilkhanate (1256\u20131335), and the Turco-Mongol Timurid Empire (1370\u20131458).\nThe year 1501 is considered the beginning of modern Iranian history, as the Safavid dynasty (1501\u20131736) rose to power and oversaw the conversion of Iran to Shia Islam, marking the region's largest religious shift since the Arab conquests. The collapse of the Safavids led to an intermediate period of turmoil, with rule of Iran contested between Safavid dynasts as well as the Afghan-origin Hotak dynasty (1722\u20131729). Nader Shah replaced these with the Afsharid Empire (1736\u20131796), but after his assassination in 1747, the Afsharids competed with the Zand dynasty (1751\u20131794) under Karim Khan Zand and his successors for supremacy. Iran was eventually reunified by the Qajar dynasty (1789\u20131925), which was succeeded by the Pahlavi dynasty of Reza Khan. The Pahlavi dynasty was the last to reign before the Iranian monarchy was abolished in 1979.\nAncient Iran (c. 727 BC\u2013AD 651).\nMedes (c. 727\u2013550 BC).\nThe Median dynasty is traditionally considered to have ruled the earliest Iranian state. Whether the Medes ruled an imperial state or merely a loose tribal confederation is disputed among historians. Median history is reconstructed almost solely through ancient Greek sources (particularly Herodotus) and disregards Near Eastern sources, which are fragmentary and do not support the existence of a unified Median Empire. There is also no material or textual evidence left behind by the supposed empire itself. The chronology and names of the Median kings mainly derives from the work of Herodotus.\nNo ruling title is securely attested for the Median rulers. They might have used \"x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iya x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iy\u0101n\u0101m\" (\"King of Kings\"), later used by the Achaemenids. Ecbatana was the Median capital.\nAchaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BC).\nThe Achaemenid dynasty originated as local rulers of Anshan under Median suzerainty. They are attributed various ancestors in later legends, including an eponymous figure called \"Achaemenes\". The earliest securely historical Achaemenid ruler is Cyrus I, king of Anshan in the second half of the seventh century BC. The Achaemenids united all Persian tribes under Cyrus I's son Cambyses I. Under Cambyses I's son, Cyrus II, the Achaemenids defeated the Medes and established the Achaemenid Empire, the largest ever Iranian state.\nThe standard title used by Achaemenid rulers in Iran from Cyrus II onwards was \"x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iya x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iy\u0101n\u0101m\", \"x\u0161\u0101ya\u03b8iya dahy\u016bn\u0101m\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings, King of the Lands'). The royal title varied in other parts of the empire. The Achaemenids had several royal cities, including Pasargadae, Susa, Ecbatana, Babylon, Bactra, and Persepolis.\nHellenistic rule (331\u2013129 BC).\nAlexander's empire (331\u2013305 BC).\nThe Achaemenid Empire was defeated and conquered by Alexander the Great, king of Macedonia, in 331\u2013329 BC. After Alexander's death in 323 BC, the Wars of the Diadochi broke out between his successors, leading to the rapid disintegration of the empire.\nAlexander did not assume the former Achaemenid royal title of 'King of Kings'. His main royal title, appearing on coins intended for his Asian territories, was instead \"basileus\" (lit.\u2009'king'). To mark his rule over the Achaemenid territories he also sometimes used the new title \"Lord of Asia\" (sometimes \"King of Asia\"). The only royal title recorded for Alexander's two immediate heirs is \"basileus\". Alexander ruled his empire from Babylon and planned to establish Babylon and Alexandria in Egypt as the twin imperial capitals. From 319 BC onwards, Alexander's heirs resided in Macedonia while the regency in Asia was contested by several generals.\nSeleucid Empire (305\u2013129 BC).\nThe main Hellenistic successors of Alexander's empire in Iran were the Seleucids, descendants of the Macedonian general Seleucus I Nicator and the Iranian noblewoman Apama. Seleucus seized most of the east, including Babylonia, in the Wars of the Diadochi and was firmly in control in the region from 312 BC onwards. After Alexander IV's death became public knowledge in 305 BC, Seleucus proclaimed himself king.\nThe main royal title used by the Seleucids was \"basileus\", as was the case for the other Macedonian successor kingdoms (such as the Ptolemaic Kingdom). Only two Seleucid rulers (Antiochus III, 223\u2013187 BC, and Antiochus VII, 139\u2013129 BC) used the greater \"megas basileus\" ('Great King'), the style applied to Achaemenid kings in ancient Greek sources. The Seleucids at first ruled from Seleucia in Mesopotamia, though Antioch was soon made the main capital.\nParthian Empire (c. 250/247 BC\u2013224 AD).\nThe Arsacids of Parthia, initially Seleucid vassals, originated as leaders of the Iranian Parni tribe in the northeastern steppes. The Parthians gradually challenged Seleucid rule over Iran. Parthian control of Iran was secured through the c. 142 BC conquest of Babylonia. Although fighting continued for years, the death of Antiochus VII Sidetes in 129 BC effectively marked the collapse of the Seleucid Empire, which then lingered on as a rump state in Syria until conquered by the Roman Empire in the 60s BC.\nThe Parthians presented themselves as heirs of the Achaemenids, though ruled a much more decentralized state. Greek inscriptions were used on Parthian coins until the time of Vologases I (AD 51\u201378). Early Parthian rulers used the name of their dynastic founder (Arsaces) as a title. Their coins also have the legend \"krny\" (probably short for \"autokrator\", i.e. autocrat or sole ruler). From the conquest of Babylonia onwards, rulers used \"basileus megas\" (lit.\u2009'Great King'). Mithridates II (123\u201391 BC) adopted the Achaemenid 'King of Kings' (rendered in Greek as \"basileus basileon\"). After him, this title was used only by Mithridates IV (57\u201354 BC) and Orodes II (57\u201337 BC) before becoming a standard part of the Parthian title from the time of Phraates IV (26\u20132 BC) onwards. The title was used in its Persian form (\"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n \u0161\u0101h\") after Greek ceased being used. The first Parthian capital was at Nisa in Parthia. In 217 BC, the capital was moved to Qumis and in 50 BC a multi-capital system was established, with royal residences at Ctesiphon, Ecbatana, and Ray.\nThis list omits rival kings and claimants. Because of poor source material there are alternate chronologies, genealogies, and enumerations of Parthian rulers, with some differences. See the list of monarchs of Parthia.\nSasanian Empire (224 AD\u2013651 AD).\nThe Sasanian dynasty originated as kings of Persis, a Parthian vassal kingdom, and claimed Achaemenid descent. In 224\u2013226, the Sasanian dynast Ardashir I led a revolt against the Parthians, weakened in a recent civil war, and took control of the empire. Ardashir presented himself as a restorer of both regional unity and Achaemenid glory. The Sasanian Empire was a significantly more militarily powerful, centralized, and aggressive state than the Parthian Empire and was also marked by a state-backed and less heterodox form of the Zoroastrian religion.\nSasanian kings continued to use the title \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n \u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings'). The title was extended by Ardashir to \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n \u0161\u0101h \u0113r\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings of Iran') and extended again by his son Shapur I (240\u2013270) to \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n \u0161\u0101h \u0113r\u0101n ud an\u0113r\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings of Iran and non-Iran'). Sasanian queens ruled with the title \"b\u0101nbi\u0161n\u0101n b\u0101nbi\u0161n \u0113r\u0101n ud an\u0113r\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'Queen of Queens of Iran and non-Iran').\"\" Ctesiphon was the capital of the Sasanian Empire.\nMedieval Iran (651\u20131501).\nThe fall of the Sasanian Empire in 651 was followed by nearly a millennium without Iranian political unity, until the rise of the Safavid Empire in 1501. In the intervening period, the territories formerly part of the ancient Iranian empires were variously subjected to larger foreign empires or divided into several smaller political units. Although no unified Iranian state existed, shared Iranian identity, culture, and language continued to survive and develop throughout the Middle Ages.\nThe medieval dynasties and kingdoms featured in this list follow a 2012 list of Iranian ruling dynasties by the Iranologist Touraj Daryaee.\nArab (caliphal) rule (638\u2013861).\nRashidun Caliphate (638\u2013661).\nThe Muslim conquest of Persia began when the armies of the Rashidun Caliphate attacked parts of Sasanian Asoristan in 633. In 637/638, the Sasanians lost Mesopotamia The empire itself was conquered in 640\u2013650. By the time of Yazdegerd III's death in 651, the Sasanians only retained Bactria. Following the Muslim victory, the Sasanian Empire was dissolved and Iran came under the direct rule of the Rashid caliphs. Although the caliphs implemented forms of ethnic stratification that discriminated against Iranians and their culture, particularly during the later Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750), they also adopted much of the old Sasanian administrative model to govern their empire.\nThe style of the caliphs was \"am\u012br al-mu'min\u012bn\" (lit.\u2009'commander of the faithful').' An additional title, \"khal\u012bfat All\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'deputy of God'), was also introduced beginning with Uthman (644\u2013656).' The caliphate was initially ruled from Medina. Under Ali, the capital was transferred to Kufa in Iraq.\nUmayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750).\nThe Umayyad Caliphate was established by Mu'awiya I, governor of Syria under the Rashidun caliphs. Mu'awiya opposed the acclamations of Ali and Hasan as caliphs, leading to the civil war known as the First Fitna (656\u2013661). Mu'awiya was victorious and became undisputed caliph after Hasan relinquished his claims.\nUmayyad caliphs continued to use the styles \"am\u012br al-mu'min\u012bn\" and \"khal\u012bfat All\u0101h\".' The Umayyad Caliphate was ruled from Damascus, though the capital was briefly transferred to Harran under the last caliph, Marwan II.'\nAbbasid Caliphate (749\u2013861).\nBecause Mu'awiya took power in civil war, the rights of his and his descendants to the caliphate was long questioned. Anti-Umayyad insurrections were to a large degree supported by non-Arab converts to Islam (especially Iranians) who were resentful over being relegated to lower social standing. In 747\u2013750, one of these insurrections grew into the Abbasid revolution, in which the Umayyads were replaced with the Abbasids, descendants of Muhammad's uncle Abbas.\nAbbasid caliphs continued to use the styles \"am\u012br al-mu'min\u012bn\" and \"khal\u012bfat All\u0101h\".' The Abbasid Caliphate was ruled from Kufa, until the capital was transferred to the newly-founded Baghdad in 762.'\nIranian Intermezzo (821\u20131090).\nThe political authority of the Abbasid caliphs diminished over the course of the ninth and tenth centuries. In Iran, this led to the establishment of several independent Iranian dynasties, the ousting of Arabs from their scattered bastions across the country, and an Iranian cultural renaissance. The period between the collapse of Abbasid authority and the conquest of Iran by the Seljuk Turks in the eleventh century is referred to as the \"Iranian Intermezzo\".\nThe Iranian Intermezzo saw the rise and fall of several major and minor dynasties. This list only includes major dynasties. Both Daryaee (2012) and Mahendrarajah (2019) list the major dynasties of the period as the Tahirids, Saffarids, Ziyarids, Buyids, and Samanids. Daryaee also includes the Ghaznavids, omitted by Mahendrarajah.\nTahirids (821\u2013873).\nThe Tahirids were a dynasty of Islamic Iranian rulers who governed Khorasan and much of the rest of Iran under the Abbasid caliphs. The Tahirids enjoyed considerable autonomy in practice but were not \"de jure\" independent; Tahirid rulers fully acknowledged that they were subordinate viceroys, were always deferential to the caliphs, and regularly forwarded tribute to Baghdad. The Tahirids were Arabized, but they were nevertheless Persians. The Tahirids claimed descent from the Iranian mythological hero Rostam.\nAs vassals of the Caliphate, the Tahirid rulers used the title \"amir\". The Tahirids initially ruled from Merv. The capital was transferred to Nishapur under Abdallah.\nSaffarids (867\u20131002).\nThe Saffarids were a dynasty of Islamic Iranian rulers who at their height ruled much of Iran, and at times even reached into modern-day Iraq, from their base of power in Sistan. Although the dynastic founder Ya'qub (867\u2013879) claimed Sasanian descent, the Saffarid dynasty originated as local ruffians and their power was attained solely through military might. The Saffarid state expanded aggressively under the rule of Ya'qub and Amr I (879\u2013901), under which the Tahirids were defeated and the Abbasid Caliphate was forced to confirm Saffarid control over various Iranian territories.\nSince they were nominally Abbasid subordinates, Saffarid rulers used the title \"amir\". Zaranj served as the Saffarid capital.\nSamanids (875\u2013999).\nThe Samanids were a dynasty of Islamic Iranian rulers established by four brothers in 819, when they were granted four important cities and regions by the Abbasid Caliphate due to helping against the revolt of Rafi ibn al-Layth. In 875, the Samanids increased dramatically in power through investment as governors of Transoxiana and in 892, all Samanid-held territories were united under a single ruler (Ismail). Under Ismail, the Samanids became autonomous of the Abbasids. The Samanids claimed descent from Bahram VI Chobin (589\u2013590).\nLike other dynasties of their time, Samanid rulers used the title \"amir\". Mansur I (961/962\u2013976/977) assumed the style \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings') as a response to the use of that title by the Buyids. Mansur I's son, Nuh II (976/977\u2013997), also used \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\". The Samanid capital was at Samarkand (875\u2013892) and then at Bukhara.\nZiyarids (927\u20131090/1091).\nThe Ziyarids were a dynasty of Iranian rulers established in northern Iran by Mardavij, a local mountain chief and mercenary who created an extensive kingdom in the late 920s and early 930s. Mardavij claimed descent from local pre-Islamic nobility and aspired to capture Baghdad, overthrow the Abbasids, and restore both the pre-651 empire as well as the Zoroastrian religion. These aspirations came to an end with Mardavij's murder by his Turkic military slaves in 934/935. Most of the Ziyarid realm was lost, except for territories surrounding the Caspian Sea, inherited by Mardavij's Islamic relatives.\nMardavij may have revived the Sasanian ruling title \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings') since later Buyid writers attribute the title to him. Later Ziyarid rulers used the title \"amir\". The Ziyarids went through a succession of capitals in northern Iran, including Ray, Amol, and Gorgan.\nBuyids (934\u20131062).\nThe Buyids were a dynasty of Islamic Iranian rulers established by three brothers who had served under Mardavij (the first Ziyarid ruler). After Mardavij's murder, the three carved out their own realm out of the southern Ziyarid territories. The Buyid state was composed of three principalities ruled by three branches of the family, sometimes with divergent goals, rather than a unified realm. The Buyids came to dominate much of Iran, a development that culminated in 945 with the capture of Baghdad and domination of the caliph himself. The Buyid dynasty claimed descent from the Sasanian king Bahram V (420\u2013438), almost certainly a forgery.\nIndividual Buyid rulers were styled as \"amir\". The senior of the three was also invested by the caliph with the grander title \"am\u012br al-omar\u0101\u02be\" (lit.\u2009'great emir'). The Buyid emirates were transformed into something akin to a restored Iranian monarchy under Rukn al-Dawla and his son 'Adud al-Dawla, who also reintroduced the Sasanian royal title \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings'). This title continued to be sporadically claimed by Buyid dynasts.\nThis list records only the 'main branch' of Buyid rulers, per Daryaee (2012). For a full list of major and minor Buyid rulers, see Buyid dynasty \u00a7 Buyid rulers.\nGhaznavids (977\u20131040).\nThe Ghaznavids were of Turkic slave origin. In the tenth century, Turkish slave commanders became increasingly prominent, and eventually effectively autonomous, in the southern parts of the Samanid realm. In 977, the commander Sabuktigin seized power in Ghazni, nominally as a Samanid vassal. Once the Samanids went into terminal decline and collapsed in the late tenth century, Sabuktigin's state became a fully independent realm. Although not Iranian, the Ghaznavid rulers nevertheless claimed descent from the Sasanian ruler Yazdegerd III (c. 633\u2013651).\nSabuktigin ruled with the title \"al-\u1e25\u0101jeb al-ajall\" (lit.\u2009'most noble commander'). From 999 onwards, the Ghaznavids ruled with the title \"sul\u1e6d\u0101n\". Sabuktigin's capital, Ghazni, remained the Ghaznavid capital for the duration of their rule in Iran.\nThe Ghaznavids lost their territories in Iran to the Seljuks after the Battle of Dandanaqan (1040). For later Ghaznavid rulers, see Ghaznavids \u00a7 List of rulers.\nTurco-Mongol rule (1038\u20131508).\nSeljuk Empire (1038\u20131194).\nThe Seljuk Empire was established by the Turkoman chieftain Tughril I, who invaded the Ghaznavids in the late 1030s. In 1040, the Seljuks conquered the Ghaznavid-held parts of Iran and over the following decades they established control over most of the Middle East, ending the Iranian Intermezzo. Though they were not of Iranian origin, the Seljuk rulers bolstered their legitimacy by claiming descent from Afrasiab, a legendary figure from the \"Shahnameh\".\"\"\nFrom the empire's inception, the Seljuk rulers minted coins with the title \"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings') in its Persian form, perhaps adopting it from the Buyids. Later on, the rulers more prominently used the Arabic title \"sul\u1e6d\u0101n\" and royal styles such as the Arabic \"malik\" and Persian \"\u0161\u0101h\" were bestowed on vassals. \"\u0160\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" continued to be used on the majority of Seljuk coinage, sometimes in the new variant \"\"\u0161\u0101h\u0101n\u0161\u0101h\" king of Islam\". Nishapur served as the first capital of the Seljuk Empire. In 1143, the capital was moved to Ray and a few years later it was moved again to Isfahan. From 1118 onwards, the Seljuk regime became increasingly unstable and rival claimants used various bases of power, including Baghdad, Hamadan, and Merv.\nKhwarazmian Empire (1097\u20131220/1221).\nThe Seljuk Empire fractured after the death of Ahmad Sanjar in 1157 and its vassals became effectively independent. One of these vassals was the Anushtegin dynasty, which ruled the Khwarazm region. The ruling dynasty were descendants of Anushtegin Gharchai, a former Turkic slave of the Seljuq sultans. In 1194, the Khwarazmian ruler Tekish conquered western Iran and Iraq from the remnants of the Seljuk Empire.\nThe Khwarazmian rulers used the ancient title \"xw\u00e2razm\u0161\u0101h\", traditionally held by Iranian rulers of Khwarazm. Urganj was the Khwarazmian capital.\nMongol Empire (1220\u20131259).\nThe Mongol Empire was established by Genghis Khan in 1206 through uniting the Mongol clans. The unification of the clans was followed by aggressive imperial expansion throughout Asia and parts of Europe. In the early thirteenth century, the Mongols under reached Iran. The region around Bukhara was conquered in 1220 and the Khwarazmian Empire was destroyed. Over the following decades, further conquests followed in the Middle East, culminating in the fall of Baghdad and end of the Abbasid Caliphate's rule there in 1258.\nThe rulers of the Mongol Empire used the ruling title \"khagan\" (lit.\u2009'Great Khan' or 'emperor'). In the 1230s, the Mongol Empire established its capital at Karakorum in Mongolia.\nIlkhanate (1256\u20131388).\nAfter the death of M\u00f6ngke Khan, the Mongol Empire was fractured by civil war, both over the succession of the next Great Khan and between nomadic traditionalists and the new settled princes of China and the Middle East. Kublai Khan (1260\u20131294) was eventually universally recognized but the empire was irreversibly fragmented. In much of the south-west of the empire (including Iran), power fell to Hulegu Khan, who had been made a deputy there under M\u00f6ngke Khan. Hulegu was swiftly accepted as a legitimate ruler in Iran and was further legitimized through a \"fatwa\" issued by the Shia scholar Ali ibn Tawus al-Hilli. Iran experienced a cultural renaissance under Ilkhanid rule. Ghazan Khan (1295\u20131304) converted to Islam in the late thirteenth century, turning the state further away from the other Mongol realms.\nThe rulers of the Ilkhanate adopted the style \"ilkhan\" (lit.\u2009'subordinate khan') to show deference to the Great Khan in China and Mongolia. From the time of Ghazan Khan onwards, they also used the title \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i \u012ar\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Iran'), sometimes extended to \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i \u012ar\u0101n wa Isl\u0101m\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Iran and Islam'). The version \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i Isl\u0101m\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Islam') is also recorded. The Ilkhanate went through a succession of capitals, beginning with Maragheh (1256\u20131265), Tabriz (1265\u20131306), and Soltaniyeh (1306\u20131335). After the empire disintegrated in the 1330s, various claimants established different centers of power. The last ilkhan, Luqman, ruled from Astarabad under Timurid suzerainty.\nTimurid Empire (1370\u20131458).\nThe Timurid Empire was established by Timur, a conqueror who claimed both Turkic and Mongol descent. Timur began as a minor brigand chief under the Chagatai Khanate. In the middle 1360s, Timur rose to become the effective ruler of Transoxiana. He went on to establish his seat of power in Khorasan and conquered most of Iran through campaigns in the 1380s and 1390s.\nDuring his conquests, Timur made some effort to portray himself as the heir of the Ilkhanate, adopting the Ilkhanid title \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i Isl\u0101m\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Islam'). Timur also used the style \"guregen\" (lit.\u2009'son-in-law') to stress his marriage to Saray Mulk Khanum, a descendant of Genghis Khan. \"P\u0101dish\u0101h\" continued to be used by Timur's successors, who at times also adopted the style of \"sul\u1e6d\u0101n\". Samarkand was the capital of the Timurid Empire.\nThe Timurids lost almost all of their territories in Iran to the Qara Qoyunlu in 1452\u20131458. For later Timurid rulers in Khorasan and elsewhere, see Timurid Empire \u00a7 Emperors (Emir).\nQara Qoyunlu (1452\u20131469).\nThe Qara Qoyunlu were a semi-nomadic Turkoman confederation that grew in power west of Iran following the collapse of the Ilkhanate. The origins of the Qara Qoyunlu are obscure and they are first recorded as an identifiable group in the 1330s. Under the leader Jahan Shah, the Qara Qoyunlu seized most of Iran from the Timurids. This began with the conquest of Jibal in 1452, and continued with further conquests of Isfahan, Fars, and Kerman in 1458.\nThe Qara Qoyunlu rulers presented themselves as rulers of Iran and political successors of the Ilkhanate, using titles such as \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i \u012ar\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Iran') and \"kesra-yi \u012ar\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'Caesar of Iran'). Tabriz served as the Qara Qoyunlu capital 1436\u20131467.\nThis list only includes the Qara Qoyunlu rulers who ruled Iran. For a full list, see the list of rulers of Qara Qoyunlu.\nAq Qoyunlu (1465\u20131508).\nLike the Qara Qoyunlu, the Aq Qoyunlu were a semi-nomadic Turkoman confederation that rose to power after the Ilkhanate's collapse. The Aq Qoyunlu was a more long-lived and better recorded group. In the 1450s and 1460s, the Aq Qoyunlu under Uzun Hasan defeated both the Qara Qoyunlu and Timurid forces and by 1469, Uzun Hasan ruled all of Iraq and Iran.\nLike the preceding Qara Qoyunlu, the Aq Qoyunlu rulers titled themselves as \"p\u0101dish\u0101h-i \u012ar\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'emperor of Iran') and \"kesra-yi \u012ar\u0101n\" (lit.\u2009'Caesar of Iran'), among other titles. Amida was the original Aq Qoyunlu capital. The capital was transferred to Tabriz under Uzun Hasan.\nThis list only includes the Aq Qoyunlu rulers who ruled Iran. For a full list, see the list of rulers of Aq Qoyunlu.\nModern Iran (1501\u20131979).\nSafavid Iran (1501\u20131722).\nOf native Iranian (possibly Kurdish) origins, the Safavid dynasty originated as the leaders of the medieval mystic Safavid order. In 1499, the Safavid \"sheikh\" Ismail defeated the Shirvanshahs of Azerbaijan and began to wrest control of Iran from the Aq Qoyunlu. The power of the Aq Qoyunlu was decisively broken in 1501 with the defeat of Alvand Beg. In 1502, Ismail crowned himself \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h\" at Tabriz. The rise of the Safavids is often considered the beginning of modern Iranian history, with their state being the earliest stage of the modern Iranian nation state. Through further conquests, the Safavids restored Iran as a single Iranian political unit and retransformed the tribal nomadic order of the land, established during its period under Turko-Mongol rule, into a sedentary society. Shia Islam was for the first time established as the state religion.\nThe Safavids ruled as \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h-e Ir\u00e2n\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings of Iran'). The initial capital of the Safavid Empire was at Tabriz. Due to conflict with the Ottoman Empire in the west, the capital was moved eastwards to Qazvin in 1548, and then to Isfahan in the 1590s.\nIntermediate period (1722\u20131796).\nComplex rivalries in the region of Khorasan led to the Afghan Hotak dynasty invading Iran. In 1722, this conflict led to the collapse of the Safavid Empire after the siege of Isfahan. The brief interlude between 1722 and the rise of the Qajar dynasty in 1789\u20131796 was marked by widespread political turmoil in Iran and several rival attempts to establish power over the country. The Safavids failed to regain power and the Hotaks failed to establish control. The rival Afsharid and Zand dynasties were established by Nader Shah (1736\u20131747) and Karim Khan (1751\u20131779), respectively. Although both of these founding figures established their rule over large parts of the former Safavid domain, the political influence of their dynasties swiftly collapsed under their successors.\nHotaks (1722\u20131729).\nIn 1701, unrest among the Ghilji Pashtun tribe of Afghanistan led to a rebellion against the Safavids. This uprising was suppressed by the local commander, George XI of Kartli, but the Afghan anti-Safavid movement continued under Mirwais Hotak and his son, Mahmud Hotak. Mahmud initially feigned loyalty and was officially appointed as governor of Kandahar. In 1720, he began raiding the Kerman area and in March 1722, a larger hastily assembled and more powerful Safavid army was defeated at the Battle of Gulnabad. Following a six-month siege of Isfahan, Soltan Hoseyn I formally submitted to Mahmud and recognized him as the new \"shah\" of Iran. The Hotak rulers of Iran ruled from the former Safavid capital of Isfahan.\nSafavid dynasts (1722\u20131773).\nWhen news of the fall of Isfahan reached Soltan Hoseyn I's son Tahmasp II at Qazvin, Tahmasp proclaimed himself \"shah\". Pro-Safavid forces successfully defeated Ashraf Hotak in 1729 and forced to Afghan forces out of Iran. Tahmasp failed to assert his authority in the aftermath of the Hotak invasion and the effective ruler of Iran was instead the general Nader Khan. In 1732, Nader deposed Tahmasp and replaced him with the eight-month old Abbas III. Abbas was in turn deposed in 1736 and Nader Khan was proclaimed the new \"shah\" of Iran under the name Nader Shah, terminating the Safavid dynasty. Safavid descendants continued to emerge for some time after 1736 as pretenders or as figurehead rulers put forward by warlords vying for power in Iran.\nAfsharids (1736\u20131796).\nThe Afsharid dynasty was established by Nader Shah, a general under the Safavids who seized control of the empire in 1736 after the deposition of Abbas III. Nader was a powerful conqueror but the Afsharid Empire quickly collapsed after his assassination in 1747. Large territories fell to the rival Zand dynasty as well as the Afghan Durrani Empire. The domain of Nader's heirs became largely confined to the Iranian parts of Khorasan. For most of its later history, the Afsharid state was dominated by military leaders or other court factions. The Afsharids ruled with the style of \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h\" and their capital was at Mashhad.\nZands (1751\u20131794).\nIn the aftermath of Nader Shah's assassination, the Zand family grew to become the most powerful rivals of the Afsharids and seized control of much of Iran in the 1750s. Established by the tribal leader Karim Khan Zand, the Zand rulers never proclaimed themselves to be \"shah\"s.' Instead, they presented themselves as regents of Iran, at first on behalf of the Safavid puppet Ismail III (1750\u20131773) and then on behalf of the Iranian people.' Karim Khan Zand ruled with the title of \"kh\u00e2n\", as well as the style of \"wakil\" (regent) or \"wakil-al-ra\u02bf\u0101y\u0101\u02be\" (lit.\u2009'regent of the people').' His successors ruled simply as \"kh\u00e2n\", though were often considered to be \"kings\" by European observers.' The Zand dynasty ruled from Shiraz.\"\"\nQajar Iran (1789\u20131925).\nThe Qajar dynasty originated as a local Turkoman noble family in northern Iran, under the Safavids. The Qajars gradually increased in power as other families fought each other in Iran, culminating in Agha Mohammad Shah proclaiming himself ruler in 1789, in opposition to the Afsharids and Zands. Agha Mohammad defeated the Zand dynasty in 1794 and was officially crowned in 1796. Shortly thereafter, he captured and deposed the Afsharid Shahrokh Shah, reunifying Iran under a single ruler.\nAgha Mohammad Shah ruled with the title \"kh\u00e2n\" and later \"\u0161\u00e2h\", never assuming the more grandiose \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h\". Agha Mohammad's successor, Fath-Ali Shah, assumed both \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h\" and the Mongol \"khagan\", titles frequently used by later Qajar rulers. Many other honorifics of imperial and religious significance were also used by the Qajar rulers. The Qajar dynasty ruled from Tehran, inaugurated as Iran's capital in the 1780s under Agha Mohammad Shah.\nPahlavi Iran (1925\u20131979).\nDuring the late Qajar dynasty, Iran became increasingly embroiled in internal political turmoil over the extent of the monarch's power, among other events leading to the Persian Constitutional Revolution (1905\u20131911). In 1923, the brigade commander Reza Khan quickly rose through the ranks to become prime minister. In 1925, Reza succeeded in deposing Ahmad Shah and having himself proclaimed by Iran's National Assembly first as regent and then as the new monarch. As his family name, Reza took \"Pahlavi\", after the Pahlavi language of the pre-Islamic Sasanian Empire.\nThe Pahlavi rulers styled themselves as \"\u0161\u00e2han\u0161\u00e2h-e Ir\u00e2n\" (lit.\u2009'King of Kings of Iran').\"\" Tehran remained the capital of Iran under Pahlavi rule.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13878", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13878", "title": "Homology", "text": "Homology, homologous, homologation or homological may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "13879", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13879", "title": "Henry J. Heinz", "text": "American businessman (1844\u20131919)\nHenry John Heinz (October 11, 1844 \u2013 May 14, 1919) was an American entrepreneur who co-founded the H. J. Heinz Company of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was involved in the passage of the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act. Many of his descendants are known for philanthropy and involvement in politics and public affairs. His fortune became the basis for the Heinz Foundations.\nEarly life.\nHenry John Heinz was born in Birmingham, Pennsylvania, to John Henry Heinz (1811\u20131891) and Anna Margaretha Schmidt (1822\u20131899). John Henry was born Johann Heinrich Heinz to parents Johann Georg and Charlotte Louisa (n\u00e9e Trump) Heinz of the Trump family in Kallstadt of the Palatinate, which at that time was part of the Kingdom of Bavaria. In 1840, John Henry emigrated to Birmingham, where he got a job making bricks and then met and married Anna in 1843, who herself had recently emigrated from Kruspis (today a part of Haunetal), Hesse-Kassel. Then when Henry was five years old, his parents moved to Sharpsburg where Henry\u2019s father went into the brick making business for himself. Anna Schmidt was the daughter of a farmer and church administrator, Johann Adam Schmidt, and Dorothea (Thiel) Schmidt. Anna came from Hesse-Kassel, which was a Reformed Protestant (Calvinist) territory, so she was raised in the Calvinist Christian faith. Anna's husband, John Heinz, was a Lutheran, and they raised and confirmed their son to that faith.\nH. J. Heinz Company.\nHenry John Heinz began packing foodstuffs on a small scale at Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1869. There, he founded Heinz Noble &amp; Company with a friend, L. Clarence Noble, and started marketing bottled horseradish, soon followed by sauerkraut, vinegar, and pickles. The company went bankrupt in 1875. The following year, Heinz founded another company, F &amp; J Heinz, with his brother John Heinz and a cousin, Frederick Heinz.\nThe company grew and, in 1888, Heinz bought out his other two partners and reorganized it as the H. J. Heinz Company, the name carried to the present day. The company was incorporated in 1905, with Heinz serving as its first president and retaining that position for the rest of his life. \nThe company's slogan, \"57 varieties,\" was introduced by Heinz in 1896, though by then, the company was selling more than 60 different products. Heinz said he chose \"5\" because it was his lucky number, while \"7\" was his wife's lucky number. \nAt the time of Heinz's death in Pittsburgh at the age of 74, the H. J. Heinz Company had more than 20 food processing plants and owned seed farms and container factories.\nLater life.\nHeinz led a successful lobbying effort in favor of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906. During World War I, he worked with the Food Administration. He was a director in many financial institutions, and was chairman of a committee to devise ways of protecting Pittsburgh from floods.\nMarriage and family.\nHeinz married Sarah Sloan Young on September 3, 1869. She was of Scots-Irish ancestry and had grown up in the Presbyterian Church. They had five children:\nThey were raised as Presbyterians.\nReligious faith.\nLater in life Heinz worshipped as a member of Methodist and Presbyterian churches, and worked closely with Baptists as well.\nWhen Heinz visited England, his \"tourist stops\" included the graves of religious leaders John Bunyan, Isaac Watts, and John Wesley. He visited a chapel that Wesley founded, later writing that \"I felt I was upon holy ground.\" At the beginning of his will Heinz wrote: \"I desire to set forth, at the very beginning of this Will, as the most important item in it, a confession of my faith in Jesus Christ as my Savior.\"\nDeath and legacy.\nHeinz died at his home on May 14, 1919, after contracting pneumonia. It took 2-3 days until someone found his corpse. His funeral was at East Liberty Presbyterian Church. He was buried at Homewood Cemetery in Pittsburgh, in the Heinz Family Mausoleum.\nA bronze statue of Heinz by Emil Fuchs was dedicated on October 11, 1924, at the Heinz Company building in Pittsburgh.\nHeinz is the grandfather of H. J. Heinz II (1908\u20131987) the great-grandfather of U.S. Senator H. John Heinz III (1938\u20131991) of Pennsylvania (who was later buried in the same family mausoleum), and great-great grandfather of Henry John Heinz IV, Andr\u00e9 Thierstein Heinz and Christopher Drake Heinz.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "13881", "revid": "50672195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13881", "title": "Heinz", "text": "American food processing company known for ketchup and condiments\nThe H. J. Heinz Company, commonly known as Heinz (), was an American food processing company headquartered at One PPG Place in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The company was founded by Henry J. Heinz in 1869. Heinz manufactured food products on six continents, and marketed them in more than 200 countries and territories. The company claimed to have 150 number-one or number-two brands worldwide . Heinz ranked first in ketchup in the US with a market share in excess of 50%; the Ore-Ida label held 46% of the frozen potato sector in 2003.\nSince 1896, the company used its \"57 Varieties\" slogan; it was inspired by a sign advertising 21 styles of shoes, and Henry Heinz chose the number 57 even though the company then manufactured more than 60 products, because \"5\" was his lucky number and \"7\" was his wife's.\nIn February 2013, Heinz agreed to be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and the Brazilian investment firm 3G Capital for $23billion. On March 25, 2015, Kraft announced its merger with Heinz, arranged by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital. The resulting Kraft Heinz Company is the fifth largest food company in the world. Berkshire Hathaway became a majority owner of Heinz on June 18, 2015. After exercising a warrant to acquire 46 million shares of common stock for a total price of over $461million, Berkshire increased its stake to 52.5%. The merger to form Kraft Heinz was completed on July 2, 2015.\nHistory.\nFoundation.\nHeinz was founded by and is named for Henry J. Heinz, who was born in the United States to German immigrants. His father was originally from Kallstadt (then part of the Bavarian Rhenish Palatinate, now part of Rhineland-Palatinate). His mother Anna was from Haunetal, Hesse-Kassel, and they met in Pittsburgh.\nHenry J. Heinz began packing foodstuffs on a small scale at Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1869. There he founded Heinz Noble &amp; Company with a friend, L. Clarence Noble, and began marketing horseradish. The first product in Heinz and Noble's new Anchor Brand (a name selected for its biblical meaning of hope) was his mother Anna Heinz's recipe for horseradish. The young Heinz manufactured it in the basement of his father's former house.\nThe company went bankrupt in 1875. The following year Heinz founded another company, F &amp; J Heinz, with his brother John Heinz and a cousin, Frederick Heinz. One of this company's first products was Heinz Tomato Ketchup. The company continued to grow.\nIn 1888, Heinz bought out his two partners and reorganized the company as the H.\u00a0J. Heinz Company. Its slogan, \"57 varieties\", was introduced by Heinz in 1896. Inspired by an advertisement he saw while riding an elevated train in New York City (a shoe store boasting \"21 styles\"), Heinz picked the number more or less at random because he liked the sound of it, selecting \"7\" specifically because, as he put it, of the \"psychological influence of that figure and of its enduring significance to people of all ages\".\n20th century.\nThe H. J. Heinz Company was incorporated in Pennsylvania on July 27, 1900; Heinz served as its first president, holding that position for the rest of his life. Under his leadership, the company pioneered processes for sanitary food preparation, and led a successful lobbying effort in favor of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906. In 1908 he established a processing plant in Leamington, Ontario, Canada for tomatoes and other products. Heinz operated it until 2014, when it was sold.\nHeinz was a pioneer in both scientific and \"technological innovations to solve problems like bacterial contamination\". He personally worked to control the \"purity of his products by managing his employees\", offering hot showers and weekly manicures for the women handling food. During World War I, he worked with the Food Administration.\nIn 1914, Heinz Salad Cream was invented in England.\nIn 1930, Howard Heinz, son of Henry Heinz, helped to fight the downturn of the Great Depression by selling ready-to-serve soups and baby food. They became top sellers.\nThe Pittsburgh plant included a large \"Heinz service building\", which included three dining rooms and a 3,000-seat auditorium. The auditorium included a pipe organ, and Heinz employed an organist to give recitals and musical programs. The original organ was severely damaged in the 1936 Pittsburgh floods, it was replaced with a new Kimball organ that had four manuals and 57 sets of pipes. The original organ was restored and installed in Grace Methodist Church in Sharpsburg.\nDuring World War II, \"Jack\" Heinz led the company as president and CEO to aid the United Kingdom and offset food shortages. Its plant in Pittsburgh was converted for a time to manufacture gliders for the War Department.\nIn the postwar years, Jack Heinz expanded the company to develop plants in several nations overseas, greatly expanding its international presence. He also acquired Ore-Ida and Starkist Tuna.\nIn 1959, long-time Heinz employee Frank Armour Jr. was elected president and COO of H.\u00a0J. Heinz Co., succeeding H.\u00a0J. Heinz II. He was the first non-family member to hold the job since the company started in 1869. He became vice chairman in 1966, and later became chairman and CEO of Heinz subsidiary, Ore-Ida Foods Inc.\nIn 1969, Tony O'Reilly joined the company's UK subsidiary, soon becoming its managing director. He moved to Pittsburgh in 1971 when he was promoted to senior vice president for the North America and Pacific region. By 1973, Heinz selected him as president. He became CEO in 1979 and chairman in 1987.\nBetween 1981 and 1991, Heinz returned 28% annually, doubling the Standard &amp; Poor's average annual return for those years. By 2000, the consolidation of grocery store chains, the spread of retailers such as Walmart, and growth of private-label brands caused competition for shelf space, and put price pressure on the company's products. The decline was also attributed to an inadequate response to broad demographic changes in the United States, particularly the growth in population among Hispanic and increased spending power of African Americans.\nIn 1998, Tony O'Reilly left Heinz after issues with the company's performance. He faced challenges from corporate governance groups and pension funds including CalPERS. He was succeeded by his deputy, William R. Johnson.\n21st century.\nIn 2001, Heinz acquired the pasta sauce, dry bouillon and soup business of Borden Foods. CEO William R. Johnson stated that \"They fit very well with our tomato-based expertise\".\nOn August 22, 2001, Heinz announced that it would acquire the Anchor Food Products' branded products, which included the Poppers line of appetizers, as well as the licensing rights to the TGI Fridays brand of frozen foods and appetizers. The acquisition was completed on September 25.\nBillionaire Nelson Peltz initiated a proxy battle during 2006, culminating in a vote to place five of Peltz's nominees on the Board. After the final vote, two of the five nominees joined the Heinz Board. The new members of the board were Nelson Peltz and Matthew Craig Walsh.\nIn 2002, Heinz announced that it had sold the StarKist and 9Lives brands to Del Monte Foods.\nIn June 2008, Heinz began an advertising campaign in the UK for their new \"New York Deli Mayo\" products. The advertisement featured two men kissing in a family setting, which drew 200 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority. On June 24, 2008, Heinz withdrew the advertisement, which had been planned for a five-week run. The company said that some of its customers had expressed concerns. Withdrawing the advert was also controversial, with critics accusing Heinz of homophobia. The gay rights group Stonewall called for a boycott of Heinz products. Some expressed surprise that it had responded to what they said was a relatively small number of complaints, compared to the UK's estimated 3.6\u00a0million gay and lesbian consumers. MP Diane Abbott called the decision to withdraw the advert \"ill-considered\" and \"likely to offend the gay community\".\nOn February 14, 2013, it was announced that Heinz would be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital for $23billion. Including debt assumption the transaction was valued at $28billion. According to Heinz, the deal was the largest in food industry history. Berkshire Hathaway and 3G would each own half of Heinz, with 3G running the company. Berkshire and 3G paid $72.50 a share. The acquisition was completed in June of that year. Berkshire and 3G immediately named Bernardo Hees, former chief executive of Burger King Worldwide Inc, as the CEO.\nOn August 13, 2013, Heinz announced it was cutting 600 jobs in North America.\nOn October 25, 2013, fast-food chain McDonald's announced it would end its 40-year relationship with Heinz, after the former Burger King, McDonald's competitor, chief Hees became CEO of Heinz.\nOn March 25, 2015, Kraft Foods Group Inc. announced that it would merge with the H. J. Heinz Company, owned by 3G Capital and Berkshire Hathaway Inc., to form the world's fifth-largest food and beverage company. The companies completed the merger on July 2, 2015, with the latter changing its name to the Kraft Heinz Foods Company.\nIn 2024, Carlos Abrams-Rivera took over as CEO of Kraft Heinz Co.\nBrands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProducts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPastas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSauces.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational presence.\nUnited States.\nThe company's world headquarters were in Chicago, Illinois, with the H. J. Heinz division located in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where the company was founded. The company's \"keystone\" logo was based on that of Pennsylvania, the \"keystone state\". Heinz Field was named after the Heinz company in 2001.\nA majority of its ketchup was produced in Fremont, Ohio, and the rest made in Muscatine, Iowa.\nHeinz opened a pickle factory in Holland, Michigan, in 1897, and it is the largest such facility in the world. The Heinz Portion Control subsidiary is located in Jacksonville, Florida, and produces single-serving containers of ketchup, mustard, salad dressings, jams, jellies and syrups.\nHeinz also had factories in the following locations: Arizona (Phoenix); California (Chatsworth, Escalon, Irvine, San Diego); Florida (Fort Myers); Idaho (Pocatello); Iowa (Cedar Rapids, Muscatine); Massachusetts (Newburyport); Ohio (Mason, Massillon); Oregon (Ontario), and South Carolina (Florence).\nIn 2000, seven retailers, including Walmart, Albertsons, and Safeway, comprised half of the company's sales by volume.\nAustralia.\nHeinz Australia's head office is located in Melbourne. Products include canned baked beans in tomato sauce (popularized in the \"beanz meanz Heinz\" advertising campaign), spaghetti in a similar sauce, and canned soup, condensed soup, and \"ready to eat\" soups.\nHeinz manufactures \"Big Red\" tomato sauce, and a number of flavored baked bean varieties, as well as canned meals. Heinz also markets the Wattie's brand of canned foods, which are made in New Zealand.\nOn October 6, 2008, Heinz announced plans to acquire the Australian company Golden Circle which \"manufactures more than 500 products, including canned fruit and vegetables, fruit juices, drinks, cordials and jams\".\nOn May 27, 2011, Heinz announced it would close its factory in Girgarre, Victoria, and downsize its factories in Northgate (Brisbane), and Wagga Wagga, with loss of more than 300 jobs. Heinz has other factories in Echuca and Mill Park.\nOn January 6, 2012, Heinz closed its tomato sauce factory in Girgarre as announced in the previous May. 146 workers lost their jobs. A local group was seeking to purchase the factory and start its own production, with offers of financial assistance from investors. The group's first offer for the site was rejected by Heinz. Girgarre was the second to last tomato sauce factory in Australia, and its closing brought an end to Heinz's 70 years of tomato processing operations in Australia.\nAs of May 2020 Kraft Heinz is said to potentially be in discussions with Graeme Hart to sell off the brands of Wattie's in New Zealand and Golden Circle in Australia.\nCanada.\nHeinz was established in Canada in 1908 in a former tobacco factory in Leamington, Ontario (known as the Tomato Capital of Canada). Most products shipped from Leamington have bilingual English and French labels for distribution throughout Canada, but a substantial amount of product is sent from there to the US. Ketchup is the main product produced there, and the city has been a center of tomato production. The factory also produces Canada Fancy (Grade A) tomato juice, mustard, vinegar, baby food, barbecue sauces, canned pastas, beans, pasta sauces, gravies and soups. Heinz Canada is the major supplier of single-serving and flexible-packaging condiments for most fast food chains in Canada. Leamington is the largest tomato-processing region per acreage in the world. The Leamington plant usually processes more than 250,000 tons of tomatoes per year. Heinz Canada's head office is in North York, Ontario; it also has operations in St. Marys, Ontario; Montreal, Quebec; and Calgary, Alberta.\nOn November 14, 2013, Heinz announced that the Leamington facility, the second-largest in the company, would close sometime in May 2014. Ketchup processing operations were to be consolidated at the company's US locations. Over 800 local jobs were lost due to the town's largest employer ending operations there. A local effort began in an attempt to save the 105-year-old Leamington plant, and it included creating a Facebook page to gather support. On February 27, 2014, the Highbury Canco Corporation signed a letter of intent to acquire and operate the facility. In April it was reported that Highbury Canco Corporation had received a one-year license to process tomatoes at the facility, saving some 250 jobs.\nAs a result of this corporate restructuring and the angry Canadian response, a rival food company, French's, began producing their own ketchup brand using Leamington produce. It marketed the brand with an appeal to Canadian patriotism. This successful campaign, combined with a Canadian grassroots effort on Facebook encouraging purchasing of the French's product, resulted in Heinz's market share in Canada dropping from 84 to 76%, a significant shift in a mature market. This undesirable development was exacerbated in 2018 when Canadian tariffs were erected against specific American exports, which includes ketchup produced in the United States, in retaliation to the US President Trump's tariffs on Canadian steel and aluminum exports. Heinz conducted a belated public relations campaign in Canada to try to counter the public anger against them, a task made more difficult by public sentiment rising to encourage a boycott of American goods in reaction of US President Trump's rhetoric against Canada.\nIndia.\nHeinz Ketchup is available in India in two varieties, the standard Tomato Ketchup and Tomato Chili Sauce. As Indian taste preferences vary among the regions, Western brands such as Heinz must work on Indian interpretations of ketchups for sale in the country. Heinz acquired the former foods division of Glaxo India, gaining the Complan, Glucon D, Glucon C, Sampriti Ghee, and Nycil products and brands. In 2019, Heinz sold a portion of the business, including Complan and Glucon-D, for $627.18 million to Zydus Wellness.\nIndonesia.\nH. J. Heinz Company entered Indonesia in 1999, when it acquired 65 percent share of PT. ABC Central Food, for US$70 million, and formed PT. Heinz ABC Indonesia. The company is based in Jakarta, and manufactures sauces, condiments, juices and syrups.\nServing demand from Indonesia's large population and growing economy, in the early 21st century PT. Heinz ABC Indonesia is the largest Heinz's business in Asia, and one of the largest in the world. It employs 3000 employees, has 3 production facilities, 8 packing facilities, and an extensive distribution network in Java and other parts of Indonesia. Their leading products are Syrup ABC (fruit syrup), Kecap ABC (sweet soy sauce), and Sambal ABC (hot chili sauce).\nNetherlands.\nHeinz sells many products in the Netherlands; the Elst factory in Gelderland is the primary production facility for Heinz sauces for Western Europe. In 2006, production of both HP Sauce and Daddies was transferred from Birmingham, West Midlands to Elst as a result of the acquisition of HP Foods and the subsequent closure of the Aston factory. Subsequently, Heinz suffered severe supply issues for the ex-HP Foods brands as the Elst factory struggled to integrate production, resulting in significant negative coverage from UK retailers. Heinz was forced to begin bottling sauce in Spain, shipping ready-made sauce from Elst, to get product back into supply. Netherlands factories are also responsible for producing signature sauces such as mayonnaise and ketchup for its Southeast Asian market.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAfter opening its first overseas office in London in 1896, the company opened its first UK factory in Peckham, south London in 1905. This was followed by a factory at Harlesden, north-west London in 1919. Bombed twice in World War II, this factory remained in production until 2000. Production was started at a former munitions factory at Standish near Wigan in 1946, before the new factory at Kitt Green, near Wigan, opened in 1959. Heinz also had an infant food factory in Kendal, Cumbria. The site specialized in baby milks, previously under the brand of Farley's, but then manufactured under the name Heinz Nurture.\nHeinz produces oriental foods sold under the Amoy brand, once used under license from Ajinomoto Co. Inc., Tokyo, Japan. In 2018, Amoy Food was sold to the new owners, CITIC Capital Asian Foods Holdings Ltd.\nIn July 2001, the Food Standards Agency of the Government of the United Kingdom found Heinz canned baked beans products to be contaminated with the hormone disruptor bisphenol.\nIn 2013, the Kitt Green facility was listed as one among the world's five largest manufacturing units by the Discovery Channel (the list comprised Reliance's Jamnagar Refinery, Volkswagen's car plant, Kitt Green Foods plant, NASA's Kennedy Space Center and POSCO's steel plant). It was Europe's largest food factory and supplied more than 1 billion cans every year.\nChina.\nOn February 22, 2013, Sanquan Food, a Chinese frozen food company, signed a contract to purchase LongFong Food, a subsidiary of Heinz Company in China. With this sale, Heinz (China) will focus on infant foods and sauces in emerging markets such as China. Heinz Hong Kong Limited is the regional office serving for operations in Hong Kong, China and Taiwan.\nNew Zealand.\nHeinz produces frozen vegetables for export for the New Zealand and Australian market. They also produce mayonnaise and other sauces for the New Zealand and Australian market. Most products sold in New Zealand are sold under the brand name \"Watties\".\nAnimal Welfare.\nKraft Heinz has made several commitments to enhance animal welfare across its global supply chain. In 2016, the company announced its intention to transition to 100% cage-free eggs in North America by 2025. This commitment was later expanded globally, aiming for a complete shift to cage-free or better egg sourcing worldwide by 2025. As of the latest reports, 64% of the company's global egg supply meets this standard, with 100% of eggs in Europe sourced from free-range hens.\nIn addition to egg sourcing, Kraft Heinz has pledged to improve broiler chicken welfare. By 2024 in the U.S. and 2026 in Europe, the company aims to implement standards aligned with the European Chicken Commitment. These standards involve giving chickens more space, providing stimulating environments, and using breeds that are less prone to health problems.\nFurthermore, Kraft Heinz has outlined expectations for its pork and dairy suppliers. The company supports the transition of pregnant sows to alternative gestation housing and requires dairy suppliers in North America to adopt animal care guidelines.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13883", "revid": "50123580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13883", "title": "Huffman coding", "text": "Technique to compress data\nIn computer science and information theory, a Huffman code is a particular type of optimal prefix code that is commonly used for lossless data compression. The process of finding or using such a code is Huffman coding, an algorithm developed by David A. Huffman while he was a Sc.D. student at MIT, and published in the 1952 paper \"A Method for the Construction of Minimum-Redundancy Codes\".\nThe output from Huffman's algorithm can be viewed as a variable-length code table for encoding a source symbol (such as a character in a file). The algorithm derives this table from the estimated probability or frequency of occurrence (\"weight\") for each possible value of the source symbol. As in other entropy encoding methods, more common symbols are generally represented using fewer bits than less common symbols. Huffman's method can be efficiently implemented, finding a code in time linear to the number of input weights if these weights are sorted. However, although optimal among methods encoding symbols separately, Huffman coding is not always optimal among all compression methods \u2013 it is replaced with arithmetic coding if a better compression ratio is required.\nHistory.\nIn 1951, David A. Huffman and his MIT information theory classmates were given the choice of a term paper or a final exam. The professor, Robert M. Fano, assigned a term paper on the problem of finding the most efficient binary code. Huffman, unable to prove any codes were the most efficient, was about to give up and start studying for the final when he hit upon the idea of using a frequency-sorted binary tree and quickly proved this method the most efficient.\nIn doing so, Huffman outdid Fano, who had worked with Claude Shannon to develop a similar code. Building the tree from the bottom up guaranteed optimality, unlike the top-down approach of Shannon\u2013Fano coding.\nTerminology.\nHuffman coding uses a specific method for choosing the representation for each symbol, resulting in a prefix code (sometimes called \"prefix-free codes\", that is, the bit string representing some particular symbol is never a prefix of the bit string representing any other symbol). Huffman coding is such a widespread method for creating prefix codes that the term \"Huffman code\" is widely used as a synonym for \"prefix code\" even when such a code is not produced by Huffman's algorithm.\nProblem definition.\nFormalized description.\nInput.\nAlphabet formula_5, which is the symbol alphabet of size formula_6. \nTuple formula_7, which is the tuple of the (positive) symbol weights (usually proportional to probabilities), i.e. formula_8. \nOutput.\nCode formula_9, which is the tuple of (binary) codewords, where formula_10 is the codeword for formula_11.\nGoal.\nLet formula_12 be the weighted path length of code formula_13. Condition: formula_14 for any code formula_15.\nExample.\nWe give an example of the result of Huffman coding for a code with five characters and given weights. We will not verify that it minimizes \"L\" over all codes, but we will compute \"L\" and compare it to the Shannon entropy \"H\" of the given set of weights; the result is nearly optimal.\nFor any code that is \"biunique\", meaning that the code is \"uniquely decodeable\", the sum of the probability budgets across all symbols is always less than or equal to one. In this example, the sum is strictly equal to one; as a result, the code is termed a \"complete\" code. If this is not the case, one can always derive an equivalent code by adding extra symbols (with associated null probabilities), to make the code complete while keeping it \"biunique\".\nAs defined by Shannon (1948), the information content \"h\" (in bits) of each symbol \"a\"i with non-null probability is\nformula_16\nThe entropy \"H\" (in bits) is the weighted sum, across all symbols \"a\"\"i\" with non-zero probability \"w\"\"i\", of the information content of each symbol:\nformula_17\nAs a consequence of Shannon's source coding theorem, the entropy is a measure of the smallest codeword length that is theoretically possible for the given alphabet with associated weights. In this example, the weighted average codeword length is 2.25 bits per symbol, only slightly larger than the calculated entropy of 2.205 bits per symbol. So not only is this code optimal in the sense that no other feasible code performs better, but it is very close to the theoretical limit established by Shannon.\nIn general, a Huffman code need not be unique. Thus the set of Huffman codes for a given probability distribution is a non-empty subset of the codes minimizing formula_19 for that probability distribution. (However, for each minimizing codeword length assignment, there exists at least one Huffman code with those lengths.)\nBasic technique.\nCompression.\nThe technique works by creating a binary tree of nodes. These can be stored in a regular array, the size of which depends on the number of symbols, formula_6. A node can be either a leaf node or an internal node. Initially, all nodes are leaf nodes, which contain the symbol itself, the weight (frequency of appearance) of the symbol and optionally, a link to a parent node which makes it easy to read the code (in reverse) starting from a leaf node. Internal nodes contain a weight, links to two child nodes and an optional link to a parent node. As a common convention, bit '0' represents following the left child and bit '1' represents following the right child. A finished tree has up to formula_6 leaf nodes and formula_22 internal nodes. A Huffman tree that omits unused symbols produces the most optimal code lengths.\nThe process begins with the leaf nodes containing the probabilities of the symbol they represent. Then, the process takes the two nodes with smallest probability, and creates a new internal node having these two nodes as children. The weight of the new node is set to the sum of the weight of the children. We then apply the process again, on the new internal node and on the remaining nodes (i.e., we exclude the two leaf nodes), we repeat this process until only one node remains, which is the root of the Huffman tree.\nThe simplest construction algorithm uses a priority queue where the node with lowest probability is given highest priority:\nSince efficient priority queue data structures require O(log \"n\") time per insertion, and a tree with \"n\" leaves has 2\"n\"\u22121 nodes, this algorithm operates in O(\"n\" log \"n\") time, where \"n\" is the number of symbols.\nIf the symbols are sorted by probability, there is a linear-time (O(\"n\")) method to create a Huffman tree using two queues, the first one containing the initial weights (along with pointers to the associated leaves), and combined weights (along with pointers to the trees) being put in the back of the second queue. This assures that the lowest weight is always kept at the front of one of the two queues:\nOnce the Huffman tree has been generated, it is traversed to generate a dictionary which maps the symbols to binary codes as follows:\nThe final encoding of any symbol is then read by a concatenation of the labels on the edges along the path from the root node to the symbol.\nIn many cases, time complexity is not very important in the choice of algorithm here, since \"n\" here is the number of symbols in the alphabet, which is typically a very small number (compared to the length of the message to be encoded); whereas complexity analysis concerns the behavior when \"n\" grows to be very large.\nIt is generally beneficial to minimize the variance of codeword length. For example, a communication buffer receiving Huffman-encoded data may need to be larger to deal with especially long symbols if the tree is especially unbalanced. To minimize variance, simply break ties between queues by choosing the item in the first queue. This modification will retain the mathematical optimality of the Huffman coding while both minimizing variance and minimizing the length of the longest character code.\nDecompression.\nGenerally speaking, the process of decompression is simply a matter of translating the stream of prefix codes to individual byte values, usually by traversing the Huffman tree node by node as each bit is read from the input stream (reaching a leaf node necessarily terminates the search for that particular byte value). Before this can take place, however, the Huffman tree must be somehow reconstructed. In the simplest case, where character frequencies are fairly predictable, the tree can be preconstructed (and even statistically adjusted on each compression cycle) and thus reused every time, at the expense of at least some measure of compression efficiency. Otherwise, the information to reconstruct the tree must be sent a priori. A naive approach might be to prepend the frequency count of each character to the compression stream. Unfortunately, the overhead in such a case could amount to several kilobytes, so this method has little practical use. If the data is compressed using canonical encoding, the compression model can be precisely reconstructed with just formula_23 bits of information (where B is the number of bits per symbol). Another method is to simply prepend the Huffman tree, bit by bit, to the output stream. For example, assuming that the value of 0 represents a parent node and 1 a leaf node, whenever the latter is encountered the tree building routine simply reads the next 8 bits to determine the character value of that particular leaf. The process continues recursively until the last leaf node is reached; at that point, the Huffman tree will thus be faithfully reconstructed. The overhead using such a method ranges from roughly 2 to 320 bytes (assuming an 8-bit alphabet). Many other techniques are possible as well. In any case, since the compressed data can include unused \"trailing bits\" the decompressor must be able to determine when to stop producing output. This can be accomplished by either transmitting the length of the compressed data along with the compression model or by defining a special code symbol to signify the end of input (the latter method can adversely affect code length optimality, however).\nMain properties.\nThe probabilities used can be generic ones for the application domain that are based on average experience, or they can be the actual frequencies found in the text being compressed.\nThis requires that a frequency table must be stored with the compressed text. See the Decompression section above for more information about the various techniques employed for this purpose.\nOptimality.\nHuffman's original algorithm is optimal for a symbol-by-symbol coding with a known input probability distribution, i.e., separately encoding unrelated symbols in such a data stream. However, it is not optimal when the symbol-by-symbol restriction is dropped, or when the probability mass functions are unknown. Also, if symbols are not independent and identically distributed, a single code may be insufficient for optimality. Other methods such as arithmetic coding often have better compression capability.\nAlthough both aforementioned methods can combine an arbitrary number of symbols for more efficient coding and generally adapt to the actual input statistics, arithmetic coding does so without significantly increasing its computational or algorithmic complexities (though the simplest version is slower and more complex than Huffman coding). Such flexibility is especially useful when input probabilities are not precisely known or vary significantly within the stream. However, Huffman coding is usually faster and arithmetic coding was historically a subject of some concern over patent issues. Thus many technologies have historically avoided arithmetic coding in favor of Huffman and other prefix coding techniques. As of mid-2010, the most commonly used techniques for this alternative to Huffman coding have passed into the public domain as the early patents have expired.\nFor a set of symbols with a uniform probability distribution and a number of members which is a power of two, Huffman coding is equivalent to simple binary block encoding, e.g., ASCII coding. This reflects the fact that compression is not possible with such an input, no matter what the compression method, i.e., doing nothing to the data is the optimal thing to do.\nHuffman coding is optimal among all methods in any case where each input symbol is a known independent and identically distributed random variable having a probability that is dyadic. Prefix codes, and thus Huffman coding in particular, tend to have inefficiency on small alphabets, where probabilities often fall between these optimal (dyadic) points. The worst case for Huffman coding can happen when the probability of the most likely symbol far exceeds 2\u22121 = 0.5, making the upper limit of inefficiency unbounded.\nThere are two related approaches for getting around this particular inefficiency while still using Huffman coding. Combining a fixed number of symbols together (\"blocking\") often increases (and never decreases) compression. As the size of the block approaches infinity, Huffman coding theoretically approaches the entropy limit, i.e., optimal compression. However, blocking arbitrarily large groups of symbols is impractical, as the complexity of a Huffman code is linear in the number of possibilities to be encoded, a number that is exponential in the size of a block. This limits the amount of blocking that is done in practice.\nA practical alternative, in widespread use, is run-length encoding. This technique adds one step in advance of entropy coding, specifically counting (runs) of repeated symbols, which are then encoded. For the simple case of Bernoulli processes, Golomb coding is optimal among prefix codes for coding run length, a fact proved via the techniques of Huffman coding. A similar approach is taken by fax machines using modified Huffman coding. However, run-length coding is not as adaptable to as many input types as other compression technologies.\nVariations.\nMany variations of Huffman coding exist, some of which use a Huffman-like algorithm, and others of which find optimal prefix codes (while, for example, putting different restrictions on the output). Note that, in the latter case, the method need not be Huffman-like, and, indeed, need not even be polynomial time.\n\"n\"-ary Huffman coding.\nThe \"n\"-ary Huffman algorithm uses an alphabet of size \"n\", typically {0, 1, ..., n-1}, to encode messages and build an \"n\"-ary tree. This approach was considered by Huffman in his original paper. The same algorithm applies as for binary (formula_24) codes, but instead of combining the two least likely symbols, the \"n\" least likely symbols are grouped together. \nNote that for \"n\" &gt; 2, not all sets of source words can properly form a complete \"n\"-ary tree for Huffman coding. In these cases, additional placeholder symbols with 0 probability may need to be added. This is because the structure of the tree needs to repeatedly join \"n\" branches into one - also known as an \"\"n\" to 1\" combination. For binary coding, this is a \"2 to 1\" combination, which works with any number of symbols. For \"n\"-ary coding, a complete tree is only possible when the total number of symbols (real + placeholders) leaves a remainder of 1 when divided by (n-1).\nAdaptive Huffman coding.\nA variation called adaptive Huffman coding involves calculating the probabilities dynamically based on recent actual frequencies in the sequence of source symbols, and changing the coding tree structure to match the updated probability estimates. It is used rarely in practice, since the cost of updating the tree makes it slower than optimized adaptive arithmetic coding, which is more flexible and has better compression.\nHuffman template algorithm.\nMost often, the weights used in implementations of Huffman coding represent numeric probabilities, but the algorithm given above does not require this; it requires only that the weights form a totally ordered commutative monoid, meaning a way to order weights and to add them. The Huffman template algorithm enables one to use any kind of weights (costs, frequencies, pairs of weights, non-numerical weights) and one of many combining methods (not just addition). Such algorithms can solve other minimization problems, such as minimizing formula_25, a problem first applied to circuit design.\nLength-limited Huffman coding/minimum variance Huffman coding.\nLength-limited Huffman coding is a variant where the goal is still to achieve a minimum weighted path length, but there is an additional restriction that the length of each codeword must be less than a given constant. The package-merge algorithm solves this problem with a simple greedy approach very similar to that used by Huffman's algorithm. Its time complexity is formula_26, where formula_27 is the maximum length of a codeword. No algorithm is known to solve this problem in formula_28 or formula_29 time, unlike the presorted and unsorted conventional Huffman problems, respectively.\nHuffman coding with unequal letter costs.\nIn the standard Huffman coding problem, it is assumed that each symbol in the set that the code words are constructed from has an equal cost to transmit: a code word whose length is \"N\" digits will always have a cost of \"N\", no matter how many of those digits are 0s, how many are 1s, etc. When working under this assumption, minimizing the total cost of the message and minimizing the total number of digits are the same thing.\n\"Huffman coding with unequal letter costs\" is the generalization without this assumption: the letters of the encoding alphabet may have non-uniform lengths, due to characteristics of the transmission medium. An example is the encoding alphabet of Morse code, where a 'dash' takes longer to send than a 'dot', and therefore the cost of a dash in transmission time is higher. The goal is still to minimize the weighted average codeword length, but it is no longer sufficient just to minimize the number of symbols used by the message. No algorithm is known to solve this in the same manner or with the same efficiency as conventional Huffman coding, though it has been solved by Richard M. Karp whose solution has been refined for the case of integer costs by Mordecai J. Golin.\nOptimal alphabetic binary trees (Hu\u2013Tucker coding).\nIn the standard Huffman coding problem, it is assumed that any codeword can correspond to any input symbol. In the alphabetic version, the alphabetic order of inputs and outputs must be identical. Thus, for example, formula_30 could not be assigned code formula_31, but instead should be assigned either formula_32 or formula_33. This is also known as the Hu\u2013Tucker problem, after T. C. Hu and Alan Tucker, the authors of the paper presenting the first formula_29-time solution to this optimal binary alphabetic problem, which has some similarities to Huffman algorithm, but is not a variation of this algorithm. A later method, the Garsia\u2013Wachs algorithm of Adriano Garsia and Michelle L. Wachs (1977), uses simpler logic to perform the same comparisons in the same total time bound. These optimal alphabetic binary trees are often used as binary search trees.\nThe canonical Huffman code.\nIf weights corresponding to the alphabetically ordered inputs are in numerical order, the Huffman code has the same lengths as the optimal alphabetic code, which can be found from calculating these lengths, rendering Hu\u2013Tucker coding unnecessary. The code resulting from numerically (re-)ordered input is sometimes called the \"canonical Huffman code\" and is often the code used in practice, due to ease of encoding/decoding. The technique for finding this code is sometimes called Huffman\u2013Shannon\u2013Fano coding, since it is optimal like Huffman coding, but alphabetic in weight probability, like Shannon\u2013Fano coding. The Huffman\u2013Shannon\u2013Fano code corresponding to the example is formula_35, which, having the same codeword lengths as the original solution, is also optimal. But in \"canonical Huffman code\", the result is formula_36.\nApplications.\nArithmetic coding and Huffman coding produce equivalent results \u2014 achieving entropy \u2014 when every symbol has a probability of the form 1/2\"k\". In other circumstances, arithmetic coding can offer better compression than Huffman coding because \u2014 intuitively \u2014 its \"code words\" can have effectively non-integer bit lengths, whereas code words in prefix codes such as Huffman codes can only have an integer number of bits. Therefore, a code word of length \"k\" only optimally matches a symbol of probability 1/2\"k\" and other probabilities are not represented optimally; whereas the code word length in arithmetic coding can be made to exactly match the true probability of the symbol. This difference is especially striking for small alphabet sizes.\nPrefix codes nevertheless remain in wide use because of their simplicity, high speed, and lack of patent coverage. They are often used as a \"back-end\" to other compression methods. Deflate (PKZIP's algorithm) and multimedia codecs such as JPEG and MP3 have a front-end model and quantization followed by the use of prefix codes; these are often called \"Huffman codes\" even though most applications use pre-defined variable-length codes rather than codes designed using Huffman's algorithm.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13885", "revid": "8565473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13885", "title": "High-density lipoprotein", "text": "One of the five major groups of lipoprotein\n High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is one of the five major groups of lipoproteins. Lipoproteins are complex particles composed of multiple proteins which transport all fat molecules (lipids) around the body within the water outside cells. They are typically composed of 80\u2013100 proteins per particle (organized by one, two or three ApoA). HDL particles enlarge while circulating in the blood, aggregating more fat molecules and transporting up to hundreds of fat molecules per particle.\nHDL particles are commonly referred to as \"good cholesterol\", because they transport fat molecules out of artery walls, reduce macrophage accumulation, and thus help prevent or even regress atherosclerosis. \nLipoproteins are divided into five subgroups, by density/size (an inverse relationship), which also correlates with function and incidence of cardiovascular events. Unlike the larger lipoprotein particles, which deliver fat molecules to cells, HDL particles remove fat molecules from cells. The lipids carried include cholesterol, phospholipids, and triglycerides, amounts of each are variable.\nHDL particles remove fats and cholesterol from cells, including within artery wall atheroma, and transport it back to the liver for excretion or re-use. Increasing concentrations of HDL particles in the blood are associated with decreasing accumulation of atherosclerosis within the walls of arteries, reducing the risk of sudden plaque ruptures, cardiovascular disease, stroke and other vascular diseases. People with higher levels of HDL-C tend to have fewer problems with cardiovascular diseases, while those with low HDL-C levels (especially less than 40\u00a0mg/dL or about 1\u00a0mmol/L) have increased rates for heart disease. Higher native HDL levels are correlated with lowered risk of cardiovascular disease in healthy people.\nHowever, a higher blood level of HDL is not necessarily protective against cardiovascular disease and may even be harmful in extremely high quantities, with an increased cardiovascular risk, especially in hypertensive patients.\nTesting.\nBecause of the high cost of directly measuring HDL particles, blood tests commonly measure a surrogate value, HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C), i.e. the cholesterol associated with HDL particles. \nHDL-C is often contrasted with the amount of cholesterol estimated to be carried within low-density lipoprotein particles, known as LDL-C, with HDL-C being nicknamed \"good cholesterol\" and LDL-C \"bad cholesterol\". \nIn healthy individuals, about 30% of blood cholesterol, along with other fats, is carried by HDL. This is often contrasted with the amount of cholesterol estimated to be carried within low-density lipoprotein particles, LDL, and called LDL-C. HDL particles remove fats and cholesterol from cells, including within artery wall atheroma, and transport it back to the liver for excretion or re-utilization; thus the cholesterol carried within HDL particles (HDL-C) is sometimes called \"good cholesterol\". Those with higher levels of HDL-C tend to have fewer problems with cardiovascular diseases, while those with low HDL-C cholesterol levels (especially less than 40\u00a0mg/dL or about 1\u00a0mmol/L) have increased rates for heart disease. Higher native HDL levels are correlated with lowered risk of cardiovascular disease in healthy people.\nThe remainder of the serum cholesterol after subtracting the HDL is the non-HDL cholesterol. The concentration of these other components, which may cause atheroma, is known as the non-HDL-C. This is now preferred to LDL-C as a secondary marker as it has been shown to be a better predictor and it is more easily calculated.\nStructure and function.\nWith a size ranging from 5 to 17\u00a0nm, HDL is the smallest of the lipoprotein particles. It is the densest because it contains the highest proportion of protein to lipids. Its most abundant apolipoproteins are apo A-I and apo A-II. A rare genetic variant, ApoA-1 Milano, has been documented to be far more effective in both protecting against and regressing arterial disease, atherosclerosis.\nThe liver synthesizes these lipoproteins as complexes of apolipoproteins and phospholipid, which resemble cholesterol-free flattened spherical lipoprotein particles, whose NMR structure was published; the complexes are capable of picking up cholesterol, carried internally, from cells by interaction with the ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1). A plasma enzyme called lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) converts the free cholesterol into cholesteryl ester (a more hydrophobic form of cholesterol), which is then sequestered into the core of the lipoprotein particle, eventually causing the newly synthesized HDL to assume a spherical shape. HDL particles increase in size as they circulate through the blood and incorporate more cholesterol and phospholipid molecules from cells and other lipoproteins, such as by interaction with the ABCG1 transporter and the phospholipid transport protein (PLTP).\nHDL transports cholesterol mostly to the liver or steroidogenic organs such as adrenals, ovary, and testes by both direct and indirect pathways. HDL is removed by HDL receptors such as scavenger receptor BI (SR-BI), which mediate the selective uptake of cholesterol from HDL. In humans, probably the most relevant pathway is the indirect one, which is mediated by cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). This protein exchanges triglycerides of VLDL against cholesteryl esters of HDL. As the result, VLDLs are processed to LDL, which are removed from the circulation by the LDL receptor pathway. The triglycerides are not stable in HDL, but are degraded by hepatic lipase so that, finally, small HDL particles are left, which restart the uptake of cholesterol from cells.\nThe cholesterol delivered to the liver is excreted into the bile and, hence, intestine either directly or indirectly after conversion into bile acids. Delivery of HDL cholesterol to adrenals, ovaries, and testes is important for the synthesis of steroid hormones.\nSeveral steps in the metabolism of HDL can participate in the transport of cholesterol from lipid-laden macrophages of atherosclerotic arteries, termed foam cells, to the liver for secretion into the bile. This pathway has been termed \"reverse cholesterol transport\" and is considered as the classical protective function of HDL toward atherosclerosis.\nHDL carries many lipid and protein species, several of which have very low concentrations but are biologically very active. For example, HDL and its protein and lipid constituents help to inhibit oxidation, inflammation, activation of the endothelium, coagulation, and platelet aggregation. All these properties may contribute to the ability of HDL to protect from atherosclerosis, and it is not yet known which are the most important. In addition, a small subfraction of HDL lends protection against the protozoan parasite \"Trypanosoma brucei brucei\". This HDL subfraction, termed trypanosome lytic factor (TLF), contains specialized proteins that, while very active, are unique to the TLF molecule.\nIn the stress response, serum amyloid A, which is one of the acute-phase proteins and an apolipoprotein, is under the stimulation of cytokines (interleukin 1, interleukin 6), and cortisol produced in the adrenal cortex and carried to the damaged tissue incorporated into HDL particles. At the inflammation site, it attracts and activates leukocytes. In chronic inflammations, its deposition in the tissues manifests itself as amyloidosis.\nIt has been postulated that the concentration of large HDL particles more accurately reflects protective action, as opposed to the concentration of total HDL particles. This ratio of large HDL to total HDL particles varies widely and is measured only by more sophisticated lipoprotein assays using either electrophoresis (the original method developed in the 1970s) or newer NMR spectroscopy methods (See also nuclear magnetic resonance and spectroscopy), developed in the 1990s.\nSubfractions.\nFive subfractions of HDL have been identified. From largest (and most effective in cholesterol removal) to smallest (and least effective), the types are 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b, and 3c.\nEpidemiology.\nMen tend to have noticeably lower HDL concentrations, with smaller size and lower cholesterol content, than women. Men also have a greater incidence of atherosclerotic heart disease. Studies confirm the fact that HDL has a buffering role in balancing the effects of the hypercoagulable state in type 2 diabetics and decreases the high risk of cardiovascular complications in these patients. Also, the results obtained in this study revealed that there was a significant negative correlation between HDL and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT).\nEpidemiological studies have shown that high concentrations of HDL (over 60\u00a0mg/dL) have protective value against cardiovascular diseases such as ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction. Low concentrations of HDL (below 40\u00a0mg/dL for men, below 50\u00a0mg/dL for women) increase the risk for atherosclerotic diseases.\nData from the landmark Framingham Heart Study showed that, for a given level of LDL, the risk of heart disease increases 10-fold as the HDL varies from high to low. On the converse, however, for a fixed level of HDL, the risk increases 3-fold as LDL varies from low to high. \nEven people with very low LDL levels achieved by statin treatment are exposed to increased risk if their HDL levels are not high enough.\nVery high HDL-C levels (\u226580\u00a0mg/dL in men, \u2265100\u00a0mg/dL in women) appears to be detrimental to cardiovascular outcomes. Several genetic conditions cause abnormally low or high HDL-C levels, often without the expected change in cardiovascular disease rates. In fact, when many known correlates of CVD risks are controlled for, HDL-C does not have any correlation with cardiovascular event risks. In this way, HDL-C only seems to serve as an imperfect, but easy-to-measure, proxy for a healthy lifestyle. What does correlate well with CVD risks even when these factors are controlled for is a direct measure of the capability for reverse cholesterol transport in a person's blood serum, the \"cholesterol efflux capacity\" (CEC).\nEstimating HDL via associated cholesterol.\nClinical laboratories formerly measured HDL cholesterol by separating other lipoprotein fractions using either ultracentrifugation or chemical precipitation with divalent ions such as Mg2+, then coupling the products of a cholesterol oxidase reaction to an indicator reaction. The reference method still uses a combination of these techniques. Most laboratories now use automated homogeneous analytical methods in which lipoproteins containing apo B are blocked using antibodies to apo B, then a colorimetric enzyme reaction measures cholesterol in the non-blocked HDL particles. HPLC can also be used. Subfractions (HDL-2C, HDL-3C) can be measured, but clinical significance of these subfractions has not been determined. The measurement of apo-A reactive capacity can be used to measure HDL cholesterol but is thought to be less accurate.\nRecommended ranges.\nThe American Heart Association, NIH and NCEP provide a set of guidelines for fasting HDL levels and risk for heart disease.\nHigh LDL with low HDL level is an additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease.\nMeasuring HDL concentration and sizes.\nAs technology has reduced costs and clinical trials have continued to demonstrate the importance of HDL, methods for directly measuring HDL concentrations and size (which indicates function) at lower costs have become more widely available and increasingly regarded as important for assessing individual risk for progressive arterial disease and treatment methods.\nElectrophoresis measurements.\nSince the HDL particles have a net negative charge and vary by density &amp; size, ultracentrifugation combined with electrophoresis have been utilized since before 1950 to enumerate the concentration of HDL particles and sort them by size with a specific volume of blood plasma. Larger HDL particles are carrying more cholesterol.\nNMR measurements.\nConcentration and sizes of lipoprotein particles can be estimated using nuclear magnetic resonance fingerprinting.\nOptimal total and large HDL concentrations.\nThe HDL particle concentrations are typically categorized by event rate percentiles based on the people participating and being tracked in the MESA trial, a medical research study sponsored by the United States National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.\nThe lowest incidence of atherosclerotic events over time occurs within those with both the highest concentrations of total HDL particles (the top quarter, &gt;75%) and the highest concentrations of large HDL particles. Multiple additional measures, including LDL particle concentrations, small LDL particle concentrations, VLDL concentrations, estimations of insulin resistance and standard cholesterol lipid measurements (for comparison of the plasma data with the estimation methods discussed above) are routinely provided in clinical testing.\nIncreasing HDL levels.\nWhile higher HDL levels are correlated with lower risk of cardiovascular diseases, no medication used to increase HDL has been proven to improve health. As of 2017, numerous lifestyle changes and drugs to increase HDL levels were under study.\nHDL lipoprotein particles that bear apolipoprotein C3 are associated with increased, rather than decreased, risk for coronary heart disease.\nDiet and exercise.\nCertain changes in diet and exercise may have a positive impact on raising HDL levels:\nMost saturated fats increase HDL cholesterol to varying degrees but also raise total and LDL cholesterol.\nRecreational drugs.\nHDL levels can be increased by smoking cessation, or mild to moderate alcohol intake.\nCannabis in unadjusted analyses, past and current cannabis use was not associated with higher HDL-C levels. A study performed in 4635 patients demonstrated no effect on the HDL-C levels (P=0.78) [the mean (standard error) HDL-C values in control subjects (never used), past users and current users were 53.4 (0.4), 53.9 (0.6) and 53.9 (0.7) mg/dL, respectively].\nExogenous anabolic androgenic steroids, particularly 17\u03b1-alkylated anabolic steroids and others administered orally, can reduce HDL-C by 50 percent or more. Other androgen receptor agonists such as selective androgen receptor modulators can also lower HDL. As there is some evidence that the HDL reduction is caused by increased reverse cholesterol transport, it is unknown if AR agonists' HDL-lowering effect is pro- or anti-atherogenic.\nPharmaceutical drugs and niacin.\nPharmacological therapy to increase the level of HDL cholesterol includes use of fibrates and niacin. Fibrates have not been proven to have an effect on overall deaths from all causes, despite their effects on lipids.\nNiacin (nicotinic acid, a form of vitamin B3) increases HDL by selectively inhibiting hepatic diacylglycerol acyltransferase 2, reducing triglyceride synthesis and VLDL secretion through a receptor HM74 otherwise known as niacin receptor 2 and HM74A / GPR109A, niacin receptor 1.\nPharmacologic (1- to 3-gram/day) niacin doses increase HDL levels by 10\u201330%, making it the most powerful agent to increase HDL-cholesterol. A randomized clinical trial demonstrated that treatment with niacin can significantly reduce atherosclerosis progression and cardiovascular events. Niacin products sold as \"no-flush\", \"i.e.\" not having side-effects such as \"niacin flush\", do not, however, contain free nicotinic acid and are therefore ineffective at raising HDL, while products sold as \"sustained-release\" may contain free nicotinic acid, but \"some brands are hepatotoxic\"; therefore the recommended form of niacin for raising HDL is the cheapest, immediate-release preparation. Both fibrates and niacin increase artery toxic homocysteine, an effect that can be counteracted by also consuming a multivitamin with relatively high amounts of the B-vitamins, but multiple European trials of the most popular B-vitamin cocktails, trial showing 30% average reduction in homocysteine, while not showing problems have also not shown any benefit in reducing cardiovascular event rates. A 2011 extended-release niacin (Niaspan) study was halted early because patients adding niacin to their statin treatment showed no increase in heart health, but did experience an increase in the risk of stroke.\nIn contrast, while the use of statins is effective against high levels of LDL cholesterol, most have little or no effect in raising HDL cholesterol. Rosuvastatin and pitavastatin, however, have been demonstrated to significantly raise HDL levels.\nLovaza has been shown to increase HDL-C. However, the best evidence to date suggests it has no benefit for primary or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease.\nThe PPAR modulator GW501516 has shown a positive effect on HDL-C and an antiatherogenic where LDL is an issue. However, research on the drug has been discontinued after it was discovered to cause rapid cancer development in several organs in rats.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13887", "revid": "51035483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13887", "title": "Honolulu", "text": "Capital and largest city in Hawaii, United States\nHonolulu ( ; ) is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Hawaii, located in the Pacific Ocean. It is the county seat of the consolidated City and County of Honolulu, situated along the southeast coast of the island of O\u02bbahu. The population of Honolulu was 350,964 at the 2020 census, while the Urban Honolulu metropolitan area has an estimated 1 million residents and is the 56th-largest metropolitan area in the nation.\nThe area's geography and Honolulu Harbor has long made it desirable as a port, accounting for the city\u2019s growth and importance in the Hawaiian archipelago and the broader Pacific region. In 1845, Honolulu became the capital of the independent Hawaiian Kingdom, a role it maintained as Hawaii became a U.S. territory and at last a U.S. State. The city gained worldwide recognition following the Empire of Japan's attack on nearby Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, which prompted the entry of the U.S. into World War II; the harbor remains a major U.S. Navy base, hosting the United States Pacific Fleet, the world's largest naval command.\nHonolulu is the westernmost and southernmost major U.S. city as well as the westernmost and southernmost U.S. state capital. It is a major hub for business, commercial, finance, hospitality, and military defense in both the state and Oceania. The city is characterized by a mix of various Asian, Western, and Pacific cultures, reflected in its diverse demography, cuisine, and traditions. Honolulu's favorable tropical climate, rich natural scenery, and extensive beaches make it a popular global destination for tourists. With nearly 1.5 million visitors in 2024, Honolulu is among the ten most visited cities in the United States.\nEtymology.\n is Hawaiian for 'sheltered harbor' or 'calm port'; the former meaning is also reflected in the related M\u0101ori cognate toponym in the tip of New Zealand's North Island. Its old name, , roughly encompasses the area from Nu\u02bbuanu Avenue to Alakea Street and from Hotel Street to Queen Street, which is the heart of the present downtown district.\nHistory.\nEvidence of the first settlement of Honolulu by the original Polynesian migrants to the archipelago comes from oral histories and artifacts. These indicate that there was a settlement where Honolulu now stands in the 11th century. After Kamehameha I conquered O\u02bbahu in the Battle of Nu\u02bbuanu at Nu\u02bbuanu Pali, he moved his royal court from the Island of Hawai\u02bbi to Waikiki in 1804. His court relocated in 1809 to what is now downtown Honolulu. The capital was moved back to Kailua-Kona in 1812.\nIn November 1794, Captain William Brown of Great Britain was the first foreigner to sail into what is now Honolulu Harbor. More foreign ships followed, making the port of Honolulu a focal point for merchant ships traveling between North America and Asia. The settlement grew from a handful of homes to a city in the early 19th century after Kamehameha I chose it as a replacement for his residence at Waikiki in 1810.\nIn 1845, Kamehameha III moved the permanent capital of the Hawaiian Kingdom from Lahaina on Maui to Honolulu. He and the kings who followed him transformed Honolulu into a modern capital, erecting buildings such as St. Andrew's Cathedral, \u02bbIolani Palace, and Ali\u02bbi\u014dlani Hale. At the same time, Honolulu became the islands' center of commerce, with descendants of American missionaries establishing major businesses downtown.\nDespite the turbulent history of the late 19th century and early 20th century\u2014such as the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy in 1893, Hawaii's annexation by the U.S. in 1898, a large fire in 1900, and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941\u2014Honolulu remained the Hawaiian Islands' capital, largest city, and main airport and seaport.\nAn economic and tourism boom following statehood brought rapid economic growth to Honolulu and Hawaii. Modern air travel brings, as of 2007[ [update]], 7.6 million visitors annually to the islands, with 62.3% entering at Honolulu International Airport. Today, Honolulu is a modern city with numerous high-rise buildings, and Waikiki is the center of the tourism industry in Hawaii, with thousands of hotel rooms. \nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the Urban Honolulu CDP has an area of , of which , or 11.56%, is water.\nHonolulu is the most remote major U.S. city and one of the most isolated major cities in the world. The closest location in mainland U.S. is the Point Arena Lighthouse in northern California, at . (Nautical vessels require some additional distance to circumnavigate Makapu\u02bbu Point.) The closest major city is San Francisco, California, at . Some islands off the Mexican coast and part of the Aleutian Islands of Alaska are slightly closer to Honolulu than the mainland.\nThe volcanic field of the Honolulu Volcanics is partially inside the city.\nClimate.\nHonolulu experiences a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen classification \"BSh\"), with a mostly dry summer season, due to a rain shadow effect. Despite temperatures that meet the tropical threshold of all months having a mean temperature of 64.4\u00a0\u00b0F (18.0\u00a0\u00b0C) or higher, the city receives too little precipitation to be classified as tropical.\nTemperatures vary little throughout the year, with average high temperatures of and average lows of . Nevertheless, there are slight seasons. The \"winter\" months from December to March can occasionally see lows fall below , whereas the \"summer\" from June to September can get a limited number of hot days achieving or higher. This occurs on an average of only 32 days annually, with lows in the upper 50s \u00b0F (14\u201315\u00a0\u00b0C) once or twice a year. The highest recorded temperature was on September 19, 1994, and August 31, 2019. The lowest recorded temperature was on February 16, 1902, and January 20, 1969.\nThe annual average rainfall is , which mainly occurs from October through early April, with very little rainfall in the summer. However, both seasons experience a similar number of rainy days. Light showers occur in summer, while heavier rain falls during winter. Honolulu has an average of 278 sunny days and 89.2 rainy days per year.\nAlthough the city is in the tropics, hurricanes are quite rare. The last recorded hurricane that hit near Honolulu was Category 4 Hurricane Iniki in 1992. Tornadoes are also uncommon and occur about every 15 years. Waterspouts off the coast are also uncommon, hitting about every five years.\nHonolulu falls under the USDA 12b Plant Hardiness zone.\nThe average temperature of the sea ranges from in March to in September.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe population of Honolulu is 350,964 as of the 2020 U.S. census, making it the 55th most populous city in the U.S. The city's population was 337,256 at the 2010 U.S. census.\nThe residential neighborhood of East Honolulu is considered a separate census-designated place by the Census Bureau but is generally considered part of Honolulu's urban core. The population of East Honolulu was 50,922 as of 2020, increasing Honolulu's core population to over 400,000.\nIn terms of race (including Hispanics in the racial counts), 54.8% were Asian, 17.9% were European, 1.5% were African American, 0.2% were Native American or Alaska Native, 8.4% were Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 0.8% were from \"some other race\", and 16.3% were from two or more races. Separately, Hispanic and Latino residents of any race made up 5.4% of the population. In 1970, the Census Bureau reported Honolulu's population as 33.9% white and 53.7% Asian and Pacific Islander.\nAsian Americans are the majority of Honolulu's population, accounting for over 52%. The Asian ethnic groups are Japanese (19.9%), Filipino (13.2%), Chinese (10.4%), Korean (4.3%), Vietnamese (2.0%), Indian (0.3%), Laotian (0.3%), Thai (0.2%), Cambodian (0.1%), and Indonesian (0.1%).\nPacific Islander Americans are 8.4% of Honolulu's population. The Pacific Islander ethnic groups are people solely of Native Hawaiian ancestry (3.2%), Samoan Americans made up 1.5% of the population, Marshallese people make up 0.5%, and Tongan people comprise 0.3%. People of Guamanian descent made up 0.2% of the population and numbered 841.\nMetropolitan Honolulu, which encompasses all of Oahu island, had a population of 953,207 as of the 2010 U.S. census and 1,016,508 in the 2020 U.S. census, making it the 54th-largest metropolitan area in the United States.\nEconomy.\nThe largest city and airport in the Hawaiian Islands, Honolulu acts as a natural gateway to the islands' large tourism industry, which brings millions of visitors and contributes $10 billion annually to the local economy. Honolulu's location in the Pacific also makes it a large business and trading hub, particularly between the East and the West. Other important aspects of the city's economy include military defense, research and development, and manufacturing.\nAmong the companies based in Honolulu are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHawaiian Airlines, Island Air, and Aloha Air Cargo are headquartered in the city. Until it dissolved, Aloha Airlines was headquartered in the city. At one time Mid-Pacific Airlines had its headquarters on the property of Honolulu International Airport.\nIn 2009, Honolulu had a 4.5% increase in average rent, maintaining it in the second most expensive rental market among 210 U.S. metropolitan areas. Similarly, the general cost of living, including gasoline, electricity, and most foodstuffs, is much higher than on the U.S. mainland, because the city and state have to import most goods. One 2014 report found that cost of living expenses were 69% higher than the U.S. average. According to a 2024 report from the Department of Business, Economic Development &amp; Tourism, Honolulu experienced a 1.5 percentage point higher CPI-U compared to the 3.2% U.S. average increase in the first half of 2024.\nSince the only national banks in Hawaii are all local, many visitors and new residents must get accustomed to different banks. First Hawaiian Bank is Hawaii's largest and oldest bank, headquartered at the First Hawaiian Center, the state's tallest office building. \nArts and culture.\nThe Bishop Museum is Honolulu's largest museum. It has the state's largest collection of natural history specimens and the world's largest collection of Hawaiiana and Pacific culture artifacts. The Honolulu Zoo is Hawaii's main zoological institution, while the Waikiki Aquarium is a working marine biology laboratory. The Waikiki Aquarium partners with the University of Hawai\u02bbi and other universities worldwide. Established for appreciation and botany, Honolulu is home to several gardens: Foster Botanical Garden, Lili\u02bbuokalani Botanical Garden, Walker Estate, among others.\nEstablished in 1900, the Honolulu Symphony is the second-oldest U.S. symphony orchestra west of the Rocky Mountains. Other classical music ensembles include the Hawaii Opera Theatre. Honolulu is also a center for Hawaiian music. The main music venues include the Hawaii Theatre, the Neal Blaisdell Center Concert Hall and Arena, and the Waikiki Shell. Honolulu also includes several venues for live theater, including the Diamond Head Theatre and Kumu Kahua Theatre.\nThe Honolulu Museum of Art has Hawaii's largest collection of Asian and Western art. It also has the largest collection of Islamic art, housed at the Shangri La estate. Since the merger of the Honolulu Academy of Arts and The Contemporary Museum, Honolulu (now called the Honolulu Museum of Art Spalding House) in 2011, the museum is also the state's only contemporary art museum. The contemporary collections are housed at main campus (Spalding House) in Makiki and a multi-level gallery in downtown Honolulu at the First Hawaiian Center. The museum hosts a film and video program dedicated to arthouse and world cinema in the museum's Doris Duke Theatre, named for the museum's historic patroness Doris Duke.\nThe Hawaii State Art Museum (also downtown) has pieces by local artists as well as traditional Hawaiian art. The museum is administered by the Hawaii State Foundation on Culture and the Arts.\nHonolulu also annually holds the Hawaii International Film Festival (HIFF). It showcases some of the best films from producers all across the Pacific Rim and is the largest \"East meets West\" style film festival of its sort in the United States.\nTourist attractions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports.\nHonolulu's tropical climate lends itself to year-round activities. Honolulu has three large road races: the Great Aloha Run, Honolulu Marathon, and Honolulu Triathlon. Ironman Hawaii was first held in Honolulu. It was the first ever Ironman triathlon event and is also the world championship. The Waikiki Roughwater Swim race is held annually off the beach of Waikiki on a course.\nFans of spectator sports in Honolulu generally support the football, volleyball, basketball, rugby union, rugby league, and baseball programs of the University of Hawai\u02bbi at M\u0101noa. High school sporting events, especially football, are especially popular. Honolulu has no professional sports teams, with any prospective teams being forced to conduct extremely long travels for away games in the continental states. It was the home of the Hawaii Islanders (Pacific Coast League, 1961\u201387), The Hawaiians (World Football League, 1974\u201375), Team Hawaii (North American Soccer League, 1977), and the Hawaiian Islanders (af2, 2002\u201304).\nThe NCAA football Hawaii Bowl is played in Honolulu. Honolulu also hosted the NFL's annual Pro Bowl each February from 1980 to 2009. After the 2010 and 2015 games were played in Miami Gardens and Glendale, respectively, the Pro Bowl was once again in Honolulu from 2011 to 2014, with 2016 the most recent. From 1993 to 2008, Honolulu hosted Hawaii Winter Baseball, featuring minor-league players from Major League Baseball, Nippon Professional Baseball, Korea Baseball Organization, and independent leagues.\nHonolulu Little League baseball teams have been successful in the Little League World Series, winning the championship in 2018 and 2022. In 2024, Honolulu was the official home of the Pok\u00e9mon World Championships.\nVenues.\nVenues for spectator sports in Honolulu include:\nAloha Stadium was a venue for American football and soccer located in Halawa near Pearl Harbor, just outside Honolulu. The stadium was closed in 2020. Plans for a new stadium at the site were announced in 2022.\nGovernment.\nRick Blangiardi was elected mayor of Honolulu County on August 8, 2020, and began serving as the county's 15th mayor on January 2, 2021. The municipal offices of the City and County of Honolulu, including Honolulu Hale, the seat of the city and county, are in the Capitol District, as are the Hawaii state government buildings.\nThe Capitol District is in the Honolulu census county division (CCD), the urban area commonly regarded as the \"City\" of Honolulu. The Honolulu CCD is on the southeast coast of O\u02bbahu between Makapuu and Halawa. The division boundary follows the Ko\u02bbolau crestline, so Makapu\u02bbu Beach is in the Ko'olaupoko District. On the west, the division boundary follows Halawa Stream, then crosses Red Hill and runs just west of Aliamanu Crater, so that Aloha Stadium, Pearl Harbor (with the USS Arizona Memorial), and Hickam Air Force Base are all in the island's Ewa CCD.\nThe Hawaii Department of Public Safety operates the Oahu Community Correctional Center, the jail for the island of Oahu, in Honolulu CCD.\nThe United States Postal Service operates post offices in Honolulu. The main Honolulu Post Office is by the international airport, at 3600 Aolele Street. Federal Detention Center, Honolulu, operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, is in the CDP.\nForeign missions on the island.\nSeveral countries have consular facilities in Honolulu. They include consulates of Japan, South Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan, Federated States of Micronesia, Australia, New Zealand and the Marshall Islands.\nEducation and research.\nColleges and universities.\nColleges and universities in Honolulu include Honolulu Community College, Kapi\u02bbolani Community College, the University of Hawai\u02bbi at M\u0101noa, Chaminade University, and Hawaii Pacific University. University of Hawai\u02bbi at M\u0101noa houses the main offices of the University of Hawai\u02bbi System.\nResearch institutions.\nHonolulu is home to three renowned international affairs research institutions. The Pacific Forum, one of the world's leading Asia-Pacific policy research institutes and one of the first U.S. organizations to focus exclusively on Asia, has its main office on Bishop Street in downtown Honolulu. The East\u2013West Center (EWC), an education and research organization established by Congress in 1960 to strengthen relations and understanding among the peoples and nations of Asia, the Pacific, and the U.S., is headquartered in M\u0101noa, Honolulu. The Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies (APCSS), a U.S. Department of Defense institute, is based in Waikiki, Honolulu. APCSS addresses regional and global security issues and supports the U.S. Pacific Command by developing and sustaining relationships among security practitioners and national security establishments throughout the region.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nHawaii State Department of Education operates Honolulu's public schools. Public high schools in the CDP area include Wallace Rider Farrington, Kaiser, Kaimuki, Kalani, Moanalua, William McKinley, and Theodore Roosevelt. It also includes the Hawaii School for the Deaf and the Blind, the statewide school for blind and deaf children. There is a charter school, University Laboratory School.\nAs of 2014[ [update]] almost 38% of K-12 students in the Honolulu area attend private schools. Private schools include Academy of the Pacific, Damien Memorial School, Hawaii Baptist Academy, \u02bbIolani School, Lutheran High School of Hawaii, Kamehameha Schools, Maryknoll School, Mid-Pacific Institute, La Pietra, Punahou School, Sacred Hearts Academy, St. Andrew's Priory School, Saint Francis School, Saint Louis School, the Education Laboratory School, Saint Patrick School, Trinity Christian School, and Varsity International School. Hawaii has one of the nation's highest rate of private school attendance.\nWeekend educational programs.\nThe Hawai\u02bbi Japanese School \u2013 Rainbow Gakuen (\u30cf\u30ef\u30a4\u30ec\u30a4\u30f3\u30dc\u30fc\u5b66\u5712 \"Hawai Reinb\u014d Gakuen\"), a supplementary weekend Japanese school, holds its classes in Kaimuki Middle School in Honolulu and has its offices in another building in Honolulu. The school serves overseas Japanese nationals. Honolulu has other weekend programs for the Japanese, Chinese, and Spanish languages.\nLibraries.\nHawaii State Public Library System operates public libraries. The Hawaii State Library in the CDP serves as the system's main library, while the Library for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, also in the CDP area, serves handicapped and blind people.\nBranches in the CDP area include Aiea, Aina Haina, Ewa Beach, Hawai\u02bbi Kai, Kahuku, Kailua, Kaimuki, Kalihi-Palama, Kaneohe, Kapolei, Liliha, M\u0101noa, McCully-Moiliili, Mililani, Moanalua, Wahiawa, Waialua, Waianae, Waikiki-Kapahulu, Waimanalo, and Waipahu.\nMedia.\nHonolulu is served by one daily newspaper, the \"Honolulu Star-Advertiser,\" along with a magazine, \"Honolulu Magazine\", several radio stations and television stations, among other media. Local news agency and CNN-affiliate \"Hawaii News Now\" broadcasts and is headquartered out of Honolulu.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nAt the western end of the CDP, Daniel K. Inouye International Airport (HNL) is the principal aviation gateway to the state of Hawaii. Kalaeloa Airport is primarily a commuter facility used by unscheduled air taxis, general aviation and transient and locally based military aircraft.\nHighways.\nHonolulu has been ranked as having the nation's worst traffic congestion, beating former record holder Los Angeles. Drivers waste on average over 58 hours per year on congested roadways. The following freeways, part of the Interstate Highway System serve Honolulu:\nOther major highways that link Honolulu CCD with other parts of the Island of Oahu are:\nLike most major American cities, the Honolulu metropolitan area experiences heavy traffic congestion during rush hours, especially to and from the western suburbs of Kapolei, \u02bbEwa Beach, Aiea, Pearl City, Waipahu, and Mililani.\nThere is a Hawaii Electric Vehicle Demonstration Project (HEVDP).\nPublic transit.\nHonolulu is constructing a rail transit line that will connect Honolulu with cities and suburban areas near Pearl Harbor and in the Leeward and West Oahu regions. Approved in 2010 by public referendum, Skyline aims to alleviate traffic congestion for West O\u02bbahu commuters while aiding the westward expansion of the metropolitan area. The project has been criticized for its high cost, delays, and potential environmental impacts, but the line is expected to have large ridership. The line's first segment connects East Kapolei and Aloha Stadium and opened on June\u00a030, 2023. The opening of the first phase of Skyline was delayed until 2023, as HART canceled the initial bids for the first nine stations, rebid the work as three packages of three stations each, and allowed more time for construction in the hope that increased competition on smaller contracts would drive down costs; initial bids ranged from $294.5\u00a0million to $320.8\u00a0million, far surpassing HART's budget of $184\u00a0million.\nElectric street railways were operated in Honolulu by the now-defunct Honolulu Rapid Transit Company before World War II. Predecessors to the Honolulu Rapid Transit Company were the Honolulu Rapid Transit and Land Company (began 1903) and Hawaiian Tramways (began 1888).\nEstablished by former Mayor Frank F. Fasi as the replacement for the Honolulu Rapid Transit Company (HRT), Honolulu's TheBus system was honored in 1994\u201395 and 2000\u201301 by the American Public Transportation Association as \"America's Best Transit System\". TheBus operates 107 routes serving Honolulu and most major cities and towns on O\u02bbahu. TheBus comprises a fleet of 531 buses, and is run by the nonprofit corporation O\u02bbahu Transit Services in conjunction with the city Department of Transportation Services. As of 2006[ [update]], Honolulu was ranked fourth for highest per-capita use of mass transit in the United States.\nThe island also features TheHandi-Van, for riders who require para-transit operations. To be eligible for this service, riders must meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). TheHandi-Van has a fare of $2 and is available from 4am to 1am. There is a 24-hour service within 3/4 of a mile of TheBus route 2 and route 40. TheHandi-Van comprises a fleet of 160 buses. The parantransit branch also runs Human Services Transportation Coordination (HSTCP), which mainly provides transportation for people with disabilities, older adults, and people with limited incomes, assisted by the Committee for Accessible Transportation (CAT). Both organizations work together to provide transportation for elderly and persons with disabilities.\nBicycle sharing.\nSince June 28, 2017, Bikeshare Hawaii administers the bicycle sharing program in O\u02bbahu while Secure Bike Share operates the \"Biki\" system. Most \"Biki\" stations are between Chinatown/Downtown and Diamond Head, but a 2018 expansion added stations toward the University of Hawai\u02bbi at M\u0101noa Campus, Kapi\u02bbolani Community College, Makiki, and Kalihi area.\nModal characteristics.\nAccording to the 2016 American Community Survey (five-year average), 56% of Urban Honolulu residents commuted to work by driving alone, 13.8% carpooled, 11.7% used public transportation, and 8.7% walked. About 5.7% commuted by bike, taxi, motorcycle or other forms of transportation, while 4.1% worked at home.\nThe city of Honolulu has a high percentage of households without a motor vehicle. In 2015, 16.6% of Honolulu households were car-free, which increased slightly to 17.2% in 2016; by comparison, the United States national average was 8.7% in 2016. Honolulu averaged 1.4 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nPublic safety.\nThe Honolulu Police Department is the primary law enforcement agency for the city and county of Honolulu and serves the entire Oahu Island. Honolulu Police Department has a mixed fleet of marked patrol cars and unmarked along with a subsidized vehicle program in place. Marked vehicles are white with blue stripes and white lettering HONOLULU POLICE. The Honolulu Police Departments lets officers of a certain rank purchase a private vehicle for police use. Subsidized vehicles are unmarked but have a small blue roof light. Subsidized vehicles can be any make, model, or color, but must follow department rules and guidelines. Honolulu Police and Hawaii County Police on the Big Island are the only departments in the state of Hawaii and the U.S. with subsidized vehicles. Honolulu Police along with other city, county law enforcement in Hawaii uses blue lights for their vehicles. They also keep their cruise blue lights on while on patrol.\nThe Honolulu Fire Department provides firefighting services and first responder level emergency medical services on Oahu. Emergency medical services at higher levels are provided by the Honolulu Emergency Medical Services. Contrary to most other fire departments, fire trucks in Honolulu are yellow.\nSister cities.\nHonolulu's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13889", "revid": "41719476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13889", "title": "Percolozoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "13890", "revid": "10841396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13890", "title": "History of India", "text": "Anatomically modern humans first arrived on the Indian subcontinent between 73,000 and 55,000 years ago. The earliest known human remains in South Asia date to 30,000 years ago. Sedentariness began in South Asia around 7000 BCE; by 4500 BCE, settled life had spread, and gradually evolved into the Indus Valley Civilisation, one of three early cradles of civilisation in the Old World, which flourished between 2500 BCE and 1900 BCE in present-day Pakistan and north-western India. Early in the second millennium BCE, persistent drought caused the population of the Indus Valley to scatter from large urban centres to villages. Indo-Aryan tribes moved into the Punjab from Central Asia in several waves of migration. The Vedic Period of the Vedic people in northern India (1500\u2013500 BCE) was marked by the composition of their extensive collections of hymns (Vedas). The social structure was loosely stratified via the varna system, incorporated into the highly evolved present-day J\u0101ti system. The pastoral and nomadic Indo-Aryans spread from the Punjab into the Gangetic plain. Around 600 BCE a second urbanization occurred resulting in a new interregional culture; then, smaller janapadas (realms) were consolidated into mahajanapadas (great states). This period saw the rise of new ascetic movements and religious concepts, including the rise of Jainism and Buddhism. The latter was synthesized with the preexisting religious cultures of the subcontinent, giving rise to Hinduism.\nChandragupta Maurya overthrew the Nanda Empire and established the first great empire in ancient India, the Maurya Empire. India's Mauryan king Ashoka is widely recognised for the violent Kalinga War and his historical acceptance of Buddhism and his attempts to spread nonviolence and peace across his empire. This period marks the rapid dissemination of \u015arama\u1e47ic religions.\nThe Maurya Empire would collapse in 185 BCE, on the assassination of the then-emperor Brihadratha by his general Pushyamitra Shunga. The Shunga Empire in the north and north-east of the subcontinent would fracture into various smaller polities. Whereas, in the North West, the Greco-Bactrians would found the Indo-Greek Kingdoms, which were replaced by successive invasions from Indo-Scythians, Indo-Parthians and Kushan Empires. The Gupta Empire from Greater Magadha, in the 4th to 6th centuries CE, would reunify these regions as mentioned in the Iron pillar of Delhi. This period, witnessing a Hindu religious and intellectual resurgence is known as the Classical or Golden Age of India. Aspects of Indian civilisation, administration, culture, and religion spread to much of Asia, which led to the establishment of Indianised kingdoms in the region, forming Greater India. \nThe Gupta Empire would gradually wane due to multiple invasions from the Huna people and loss of core territories. Huna invasions would be checked by regional rulers including Yashodharman supported by the Later Guptas, then again by Harsha. The large scale invasion of Huna peoples and their assimilation led to the syncretic Pratihara dynasty. The most significant event between the 7th and 11th centuries was the Tripartite struggle centred on Kannauj resulting in Pratihara victory.\nSouthern India saw the rise of multiple imperial powers from the middle of the fifth century. The Chola dynasty conquered southern India in the 11th century. In the early medieval period, Indian mathematics, including Hindu numerals, influenced the development of mathematics and astronomy in the Arab world, including the creation of the Hindu-Arabic numeral system.\nIslamic conquests made limited inroads into modern Afghanistan and Sindh as early as the 8th century, followed by the invasions of Mahmud Ghazni.\nThe Delhi Sultanate, established in 1206 by Central Asian Turks, ruled much of northern India in the 14th century. It was governed by various Turkic and Afghan dynasties, including the Indo-Turkic Tughlaqs. The empire declined in the late 14th century following the invasions of Timur and saw the advent of the Malwa, Gujarat, and Bahmani sultanates, the last of which split in 1518 into the five Deccan sultanates. The wealthy Bengal Sultanate also emerged as a major power, lasting over three centuries. During this period, multiple strong Hindu kingdoms, notably the Vijayanagara Empire and Rajput states under the Kingdom of Mewar emerged and played significant roles in shaping the cultural and political landscape of India.\nThe early modern period began in the 16th century, when the Mughal Empire conquered most of the Indian subcontinent, signaling the proto-industrialisation, becoming the biggest global economy and manufacturing power. The Mughals suffered a gradual decline in the early 18th century, largely due to the rising power of the Marathas, who took control of extensive regions of the Indian subcontinent, and numerous Afghan invasions. The East India Company, acting as a sovereign force on behalf of the British government, gradually acquired control of huge areas of India between the middle of the 18th and the middle of the 19th centuries. Policies of company rule in India led to the Indian Rebellion of 1857. India was afterwards ruled directly by the British Crown, in the British Raj. After World War I, a nationwide struggle for independence was launched by the Indian National Congress, led by Mahatma Gandhi. Later, the All-India Muslim League would advocate for a separate Muslim-majority nation state. The British Indian Empire was partitioned in August 1947 into the Dominion of India and Dominion of Pakistan, each gaining its independence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrehistoric era (before c. 3300 BCE).\nPaleolithic.\nHominin expansion from Africa is estimated to have reached the Indian subcontinent approximately two million years ago, and possibly as early as 2.2 million years ago. This dating is based on the known presence of \"Homo erectus\" in Indonesia by 1.8 million years ago and in East Asia by 1.36 million years ago, as well as the discovery of stone tools at Riwat in Pakistan. Although some older discoveries have been claimed, the suggested dates, based on the dating of fluvial sediments, have not been independently verified.\nThe oldest hominin fossil remains in the Indian subcontinent are those of \"Homo erectus\" or \"Homo heidelbergensis\", from the Narmada Valley in central India, and are dated to approximately half a million years ago. Older fossil finds have been claimed, but are considered unreliable. Reviews of archaeological evidence have suggested that occupation of the Indian subcontinent by hominins was sporadic until approximately 700,000 years ago, and was geographically widespread by approximately 250,000 years ago.\nAccording to a historical demographer of South Asia, Tim Dyson:Modern human beings\u2014\"Homo sapiens\"\u2014originated in Africa. Then, intermittently, sometime between 60,000 and 80,000 years ago, tiny groups of them began to enter the north-west of the Indian subcontinent. It seems likely that initially they came by way of the coast. It is virtually certain that there were \"Homo sapiens\" in the subcontinent 55,000 years ago, even though the earliest fossils that have been found of them date to only about 30,000 years before the present.\nAccording to Michael D. Petraglia and Bridget Allchin: Y-Chromosome and Mt-DNA data support the colonisation of South Asia by modern humans originating in Africa. ... Coalescence dates for most non-European populations average to between 73\u201355 ka.\nHistorian of South Asia, Michael H. Fisher, states: Scholars estimate that the first successful expansion of the Homo sapiens range beyond Africa and across the Arabian Peninsula occurred from as early as 80,000 years ago to as late as 40,000 years ago, although there may have been prior unsuccessful emigrations. Some of their descendants extended the human range ever further in each generation, spreading into each habitable land they encountered. One human channel was along the warm and productive coastal lands of the Persian Gulf and northern Indian Ocean. Eventually, various bands entered India between 75,000 years ago and 35,000 years ago.\nArchaeological evidence has been interpreted to suggest the presence of anatomically modern humans in the Indian subcontinent 78,000\u201374,000 years ago, although this interpretation is disputed. The occupation of South Asia by modern humans, initially in varying forms of isolation as hunter-gatherers, has turned it into a highly diverse one, second only to Africa in human genetic diversity.\nAccording to Tim Dyson: Genetic research has contributed to knowledge of the prehistory of the subcontinent's people in other respects. In particular, the level of genetic diversity in the region is extremely high. Indeed, only Africa's population is genetically more diverse. Related to this, there is strong evidence of 'founder' events in the subcontinent. By this is meant circumstances where a subgroup\u2014such as a tribe\u2014derives from a tiny number of 'original' individuals. Further, compared to most world regions, the subcontinent's people are relatively distinct in having practised comparatively high levels of endogamy.\nNeolithic.\nSettled life emerged on the subcontinent in the western margins of the Indus River alluvium approximately 9,000 years ago, evolving gradually into the Indus Valley Civilisation of the third millennium BCE. According to Tim Dyson: \"By 7,000 years ago agriculture was firmly established in Baluchistan... [and] slowly spread eastwards into the Indus valley.\" Michael Fisher adds: The earliest discovered instance ... of well-established, settled agricultural society is at Mehrgarh in the hills between the Bolan Pass and the Indus plain (today in Pakistan) (see Map 3.1). From as early as 7000 BCE, communities there started investing increased labor in preparing the land and selecting, planting, tending, and harvesting particular grain-producing plants. They also domesticated animals, including sheep, goats, pigs, and oxen (both humped zebu [\"Bos indicus\"] and unhumped [\"Bos taurus\"]). Castrating oxen, for instance, turned them from mainly meat sources into domesticated draft-animals as well.\nBronze Age (c. 3300 \u2013 1800 BCE).\nIndus Valley Civilisation.\nThe Bronze Age in the Indian subcontinent began around 3300\u00a0BCE. The Indus Valley region was one of three early cradles of civilisation in the Old World; the Indus Valley civilisation was the most expansive, and at its peak, may have had a population of over five million.\nThe civilisation was primarily centred in modern-day Pakistan, in the Indus river basin, and secondarily in the Ghaggar-Hakra River basin. The mature Indus civilisation flourished from about 2600 to 1900\u00a0BCE, marking the beginning of urban civilisation on the Indian subcontinent. It included cities such as Harappa, Ganweriwal, and Mohenjo-daro in modern-day Pakistan, and Dholavira, Kalibangan, Rakhigarhi, and Lothal in modern-day India.\nInhabitants of the ancient Indus River valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and handicraft, and produced copper, bronze, lead, and tin. The civilisation is noted for its cities built of brick, and its roadside drainage systems, and is thought to have had some kind of municipal organisation. The civilisation also developed an Indus script, the earliest of the ancient Indian scripts, which is presently undeciphered. This is the reason why Harappan language is not directly attested, and its affiliation is uncertain.\nAfter the collapse of Indus Valley civilisation, the inhabitants migrated from the river valleys of Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra, towards the Himalayan foothills of Ganga-Yamuna basin.\nOchre Coloured Pottery culture.\nDuring the 2nd millennium\u00a0BCE, Ochre Coloured Pottery culture was in Ganga Yamuna Doab region. These were rural settlements with agriculture and hunting. They were using copper tools such as axes, spears, arrows, and swords, and had domesticated animals.\nIron Age (c. 1800 \u2013 200 BCE).\nVedic period (c. 1500 \u2013 600 BCE).\nStarting c.\u20091900\u00a0BCE, Indo-Aryan tribes moved into the Punjab from Central Asia in several waves of migration. The Vedic period is when the Vedas were composed of liturgical hymns from the Indo-Aryan people. The Vedic culture was located in part of north-west India, while other parts of India had a distinct cultural identity. Many regions of the Indian subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic to the Iron Age in this period.\nThe Vedic culture is described in the texts of Vedas, still sacred to Hindus, which were orally composed and transmitted in Vedic Sanskrit. The Vedas are some of the oldest extant texts in India. The Vedic period, lasting from about 1500 to 500\u00a0BCE, contributed to the foundations of several cultural aspects of the Indian subcontinent.\nVedic society.\nHistorians have analysed the Vedas to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab, and the upper Gangetic Plain. The Peepal tree and cow were sanctified by the time of the Atharva Veda. Many of the concepts of Indian philosophy espoused later, like dharma, trace their roots to Vedic antecedents.\nEarly Vedic society is described in the Rigveda, the oldest Vedic text, believed to have been compiled during the 2nd millennium BCE, in the north-western region of the Indian subcontinent. At this time, Aryan society consisted of predominantly tribal and pastoral groups, distinct from the Harappan urbanisation which had been abandoned. The early Indo-Aryan presence probably corresponds, in part, to the Ochre Coloured Pottery culture in archaeological contexts.\nAt the end of the Rigvedic period, the Aryan society expanded from the north-western region of the Indian subcontinent into the western Ganges plain. It became increasingly agricultural and was socially organised around the hierarchy of the four \"varnas\", or social classes. This social structure was characterised by the exclusion of some indigenous peoples by labelling their occupations impure. During this period, many of the previous small tribal units and chiefdoms began to coalesce into Janapadas (monarchical, state-level polities).\nSanskrit epics.\nThe Sanskrit epics \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\" were composed during this period. The \"Mahabharata\" remains the longest single poem in the world. Historians formerly postulated an \"epic age\" as the milieu of these two epic poems, but now recognise that the texts went through multiple stages of development over centuries. The existing texts of these epics are believed to belong to the post-Vedic age, between c. 400\u00a0BCE and 400\u00a0CE.\nJanapadas.\nThe Iron Age in the Indian subcontinent from about 1200\u00a0BCE to the 6th century BCE is defined by the rise of Janapadas, which are realms, republics and kingdoms\u2014notably the Iron Age Kingdoms of Kuru, Panchala, Kosala and Videha.\nThe Kuru kingdom (c. 1200\u2013450 BCE) was the first state-level society of the Vedic period, corresponding to the beginning of the Iron Age in north-western India, around 1200\u2013800\u00a0BCE, as well as with the composition of the Atharvaveda. The Kuru state organised the Vedic hymns into collections and developed the srauta ritual to uphold the social order. Two key figures of the Kuru state were king Parikshit and his successor Janamejaya, who transformed this realm into the dominant political, social, and cultural power of northern India. When the Kuru kingdom declined, the centre of Vedic culture shifted to their eastern neighbours, the Panchala kingdom. The archaeological PGW (Painted Grey Ware) culture, which flourished in north-eastern India's Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh regions from about 1100 to 600\u00a0BCE, is believed to correspond to the Kuru and Panchala kingdoms.\nDuring the Late Vedic Period, the kingdom of Videha emerged as a new centre of Vedic culture, situated even farther to the East (in what is today Nepal and Bihar state); reaching its prominence under the king Janaka, whose court provided patronage for Brahmin sages and philosophers such as Yajnavalkya, Aruni, and G\u0101rg\u012b V\u0101chaknav\u012b. The later part of this period corresponds with a consolidation of increasingly large states and kingdoms, called \"Mahajanapadas\", across Northern India.\nSecond urbanisation (c. 600 \u2013 200 BCE).\nThe period between 800 and 200\u00a0BCE saw the formation of the \"\u015arama\u1e47a\" movement, from which Jainism and Buddhism originated. The first Upanishads were written during this period. After 500\u00a0BCE, the so-called \"second urbanisation\" started, with new urban settlements arising at the Ganges plain. The foundations for the \"second urbanisation\" were laid prior to 600 BCE, in the Painted Grey Ware culture of the Ghaggar-Hakra and Upper Ganges Plain; although most PGW sites were small farming villages, \"several dozen\" PGW sites eventually emerged as relatively large settlements that can be characterised as towns, the largest of which were fortified by ditches or moats and embankments made of piled earth with wooden palisades.\nThe Central Ganges Plain, where Magadha gained prominence, forming the base of the Maurya Empire, was a distinct cultural area, with new states arising after 500\u00a0BCE. It was influenced by the Vedic culture, but differed markedly from the Kuru-Panchala region. It \"was the area of the earliest known cultivation of rice in South Asia and by 1800 BCE was the location of an advanced Neolithic population associated with the sites of Chirand and Chechar\". In this region, the \u015arama\u1e47ic movements flourished, and Jainism and Buddhism originated.\nBuddhism and Jainism.\nThe time between 800\u00a0BCE and 400\u00a0BCE witnessed the composition of the earliest Upanishads, which form the theoretical basis of classical Hinduism, and are also known as the \"Vedanta\" (conclusion of the Vedas).\nThe increasing urbanisation of India in the 7th and 6th centuries BCE led to the rise of new ascetic or \"\u015arama\u1e47a movements\" which challenged the orthodoxy of rituals. Mahavira (c. 599\u2013527\u00a0BCE), proponent of Jainism, and Gautama Buddha (c. 563\u2013483\u00a0BCE), founder of Buddhism, were the most prominent icons of this movement. \u015arama\u1e47a gave rise to the concept of the cycle of birth and death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation. Buddha found a Middle Way that ameliorated the extreme asceticism found in the \"\u015arama\u1e47a\" religions.\nAround the same time, Mahavira (the 24th \"Tirthankara\" in Jainism) propagated a theology that was to later become Jainism. However, Jain orthodoxy believes the teachings of the \"Tirthankaras\" predates all known time and scholars believe Parshvanatha (c. 872 \u2013 c. 772\u00a0BCE), accorded status as the 23rd \"Tirthankara\", was a historical figure. The Vedas are believed to have documented a few \"Tirthankaras\" and an ascetic order similar to the \"\u015arama\u1e47a\" movement.\nMahajanapadas.\nThe period from c.\u2009600\u00a0BCE to c.\u2009300\u00a0BCE featured the rise of the Mahajanapadas, sixteen powerful kingdoms and oligarchic republics in a belt stretching from Gandhara in the north-west to Bengal in the eastern part of the Indian subcontinent\u2014including parts of the trans-Vindhyan region. Ancient Buddhist texts, like the \"A\u1e45guttara Nik\u0101ya\", make frequent reference to these sixteen great kingdoms and republics\u2014Anga, Assaka, Avanti, Chedi, Gandhara, Kashi, Kamboja, Kosala, Kuru, Magadha, Malla, Matsya (or Machcha), Panchala, Surasena, V\u1e5bji, and Vatsa. This period saw the second major rise of urbanism in India after the Indus Valley Civilisation.\nEarly \"republics\" or , such as Shakyas, Koliyas, Mallakas, and Licchavis had republican governments. s, such as the Mallakas, centered in the city of Kusinagara, and the Vajjika League, centred in the city of Vaishali, existed as early as the 6th century BCE and persisted in some areas until the 4th century CE. The most famous clan amongst the ruling confederate clans of the Vajji Mahajanapada were the Licchavis.\nThis period corresponds in an archaeological context to the Northern Black Polished Ware culture. Especially focused in the Central Ganges plain but also spreading across vast areas of the northern and central Indian subcontinent, this culture is characterised by the emergence of large cities with massive fortifications, significant population growth, increased social stratification, wide-ranging trade networks, construction of public architecture and water channels, specialised craft industries, a system of weights, punch-marked coins, and the introduction of writing in the form of Brahmi and Kharosthi scripts. The language of the gentry at that time was Sanskrit, while the languages of the general population of northern India are referred to as Prakrits.\nMany of the sixteen kingdoms had merged into four major ones by the time of Gautama Buddha. These four were Vatsa, Avanti, Kosala, and Magadha.\nEarly Magadha dynasties.\nMagadha formed one of the sixteen Mahajanapadas (Sanskrit: \"Great Realms\") or kingdoms in ancient India. The core of the kingdom was the area of Bihar south of the Ganges; its first capital was Rajagriha (modern Rajgir) then Pataliputra (modern Patna). Magadha expanded to include most of Bihar and Bengal with the conquest of Licchavi and Anga respectively, followed by much of eastern Uttar Pradesh and Orissa. The ancient kingdom of Magadha is heavily mentioned in Jain and Buddhist texts. It is also mentioned in the Ramayana, Mahabharata and Puranas. The earliest reference to the Magadha people occurs in the Atharva-Veda where they are found listed along with the Angas, Gandharis, and Mujavats. Magadha played an important role in the development of Jainism and Buddhism. Republican communities (such as the community of Rajakumara) are merged into Magadha kingdom. Villages had their own assemblies under their local chiefs called Gramakas. Their administrations were divided into executive, judicial, and military functions.\nEarly sources, from the Buddhist P\u0101li Canon, the Jain Agamas and the Hindu Puranas, mention Magadha being ruled by the Pradyota dynasty and Haryanka dynasty (c. 544\u2013413 BCE) for some 200 years, c. 600\u2013413\u00a0BCE. King Bimbisara of the Haryanka dynasty led an active and expansive policy, conquering Anga in what is now eastern Bihar and West Bengal. King Bimbisara was overthrown and killed by his son, Prince Ajatashatru, who continued the expansionist policy of Magadha. During this period, Gautama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, lived much of his life in the Magadha kingdom. He attained enlightenment in Bodh Gaya, gave his first sermon in Sarnath and the first Buddhist council was held in Rajgriha. The Haryanka dynasty was overthrown by the Shaishunaga dynasty (c. 413\u2013345 BCE). The last Shishunaga ruler, Kalasoka, was assassinated by Mahapadma Nanda in 345\u00a0BCE, the first of the so-called Nine Nandas (Mahapadma Nanda and his eight sons).\nNanda Empire and Alexander's campaign.\nThe Nanda Empire (c. 345\u2013322 BCE), at its peak, extended from Bengal in the east, to the Punjab in the west and as far south as the Vindhya Range. The Nanda dynasty built on the foundations laid by their Haryanka and Shishunaga predecessors. Nanda empire have built a vast army, consisting of 200,000 infantry, 20,000 cavalry, 2,000 war chariots and 3,000 war elephants (at the lowest estimates).\nMaurya Empire.\nThe Maurya Empire (322\u2013185\u00a0BCE) unified most of the Indian subcontinent into one state, and was the largest empire ever to exist on the Indian subcontinent. At its greatest extent, the Mauryan Empire stretched to the north up to the natural boundaries of the Himalayas and to the east into what is now Assam. To the west, it reached beyond modern Pakistan, to the Hindu Kush mountains in what is now Afghanistan. The empire was established by Chandragupta Maurya assisted by Chanakya (Kautilya) in Magadha (in modern Bihar) when he overthrew the Nanda Empire.\nChandragupta rapidly expanded his power westwards across central and western India, and by 317\u00a0BCE the empire had fully occupied north-western India. The Mauryan Empire defeated Seleucus I, founder of the Seleucid Empire, during the Seleucid\u2013Mauryan war, thus gained additional territory west of the Indus River. Chandragupta's son Bindusara succeeded to the throne around 297\u00a0BCE. By the time he died in c. 272\u00a0BCE, a large part of the Indian subcontinent was under Mauryan suzerainty. However, the region of Kalinga (around modern day Odisha) remained outside Mauryan control, perhaps interfering with trade with the south.\nBindusara was succeeded by Ashoka, whose reign lasted until his death in about 232\u00a0BCE. His campaign against the Kalingans in about 260\u00a0BCE, though successful, led to immense loss of life and misery. This led Ashoka to shun violence, and subsequently to embrace Buddhism. The empire began to decline after his death and the last Mauryan ruler, Brihadratha, was assassinated by Pushyamitra Shunga to establish the Shunga Empire.\nUnder Chandragupta Maurya and his successors, internal and external trade, agriculture, and economic activities all thrived and expanded across India thanks to the creation of a single efficient system of finance, administration, and security. The Mauryans built the Grand Trunk Road, one of Asia's oldest and longest major roads connecting the Indian subcontinent with Central Asia. After the Kalinga War, the Empire experienced nearly half a century of peace and security under Ashoka. Mauryan India also enjoyed an era of social harmony, religious transformation, and expansion of scientific knowledge. Chandragupta Maurya's embrace of Jainism increased social and religious renewal and reform across his society, while Ashoka's embrace of Buddhism has been said to have been the foundation of the reign of social and political peace and non-violence across India. Ashoka sponsored Buddhist missions across the Indo-Mediterranean, into Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, West Asia, North Africa, and Mediterranean Europe.\nThe \"Arthashastra\" written by Chanakya and the Edicts of Ashoka are the primary written records of the Mauryan times. Archaeologically, this period falls in the era of Northern Black Polished Ware. The Mauryan Empire was based on a modern and efficient economy and society in which the sale of merchandise was closely regulated by the government. Although there was no banking in the Mauryan society, usury was customary. A significant amount of written records on slavery are found, suggesting a prevalence thereof. During this period, a high-quality steel called Wootz steel was developed in south India and was later exported to China and Arabia.\nSangam period.\nDuring the Sangam period Tamil literature flourished from the 3rd century BCE to the 4th century CE. Three Tamil dynasties, collectively known as the Three Crowned Kings of Tamilakam: Chera dynasty, Chola dynasty, and the Pandya dynasty ruled parts of southern India.\nThe Sangam literature deals with the history, politics, wars, and culture of the Tamil people of this period. Unlike Sanskrit writers who were mostly Brahmins, Sangam writers came from diverse classes and social backgrounds and were mostly non-Brahmins.\nAround c.\u2009300 BCE \u2013 c.\u2009200 CE, Pathupattu, an anthology of ten mid-length book collections, which is considered part of Sangam Literature, were composed; the composition of eight anthologies of poetic works Ettuthogai as well as the composition of eighteen minor poetic works Pati\u1e49e\u1e47k\u012b\u1e3bka\u1e47akku; while Tolk\u0101ppiyam, the earliest grammarian work in the Tamil language was developed. Also, during Sangam period, two of the Five Great Epics of Tamil Literature were composed. Ilango Adigal composed \"Silappatikaram\", which is a non-religious work, that revolves around Kannagi, and \"Manimekalai\", composed by Chithalai Chathanar, is a sequel to \"Silappatikaram\", and tells the story of the daughter of Kovalan and Madhavi, who became a Buddhist Bhikkhuni.\nClassical period (c. 200 BCE \u2013 650 CE).\nThe time between the Maurya Empire in the 3rd century BCE and the end of the Gupta Empire in the 6th century CE is referred to as the \"Classical\" period of India. The Gupta Empire (4th\u20136th century) is regarded as the Golden Age of India, although a host of kingdoms ruled over India in these centuries. Also, the Sangam literature flourished from the 3rd century BCE to the 3rd century CE in southern India. During this period, India's economy is estimated to have been the largest in the world, having between one-third and one-quarter of the world's wealth, from 1 CE to 1000 CE.\nEarly classical period (c. 200 BCE \u2013 320 CE).\nShunga Empire.\nThe Shungas originated from Magadha, and controlled large areas of the central and eastern Indian subcontinent from around 187 to 78\u00a0BCE. The dynasty was established by Pushyamitra Shunga, who overthrew the last Maurya emperor. Its capital was Pataliputra, but later emperors, such as Bhagabhadra, also held court at Vidisha, modern Besnagar.\nPushyamitra Shunga ruled for 36 years and was succeeded by his son Agnimitra. There were ten Shunga rulers. However, after the death of Agnimitra, the empire rapidly disintegrated; inscriptions and coins indicate that much of northern and central India consisted of small kingdoms and city-states that were independent of any Shunga hegemony. The empire is noted for its numerous wars with both foreign and indigenous powers. They fought with the Mahameghavahana dynasty of Kalinga, Satavahana dynasty of Deccan, the Indo-Greeks, and possibly the Panchalas and Mitras of Mathura.\nArt, education, philosophy, and other forms of learning flowered during this period including architectural monuments such as the Stupa at Bharhut and the renowned Great Stupa at Sanchi. The Shunga rulers helped to establish the tradition of royal sponsorship of learning and art. The script used by the empire was a variant of Brahmi and was used to write the Sanskrit language. The Shunga Empire played an imperative role in patronising Indian culture at a time when some of the most important developments in Hindu thought were taking place.\nSatavahana Empire.\nThe \u015a\u0101tav\u0101hanas were based from Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh as well as Junnar (Pune) and Prathisthan (Paithan) in Maharashtra. The territory of the empire covered large parts of India from the 1st century BCE onward. The S\u0101tav\u0101hanas started out as feudatories to the Mauryan dynasty, but declared independence with its decline.\nThe S\u0101tav\u0101hanas are known for their patronage of Hinduism and Buddhism, which resulted in Buddhist monuments from Ellora (a UNESCO World Heritage Site) to Amaravati. They were one of the first Indian states to issue coins with their rulers embossed. They formed a cultural bridge and played a vital role in trade as well as the transfer of ideas and culture to and from the Indo-Gangetic Plain to the southern tip of India.\nThey had to compete with the Shunga Empire and then the Kanva dynasty of Magadha to establish their rule. Later, they played a crucial role to protect large part of India against foreign invaders like the Sakas, Yavanas and Pahlavas. In particular, their struggles with the Western Kshatrapas went on for a long time. The notable rulers of the Satavahana Dynasty Gautamiputra Satakarni and Sri Yajna S\u0101takarni were able to defeat the foreign invaders like the Western Kshatrapas and to stop their expansion. In the 3rd century CE, the empire was split into smaller states.\nTrade and travels to India.\nThe spice trade in Kerala attracted traders from all over the Old World to India. India's Southwest coastal port Muziris had established itself as a major spice trade centre from as early as 3,000\u00a0BCE, according to Sumerian records. Jewish traders arrived in Kochi, Kerala, India as early as 562 BCE. The Greco-Roman world followed by trading along the incense route and the Roman-India routes. During the 2nd century BCE Greek and Indian ships met to trade at Arabian ports such as Aden. During the first millennium, the sea routes to India were controlled by the Indians and Ethiopians that became the maritime trading power of the Red Sea.\nIndian merchants involved in spice trade took Indian cuisine to Southeast Asia, where spice mixtures and curries became popular with the native inhabitants. Buddhism entered China through the Silk Road in the 1st or 2nd century CE. Hindu and Buddhist religious establishments of South and Southeast Asia came to be centres of production and commerce as they accumulated capital donated by patrons. They engaged in estate management, craftsmanship, and trade. Buddhism in particular travelled alongside the maritime trade, promoting literacy, art, and the use of coinage.\nKushan Empire.\nThe Kushan Empire expanded out of what is now Afghanistan into the northwest of the Indian subcontinent under the leadership of their first emperor, Kujula Kadphises, about the middle of the 1st century CE. The Kushans were possibly a Tocharian speaking tribe, one of five branches of the Yuezhi confederation. By the time of his grandson, Kanishka the Great, the empire spread to encompass much of Afghanistan, and then the northern parts of the Indian subcontinent.\nEmperor Kanishka was a great patron of Buddhism; however, as Kushans expanded southward, the deities of their later coinage came to reflect its new Hindu majority. Historian Vincent Smith said about Kanishka:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He played the part of a second Ashoka in the history of Buddhism.\nThe empire linked the Indian Ocean maritime trade with the commerce of the Silk Road through the Indus valley, encouraging long-distance trade, particularly between China and Rome. The Kushans brought new trends to the budding and blossoming Gandhara art and Mathura art, which reached its peak during Kushan rule. The period of peace under Kushan rule is known as \"Pax Kushana\". By the 3rd century, their empire in India was disintegrating and their last known great emperor was Vasudeva I.\nClassical period (c. 320 \u2013 650 CE).\nGupta Empire.\nThe Gupta period was noted for cultural creativity, especially in literature, architecture, sculpture, and painting. The Gupta period produced scholars such as Kalidasa, Aryabhata, Varahamihira, Vishnu Sharma, and Vatsyayana. The Gupta period marked a watershed of Indian culture: the Guptas performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimise their rule, but they also patronised Buddhism, an alternative to Brahmanical orthodoxy. The military exploits of the first three rulers \u2013 Chandragupta I, Samudragupta, and Chandragupta II \u2013 brought much of India under their leadership. Science and political administration reached new heights during the Gupta era. Strong trade ties also made the region an important cultural centre and established it as a base that would influence nearby kingdoms and regions. The period of peace under Gupta rule is known as \"Pax Gupta\".\nThe latter Guptas successfully resisted the northwestern kingdoms until the arrival of the Alchon Huns, who established themselves in Afghanistan by the first half of the 5th century CE, with their capital at Bamiyan. However, much of the southern India including Deccan were largely unaffected by these events.\nVakataka Empire.\nThe V\u0101k\u0101\u1e6daka Empire originated from the Deccan in the mid-third century CE. Their state is believed to have extended from the southern edges of Malwa and Gujarat in the north to the Tungabhadra River in the south as well as from the Arabian Sea in the western to the edges of Chhattisgarh in the east. They were the most important successors of the Satavahanas in the Deccan, contemporaneous with the Guptas in northern India and succeeded by the Vishnukundina dynasty.\nThe Vakatakas are noted for having been patrons of the arts, architecture and literature. The rock-cut Buddhist viharas and chaityas of Ajanta Caves (a UNESCO World Heritage Site) were built under the patronage of Vakataka emperor, Harishena.\nKamarupa Kingdom.\nSamudragupta's 4th-century Allahabad pillar inscription mentions Kamarupa (Western Assam) and Davaka (Central Assam) as frontier kingdoms of the Gupta Empire. Davaka was later absorbed by Kamarupa, which grew into a large kingdom that spanned from Karatoya river to near present Sadiya and covered the entire Brahmaputra valley, North Bengal, parts of Bangladesh and, at times Purnea and parts of West Bengal.\nRuled by three dynasties Varmanas (c. 350\u2013650\u00a0CE), Mlechchha dynasty (c. 655\u2013900\u00a0CE) and Kamarupa-Palas (c. 900\u20131100\u00a0CE), from their capitals in present-day Guwahati (Pragjyotishpura), Tezpur (Haruppeswara) and North Gauhati (Durjaya) respectively. All three dynasties claimed their descent from Narakasura. In the reign of the Varman king, Bhaskar Varman (c. 600\u2013650\u00a0CE), the Chinese traveller Xuanzang visited the region and recorded his travels. Later, after weakening and disintegration (after the Kamarupa-Palas), the Kamarupa tradition was somewhat extended until c. 1255\u00a0CE by the Lunar I (c. 1120\u20131185\u00a0CE) and Lunar II (c. 1155\u20131255\u00a0CE) dynasties. The Kamarupa kingdom came to an end in the middle of the 13th century when the Khen dynasty under Sandhya of Kamarupanagara (North Guwahati), moved his capital to Kamatapur (North Bengal) after the invasion of Muslim Turks, and established the Kamata kingdom.\nPallava Empire.\nThe Pallavas, during the 4th to 9th centuries were, alongside the Guptas of the North, great patronisers of Sanskrit development in the South of the Indian subcontinent. The Pallava reign saw the first Sanskrit inscriptions in a script called Grantha. Early Pallavas had different connexions to Southeast Asian countries. The Pallavas used Dravidian architecture to build some very important Hindu temples and academies in Mamallapuram, Kanchipuram and other places; their rule saw the rise of great poets. The practice of dedicating temples to different deities came into vogue followed by fine artistic temple architecture and sculpture style of Vastu Shastra.\nPallavas reached the height of power during the reign of Mahendravarman I (571\u2013630 CE) and Narasimhavarman I (630\u2013668 CE) and dominated the Telugu and northern parts of the Tamil region until the end of the 9th century.\nKadamba Empire.\nKadambas originated from Karnataka, was founded by Mayurasharma in 345\u00a0CE which at later times showed the potential of developing into imperial proportions. King Mayurasharma defeated the armies of Pallavas of Kanchi possibly with help of some native tribes. The Kadamba fame reached its peak during the rule of Kakusthavarma, a notable ruler with whom the kings of Gupta Dynasty of northern India cultivated marital alliances. The Kadambas were contemporaries of the Western Ganga Dynasty and together they formed the earliest native kingdoms to rule the land with absolute autonomy. The dynasty later continued to rule as a feudatory of larger Kannada empires, the Chalukya and the Rashtrakuta empires, for over five hundred years during which time they branched into minor dynasties (Kadambas of Goa, Kadambas of Halasi and Kadambas of Hangal).\nEmpire of Harsha.\nHarsha ruled northern India from 606 to 647 CE. He was the son of Prabhakarvardhana and the younger brother of Rajyavardhana, who were members of the Vardhana dynasty and ruled Thanesar, in present-day Haryana.\nAfter the downfall of the prior Gupta Empire in the middle of the 6th century, North India reverted to smaller republics and monarchical states. The power vacuum resulted in the rise of the Vardhanas of Thanesar, who began uniting the republics and monarchies from the Punjab to central India. After the death of Harsha's father and brother, representatives of the empire crowned Harsha emperor in April 606 CE, giving him the title of Maharaja. At the peak, his Empire covered much of North and Northwestern India, extended East until Kamarupa, and South until Narmada River; and eventually made Kannauj (in present Uttar Pradesh) his capital, and ruled until 647 CE.\nThe peace and prosperity that prevailed made his court a centre of cosmopolitanism, attracting scholars, artists and religious visitors. During this time, Harsha converted to Buddhism from Surya worship. The Chinese traveller Xuanzang visited the court of Harsha and wrote a very favourable account of him, praising his justice and generosity. His biography \"Harshacharita\" (\"Deeds of Harsha\") written by Sanskrit poet Banabhatta, describes his association with Thanesar and the palace with a two-storied \"Dhavalagriha\" (White Mansion).\nEarly medieval period (c. 650 \u2013 1200).\nEarly medieval India began after the end of the Gupta Empire in the 6th century\u00a0CE. This period also covers the \"Late Classical Age\" of Hinduism, which began after the collapse of the Empire of Harsha in the 7th century, and ended in the 13th century with the rise of the Delhi Sultanate in Northern India; the beginning of Imperial Kannauj, leading to the Tripartite struggle; and the end of the Later Cholas with the death of Rajendra Chola III in 1279 in Southern India; however some aspects of the Classical period continued until the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in the south around the 17th century.\nFrom the fifth century to the thirteenth, \u015arauta sacrifices declined, and support for Shaivism, Vaishnavism and Shaktism expanded in royal courts, while the support for Buddhism declined. Lack of appeal among the rural masses, who instead embraced Brahmanical Hinduism formed in the Hindu synthesis, and dwindling financial support from trading communities and royal elites, were major factors in the decline of Buddhism.\nIn the 7th century, Kum\u0101rila Bha\u1e6d\u1e6da formulated his school of Mimamsa philosophy and defended the position on Vedic rituals.\nFrom the 8th to the 10th century, three dynasties contested for control of northern India: the Gurjara Pratiharas of Malwa, the Palas of Bengal, and the Rashtrakutas of the Deccan. The Sena dynasty would later assume control of the Pala Empire; the Gurjara Pratiharas fragmented into various states, notably the Kingdom of Malwa, the Kingdom of Bundelkhand, the Kingdom of Dahala, the Tomaras of Haryana, and the Kingdom of Sambhar, these states were some of the earliest Rajput kingdoms; while the Rashtrakutas were annexed by the Western Chalukyas. During this period, the Chaulukya dynasty emerged; the Chaulukyas constructed the Dilwara Temples, Modhera Sun Temple, Rani ki vav in the style of M\u0101ru-Gurjara architecture, and their capital Anhilwara (modern Patan, Gujarat) was one of the largest cities in the Indian subcontinent, with the population estimated at 100,000 in c. 1000. Patan's rise also marked the revival of Jainism in Gujarat during the times of Hemchandracharya. It became renowned for its collection of ancient Jain manuscripts and an important centre of Jain learning, which drew the admiration of many scholars. British Indologist and Sanskritist Peter Peterson described the collection as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I know of no town in India and only a few in the world which can boast of so great a store documents of venerable antiquity. They would be the pride and jealously guarded treasure of any University Library in Europe.\" \nThe Chola Empire emerged as a major power during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I and Rajendra Chola I who successfully invaded parts of Southeast Asia and Sri Lanka in the 11th century. Lalitaditya Muktapida (r. 724\u2013760) was an emperor of the Kashmiri Karko\u1e6da dynasty, which exercised influence in northwestern India from 625 until 1003, and was followed by Lohara dynasty. Kalhana in his Rajatarangini credits king Lalitaditya with leading an aggressive military campaign in Northern India and Central Asia.\nThe Hindu Shahi dynasty ruled portions of eastern Afghanistan, northern Pakistan, and Kashmir from the mid-7th century to the early 11th century. While in Odisha, the Eastern Ganga Empire rose to power; noted for the advancement of Hindu architecture, most notable being Jagannath Temple and Konark Sun Temple, as well as being patrons of art and literature.\nLater Gupta dynasty.\nThe Later Gupta dynasty ruled the Magadha region in eastern India between the 6th and 7th centuries AD. The Later Guptas succeeded the imperial Guptas as the rulers of Magadha, but there is no evidence connecting the two dynasties; these appear to be two distinct families. The Later Guptas are so-called because the names of their rulers ended with the suffix \"-gupta\", which they might have adopted to portray themselves as the legitimate successors of the imperial Guptas.\nChalukya Empire.\nThe Chalukya Empire ruled large parts of southern and central India between the 6th and the 12th centuries, as three related yet individual dynasties. The earliest dynasty, known as the \"Badami Chalukyas\", ruled from Vatapi (modern Badami) from the middle of the 6th century. The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakeshin\u00a0II. The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone in the history of South India and a golden age in the history of Karnataka. The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas. A Southern India-based kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada Rivers. The rise of this empire saw the birth of efficient administration, overseas trade and commerce and the development of new style of architecture called \"Chalukyan architecture\". The Chalukya dynasty ruled parts of southern and central India from Badami in Karnataka between 550 and 750, and then again from Kalyani between 970 and 1190.\nRashtrakuta Empire.\nFounded by Dantidurga around 753, the Rashtrakuta Empire ruled from its capital at Manyakheta for almost two centuries. At its peak, the Rashtrakutas ruled from the Ganges-Yamuna Doab in the north to Cape Comorin in the south, a fruitful time of architectural and literary achievements.\nThe early rulers of this dynasty were Hindu, but the later rulers were strongly influenced by Jainism. Govinda III and Amoghavarsha were the most famous of the long line of able administrators produced by the dynasty. Amoghavarsha was also an author and wrote Kavirajamarga, the earliest known Kannada work on poetics. Architecture reached a milestone in the Dravidian style, the finest example of which is seen in the Kailasanath Temple at Ellora. Other important contributions are the Kashivishvanatha temple and the Jain Narayana temple at Pattadakal in Karnataka.\nThe Arab traveller Suleiman described the Rashtrakuta Empire as one of the four great Empires of the world. The Rashtrakuta period marked the beginning of the golden age of southern Indian mathematics. The great south Indian mathematician Mah\u0101v\u012bra had a huge impact on medieval south Indian mathematicians. The Rashtrakuta rulers also patronised men of letters in a variety of languages.\nGurjara-Pratihara Empire.\nThe Gurjara-Pratiharas were instrumental in containing Arab armies moving east of the Indus River. Nagabhata I defeated the Arab army under Junaid and Tamin during the Umayyad campaigns in India. Under Nagabhata II, the Gurjara-Pratiharas became the most powerful dynasty in northern India. He was succeeded by his son Ramabhadra, who ruled briefly before being succeeded by his son, Mihira Bhoja. Under Bhoja and his successor Mahendrapala I, the Pratihara Empire reached its peak of prosperity and power. By the time of Mahendrapala, its territory stretched from the border of Sindh in the west to Bihar in the east and from the Himalayas in the north to around the Narmada River in the south. The expansion triggered a tripartite power struggle with the Rashtrakuta and Pala empires for control of the Indian subcontinent.\nBy the end of the 10th century, several feudatories of the empire took advantage of the temporary weakness of the Gurjara-Pratiharas to declare their independence, notably the Kingdom of Malwa, the Kingdom of Bundelkhand, the Tomaras of Haryana, and the Kingdom of Sambhar and the Kingdom of Dahala.\nGahadavala dynasty.\nGahadavala dynasty ruled parts of the present-day Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, during 11th and 12th centuries. Their capital was located at Varanasi.\nKarnat dynasty.\nIn 1097 AD, the Karnat dynasty of Mithila emerged on the Bihar/Nepal border area and maintained capitals in Darbhanga and Simraongadh. The dynasty was established by Nanyadeva, a military commander of Karnataka origin. Under this dynasty, the Maithili language started to develop with the first piece of Maithili literature, the Varna Ratnakara being produced in the 14th century by Jyotirishwar Thakur. The Karnats also carried out raids into Nepal. They fell in 1324 following the invasion of Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq.\nPala Empire.\nThe Pala Empire was founded by Gopala I. It was ruled by a Buddhist dynasty from Bengal. The Palas reunified Bengal after the fall of Shashanka's Gauda Kingdom.\nThe Palas were followers of the Mahayana and Tantric schools of Buddhism, they also patronised Shaivism and Vaishnavism. The empire reached its peak under Dharmapala and Devapala. Dharmapala is believed to have conquered Kanauj and extended his sway up to the farthest limits of India in the north-west.\nThe Pala Empire can be considered as the golden era of Bengal. Dharmapala founded the Vikramashila and revived Nalanda, considered one of the first great universities in recorded history. Nalanda reached its height under the patronage of the Pala Empire. The Palas also built many viharas. They maintained close cultural and commercial ties with countries of Southeast Asia and Tibet. Sea trade added greatly to the prosperity of the Pala Empire.\nCholas.\nMedieval Cholas rose to prominence during the middle of the 9th century and established the greatest empire South India had seen. They successfully united the South India under their rule and through their naval strength extended their influence in the Southeast Asian countries such as Srivijaya. Under Rajaraja Chola I and his successors Rajendra Chola I, Rajadhiraja Chola, Virarajendra Chola and Kulothunga Chola I the dynasty became a military, economic and cultural power in South Asia and South-East Asia. Rajendra Chola I's navies occupied the sea coasts from Burma to Vietnam, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Lakshadweep (Laccadive) islands, Sumatra, and the Malay Peninsula. The power of the new empire was proclaimed to the eastern world by the expedition to the Ganges which Rajendra Chola I undertook and by the occupation of cities of the maritime empire of Srivijaya in Southeast Asia, as well as by the repeated embassies to China.\nThey dominated the political affairs of Sri Lanka for over two centuries through repeated invasions and occupation. They also had continuing trade contacts with the Arabs and the Chinese empire. Rajaraja Chola I and his son Rajendra Chola I gave political unity to the whole of Southern India and established the Chola Empire as a respected sea power. Under the Cholas, the South India reached new heights of excellence in art, religion and literature. In all of these spheres, the Chola period marked the culmination of movements that had begun in an earlier age under the Pallavas. Monumental architecture in the form of majestic temples and sculpture in stone and bronze reached a finesse never before achieved in India.\nWestern Chalukya Empire.\nThe Western Chalukya Empire ruled most of the western Deccan, South India, between the 10th and 12th centuries. Vast areas between the Narmada River in the north and Kaveri River in the south came under Chalukya control. During this period the other major ruling families of the Deccan, the Hoysalas, the Seuna Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiya dynasty and the Southern Kalachuris, were subordinates of the Western Chalukyas and gained their independence only when the power of the Chalukya waned during the latter half of the 12th century.\nThe Western Chalukyas developed an architectural style known today as a transitional style, an architectural link between the style of the early Chalukya dynasty and that of the later Hoysala empire. Most of its monuments are in the districts bordering the Tungabhadra River in central Karnataka. Well known examples are the Kasivisvesvara Temple at Lakkundi, the Mallikarjuna Temple at Kuruvatti, the Kallesvara Temple at Bagali, Siddhesvara Temple at Haveri, and the Mahadeva Temple at Itagi. This was an important period in the development of fine arts in Southern India, especially in literature as the Western Chalukya kings encouraged writers in the native language of Kannada, and Sanskrit like the philosopher and statesman Basava and the great mathematician Bh\u0101skara II.\nLate medieval period (c. 1200 \u2013 1526).\nThe late medieval period is marked by repeated invasions by Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, the rule of the Delhi Sultanate, and by the growth of other states, built upon military technology of the sultanate.\nDelhi Sultanate.\nThe Delhi Sultanate was a series of successive Islamic states based in Delhi, ruled by several dynasties of varying origins. The polity ruled over large parts of the Indian subcontinent from the 13th to early 16th centuries. The sultanate was founded in the 12th and 13th centuries by Central Asian Turks, who invaded parts of northern India and established the state atop former Hindu holdings. The subsequent Mamluk dynasty of Delhi managed to conquer large areas of northern India. The Khalji dynasty conquered much of central India while forcing the principal Hindu kingdoms of South India to become vassal states.\nThe sultanate ushered in a period of Indian cultural renaissance. The resulting \"Indo-Muslim\" fusion of cultures left lasting syncretic monuments in architecture, music, literature, religion, and clothing. It is surmised that the language of Urdu was born during the period of the Delhi Sultanate. The sultanate was the only Indo-Islamic state to enthrone one of the few female rulers in India, Razia Sultana (r.\u20091236\u00a0\u2013\u00a01240).\nWhile initially disruptive due to the passing of power from native Indian elites to Turkic Muslim elites, the Delhi Sultanate was responsible for integrating the Indian subcontinent into a growing world system, drawing India into a wider international network, which had a significant impact on Indian culture and society. However, the Delhi Sultanate also caused large-scale destruction and desecration of temples in the Indian subcontinent.\nThe Mongol invasions of India were successfully repelled by the Delhi Sultanate during the rule of Alauddin Khalji. A major factor in their success was their Turkic Mamluk slave army, who were highly skilled in the same style of nomadic cavalry warfare as the Mongols. It is possible that the Mongol Empire may have expanded into India were it not for the Delhi Sultanate's role in repelling them. By repeatedly repulsing the Mongol raiders, the sultanate saved India from the devastation waged on West and Central Asia. Soldiers from that region and learned men and administrators fleeing Mongol invasions of Iran migrated into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north.\nA Turco-Mongol conqueror from Central Asia, Timur (Tamerlane), attacked the reigning sultan Nasir-u Din Mehmud of the Tughlaq dynasty in Delhi. The sultan's army was defeated on 17 December 1398. Timur entered Delhi and the city was sacked, destroyed, and left in ruins after Timur's army had killed and plundered for three days and nights. He ordered the whole city to be sacked except for the sayyids, scholars, and the \"other Muslims\" (artists); 100,000 war prisoners were said to have been put to death in one day. The sultanate suffered significantly from the sacking of Delhi. Though revived briefly under the Sayyid and Lodi dynasties, it was but a shadow of the former. Lodi rule lasted in Delhi until the defeat of the last sultan, Ibrahim Khan Lodi, in 1526 to the forces of Babur.\nVijayanagara Empire.\nThe Vijayanagara Empire was established in 1336 by Harihara I and his brother Bukka Raya I of Sangama Dynasty, which originated as a political heir of the Hoysala Empire, Kakatiya Empire, and the Pandyan Empire. The empire rose to prominence as a culmination of attempts by the south Indian powers to ward off Islamic invasions by the end of the 13th century. It lasted until 1646, although its power declined after a major military defeat in 1565 by the combined armies of the Deccan sultanates. The empire is named after its capital city of Vijayanagara, whose ruins surround present day Hampi, now a World Heritage Site in Karnataka, India.\nIn the first two decades after the founding of the empire, Harihara I gained control over most of the area south of the Tungabhadra river and earned the title of \"Purvapaschima Samudradhishavara\" (\"master of the eastern and western seas\"). By 1374 Bukka Raya I, successor to Harihara I, had defeated the chiefdom of Arcot, the Reddys of Kondavidu, and the Sultan of Madurai and had gained control over Goa in the west and the Tungabhadra-Krishna doab in the north.\nHarihara II, the second son of Bukka Raya I, further consolidated the kingdom beyond the Krishna River and brought the whole of South India under the Vijayanagara umbrella. The next ruler, Deva Raya I, emerged successful against the Gajapatis of Odisha and undertook important works of fortification and irrigation. Italian traveller Niccolo de Conti wrote of him as the most powerful ruler of India. Deva Raya II succeeded to the throne in 1424 and was possibly the most capable of the Sangama Dynasty rulers. He quelled rebelling feudal lords as well as the Zamorin of Calicut and Quilon in the south. He invaded the island of Sri Lanka and became overlord of the kings of Burma at Pegu and Tanasserim.\nThe Vijayanagara Emperors were tolerant of all religions and sects, as writings by foreign visitors show. The kings used titles such as \"Gobrahamana Pratipalanacharya\" (\"literally\", \"protector of cows and Brahmins\") and \"Hindurayasuratrana\" (\"lit\", \"upholder of Hindu faith\") that testified to their intention of protecting Hinduism and yet were at the same time staunchly Islamicate in their court ceremonials and dress. The empire's founders, Harihara I and Bukka Raya I, were devout Shaivas (worshippers of Shiva), but made grants to the Vaishnava order of Sringeri with Vidyaranya as their patron saint, and designated \"Varaha\" (an avatar of Vishnu) as their emblem. Nobles from Central Asia's Timurid kingdoms also came to Vijayanagara. The later Saluva and Tuluva kings were Vaishnava by faith, but worshipped at the feet of Lord Virupaksha (Shiva) at Hampi as well as Lord Venkateshwara (Vishnu) at Tirupati. A Sanskrit work, \"Jambavati Kalyanam\" by King Krishnadevaraya, called Lord Virupaksha \"Karnata Rajya Raksha Mani\" (\"protective jewel of Karnata Empire\"). The kings patronised the saints of the dvaita order (philosophy of dualism) of Madhvacharya at Udupi.\nThe empire's legacy includes many monuments spread over South India, the best known of which is the group at Hampi. The previous temple building traditions in South India came together in the Vijayanagara Architecture style. The mingling of all faiths and vernaculars inspired architectural innovation of Hindu temple construction. South Indian mathematics flourished under the protection of the Vijayanagara Empire in Kerala. The south Indian mathematician Madhava of Sangamagrama founded the famous Kerala School of Astronomy and Mathematics in the 14th century which produced a lot of great south Indian mathematicians like Parameshvara, Nilakantha Somayaji and Jye\u1e63\u1e6dhadeva. Efficient administration and vigorous overseas trade brought new technologies such as water management systems for irrigation. The empire's patronage enabled fine arts and literature to reach new heights in Kannada, Telugu, Tamil, and Sanskrit, while Carnatic music evolved into its current form.\nVijayanagara went into decline after the defeat in the Battle of Talikota (1565). After the death of Aliya Rama Raya in the Battle of Talikota, Tirumala Deva Raya started the Aravidu dynasty, moved and founded a new capital of Penukonda to replace the destroyed Hampi, and attempted to reconstitute the remains of Vijayanagara Empire. Tirumala abdicated in 1572, dividing the remains of his kingdom to his three sons, and pursued a religious life until his death in 1578. The Aravidu dynasty successors ruled the region but the empire collapsed in 1614, and the final remains ended in 1646, from continued wars with the Bijapur sultanate and others. During this period, more kingdoms in South India became independent and separate from Vijayanagara. These include the Mysore Kingdom, Keladi Nayaka, Nayaks of Madurai, Nayaks of Tanjore, Nayakas of Chitradurga and Nayak Kingdom of Gingee\u00a0\u2013 all of which declared independence and went on to have a significant impact on the history of South India in the coming centuries.\nOther kingdoms.\nFor two and a half centuries from the mid-13th century, politics in Northern India was dominated by the Delhi Sultanate, and in Southern India by the Vijayanagar Empire. However, there were other regional powers present as well. After fall of Pala Empire, the Chero dynasty ruled much of Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand from the 12th to the 18th centuries. The Reddy dynasty successfully defeated the Delhi Sultanate and extended their rule from Cuttack in the north to Kanchi in the south, eventually being absorbed into the expanding Vijayanagara Empire.\nIn the north, the Rajput kingdoms remained the dominant force in Western and Central India. The Mewar dynasty under Maharana Hammir defeated and captured Muhammad Tughlaq with the Bargujars as his main allies. Tughlaq had to pay a huge ransom and relinquish all of Mewar's lands. After this event, the Delhi Sultanate did not attack Chittor for a few hundred years. The Rajputs re-established their independence, and Rajput states were established as far east as Bengal and north into the Punjab. The Tomaras established themselves at Gwalior, and Man Singh Tomar reconstructed the Gwalior Fort. During this period, Mewar emerged as the leading Rajput state; and Rana Kumbha expanded his kingdom at the expense of the Sultanates of Malwa and Gujarat. The next great Rajput ruler, Rana Sanga of Mewar, became the principal player in Northern India. His objectives grew in scope \u2013 he planned to conquer Delhi. But, his defeat in the Battle of Khanwa consolidated the new Mughal dynasty in India. The Mewar dynasty under Maharana Udai Singh II faced further defeat by Mughal emperor Akbar, with their capital Chittor being captured. Due to this event, Udai Singh II founded Udaipur, which became the new capital of the Mewar kingdom. His son, Maharana Pratap of Mewar, firmly resisted the Mughals. Akbar sent many missions against him. He survived to ultimately gain control of all of Mewar, excluding the Chittor Fort.\nIn the south, the Bahmani Sultanate in the Deccan, born from a rebellion in 1347 against the Tughlaq dynasty, was the chief rival of Vijayanagara, and frequently created difficulties for them. Starting in 1490, the Bahmani Sultanate's governors revolted, their independent states composing the five Deccan sultanates; Ahmadnagar declared independence, followed by Bijapur and Berar in the same year; Golkonda became independent in 1518 and Bidar in 1528. Although generally rivals, they allied against the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565, permanently weakening Vijayanagar in the Battle of Talikota.\nIn the East, the Gajapati Kingdom remained a strong regional power to reckon with, associated with a high point in the growth of regional culture and architecture. Under Kapilendradeva, Gajapatis became an empire stretching from the lower Ganga in the north to the Kaveri in the south. In Northeast India, the Ahom Kingdom was a major power for six centuries; led by Lachit Borphukan, the Ahoms decisively defeated the Mughal army at the Battle of Saraighat during the Ahom-Mughal conflicts. Further east in Northeastern India was the Kingdom of Manipur, which ruled from their seat of power at Kangla Fort and developed a sophisticated Hindu Gaudiya Vaishnavite culture.\nThe Sultanate of Bengal was the dominant power of the Ganges\u2013Brahmaputra Delta, with a network of mint towns spread across the region. It was a Sunni Muslim monarchy with Indo-Turkic, Arab, Abyssinian and Bengali Muslim elites. The sultanate was known for its religious pluralism where non-Muslim communities co-existed peacefully. The Bengal Sultanate had a circle of vassal states, including Odisha in the southwest, Arakan in the southeast, and Tripura in the east. In the early 16th century, the Bengal Sultanate reached the peak of its territorial growth with control over Kamrup and Kamata in the northeast and Jaunpur and Bihar in the west. It was reputed as a thriving trading nation and one of Asia's strongest states. The Bengal Sultanate was described by contemporary European and Chinese visitors as a relatively prosperous kingdom and the \"richest country to trade with\". The Bengal Sultanate left a strong architectural legacy. Buildings from the period show foreign influences merged into a distinct Bengali style. The Bengal Sultanate was also the largest and most prestigious authority among the independent medieval Muslim-ruled states in the history of Bengal. Its decline began with an interregnum by the Suri Empire, followed by Mughal conquest and disintegration into petty kingdoms.\nBhakti movement and Sikhism.\nThe Bhakti movement refers to the theistic devotional trend that emerged in medieval Hinduism and later revolutionised in Sikhism. It originated in the seventh-century south India (now parts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala), and spread northwards. It swept over east and north India from the 15th century onwards, reaching its zenith between the 15th and 17th century.\nEarly modern period (1526\u20131858).\nThe early modern period of Indian history is dated from 1526 to 1858, corresponding to the rise and fall of the Mughal Empire, which inherited from the Timurid Renaissance. During this age India's economy expanded, relative peace was maintained and arts were patronised. This period witnessed the further development of Indo-Islamic architecture; the growth of Marathas and Sikhs enabled them to rule significant regions of India in the waning days of the Mughal empire. With the discovery of the Cape route in the 1500s, the first Europeans to arrive by sea and establish themselves, were the Portuguese in Goa and Bombay.\nMughal Empire.\nIn 1526, Babur swept across the Khyber Pass and established the Mughal Empire, which at its zenith covered much of South Asia. However, his son Humayun was defeated by the Afghan warrior Sher Shah Suri in 1540, and Humayun was forced to retreat to Kabul. After Sher Shah's death, his son Islam Shah Suri and his Hindu general Hemu Vikramaditya established secular rule in North India from Delhi until 1556, when Akbar (r.\u20091556\u00a0\u2013\u00a01605), grandson of Babur, defeated Hemu in the Second Battle of Panipat on 6 November 1556 after winning Battle of Delhi. Akbar tried to establish a good relationship with the Hindus. Akbar declared \"Amari\" or non-killing of animals in the holy days of Jainism. He rolled back the \"jizya\" tax for non-Muslims. The Mughal emperors married local royalty, allied themselves with local \"maharajas\", and attempted to fuse their Turko-Persian culture with ancient Indian styles, creating a unique Indo-Persian culture and Indo-Saracenic architecture.\nAkbar married a Rajput princess, Mariam-uz-Zamani, and they had a son, Jahangir (r.\u20091605\u00a0\u2013\u00a01627). Jahangir followed his father's policy. The Mughal dynasty ruled most of the Indian subcontinent by 1600. The reign of Shah Jahan (r.\u20091628\u00a0\u2013\u00a01658) was the golden age of Mughal architecture. He erected several large monuments, the most famous of which is the Taj Mahal at Agra.\nIt was one of the largest empires to have existed in the Indian subcontinent, and surpassed China to become the world's largest economic power, controlling 24.4% of the world economy, and the world leader in manufacturing, producing 25% of global industrial output. The economic and demographic upsurge was stimulated by Mughal agrarian reforms that intensified agricultural production, and a relatively high degree of urbanisation.\nThe Mughal Empire reached the zenith of its territorial expanse during the reign of Aurangzeb (r.\u20091658\u00a0\u2013\u00a01707), under whose reign India surpassed Qing China as the world's largest economy. Aurangzeb was less tolerant than his predecessors, reintroducing the \"jizya\" tax and destroying several historical temples, while at the same time building more Hindu temples than he destroyed, employing significantly more Hindus in his imperial bureaucracy than his predecessors, and advancing administrators based on ability rather than religion. However, he is often blamed for the erosion of the tolerant syncretic tradition of his predecessors, as well as increasing religious controversy and centralisation. The English East India Company suffered a defeat in the Anglo-Mughal War.\nThe Mughals suffered several blows due to invasions from Marathas, Rajputs, Jats and Afghans. In 1737, the Maratha general Bajirao of the Maratha Empire invaded and plundered Delhi. Under the general Amir Khan Umrao Al Udat, the Mughal Emperor sent 8,000 troops to drive away the 5,000 Maratha cavalry soldiers. Baji Rao easily routed the novice Mughal general. In 1737, in the final defeat of Mughal Empire, the commander-in-chief of the Mughal Army, Nizam-ul-mulk, was routed at Bhopal by the Maratha army. This essentially brought an end to the Mughal Empire. While Bharatpur State under Jat ruler Suraj Mal, overran the Mughal garrison at Agra and plundered the city. In 1739, Nader Shah, emperor of Iran, defeated the Mughal army at the Battle of Karnal. After this victory, Nader captured and sacked Delhi, carrying away treasures including the Peacock Throne. Ahmad Shah Durrani commenced his own invasions as ruler of the Durrani Empire, eventually sacking Delhi in 1757. Mughal rule was further weakened by constant native Indian resistance; Banda Singh Bahadur led the Sikh Khalsa against Mughal religious oppression; Hindu Rajas of Bengal, Pratapaditya and Raja Sitaram Ray revolted; and Maharaja Chhatrasal, of Bundela Rajputs, fought the Mughals and established the Panna State. The Mughal dynasty was reduced to puppet rulers by 1757. Vadda Ghalughara took place under the Muslim provincial government based at Lahore to wipe out the Sikhs, with 30,000 Sikhs being killed, an offensive that had begun with the Mughals, with the Chhota Ghallughara, and lasted several decades under its Muslim successor states.\nMaratha Empire.\nThe Maratha kingdom was founded and consolidated by Chatrapati Shivaji. However, the credit for making the Marathas formidable power nationally goes to \"Peshwa\" (chief minister) Bajirao I. Historian K.K. Datta wrote that Bajirao I \"may very well be regarded as the second founder of the Maratha Empire\".\nIn the early 18th century, under the Peshwas, the Marathas consolidated and ruled over much of South Asia. The Marathas are credited to a large extent for ending Mughal rule in India. In 1737, the Marathas defeated a Mughal army in their capital, in the Battle of Delhi. The Marathas continued their military campaigns against the Mughals, Nizam, Nawab of Bengal and the Durrani Empire to further extend their boundaries. At its peak, the domain of the Marathas encompassed most of the Indian subcontinent. The Marathas even attempted to capture Delhi and discussed putting Vishwasrao Peshwa on the throne there in place of the Mughal emperor.\nThe Maratha empire at its peak stretched from Tamil Nadu in the south, to Peshawar (modern-day Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan ) in the north, and Bengal in the east. The Northwestern expansion of the Marathas was stopped after the Third Battle of Panipat (1761). However, the Maratha authority in the north was re-established within a decade under Peshwa Madhavrao I.\nUnder Madhavrao I, the strongest knights were granted semi-autonomy, creating a confederacy of United Maratha states under the Gaekwads of Baroda, the Holkars of Indore and Malwa, the Scindias of Gwalior and Ujjain, the Bhonsales of Nagpur and the Puars of Dhar and Dewas. In 1775, the East India Company intervened in a Peshwa family succession struggle in Pune, which led to the First Anglo-Maratha War, resulting in a Maratha victory. The Marathas remained a major power in India until their defeat in the Second and Third Anglo-Maratha Wars (1805\u20131818).\nSikh Empire.\nThe Sikh Empire was a political entity that governed the Northwestern regions of the Indian subcontinent, based around the Punjab, from 1799 to 1849. It was forged, on the foundations of the Khalsa, under the leadership of Maharaja Ranjit Singh (1780\u20131839).\nMaharaja Ranjit Singh consolidated much of northern India into an empire using his Sikh Khalsa Army, trained in European military techniques and equipped with modern military technologies. Ranjit Singh proved himself to be a master strategist and selected well-qualified generals for his army. He successfully ended the Afghan-Sikh Wars. In stages, he added central Punjab, the provinces of Multan and Kashmir, and the Peshawar Valley to his empire.\nAt its peak in the 19th century, the empire extended from the Khyber Pass in the west, to Kashmir in the north, to Sindh in the south, running along Sutlej river to Himachal in the east. After the death of Ranjit Singh, the empire weakened, leading to conflict with the British East India Company. The First Anglo-Sikh War and Second Anglo-Sikh War marked the downfall of the Sikh Empire, making it among the last areas of the Indian subcontinent to be conquered by the British.\nOther kingdoms.\nThe Kingdom of Mysore in southern India expanded to its greatest extent under Hyder Ali and his son Tipu Sultan in the later half of the 18th century. Under their rule, Mysore fought series of wars against the Marathas and British or their combined forces. The Maratha\u2013Mysore War ended in April 1787, following the finalising of \"treaty of Gajendragad\", in which Tipu Sultan was obligated to pay tribute to the Marathas. Concurrently, the Anglo-Mysore Wars took place, where the Mysoreans used the Mysorean rockets. The Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1798\u20131799) saw the death of Tipu. Mysore's alliance with the French was seen as a threat to the British East India Company, and Mysore was attacked from all four sides. The Nizam of Hyderabad and the Marathas launched an invasion from the north. The British won a decisive victory at the Siege of Seringapatam (1799).\nHyderabad was founded by the Qutb Shahi dynasty of Golconda in 1591. Following a brief Mughal rule, Asif Jah, a Mughal official, seized control of Hyderabad and declared himself Nizam-al-Mulk of Hyderabad in 1724. The Nizams lost considerable territory and paid tribute to the Maratha Empire after being routed in multiple battles, such as the Battle of Palkhed. However, the Nizams maintained their sovereignty from 1724 until 1948 through paying tributes to the Marathas, and later, being vassals of the British. Hyderabad State became a princely state in British India in 1798.\nThe Nawabs of Bengal had become the de facto rulers of Bengal following the decline of Mughal Empire. However, their rule was interrupted by Marathas who carried out six expeditions in Bengal from 1741 to 1748, as a result of which Bengal became a tributary state of Marathas. On 23 June 1757, Siraj ud-Daulah, the last independent Nawab of Bengal was betrayed in the Battle of Plassey by Mir Jafar. He lost to the British, who took over the charge of Bengal in 1757, installed Mir Jafar on the \"Masnad\" (throne) and established itself to a political power in Bengal. In 1765 the system of Dual Government was established, in which the Nawabs ruled on behalf of the British and were mere puppets to the British. In 1772 the system was abolished and Bengal was brought under the direct control of the British. In 1793, when the \"Nizamat\" (governorship) of the Nawab was also taken away, they remained as mere pensioners of the British East India Company.\nIn the 18th century, the whole of Rajputana was virtually subdued by the Marathas. The Second Anglo-Maratha War distracted the Marathas from 1807 to 1809, but afterward Maratha domination of Rajputana resumed. In 1817, the British went to war with the Pindaris, raiders who were fled in Maratha territory, which quickly became the Third Anglo-Maratha War, and the British government offered its protection to the Rajput rulers from the Pindaris and the Marathas. By the end of 1818 similar treaties had been executed between the other Rajput states and Britain. The Maratha Sindhia ruler of Gwalior gave up the district of Ajmer-Merwara to the British, and Maratha influence in Rajasthan came to an end. Most of the Rajput princes remained loyal to Britain in the Revolt of 1857, and few political changes were made in Rajputana until Indian independence in 1947. The Rajputana Agency contained more than 20 princely states, most notable being Udaipur State, Jaipur State, Bikaner State and Jodhpur State.\nAfter the fall of the Maratha Empire, many Maratha dynasties and states became vassals in a subsidiary alliance with the British. With the decline of the Sikh Empire, after the First Anglo-Sikh War in 1846, under the terms of the Treaty of Amritsar, the British government sold Kashmir to Maharaja Gulab Singh and the princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, the second-largest princely state in British India, was created by the Dogra dynasty. While in eastern and north-eastern India, the Hindu and Buddhist states of Cooch Behar Kingdom, Twipra Kingdom and Kingdom of Sikkim were annexed by the British and made vassal princely state.\nAfter the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire, Polygar states emerged in Southern India; and managed to weather invasions and flourished until the Polygar Wars, where they were defeated by the British East India Company forces. Around the 18th century, the Kingdom of Nepal was formed by Rajput rulers.\nEuropean exploration.\nIn 1498, a Portuguese fleet under Vasco da Gama discovered a new sea route from Europe to India, which paved the way for direct Indo-European commerce. The Portuguese soon set up trading posts in Velha Goa, Damaon, Dio island, and Bombay. The Portuguese instituted the Goa Inquisition, where new Indian converts were punished for suspected heresy against Christianity and non-Christians were condemned. Goa remained the main Portuguese territory until it was annexed by India in 1961.\nThe next to arrive were the Dutch, with their main base in Ceylon. They established ports in Malabar. However, their expansion into India was halted after their defeat in the Battle of Colachel by the Kingdom of Travancore during the Travancore-Dutch War. The Dutch never recovered from the defeat and no longer posed a large colonial threat to India.\nThe internal conflicts among Indian kingdoms gave opportunities to the European traders to gradually establish political influence and appropriate lands. Following the Dutch, the British \u2014 who set up in the west coast port of Surat in 1619 \u2014 and the French both established trading outposts in India. Although continental European powers controlled various coastal regions of southern and eastern India during the ensuing century, they eventually lost all their territories in India to the British, with the exception of the French outposts of Pondich\u00e9ry and Chandernagore, and the Portuguese colonies of Goa, Daman and Diu.\nEast India Company rule in India.\nThe English East India Company was founded in 1600. It gained a foothold in India with the establishment of a factory in Masulipatnam on the Eastern coast of India in 1611 and a grant of rights by the Mughal emperor Jahangir to establish a factory in Surat in 1612. In 1640, after receiving similar permission from the Vijayanagara ruler farther south, a second factory was established in Madras on the southeastern coast. The islet of \"Bom Bahia\" in present-day Mumbai (Bombay) was a Portuguese outpost not far from Surat. It was presented to Charles II of England as dowry in his marriage to Catherine of Braganza. Charles in turn leased Bombay to the Company in 1668. Two decades later, the company established a trade post in the River Ganges delta. During this time other companies established by the Portuguese, Dutch, French, and Danish were similarly expanding in the subcontinent.\nThe company's victory under Robert Clive in the 1757 Battle of Plassey and another victory in the 1764 Battle of Buxar (in Bihar), consolidated the company's power, and forced emperor Shah Alam II to appoint it the \"diwan\", or revenue collector, of Bengal, Bihar, and Orissa. The company thus became the \"de facto\" ruler of large areas of the lower Gangetic plain by 1773. It also proceeded by degrees to expand its dominions around Bombay and Madras. The Anglo-Mysore Wars (1766\u201399) and the Anglo-Maratha Wars (1772\u20131818) left it in control of large areas of India south of the Sutlej River. With the defeat of the Marathas, no native power represented a threat for the company any longer.\nThe expansion of the company's power chiefly took two forms. The first of these was the outright annexation of Indian states and subsequent direct governance of the underlying regions that collectively came to comprise British India. The annexed regions included the North-Western Provinces (comprising Rohilkhand, Gorakhpur, and the Doab) (1801), Delhi (1803), Assam (Ahom Kingdom 1828) and Sindh (1843). Punjab, North-West Frontier Province, and Kashmir were annexed after the Anglo-Sikh Wars in 1849\u201356 (Period of tenure of Marquess of Dalhousie Governor General). However, Kashmir was immediately sold under the Treaty of Amritsar (1850) to the Dogra Dynasty of Jammu and thereby became a princely state. In 1854, Berar was annexed along with the state of Oudh two years later.\nThe second form of asserting power involved treaties in which Indian rulers acknowledged the company's hegemony in return for limited internal autonomy. Since the company operated under financial constraints, it had to set up \"political\" underpinnings for its rule. The most important such support came from the \"subsidiary alliances\" with Indian princes. In the early 19th century, the territories of these princes accounted for two-thirds of India. When an Indian ruler who was able to secure his territory wanted to enter such an alliance, the company welcomed it as an economical method of indirect rule that did not involve the economic costs of direct administration or the political costs of gaining the support of alien subjects.\nIn return, the company undertook the \"defense of these subordinate allies and treated them with traditional respect and marks of honor.\" Subsidiary alliances created the Princely States of the Hindu maharajas and the Muslim nawabs. Prominent among the princely states were Cochin (1791), Jaipur (1794), Travancore (1795), Hyderabad (1798), Mysore (1799), Cis-Sutlej Hill States (1815), Central India Agency (1819), Cutch and Gujarat Gaikwad territories (1819), Rajputana (1818), and Bahawalpur (1833).\nIndian indenture system.\nThe Indian indenture system was an ongoing system of indenture, a form of debt bondage, by which 3.5\u00a0million Indians were transported to colonies of European powers to provide labour for the (mainly sugar) plantations. It started from the end of slavery in 1833 and continued until 1920. This resulted in the development of a large Indian diaspora that spread from the Caribbean to the Pacific Ocean and the growth of large Indo-Caribbean and Indo-African populations.\nLate modern period and contemporary history (1857\u20131947).\nRebellion of 1857 and its consequences.\nThe Indian rebellion of 1857 was a large-scale rebellion by soldiers employed by the British East India Company in northern and central India against the company's rule. The spark that led to the mutiny was the issue of new gunpowder cartridges for the Enfield rifle, which was insensitive to local religious prohibition. The key mutineer was Mangal Pandey. In addition, the underlying grievances over British taxation, the ethnic gulf between the British officers and their Indian troops and land annexations played a significant role in the rebellion. Within weeks after Pandey's mutiny, dozens of units of the Indian army joined peasant armies in widespread rebellion. The rebel soldiers were later joined by Indian nobility, many of whom had lost titles and domains under the Doctrine of Lapse and felt that the company had interfered with a traditional system of inheritance. Rebel leaders such as Nana Sahib and the Rani of Jhansi belonged to this group.\nAfter the outbreak of the mutiny in Meerut, the rebels very quickly reached Delhi. The rebels had also captured large tracts of the North-Western Provinces and Awadh (Oudh). Most notably, in Awadh, the rebellion took on the attributes of a patriotic revolt against British presence. However, the British East India Company mobilised rapidly with the assistance of friendly Princely states, but it took the British the better part of 1858 to suppress the rebellion. Due to the rebels being poorly equipped and having no outside support or funding, they were brutally subdued.\nIn the aftermath, all power was transferred from the British East India Company to the British Crown, which began to administer most of India as provinces. The Crown controlled the company's lands directly and had considerable indirect influence over the rest of India, which consisted of the Princely states ruled by local royal families. There were officially 565 princely states in 1947, but only 21 had actual state governments, and only three were large (Mysore, Hyderabad, and Kashmir). They were absorbed into the independent nation in 1947\u201348.\nBritish Raj (1858\u20131947).\nAfter 1857, the colonial government strengthened and expanded its infrastructure via the court system, legal procedures, and statutes. The Indian Penal Code came into being. In education, Thomas Babington Macaulay had made schooling a priority for the Raj in 1835 and succeeded in implementing the use of English for instruction. By 1890 some 60,000 Indians had matriculated. The Indian economy grew at about 1% per year from 1880 to 1920, and the population also grew at 1%. However, from 1910s Indian private industry began to grow significantly. India built a modern railway system in the late 19th century which was the fourth largest in the world. Historians have been divided on issues of economic history, with the Nationalist school arguing that India was poorer due to British rule.\nIn 1905, Lord Curzon split the large province of Bengal into a largely Hindu western half and \"Eastern Bengal and Assam\", a largely Muslim eastern half. The British goal was said to be efficient administration but the people of Bengal were outraged at the apparent \"divide and rule\" strategy. It also marked the beginning of the organised anti-colonial movement. When the Liberal party in Britain came to power in 1906, he was removed. Bengal was reunified in 1911. The new Viceroy Gilbert Minto and the new Secretary of State for India John Morley consulted with Congress leaders on political reforms. The Morley-Minto reforms of 1909 provided for Indian membership of the provincial executive councils as well as the Viceroy's executive council. The Imperial Legislative Council was enlarged from 25 to 60 members and separate communal representation for Muslims was established in a dramatic step towards representative and responsible government. Several socio-religious organisations came into being at that time. Muslims set up the All India Muslim League in 1906 to protect the interests of the aristocratic Muslims. The Hindu Mahasabha sought to represent Hindu interests. The Hindu nationalist Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) was formed in 1925\u20131926. Sikhs founded the Shiromani Akali Dal in 1920. However, the largest and oldest political party Indian National Congress, founded in 1885, attempted to keep a distance from the socio-religious movements and identity politics.\nIndian Renaissance.\nThe Bengali Renaissance refers to a social reform movement, dominated by Bengali Hindus, in the Bengal region of the Indian subcontinent during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, a period of British rule. Historian Nitish Sengupta describes the renaissance as having started with reformer and humanitarian Raja Ram Mohan Roy (1775\u20131833), and ended with Asia's first Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore (1861\u20131941). This flowering of religious and social reformers, scholars, and writers is described by historian David Kopf as \"one of the most creative periods in Indian history.\"\nDuring this period, Bengal witnessed an intellectual awakening that is in some way similar to the Renaissance. This movement questioned existing orthodoxies, particularly with respect to women, marriage, the dowry system, the caste system, and religion. One of the earliest social movements that emerged during this time was the Young Bengal movement, which espoused rationalism and atheism as the common denominators of civil conduct among upper caste educated Hindus. It played an important role in reawakening Indian minds and intellect across the Indian subcontinent.\nFamines.\nDuring British East India Company and British Crown rule, India experienced some of deadliest ever recorded famines. These famines, usually resulting from crop failures and often exacerbated by policies of the colonial government, included the Great Famine of 1876\u20131878 in which 6.1\u00a0million to 10.3\u00a0million people died, the Great Bengal famine of 1770 where between 1 and 10 million people died, the Indian famine of 1899\u20131900 in which 1.25 to 10\u00a0million people died, and the Bengal famine of 1943 where between 2.1 and 3.8 million people died. The Third plague pandemic in the mid-19th century killed 10\u00a0million people in India. Despite persistent diseases and famines, the population of the Indian subcontinent, which stood at up to 200\u00a0million in 1750, had reached 389\u00a0million by 1941.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, over 800,000 volunteered for the army, and more than 400,000 volunteered for non-combat roles, compared with the pre-war annual recruitment of about 15,000 men. The Army saw early action on the Western Front at the First Battle of Ypres. After a year of front-line duty, sickness and casualties had reduced the Indian Corps to the point where it had to be withdrawn. Nearly 700,000 Indians fought the Turks in the Mesopotamian campaign. Indian formations were also sent to East Africa, Egypt, and Gallipoli.\nIndian Army and Imperial Service Troops fought during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign's defence of the Suez Canal in 1915, at Romani in 1916 and to Jerusalem in 1917. India units occupied the Jordan Valley and after the German spring offensive they became the major force in the Egyptian Expeditionary Force during the Battle of Megiddo and in the Desert Mounted Corps' advance to Damascus and on to Aleppo. Other divisions remained in India guarding the North-West Frontier and fulfilling internal security obligations.\nOne million Indian troops served abroad during the war. In total, 74,187 died, and another 67,000 were wounded. The roughly 90,000 soldiers who died fighting in World War I and the Afghan Wars are commemorated by the India Gate.\nWorld War II.\nBritish India officially declared war on Nazi Germany in September 1939. The British Raj, as part of the Allied Nations, sent over two and a half million volunteer soldiers to fight under British command against the Axis powers. Additionally, several Princely States provided large donations to support the Allied campaign. India also provided the base for American operations in support of China in the China Burma India Theatre.\nIndians fought throughout the world, including in the European theatre against Germany, in North Africa against Germany and Italy, against the Italians in East Africa, in the Middle East against the Vichy French, in the South Asian region defending India against the Japanese and fighting the Japanese in Burma. Indians also aided in liberating British colonies such as Singapore and Hong Kong after the Japanese surrender in August 1945. Over 87,000 soldiers from the subcontinent died in World War II.\nThe Indian National Congress denounced Nazi Germany but would not fight it or anyone else until India was independent. Congress launched the Quit India Movement in August 1942, refusing to co-operate in any way with the government until independence was granted. The government immediately arrested over 60,000 national and local Congress leaders. The Muslim League rejected the Quit India movement and worked closely with the Raj authorities.\nSubhas Chandra Bose (also called \"Netaji\") broke with Congress and tried to form a military alliance with Germany or Japan to gain independence. The Germans assisted Bose in the formation of the Indian Legion; however, it was Japan that helped him revamp the Indian National Army (INA), after the First Indian National Army under Mohan Singh was dissolved. The INA fought under Japanese direction, mostly in Burma. Bose also headed the Provisional Government of Free India (or Azad Hind), a government-in-exile based in Singapore.\nBy 1942, neighbouring Burma was invaded by Japan, which by then had already captured the Indian territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Japan gave nominal control of the islands to the Provisional Government of Free India on 21 October 1943, and in the following March, the Indian National Army with the help of Japan crossed into India and advanced as far as Kohima in Nagaland. This advance on the mainland of the Indian subcontinent reached its farthest point on Indian territory, retreating from the Battle of Kohima in June and from that of Imphal on 3 July 1944.\nThe region of Bengal in British India suffered a devastating famine during 1940\u20131943. An estimated 2.1\u20133 million died from the famine, frequently characterised as \"man-made\", with most sources asserting that wartime colonial policies exacerbated the crisis.\nIndian independence movement (1885\u20131947).\nThe numbers of British in India were small, yet they were able to rule 52% of the Indian subcontinent directly and exercise considerable leverage over the princely states that accounted for 48% of the area.\nOne of the most important events of the 19th century was the rise of Indian nationalism, leading Indians to seek first \"self-rule\" and later \"complete independence\". However, historians are divided over the causes of its rise. Probable reasons include a \"clash of interests of the Indian people with British interests\", \"racial discriminations\", and \"the revelation of India's past\".\nThe first step toward Indian self-rule was the appointment of councillors to advise the British viceroy in 1861 and the first Indian was appointed in 1909. Provincial Councils with Indian members were also set up. The councillors' participation was subsequently widened into legislative councils. The British built a large British Indian Army, with the senior officers all British and many of the troops from small minority groups such as Gurkhas from Nepal and Sikhs. The civil service was increasingly filled with natives at the lower levels, with the British holding the more senior positions.\nBal Gangadhar Tilak, an Indian nationalist leader, declared Swaraj (home rule) as the destiny of the nation. His popular sentence \"Swaraj is my birthright, and I shall have it\" became the source of inspiration. Tilak was backed by rising public leaders like Bipin Chandra Pal and Lala Lajpat Rai, who held the same point of view, notably they advocated the Swadeshi movement involving the boycott of imported items and the use of Indian-made goods; the triumvirate were popularly known as Lal Bal Pal. In 1907, the Congress was split into two factions: The radicals, led by Tilak, advocated civil agitation and direct revolution to overthrow the British Empire and the abandonment of all things British. The moderates, led by leaders like Dadabhai Naoroji and Gopal Krishna Gokhale, on the other hand, wanted reform within the framework of British rule.\nThe partition of Bengal in 1905 further increased the revolutionary movement for Indian independence. The disenfranchisement lead some to take violent action.\nThe British themselves adopted a \"carrot and stick\" approach in response to renewed nationalist demands. The means of achieving the proposed measure were later enshrined in the Government of India Act 1919, which introduced the principle of a dual mode of administration, or diarchy, in which elected Indian legislators and appointed British officials shared power. In 1919, Colonel Reginald Dyer ordered his troops to fire their weapons on peaceful protestors, including unarmed women and children, resulting in the Jallianwala Bagh massacre; which led to the Non-cooperation Movement of 1920\u20131922. The massacre was a decisive episode towards the end of British rule in India.\nFrom 1920 leaders such as Mahatma Gandhi began highly popular mass movements to campaign against the British Raj using largely peaceful methods. The Gandhi-led independence movement opposed the British rule using non-violent methods like non-co-operation, civil disobedience and economic resistance. However, revolutionary activities against the British rule took place throughout the Indian subcontinent and some others adopted a militant approach like the Hindustan Republican Association, that sought to overthrow British rule by armed struggle.\nThe All India Azad Muslim Conference gathered in Delhi in April 1940 to voice its support for an independent and united India. Its members included several Islamic organisations in India, as well as 1,400 nationalist Muslim delegates. The pro-separatist All-India Muslim League worked to try to silence those nationalist Muslims who stood against the partition of India, often using \"intimidation and coercion\". The murder of the All India Azad Muslim Conference leader Allah Bakhsh Soomro also made it easier for the pro-separatist All-India Muslim League to demand the creation of a Pakistan.\nAfter World War II (c. 1946\u20131947).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new; when an age ends; and when the soul of a nation long suppressed finds utterance.\"\n\u00a0\u2014 From, Tryst with destiny, a speech given by Jawaharlal Nehru to the Constituent Assembly of India on the eve of independence, 14 August 1947.\nIn January 1946, several mutinies broke out in the armed services, starting with that of RAF servicemen frustrated with their slow repatriation. The mutinies came to a head with mutiny of the Royal Indian Navy in Bombay in February 1946, followed by others in Calcutta, Madras, and Karachi. The mutinies were rapidly suppressed. In early 1946, new elections were called and Congress candidates won in eight of the eleven provinces. \nLate in 1946, the Labour government decided to end British rule of India, and in early 1947 it announced its intention of transferring power no later than June 1948 and participating in the formation of an interim government. \nAlong with the desire for independence, tensions between Hindus and Muslims had also been developing over the years. Muslim League leader Muhammad Ali Jinnah proclaimed 16 August 1946 as Direct Action Day, with the stated goal of highlighting, peacefully, the demand for a Muslim homeland in British India, which resulted in the outbreak of the cycle of violence that would be later called the \"Great Calcutta Killing of August 1946\". The communal violence spread to Bihar, Noakhali in Bengal, Garhmukteshwar in the United Provinces, and on to Rawalpindi in March 1947 in which Sikhs and Hindus were attacked or driven out by Muslims. \nIndependence and partition (1947\u2013present).\nIn August 1947, the British Indian Empire was partitioned into the Union of India and Dominion of Pakistan. In particular, the partition of the Punjab and Bengal led to rioting between Hindus, Muslims, and Sikhs in these provinces and spread to other nearby regions, leaving some 500,000 dead. The police and army units were largely ineffective. The British officers were gone, and the units were beginning to tolerate if not actually indulge in violence against their religious enemies. Also, this period saw one of the largest mass migrations anywhere in modern history, with a total of 12\u00a0million Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims moving between the newly created nations of India and Pakistan (which gained independence on 15 and 14 August 1947 respectively). In 1971, Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan and East Bengal, seceded from Pakistan.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrinted sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13891", "revid": "50996365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13891", "title": "Highlander (franchise)", "text": "Media franchise (1986\u20132007)\nHighlander is an American media franchise created by Gregory Widen. The series began with \"Highlander\", a 1986 fantasy film starring Christopher Lambert, who played Connor MacLeod, the eponymous Highlander. There have been four theatrical \"Highlander\" films, one made-for-TV film, two live-action television series, an animated television series, an anime film, original novels, comic books, and various licensed merchandise.\nThe main character of the series, Connor MacLeod, was born in Glenfinnan in the Scottish Highlands in the 16th century, and is one of a number of immortals empowered by an energy called the Quickening and only able to die if beheaded. Other immortal protagonists from the MacLeod clan were introduced over time, including Duncan MacLeod, Quentin MacLeod and Colin MacLeod, each of whom exists in their own timelines.\nOn television, ' aired for six seasons from 1992 to 1998, starring Adrian Paul as Connor's kinsman Duncan MacLeod, another immortal Highlander born decades later. Recurring characters in the series included the immortal thief Amanda (Elizabeth Gracen) and oldest immortal Methos (Peter Wingfield) who each had spin-off shows, ' and \"The Methos Chronicles\" respectively, which each lasted one season.\nFilms.\n\"Highlander\" (1986).\nThe original film \"Highlander\", directed by Russell Mulcahy, was released on March 7, 1986, with the tagline \"There Can Be Only One\". The film features a number of flashback scenes establishing the early history of Connor MacLeod (Christopher Lambert) of the Clan MacLeod. After dying on the battlefield in 1536 and returning to life fully healed, Connor is mentored by an Egyptian swordsman calling himself Juan S\u00e1nchez-Villalobos Ram\u00edrez (Sean Connery). The young Highlander learns he and others are among a rare number of humans born throughout history in different parts of the world who possess the \"Quickening\", a power that connects them to nature, leaves them unable to have children, and makes them ageless and unable to die unless beheaded. Immortals can absorb the Quickening of another by taking their head, and so many battle one another in mortal combat to increase their power. Ram\u00edrez says that one day when only a few remain they will be pulled to a \"faraway land\" and fight in the Gathering, where the final survivor will take the Prize: the collected power of all immortals who ever lived, enough power to enslave humanity.\nIn the film's present-day story, the Gathering is occurring in 1985 in New York City where MacLeod lives as an antique dealer, working alongside his adopted daughter Rachel. The Highlander must ensure the Prize is not won by The Kurgan (Clancy Brown), the same ruthless immortal who once hunted him and killed Ram\u00edrez centuries before. As the final battle draws near, MacLeod reflects on his life with his adopted daughter Rachel Ellenstein (Sheila Gish) and meets a new love, forensics scientist Brenda Wyatt (Roxanne Hart).\nThe film was titled \"Shadow Clan\" and \"Princes of the Universe\" in the earliest drafts. Upon its release, the film was not a financial success and was poorly reviewed by critics, but it gained a strong cult following, was a hit internationally, and is regarded by many as the best film in the series.\nThe original orchestral score was composed by Michael Kamen. Queen produced and performed the soundtrack, released as the album \"A Kind of Magic\" (a reference to a line used by Connor in the film to explain his ability to survive death). Sounds from the soundtrack were also used in \"\", and the track, \"Princes of the Universe\" became the theme song for the show's opening title introduction.\nThe film grossed $12.9 million worldwide, with $5.9 million in the United States and Canada.\n\"Highlander II: The Quickening\" (1991).\n\"\" was initially directed by Russell Mulcahy. Filming was done almost entirely in Argentina. After the country's economy crashed, the film's investors took direct control of the film, removing Mulcahy and his creative influence while altering the story. Released on November 1, 1991, the film mainly takes place in 2024, with flashbacks to events on Earth in the 1990s and also the planet Zeist \"500 years ago\". The film offers an origin story for immortals, depicting Ram\u00edrez and MacLeod as alien revolutionaries of Zeist who oppose the corrupt rulers and General Katana (Michael Ironside). Ram\u00edrez and MacLeod, who share a bond due to a magic called \"the Quickening\", are then exiled to Earth along with others. On Earth they become immortal and are forced to kill each other until only one is left alive. The winner will have a choice: to become mortal and live out their life on Earth or return to Zeist now pardoned of all crimes. This origin story contradicts the age and history of Ram\u00edrez in the first film, Connor's childhood growing up in Scotland, and the circumstances of how the two first met, but no explanation is offered for these contradictions. \"Highlander II\" also does not explain why MacLeod no longer seems to have access to the power he won at the end of the previous film, which allowed him to know the thoughts and dreams of all living people. Only the mortality he earned is mentioned.\nIn the film's main story, the ozone layer deteriorates and many are killed by solar radiation by 1994, including Brenda Wyatt (now said to be Connor's wife). In 1999, MacLeod supervises a team that creates an energy shield across the planet. Earth is protected but can no longer see the sky or natural sunlight. By 2024, humanity is largely in despair as society is overwhelmed by violence and crime. The shield is now under control of The Shield Corporation (TSC), which charges countries heavily for its protection. Having won the Prize in 1985, MacLeod became mortal and has physically aged into a frail old man. Worried the Highlander may still return to Zeist, Katana sends immortal henchmen after him. MacLeod defends himself and his attackers die, their immortal energies restoring his youth. He allies with Louise Marcus (Virginia Madsen), a political radical who knows the ozone has healed and that TSC is covering up the truth in order to continue profits. Joining them is Ram\u00edrez, whom MacLeod summons back to life through their magical bond. They fight Katana and free Earth from the shield.\nWhen \"Highlander II\" was released in 1991, it was poorly reviewed by critics worldwide, and is considered to be one of the worst films ever made. Russell Mulcahy was disappointed with the film and later made his own Renegade Version director's cut by re-editing the footage and removing all verbal reference to the immortals being aliens from a planet called Zeist. The Zeist footage was repurposed as a flashback to an ancient, technologically advanced civilization that existed on Earth before recorded history (the name and location of this civilization is not said). MacLeod and Ram\u00edrez were said to have been members of this ancient society and it is stated that they, along with Katana and others, are once again rare human beings born with their immortality. While the film still shows Ram\u00edrez wielding a form of magic, it is no longer called the Quickening. The rulers of this ancient society banished the immortal revolutionaries and criminals to different points in the future, allowing Ram\u00edrez to be sent to ancient Egypt while MacLeod becomes a Highlander in 16th century Scotland, the two of them reuniting later. It is said the winner of the Prize can either become mortal and live out their life \"in the future\" or choose to return to their original civilization in the distant past.\nIn 2004, a \"Special Edition\" was released, featuring several distinct alterations, including new computer-generated visual effects throughout the film (and changing the Shield from red to dark blue as originally intended). Though many fans regarded the \"Renegade Version\" and \"Special Edition\" as being better than the original film, the general reception was still somewhat mixed.\n\"Highlander III: The Sorcerer\" (1994).\n\"\" (alternatively titled \"Highlander: The Final Dimension\") was released in late 1994 in the Philippines and the United Kingdom and on January 27, 1995, in the United States. It is a direct sequel to the original film, ignoring and contradicting the story of \"Highlander II\". Following Brenda Wyatt's death in a car crash in 1987, MacLeod is living in Marrakesh with his adopted son John. In 1994, he is hunted by the warrior Kane (Mario Van Peebles) who missed the original Gathering because he was buried deep in a Japanese cave by magic, isolating him from the Game. Having killed and absorbed the power of MacLeod's second teacher, the sorcerer Nakano (Mako), Kane is a master of illusion. Realizing there are other immortals again, Connor returns to New York to ensure Kane does not win the Prize. Along the way, he finds a new love, archaeologist Dr. Alex Johnson (Deborah Unger) who resembles a woman MacLeod loved during the French Revolution. Kane kidnaps John and lures MacLeod to a final battle in New Jersey. MacLeod wins and leaves to start a new life with John and Alex.\nThe film grossed $36.7 million worldwide, with $13.7 million in the United States and Canada. Critics claim that it was little more than rehash of the first film.\n\"Highlander: Endgame\" (2000).\n' was released to theaters on September 1, 2000. Rather than a direct sequel in the \"Highlander\" film franchise, it followed the continuity of the ', acting as a franchise bridge by starring both previous film protagonist Connor MacLeod and TV series protagonist Duncan MacLeod. In the canon of the TV series, the events of the original \"Highlander\" film still took place but the Prize was not won because many immortals still lived on Earth in 1985. The series protagonist Duncan is introduced in the first episode as another immortal of the Clan MacLeod who was born decades after Connor left the clan. Christopher Lambert appeared as Connor in the first episode, revealed to have been Duncan's teacher in the ways of immortals.\nTaking place in the present day, the film's antagonist is Jacob Kell (Bruce Payne), an evil immortal who ignores the rules of the Game. Kell holds a centuries-old grudge against Connor MacLeod and kills his adopted daughter Rachel Ellenstein when he bombs their old antique shop in New York City. Following Rachel's death, Connor is disillusioned with life and spends a decade in a hidden fortress known as the Sanctuary. When Kell discovers the Sanctuary ten years later, Connor and Duncan join forces against him. Believing neither of them can defeat Kell alone, Connor, tired of his immortal life, insists he be killed by Duncan so the younger MacLeod may possess their combined power. Duncan reluctantly does so and defeats Kell.\nCritical reaction to \"Highlander: Endgame\" was negative. It holds a 11% \"rotten\" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 52 reviews, higher than \"Highlander II\" and \"Highlander III\", both of which hold ratings of 5% or lower, and a score of 21 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 16 reviews.\nThe film was a box office bomb, managing to garner $15 million of its $25 million budget. The film opened at #3, grossing $5,067,331 in the opening weekend. It went on to gross $12,811,858 domestically and gather $3,031,750 from foreign markets for a worldwide total of $15,843,608. The film however sold better when it was released on DVD. This prompted the producers to release the director's cut version of the film, adding new footage along with better special effects and audio tracks, and re-editing certain parts of the story. The reception to the director's cut was mixed but better than the overall fan reception to the theatrical release.\n\"Highlander: The Source\" (2007).\n\"\" premiered on the Sci Fi Channel on September 15, 2007, and continues the canon of \"Highlander: The Series\", taking place several years after \"Endgame\". The film takes place in a future version of Earth where human society has descended into violence and chaos. Duncan MacLeod and a group of allies seek an energy well in Eastern Europe that may be the legendary Source of immortality, all while fighting the Guardian (Cristian Solimeno), an immortal empowered with superhuman abilities. The story and the mythology of the Source were meant to be expanded on with future films, but reception to \"The Source\" was largely negative and plans for follow-up stories were canceled. A 2008 short film called \"Reunion\", written by TV series producer David Abramowitz and directed by Don Paonessa, featured the series characters but did not acknowledge the events of \"Highlander: The Source\". At the Highlander Worldwide Convention the next year, Abramowitz and others from the TV series referred to \"Highlander: The Source\" as a \"bad dream\" Duncan had. The same year, Big Finish Productions released officially licensed \"Highlander: The Series\" audio plays that contradicted the events of \"The Source\".\nFuture.\nIn 2008, Summit Entertainment bought the franchise's rights, with the intention to remake the original 1986 film. The writers Art Marcum and Matt Holloway and producer Peter Davis were attached to the project at one point. Justin Lin signed on to direct the remake. The film's reported title is \"Highlander: The Reckoning\".\nProducer Neal H. Moritz said in an interview that they want to stay true to the mythologies as a whole of the \"Highlander\" series, acknowledging that there are certain things between all the different \"Highlanders\", but to stay faithful in what the original film delivered, while presenting the new version for old and new fans of the franchise.\n\"Twilight\" series writer Melissa Rosenberg was attached to write \"Highlander\" script in 2011. Justin Lin was still attached to direct, but in August, Lin dropped out of the film due to commitments to other projects.\nIn 2012, director Juan Carlos Fresnadillo later signed on to direct the remake. Vinnie Jones and Ray Stevenson were rumored for the role of The Kurgan. Ryan Reynolds was confirmed to play Connor MacLeod. Later in December, Fresnadillo left the project due to creative differences and Reynolds also dropped out of the film.\n' writer and executive producer David Abramowitz was reported to polish the film's script in 2013. Cedric Nicolas-Troyan was hired to direct in October. The following year in November, the studio wanted actor Tom Cruise in the role of Ram\u00edrez, but Cruise was busy shooting ' and was reportedly not considering future projects at that time. James Jaysen Bryhan was rumored to play Ram\u00edrez.\nWrestler turned actor Dave Bautista was cast as The Kurgan in February 2015. Nicolas-Troyan was still involved with the reboot, but later in November 2016, Chad Stahelski was confirmed to direct, and Ryan J. Condal was brought for the script. The reboot was in \"heavy development mode\" since June 2020.\nHenry Cavill was in talks to have a lead role in the reboot as of May 2021, but his role was unknown at the time until two years later. In June 2025, Russell Crowe signed on in the role of Ramirez.\nIn autumn of 2023, Lionsgate, owner of Summit Entertainment, was moving forward with the reboot, with Cavill starring as MacLeod and Stahelski still attached to direct from a screenplay by Mike Finch. The budget of the film is reportedly over $100 million and producers on the project include Joshua Davis, Moritz, Stahelski and Louise Rosner. Lionsgate intended to sell the film to international distributors at the 2023 American Film Market and filming was expected to begin in early 2024. In April 2025, Amazon MGM Studios and Scott Stuber acquired the reboot under the United Artists banner. Karen Gillan was cast as Heather that August, while Drew McIntyre joined a month later as MacLeod's brother Angus.\nAnimated film.\n\"Highlander: The Search for Vengeance\" (2007).\nIn 2007, an anime film, \"\" was released, featuring the immortal Colin MacLeod in the year 2187. The film exists in its own continuity, separate from the live-action films and TV shows. The story largely takes place in a post-apocalyptic version of Earth and implies immortals can use their power to achieve superhuman speed and strength.\nTelevision.\n\"Highlander: The Series\" (1992\u20131998).\nIn 1992, a television spin-off was developed, entitled \"\". It was shown in syndication from October 3, 1992, to May 16, 1998. The series was an offshoot of the 1986 feature film but with one major difference: immortals still exist post-1985. The first episode of season 2 confirmed the events of the original \"Highlander\" film still happened in the TV series continuity but that Connor's battle with the Kurgan was not the Gathering and he did not win the Prize, since in this version there were many other immortals still alive on Earth in 1985. The series introduced the Watchers, an organization of mortals who observe and record the lives of immortals.\nAdrian Paul starred as Duncan MacLeod, another immortal from the same clan as Connor, born decades later. Soon after Duncan realizes he is immortal, Connor finds him and trains him for years before they both part ways. Christopher Lambert reprised his role as Connor MacLeod for the first episode and was mentioned again in several subsequent episodes. The series originally featured Alexandra Vandernoot as Duncan's love Tessa No\u00ebl and Stan Kirsch as his young friend Richie Ryan. Other series regulars included Philip Akin as Charlie DeSalvo, Jim Byrnes as Joe Dawson, Lisa Howard as Anne Lindsey, Michel Modo as the comedic character Maurice, and Peter Wingfield as the immortal Methos. Roger Daltrey of The Who made recurring appearances as Duncan's immortal friend Hugh Fitzcairn, while Elizabeth Gracen made frequent appearances as Duncan's old friend and occasional love interest Amanda Darieux, an immortal thief whose popularity led to her being the star of the spin-off series \"\".\nOver its six-year run, the series had many notable guest stars including Joan Jett, Vanity, Richard Moll, Traci Lords, Sheena Easton, \"Rowdy\" Roddy Piper, Nia Peeples, Rae Dawn Chong, Eric McCormack, Sandra Bernhard, Claudia Christian and Ron Perlman. The show was co-produced in syndication by international partners including Gaumont, RTL Plus (Germany), Rysher Distribution (United States), Reteitalia Productions (Italy), Amuse Video (Japan) and TF1 (France). The series had high ratings internationally, but the ratings fell during the show's last two seasons and it ended in 1998 after six years.\n\"Highlander: The Animated Series\" (1994\u20131996).\nA 1994 animated series, \"\", was set in the 27th century on a post-apocalyptic Earth now ruled by an immortal named Kortan. The series protagonist is a young immortal named Quentin MacLeod, voiced by Miklos Perlus, who is the last of the Clan MacLeod and mentored by an immortal named Don Vincente Marino Ram\u00edrez. Connor MacLeod appeared in one episode during a flashback scene to the late 20th century, where he dies at Kortan's hand after prophesying the villain will one day be defeated by Quentin. To curb the violence, the show creates a way for immortals to willingly transfer their Quickening energy to another, allowing Quentin to rise in power without killing.\n\"Highlander: The Raven\" (1998\u20131999).\nA spin-off of \"Highlander: The Series\", this show starred Elizabeth Gracen as the popular character Amanda Darieux, a recurring role she played in the original TV show. Previously known as a thief who often avoided confrontation and responsibility, the series showed Amanda now trying to become a better person alongside a new supporting cast of characters. \"\" lasted one season due to low ratings and changes in how syndicated shows are marketed.\nWeb series.\n\"The Methos Chronicles\" (2001).\n\"The Methos Chronicles\" is an animated television series based on Methos (Peter Wingfield), a 5000-year-old immortal introduced in \"Highlander: The Series\". Wingfield voiced the character for the series, which lasted one eight-episode season. There were talks about developing a live-action series in the early 2000s with Wingfield but the series never went into production.\n\"Highlander: Reunion\" (2008).\nAmanda, Joe, and Methos get together for a private gathering before Methos' wedding ceremony to discuss a variety of topics surrounding passions for life and tragedy. This was a one-shot 17 minute short written by show writer David Abramowitz and directed by Donald Paonessa.\nOther media.\nNovels.\nA number of \"Highlander\" novels were released, including a novelization of the first film by Garry Kilworth and a line of books based on the television series by various authors. The 9 published Warner Books \"Highlander\" novels are:\nThere was a 10th novel in the works entitled \"Barricades\" that was to be published in July 1999, but the author Donna Lettow fell ill before she could complete it, and by the time she had recovered, the books were no longer being published.\nIn 2000, \"An Evening at Joe's: Fiction by the Cast and Crew\" was published as a collection of short stories written by some of the series cast and crew members, including Peter Wingfied, Stan Kirsch, and Jim Byrnes, and edited by series writer Gillian Horvath.\nNonfiction.\nNonfictional books about all or part of the \"Highlander\" franchise include:\nComics.\nThe \"Highlander\" comic book series from Dynamite Entertainment followed Connor MacLeod after his battle with the Kurgan in New York, adopting the television series idea that this wasn't the final battle for the Prize because many immortals still existed on Earth. It was followed by a miniseries acting as a prequel to the original film, \"\", and a miniseries explaining the Kurgan's past before meeting Connor MacLeod, \"Highlander Origins: The Kurgan\".\nIn 2015, Emerald Star Comics released \"Highlander 3030\", written by Lennit Williams and Matt Kelly. The comic was an officially licensed story following the adventures of Duncan MacLeod in a far-off dystopian future, and even received social media support from the official \"Highlander\" account on Facebook. \"Highlander 3030\" only had one issue digitally released and was poorly received by critics. In an interview on the podcast Ten Cent Takes, Kelly confirmed the comic had production problems, including the initial artist having to drop out due to health issues and Davis-Panzer Productions demanding replacement artist Dan Goodfellow draw the book in a style that wasn't his own. As such, the book was a financial failure and Emerald Star Comics went out of business soon after.\nIn 2017, IDW Publishing published the miniseries \"Highlander: The American Dream\", which also served as a prequel to the first \"Highlander\" film.\nSoundtracks.\nAll five live-action \"Highlander\" films received soundtrack albums, as well as \"Highlander: The Series\", with its soundtrack being released in two volumes. \"Highlander: The Original Scores\", an album featuring music from the first three films, was released in 1995. \"The Best of Highlander: The Series\", with a selection of songs from the series, was released in 2002.\nAudio plays.\nBig Finish Productions temporarily held the license to produce original \"Highlander\" audio dramas. While many Big Finish products are full cast audio dramas, some involve one actor narrating the story and several parts while another actor narrates one or two other important roles. This format was followed for the \"Highlander\" audios. The first four audios star Adrian Paul as Duncan MacLeod and were released monthly starting in June 2009. The stories are set after \"\". In the audio \"Kurgan Rising\", both the Kurgan and Connor MacLeod seem to return from the dead.\nBig Finish released a second series of four \"Highlander\" audio stories, each based around one of the Four Horsemen: \"Kronos\" read by Valentine Pelka, \"Silas\" read by Richard Ridings, \"Caspian\" read by https://, and \"Methos\" read by Peter Wingfield.\nVideo games.\n\"Highlander\", a video game tie-in to the first film, was released for home computers in 1986. The player faced a few opponents from the film, each of whom had to be struck three times to be beaten. It was poorly received.\n1995 saw the release of ', a video game based on ', for the Atari Jaguar CD.\nA \"Highlander\" massively multiplayer online role-playing game video game was planned by Kalisto Entertainment. Following the developer's closure, rights to the \"Highlander\" video game franchise went to SCi Entertainment in 2004. The new developer decided not to release a \"Highlander\" video game. Trailers showed the game title would have been \"Highlander: The Gathering\".\n\"\" and a PC version of \"Highlander: The Last of the MacLeods\" were likewise cancelled.\nCollectible card games.\n\"\" is a collectible card game produced by La Montagnard Inc., intended to simulate a sword fight between two Immortals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13893", "revid": "41438237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13893", "title": "List of ships called HMS Hood", "text": "Three ships of the Royal Navy have been named HMS \"Hood\" after several members of the Hood family, who were notable naval officers:\nBattle honours.\nShips named \"Hood\" have earned the following battle honours:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "13894", "revid": "14377864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13894", "title": "Houston Astros", "text": "Major League Baseball franchise in Houston, Texas\nThe Houston Astros are an American professional baseball team based in Houston. The Astros compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) West Division. They are one of two major league clubs based in Texas; the Texas Rangers belong to the same division. They play their home games at Daikin Park.\nEstablished as the Houston Colt .45s, the Astros entered the National League as an expansion team in along with the New York Mets. The current name was adopted three years later, when they moved into the Astrodome, the world's first multi-purpose, domed sports stadium. The Astros moved to Enron Field (now Daikin Park) in . The team played in the NL West division from 1969 to 1993, then the NL Central division from 1994 to 2012, before being moved to the AL West as part of an MLB realignment in 2013.\nThe Astros posted their first winning record in and made the playoffs for the first time in , before winning a total of three division titles throughout the 1980s. Spearheaded by the Killer B's, a collection of prominent hitters that included the Astros' Hall of Fame members Craig Biggio and Jeff Bagwell, along with closer Billy Wagner, the Astros began reaching major prominence in the late 1990s and early 2000s with four further division titles and two Wild Card appearances, culminating in their first World Series appearance in where they were swept by the Chicago White Sox.\nAfter a major slump throughout the next decade, the team was purchased by business owner Jim Crane in 2011 for $680 million. Under Crane's ownership, the Astros embraced sabermetrics and pioneered new analytical technologies in their transition to the American League, and by the mid-2010s transformed from a historically middling franchise into one of MLB's most dominant and successful clubs, as headlined by stars such as Jose Altuve. Since then, the Astros have won over 100 games in four seasons, and have appeared in a record seven consecutive American League Championship Series, winning four of the last seven American League pennants. During this era, the Astros won the 2017 World Series, their first championship, against the Los Angeles Dodgers; however, this win drew controversy and backlash from fans after the Astros were implicated in a sign stealing scandal. \nThe Astros made later World Series appearances in against the Washington Nationals, against the Atlanta Braves, and against the Philadelphia Phillies, winning their second title in the latter series. Often cited as one of the best teams in the American League, the team's sustained success since 2015 has led some to declare the Astros a dynasty. They are the only team to win a postseason series in seven straight seasons. Their fifth pennant in 2022 made them the second team created in the expansion era to win five league pennants (after the Mets) and the fifth expansion team to have won two World Series championships. In 2024, the Astros clinched their AL West division title for the seventh time in eight years and became the first team to win the AL West division in four straight years since the 1971\u20131975 Oakland Athletics.\nSince 2017 when the Astros won their first American League pennant, they are the first and only team in Major League Baseball to win pennants in both leagues. While in the National League, the Astros held rivalries with the Braves and the St. Louis Cardinals, but since their transition to the American League, have come to hold divisional rivalries with the Seattle Mariners and Texas Rangers (known as the Lone Star Series), as well as a recurring postseason rivalry with the New York Yankees. From 1962 through the end of the 2025 season, the Astros' all-time record is 5,096\u20135,040\u20135 (). In addition to having the most postseason appearances by an expansion team, they are the only expansion era team with an all-time winning record. In 2024, the Astros became the second expansion team to reach 5,000 wins.\nHistory.\nMajor League Baseball comes to Texas.\nFrom 1888 until 1961, Houston's professional baseball club was the minor league Houston Buffaloes. Although expansion from the National League eventually brought an MLB team to Texas in 1962, Houston officials had been making efforts to do so for years prior, with a group effort led in 1952 to buy the St. Louis Cardinals for $4.25 million, but local owners were instead chosen. There were four men chiefly responsible for bringing Major League Baseball to Houston: journalist/promoter George Kirksey, Craig Cullinan Jr., R.E. \"Bob\" Smith, a prominent oilman and real estate magnate in Houston who like Cullinan was brought in for his financial resources, and Judge Roy Hofheinz, a former Mayor of Houston and Harris County Judge who was recruited for his salesmanship and political style. They founded the Houston Sports Association (HSA) as their vehicle for attaining a big league franchise for the city of Houston.\nGiven MLB's refusal to consider expansion, Kirksey, Cullinan, Smith, and Hofheinz joined forces with would-be owners from other cities and announced the formation of a new league to compete with the established National and American Leagues. They called the new league the Continental League. Wanting to protect potential new markets, both existing leagues chose to expand from eight teams to ten. However, plans eventually fell through for the Houston franchise after the Houston Buffaloes owner, Marty Marion, could not come to an agreement with the HSA to sell the team. To make matters worse, the Continental League as a whole folded in August 1960.\nHowever, on October 17, 1960, the National League granted an expansion franchise to the Houston Sports Association for them to begin play in the 1962 season. According to the Major League Baseball Constitution, the Houston Sports Association was required to obtain territorial rights from the Houston Buffaloes in order to play in the Houston area, resulting in the HSA revisiting negotiations. Eventually, the Houston Sports Association succeeded in purchasing the Houston Buffaloes, which were at this point majority-owned by William Hopkins, on January 17, 1961. The Buffs played one last minor league season as the top farm team of the Chicago Cubs in 1961 before being succeeded by the city's NL club.\nThe new Houston team was named the Colt .45s after a \"Name the Team\" contest was won by William Irving Neder. The Colt .45 was well known as \"the gun that won the west\".\nThe colors selected were navy and orange. The first team was formed mostly through an expansion draft after the 1961 season. The Colt .45s and their expansion cousins, the New York Mets, took turns choosing players left unprotected by the other National League franchises.\nMany players and staff associated with the Houston Buffaloes organization continued in the major leagues. Manager Harry Craft, who had joined Houston in 1961, remained in the same position for the team until the end of the 1964 season. General manager Spec Richardson also continued with the organization as business manager but was later promoted back to GM for the Astros from 1967 until 1975. Although most players for the major league franchise were obtained through the 1961 Major League Baseball expansion draft, Buffs players J.C. Hartman, Pidge Browne, Jim Campbell, Ron Davis, Dave Giusti, and Dave Roberts were chosen to continue as major league ball players.\nSimilarly, the radio broadcasting team remained with the new Houston major league franchise. Loel Passe worked alongside Gene Elston as a color commentator until he retired from broadcasting in 1976. Elston continued with the Astros until 1986.\nThe Colt .45s began their existence playing at Colt Stadium, a temporary venue built just north of the construction site of their permanent home, a domed stadium. Hofheinz and his partners believed a domed stadium was a must for MLB to be viable in Houston, given the area's oppressive humidity.\n1962\u20131964: The Colt .45s.\nThe Colt .45s started their inaugural season on April 10, 1962, against the Chicago Cubs with Harry Craft as the Colt .45s' manager. Bob Aspromonte scored the first run for the Colt .45s on an Al Spangler triple in the first inning. They started the season with a three-game sweep of the Cubs but eventually finished eighth among the National League's ten teams. The team's best pitcher, Richard \"Turk\" Farrell, lost 20 games despite an ERA of 3.02. A starter for the Colt .45s, Farrell was primarily a relief pitcher prior to playing for Houston. He was selected to both All-Star Games in 1962.\nThe 1963 season saw more young talent mixed with seasoned veterans. Jimmy Wynn, Rusty Staub, and Joe Morgan all made their major league debuts in the 1963 season. However, Houston's position in the standings did not improve, as the Colt .45s finished in ninth place with a 66\u201396 record. The team was still building, trying to find that perfect mix to compete. The 1964 campaign began on a sad note, as relief pitcher Jim Umbricht died of cancer at the age of 33 on April 8, just before Opening Day. Umbricht was the only Colt .45s pitcher to post a winning record in Houston's first two seasons. He was so well liked by players and fans that the team retired his jersey number, 32, in 1965.\nJust on the horizon, the structure of the new domed stadium was more prevalent, and it would soon change the way that baseball was watched in Houston and around the league. On December 1, 1964, the team announced the name change to \"Astros\" after their new domed stadium, the Houston Astrodome. The name also reflects Houston's role in the American aerospace industry\u2014NASA's new Manned Spacecraft Center had recently opened southeast of the city. \n1965\u20131970: The Great Indoors.\nWith Judge Roy Hofheinz now the sole owner of the franchise and the new venue complete, the team moved into the Astrodome in 1965. The Astrodome, called the \"Eighth Wonder of the World\", did little to improve the home team's results on the field. While several \"indoor\" firsts were accomplished, the team still finished ninth in the standings. The attendance was high not because of the team's accomplishments, but because people came from miles around to see the Astrodome.\nJust as the excitement was settling down over the Astrodome, the 1966 season found something new to put the domed stadium in the spotlight once again \u2013 the field. Grass would not grow in the new park, since the roof panels had been painted to reduce the glare that was causing players on both the Astros and the visiting teams to miss routine pop flies. A new artificial turf was created called \"AstroTurf\" and Houston would be involved in yet another change in the way the game was played.\nWith new manager Grady Hatton, the Astros started the 1966 season strong. By May they were in second place in the National League and looked like a team that could contend. Joe Morgan was named as a starter on the All-Star Team. The success did not last as they lost Jimmy Wynn for the season after he crashed into an outfield fence in Philadelphia and Morgan had broken his knee cap. The 1967 season saw first baseman Eddie Mathews join the Astros. The slugger hit his 500th home run while in Houston. He would be traded late in the season and Doug Rader would be promoted to the big leagues. Rookie Don Wilson pitched a no-hitter on June 18. Wynn also provided some enthusiasm in 1967. The 5\u00a0ft 9\u00a0in Wynn was becoming known not only for how often he hit home runs, but also for how far he hit them. Wynn set club records with 37 home runs, and 107 RBIs. It was also in 1967 that Wynn hit his famous home run onto Interstate 75 in Cincinnati. As the season came to a close, the Astros found themselves again in ninth place and with a winning percentage below .500. The team looked good on paper, but could not make it work on the field.\nApril 15, 1968, saw a pitching duel for the ages. The Astros' Don Wilson and the Mets' Tom Seaver faced each other in a battle that lasted six hours. Seaver went ten innings, allowing no walks and just two hits. Wilson went nine innings, allowing five hits and three walks. After the starters exited, eleven relievers (seven for the Mets and four for the Astros) tried to end the game. The game finally ended in the 24th inning when Bob Aspromonte hit a shot toward Mets shortstop Al Weis. Weis had been perfect all night at short, but he was not quick enough to make the play. The ball zipped into left field, allowing Norm Miller to score.\nWith baseball expansion and trades, the Astros had dramatically changed in 1969. Aspromonte was sent to the Braves and Rusty Staub was traded to the expansion Montreal Expos, in exchange for outfielder Jes\u00fas Alou and first baseman Donn Clendenon. However, Clendenon refused to report to Houston, electing to retire and take job with a pen manufacturing company. The Astros asked Commissioner Bowie Kuhn to void the trade, but he refused. Instead, he awarded Jack Billingham and a left-handed relief pitcher to the Astros to complete the trade. Cuellar was traded to the Baltimore Orioles for Curt Blefary. Other new players included catcher Johnny Edwards, infielder Denis Menke and pitcher Denny Lemaster. Wilson continued to pitch brilliantly and on May 1 threw the second no-hitter of his career. In that game, he struck out 18 batters, tying what was then the all-time single-game mark. He was just 24 years of age and was second to only Sandy Koufax for career no-hit wins. Wilson's no-hitter lit the Astros' fire after a miserable month of April, and six days later the team tied a major league record by turning seven double plays in a game. By May's end, the Astros had put together a ten-game winning streak. The Houston infield tandem of Menke and Joe Morgan continued to improve, providing power at the plate and great defense. Morgan had 15 homers and stole 49 bases while Menke led the Astros with 90 RBIs. The Menke/Morgan punch was beginning to come alive, and the team was responding to Walker's management style. The Astros dominated the season series against their expansion twins, the New York Mets. In one game at New York, Denis Menke and Jimmy Wynn hit grand slams in the same inning, against a Mets team that would go on to win the World Series that same year. The Astros finished the 1969 season with a record of 81 wins, 81 losses, marking their first season of .500 ball.\nIn 1970, the Astros were expected to be a serious threat in the National League West. In June, 19-year-old C\u00e9sar Cede\u00f1o was called up and immediately showed signs of being a superstar. The Dominican outfielder batted .310 after being called up. Not to be outdone, Menke batted .304 and Jes\u00fas Alou batted .306. The Astros' batting average was up by 19 points compared to the season before. The team looked good, but the Astros' ERA was up. Larry Dierker and Wilson had winning records, but the pitching staff as a whole had an off season. Houston finished in fourth place in 1970.\n1971\u20131974: The boys in orange.\nThe fashion trends of the 1970s had started taking root in baseball. Long hair and loud colors were starting to appear on team uniforms, including the Astros'. In 1971 the Astros made some changes to their uniform: they kept the same style they had in previous seasons, but inverted the colors. What was navy was now orange and what was orange was now a lighter shade of blue. The players' last names were added to the back of the jerseys. In 1972, the uniform fabric was also changed to what was at the time revolutionizing the industry \u2013 polyester. Belts were replaced by elastic waistbands, and jerseys zipped up instead of having buttons. The uniforms became popular with fans, but would last only until 1975, when the Astros would shock baseball and the fashion world.\nThe uniforms were about the only thing that did change in 1971. The acquisition of Roger Metzger from the Chicago Cubs in the off-season moved Menke to first base and Bob Watson to the outfield. The Astros got off to a slow start and the pitching and hitting averages were down. Larry Dierker was selected to the All-Star Game in 1971, but due to an arm injury he could not make it. C\u00e9sar Cede\u00f1o led the club with 81 RBIs and the league with 40 doubles, but batted just .264 and had 102 strikeouts in his second season with the Astros. Pitcher J. R. Richard made his debut in September of the 1971 season against the Giants.\nThe Big Trade.\nIn November 1971 the Astros and Cincinnati Reds made one of the biggest blockbuster trades in the history of the sport, and helped create The Big Red Machine of the 1970s, with the Reds getting the better end of the deal. Houston sent second baseman Joe Morgan, infielder Denis Menke, pitcher Jack Billingham, outfielder C\u00e9sar Ger\u00f3nimo and prospect Ed Armbrister to Cincinnati for first baseman Lee May, second baseman Tommy Helms and infielder Jimmy Stewart. The trade left Astros fans and the baseball world scratching their heads as to why general manager Spec Richardson would give up so much for so little. The Reds, on the other hand, would shore up many problems. They had an off year in 1971, but were the National League Pennant winner in 1972.\nThe Astros' acquisition of Lee May added more power to the lineup in 1972. May, Wynn, Rader and Cede\u00f1o all had 20 or more home runs and Watson hit 16. Cede\u00f1o also led the Astros with a .320 batting average, 55 stolen bases and made spectacular plays on the field. Cede\u00f1o made his first All-Star game in 1972 and became the first Astros player in team history to hit for the cycle in August versus the Reds. The Astros finished the strike-shortened season at 84\u201369, their first winning season.\nAstros fans had hoped for more of the same in 1973, but it was not to be. The Astros run production was down, even though the same five sluggers the year before were still punching the ball out of the park. Lee May led the Astros with 28 home runs and Cesar Cede\u00f1o batted .320 with 25 home runs. Bob Watson hit the .312 mark and drove in 94 runs. Doug Rader and Jimmy Wynn both had 20 or more home runs. However, injuries to their pitching staff limited the Astros to an 82\u201380 fourth-place finish. The Astros again finished in fourth place the next year under new manager Preston G\u00f3mez.\n1975\u20131979: Cautious corporate ownership.\nWith the $38\u00a0million deficit of the Astrodome, control of the Astrodomain (including the Astros) was passed from Roy Hofheinz to GE Credit and Ford Motor Credit. The creditors were just interested in preserving asset value of the team, so any money spent had to be found or saved somewhere else. Tal Smith returned to the Astros from the New York Yankees to find a team that needed a lot of work and did not have a lot of money. However, there would be some bright spots that would prove to be good investments in the near future.\nThe year started on a sad note. Pitcher Don Wilson was found dead in the passenger seat of his car on January 5, 1975; the cause of death was asphyxiation by carbon monoxide. Wilson was 29 years old. Wilson's number 40 was retired on April 13, 1975.\nThe 1975 season saw the introduction of the Astros' new uniforms. Many teams were going away from the traditional uniform and the Astros were no exception. From the chest down, the uniform was a solid block of yellow, orange, and red stripes. There was also a large dark blue star over the midsection. The same multi-colored stripes ran down the pant legs. Players' numbers not only appeared on the back of the jersey, but also on the pant leg. The bright stripes were meant to appear as a fiery trail like a rocket sweeping across the heavens. The uniforms were panned by critics, but the public liked them and versions started appearing at the high school and little league level. The uniform was so different from what other teams wore that the Astros wore it both at home and on the road until 1980.\nBesides the bright new uniforms there were some other changes. Lee May was traded to Baltimore for much talked about rookie second baseman Rob Andrews and utility player Enos Cabell. In Baltimore, Cabell was stuck behind third baseman Brooks Robinson, but he took advantage of his opportunity in Houston and became their everyday third baseman. Cabell would go on to become a big part of the team's success in later years. With May gone, Bob Watson was able to move to first base and was a bright spot in the line up, batting .324 with 85 RBI.\nThe two biggest moves the Astros made in the offseason were the acquisitions of Joe Niekro and Jos\u00e9 Cruz. The Astros bought Niekro from the Braves for almost nothing. Niekro had bounced around the big leagues with minimal success. His older brother Phil Niekro had started teaching Joe how to throw his knuckleball and Joe was just starting to use it when he came to the Astros. Niekro won six games, saved four games and had an ERA of 3.07. Acquiring Jos\u00e9 Cruz from the Cardinals was another big win. Cruz became a fixture in the Astros' outfield for several years and would eventually have his number 25 retired.\nDespite high expectations, 1975 was among the Astros' worst in franchise history. Their record of 64\u201397 was far worse than even the expansion Colt .45's and would remain the worst record in franchise history until 2011. It was the worst record in baseball and manager Preston G\u00f3mez was fired late in the season and replaced by Bill Virdon. The Astros played .500 ball under Virdon in the last 34 games of the season. With Virdon as the manager the Astros improved greatly in 1976 finishing in third place with an 80\u201382 record. A healthy C\u00e9sar Cede\u00f1o was a key reason for the Astros' success in 1976. Bob Watson continued to show consistency and led the club with a .313 average and 102 RBI. Jos\u00e9 Cruz became Houston's everyday left fielder and hit .303 with 28 stolen bases. 1976 saw the end of Larry Dierker's playing career as an Astro, but before it was all over he would throw a no-hitter and win the 1,000th game in the Astrodome. The Astros finished in third place again in 1977 with a record of 81\u201381.\nOne of the big problems the Astros had in the late 1970s was that they were unable to compete in the free-agent market. Ford Motor Credit Company was still in control of the team and was looking to sell the Astros, but would not spend money on better players. Most of the talent was either farm grown or bought cheaply.\nThe 1979 season would prove to be a big turnaround in Astros history. During the offseason, the Astros attempted to fix some of their problem areas. They traded Floyd Bannister to Seattle for shortstop Craig Reynolds and acquired catcher Alan Ashby from Toronto for pitcher Mark Lemongello. Reynolds and Ashby were both solid in their positions and gave Houston some much-needed consistency. The season started with a boost from pitcher Ken Forsch, who threw a no-hitter against the Braves the second game of the season. In May 1979, New Jersey shipping tycoon John McMullen had agreed to buy the Astros. Now with an investor in charge, the Astros would be more likely to compete in the free-agent market.\nThe Astros were playing great baseball throughout the season. Jos\u00e9 Cruz and Enos Cabell both stole 30 bases. Joe Niekro had a great year with 21 wins and 3.00 ERA. J. R. Richard won 18 games and set a new personal strikeout record at 313. Joe Sambito came into his own with 22 saves as the Astros closer. Things were going as they should for a team that could win the west. The Astros and Reds battled the final month of the season. The Reds pulled ahead of the Astros by a game and a half. Later that month they split a pair and the Reds kept the lead. The Astros finished with their best record to that point at 89\u201373 and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 games behind the NL winner Reds.\nWith Dr. McMullen as sole owner of the Astros, the team would now benefit in ways a corporation could not give them. The rumors of the Astros moving out of Houston started to crumble and the Astros were now able to compete in the free-agent market. McMullen showed the city of Houston that he too wanted a winning team, signing nearby Alvin, Texas native Nolan Ryan to the first million-dollar-a-year deal. Ryan had four career no-hitters already and had struck out 383 in one season.\n1980\u20131985: More rainbow, and seasons on the brink.\nJoe Morgan returned in 1980. The 1980 pitching staff was one of the best Houston ever had, with the fastball of Ryan, the knuckleball of Joe Niekro and the terrifying 6\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in frame of J. R. Richard. Teams felt lucky to face Ken Forsch, who was a double-digit winner in the previous two seasons. Richard became the first Astros pitcher to start an All-Star game. Three days later, Richard was told to rest his arm after a medical examination and on July 30 he collapsed during a workout. He had suffered a stroke after a blood clot in the arm apparently moved to his neck and cut off blood flow to the brain. Surgery was done to save his life, but the Astros had lost their ace pitcher after a 10\u20134 start with a stingy 1.89 ERA. Richard attempted a comeback, but would never again pitch a big league game.\nAfter the loss of Richard and some offensive struggles, the Astros slipped to third place in the division behind the Dodgers and the Reds. They bounced back to first with a ten-game winning streak, but the Dodgers regained a two-game lead before arriving in Houston on September 9. The Astros won the first two games of the series to tie the Dodgers for the division lead. The Astros went on to win a third game and take the lead- with three games against the Dodgers left. The Dodgers swept the next series, forcing a one-game playoff the next day. The Astros won the playoff game 7\u20131, and advanced to their first post-season.\nThe team would face the Philadelphia Phillies in the 1980 National League Championship Series. The Phillies sent out Steve Carlton in game one of the NLCS. The Phillies would win the opener after the Astros got out to a 1\u20130 third-inning lead. Ken Forsch pitched particularly strong fourth and fifth innings, but Greg Luzinski hit a sixth-inning two-run bomb to the 300 level seats of Veterans Stadium. The Phillies added an insurance run on the way to a 3\u20131 win. Houston bounced back to win games two and three. Game four went into extra innings, with the Phillies taking the lead and the win in the tenth inning. Pete Rose started a rally with a one-out single, then Luzinski doubled off the left-field wall and Rose bowled over catcher Bruce Bochy to score the go-ahead run. The Phillies got an insurance run on the way to tying the series.\nRookie Phillies pitcher Marty Bystrom was sent out by Philadelphia manager Dallas Green to face veteran Nolan Ryan in Game Five. The rookie gave up a run in the first inning, then held the Astros at bay until the sixth inning. An Astros lead was lost when Bob Boone hit a two-out single in the second, but the Astros tied the game in the sixth with an Alan Ashby single scoring Denny Walling. Houston took a 5\u20132 lead in the seventh; however, the Phillies came back with five runs in the inning. The Astros came back against Tug McGraw with four singles and two two-out runs. Now in extra innings, Garry Maddox doubled in Del Unser with one out to give the Phillies an 8\u20137 lead. The Astros failed to score in the bottom of the tenth.\nA 1981 player strike ran between June 12 and August 10. Ultimately, the strike would help the Astros get into the playoffs. Nolan Ryan and Bob Knepper picked up steam in the second half of the season. Ryan threw his fifth no-hitter on September 26 and finished the season with a 1.69 ERA. Knepper finished with an ERA of 2.18. In the wake of the strike, Major League Baseball took the winners of each \"half\" season and set up a best-of-five divisional playoff. The Reds won more games than any other team in the National League, but they won neither half of the strike-divided season. The Astros finished 61\u201349 overall, which would have been third in the division behind the Reds and the Dodgers. Advancing to the playoffs as winners of the second half, Houston beat Los Angeles in their first two playoff games at home, but the Dodgers took the next three in Los Angeles to advance to the NLCS.\nBy 1982, only four players and three starting pitchers remained from the 1980 squad. The Astros were out of pennant contention by August and began rebuilding for the near future. Bill Virdon was fired as manager and replaced by original Colt .45 Bob Lillis. Don Sutton asked to be traded and was sent to the Milwaukee Brewers for cash and the team gained three new prospects, including Kevin Bass. Minor league player Bill Doran was called up in September. The Astros finished fourth in the west, but new talent was starting to appear.\nBefore the 1983 season, the Astros traded Danny Heep to the Mets for pitcher Mike Scott, a 28-year-old who had struggled with New York. Art Howe sat out the 1983 season with an injury, forcing Phil Garner to third and Ray Knight to first. Doran took over at second, becoming the everyday second baseman for the next seven seasons. The Astros finished third in the National League West. The 1984 season started off badly when shortstop Dickie Thon was hit in the head by a pitch and was lost for the season. In September, the Astros called up rookie Glenn Davis after he posted impressive numbers in AAA. The Astros finished in second place. In 1985, Mike Scott learned a new pitch, the split-finger fastball. Scott, who was coming off of a 5\u201311 season, had found his new pitch and would become one of Houston's most celebrated hurlers. In June, Davis made the starting lineup at first base, adding power to the team. In September, Joe Niekro was traded to the Yankees for two minor league pitchers and lefty Jim Deshaies. The Astros finished in fourth place in 1985.\n1986\u20131990: A deep run, and building for the future.\nAfter finishing fourth in 1985, the Astros fired general manager Al Rosen and manager Bob Lillis. The former was supplanted by Dick Wagner, the man whose Reds defeated the Astros to win the 1979 NL West title. The latter was replaced by Hal Lanier who, like his manager mentor in St. Louis, Whitey Herzog, had a hard-nosed approach to managing and espoused a playing style that focused on pitching, defense, and speed rather than home runs to win games. This style of baseball, known as Whiteyball, took advantage of stadiums with deep fences and artificial turf, both of which were characteristics of the Astrodome. Lanier's style of baseball took Houston by storm. Before Lanier took over, fans were accustomed to Houston's occasional slow starts, but with Lanier leading the way, Houston got off to a hot start, winning 13 of their first 19 contests.\nPrior to the start of the season the Astros acquired outfielder Billy Hatcher from the Cubs for Jerry Mumphrey. Lainer also made a change in the pitching staff, going with a three-man rotation to start the season. This allowed Lanier to keep his three starters (Nolan Ryan, Bob Knepper, and Mike Scott) sharp and to slowly work in rookie hurler Jim Deshaies. Bill Doran and Glenn Davis held down the right side of the field but Lainer rotated the left side. Denny Walling and Craig Reynolds faced the right-handed pitchers while Phil Garner and Dickie Thon batted against left-handers. Lanier knew the Astros had talent and he put it to work.\nThe Astrodome was host to the 1986 All-Star Game in which Astros Mike Scott, Kevin Bass, Glenn Davis, and Dave Smith represented the host field. The Astros kept pace with the NL West after the All-Star break. They went on a streak of five straight come-from-behind wins. Houston swept a key 3-game series over the San Francisco Giants in late September to clinch the division title. Mike Scott took the mound in the final game of the series and pitched a no-hitter \u2013 the only time in MLB history that any division was clinched via a no-hitter. Scott would finish the season with an 18\u201310 record and a Cy Young Award.\nThe 1986 National League Championship Series against the New York Mets was noted for its drama and is considered to be one of the greatest postseason series. In Game 3, the Astros were ahead at Shea Stadium, 5\u20134, in the bottom of the 9th when closer Dave Smith gave up a two-run home run to Lenny Dykstra, giving the Mets a dramatic 6\u20135 win.\nHowever, the signature game of the series was Game 6. Needing a win to get to Mike Scott (who had been dominant in the series) in Game 7, the Astros jumped off to a 3\u20130 lead in the first inning but neither team would score again until the 9th inning. In the 9th, starting pitcher Bob Knepper would give up two runs, and once again the Astros would look to Dave Smith to close it out. However, Smith would walk Gary Carter and Darryl Strawberry, giving up a sacrifice fly to Ray Knight, tying the game. Despite having the go-ahead runs on base, Smith was able to escape the inning without any further damage.\nThere was no scoring until the 14th inning when the Mets would take the lead on a Wally Backman single and an error by left fielder Billy Hatcher. The Astros would get the run back in the bottom of the 14th when Hatcher (in a classic goat-to-hero-conversion-moment) hit one of the most dramatic home runs in NLCS history, off the left-field foul pole. In the 16th inning, Darryl Strawberry doubled to lead off the inning and Ray Knight drove him home in the next at-bat. The Mets would score a total of three runs in the inning to take what appeared an insurmountable 7\u20134 lead. With their season on the line, the Astros would nonetheless rally for two runs to come to within 7\u20136. Kevin Bass came up with the tying and winning runs on base; however Jesse Orosco would strike him out, ending the game. At the time the 16-inning game held the record for the longest in MLB postseason history. The Mets won the series, 4\u20132.\nAfter the 1986 season, the team had difficulty finding success again. Several changes occurred. The \"rainbow\" uniforms were phased out, the team electing to keep a five-stripe \"rainbow\" design on the sleeves. Team favorites Nolan Ryan and Jos\u00e9 Cruz moved on and the team entered a rebuilding phase. Craig Biggio debuted in June 1988, joining new prospects Ken Caminiti and Gerald Young. Biggio would become the everyday catcher by 1990. A trade acquiring Jeff Bagwell in exchange for Larry Andersen would become one of the biggest deals in Astros history. Glenn Davis was traded to Baltimore for Curt Schilling, Pete Harnisch and Steve Finley in 1990.\n1991\u20131999: Fine tuning and first rebranding.\nThe early 1990s were marked by the Astros' growing discontent with their home, the Astrodome. After the Astrodome was renovated for the primary benefit of the NFL's Houston Oilers (who shared the Astrodome with the Astros since the 1960s), the Astros began to grow increasingly disenchanted with the facility. Faced with declining attendance at the Astrodome and the inability of management to obtain a new stadium, in the 1991 off-season Astros management announced its intention to sell the team and move the franchise to the Washington, D.C. area. However, the move was not approved by other National League owners, thus compelling the Astros to remain in Houston. Shortly thereafter, McMullen (who also owned the NHL's New Jersey Devils) sold the team to Texas businessman Drayton McLane in 1993, who committed to keeping the team in Houston.\nShortly after McLane's arrival, which coincided with the maturation of Bagwell and Biggio, the Astros began to show signs of consistent success. After finishing second in their division in 1994 (in a strike year), 1995, and 1996, the Astros won consecutive division titles in 1997, 1998, and 1999. In the 1998 season, the Astros set a team record with 102 victories. However, each of these titles was followed by a first-round playoff elimination, in 1998 by the San Diego Padres and in 1997 and 1999 against the Atlanta Braves. The manager of these title teams was Larry Dierker, who had previously been a broadcaster and pitcher for the Astros. During this period, Bagwell, Biggio, Derek Bell, and Sean Berry earned the collective nickname \"The Killer Bs\". In later seasons, the name came to include other Astros, especially Lance Berkman.\nCoinciding with the change in ownership, the team switched uniforms and team colors after the 1993 season in order to go for a new, more serious image. The team's trademark rainbow uniforms were retired, and the team's colors changed to midnight blue and metallic gold. The \"Astros\" font on the team logo was changed to a more aggressive one, and the team's traditional star logo was changed to a stylized, \"flying\" star with an open left end. It marked the first time since the team's inception that orange was not part of the team's colors. Despite general agreement that the rainbow uniforms identified with the team had become tired (and looked too much like a minor league team according to the new owners), the new uniforms and caps were never especially popular with many Astros fans.\nOff the field, in 1994, the Astros hired one of the first African American general managers, former franchise player Bob Watson. Watson would leave the Astros after the 1995 season to become general manager of the New York Yankees and helped to lead the Yankees to a World Series championship in 1996. He would be replaced by Gerry Hunsicker, who until 2004 would continue to oversee the building of the Astros into one of the better and most consistent organizations in the Major Leagues.\nHowever, in 1996, the Astros again nearly left Houston. By the mid-1990s, McLane (like McMullen before him) wanted his team out of the Astrodome and was asking the city to build the Astros a new stadium. When things did not progress quickly toward that end, he put the team up for sale. He had nearly finalized a deal to sell the team to businessman William Collins, who planned to move them to Northern Virginia. However, Collins was having difficulty finding a site for a stadium himself, so Major League owners stepped in and forced McLane to give Houston another chance to grant his stadium wish. Houston voters, having already lost the Houston Oilers in a similar situation, responded positively via a stadium referendum and the Astros stayed put.\n2000\u20132004: New ballpark and second rebranding.\nThe 2000 season saw a move to a new stadium. Originally to be named \"The Ballpark at Union Station\" due to being located on the site of Union Station, it was renamed \"Enron Field\" by the season opening after the naming rights were sold to energy corporation Enron. The stadium was to feature a retractable roof, a particularly useful feature with unpredictable Houston weather. The ballpark also featured more intimate surroundings than the Astrodome. In 2002, naming rights were purchased by Houston-based Minute Maid, after Enron went bankrupt. The park was built on the grounds of the old Union Station. A replica 4-4-0 locomotive moves across the outfield and whistles after home runs, paying homage to a Houston history which had 11 railroad company lines running through the city by 1860. The ballpark previously contained quirks such as \"Tal's Hill\", which was a hill in deep center field on which a flagpole stood, all in fair territory. Over the years, many highlight reel catches have been made by center fielders running up the hill to make catches. Tal's Hill was removed in the 2016\u20132017 offseason and the center field wall was moved in to , which the team hoped would generate more home runs.\nWith the change in location also came a change in attire. Gone were the blue and gold uniforms of the 1990s in favor of a more \"retro\" look with pinstripes, a traditional baseball font, and the colors of brick red, sand and black. These colors were chosen because ownership originally wanted to rename the team the Houston Diesels. The \"shooting star\" logo was modified but still retained its definitive look.\nAfter two fairly successful seasons without a playoff appearance, the Astros were early favorites to win the 2004 NL pennant. They added star pitcher Andy Pettitte to a roster that already included standouts like Lance Berkman and Jeff Kent as well as veterans Bagwell and Biggio. Roger Clemens, who had retired after the 2003 season with the New York Yankees, agreed to join former teammate Pettitte on the Astros for 2004. The one-year deal included unique conditions, such as the option for Clemens to stay home in Houston on select road trips when he wasn't scheduled to pitch. Despite the early predictions for success, the Astros had a mediocre 44\u201344 record at the All-Star break. A lack of run production and a poor record in close games were major issues. After being booed at the 2004 All-Star Game held in Houston, manager Jimy Williams was fired and replaced by Phil Garner, a star on the division-winning 1986 Astros. The Astros enjoyed a 46\u201326 record in the second half of the season under Garner and earned the NL wild-card spot. The Astros defeated the Braves 3\u20132 in the Division Series, but would lose the National League Championship Series to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games. Clemens earned a record seventh Cy Young Award in 2004. Additionally, the mid-season addition of Carlos Beltr\u00e1n in a trade with the Kansas City Royals helped the Astros tremendously in their playoff run. Despite midseason trade rumors, Beltr\u00e1n would prove instrumental to the team's hopes, hitting eight home runs in the postseason. Though he had asserted a desire to remain with the Astros, Beltr\u00e1n signed a long-term contract with the New York Mets on January 9, 2005.\n2005: First World Series played in Texas.\nIn 2005, the Astros started poorly and found themselves with a 15\u201330 record in late May. The \"Houston Chronicle\" had written them off with a tombstone emblazoned with \"RIP 2005 Astros\". However, from that low point until the end of July, Houston went 42\u201317 and found themselves in the lead for an NL wild card spot. July saw the best single-month record in the club's history at 22\u20137. Offensive production had increased greatly after a slow start in the first two months. The Astros had also developed an excellent pitching staff, anchored by Roy Oswalt (20\u201312, 2.94), Andy Pettitte (17\u20139, 2.39), and Roger Clemens (13\u20138 with a league-low ERA of only 1.87). The contributions of the other starters\u2014Brandon Backe (10\u20138, 4.76) and rookie starters Ezequiel Astacio (3\u20136, 5.67) and Wandy Rodr\u00edguez (10\u201310, 5.53)\u2014were less remarkable, but enough to push the Astros into position for a playoff run. The Astros won a wild card berth on the final day of the regular season, becoming the first team since the World Series champion 1914 Boston Braves to qualify for the postseason after being 15 games under .500.\nThe Astros won the National League Division Series against the Atlanta Braves, 3\u20131, with a game four that set postseason records for most innings (18), most players used by a single team (23), and longest game time (5 hours and 50 minutes). Trailing by a score of 6\u20131, Lance Berkman hit an eighth-inning grand slam to narrow the score to 6\u20135. In the bottom of the ninth, catcher Brad Ausmus hit a game-tying home run that allowed the game to continue in extra innings. In the bottom of the tenth inning, Luke Scott hit a blast to left field that had home run distance, but was inches foul. This game remained scoreless for the next eight innings. In the top of the 15th inning, Roger Clemens made only his second career relief appearance, pitching three shutout innings, notably striking out Julio Franco, at the time the oldest player in MLB at 47 years old; Clemens was himself 43. In the bottom of the eighteenth inning, Clemens came to bat again, indicating that he would be pitching in the nineteenth inning, if it came to that. Clemens struck out, but the next batter, Chris Burke, hit a home run to left field to send the Astros to a 7\u20136 victory. The National League Championship Series featured a rematch of the 2004 NLCS. The Astros lost the first game in St. Louis, but would win the next three games. Though the Astros were poised to close out the series in Game Five in Houston, Brad Lidge gave up a monstrous two-out three-run home run to Albert Pujols, forcing the series to a sixth game in St. Louis, where the Astros clinched a World Series appearance. Roy Oswalt was named NLCS MVP, having gone 2\u20130 with a 1.29 ERA in the series. Honorary National League President Bill Giles presented the league champion Astros with the Warren C. Giles Trophy (named for his father) for winning the series; the younger Giles had been one of the founders of the original Colt 45 team in 1962, while his father Warren had been president of the National League from 1951 to 1969.\nThe Astros faced the Chicago White Sox in the World Series. Chicago had been considered the slight favorite but would win all four games, the first two at U.S. Cellular Field in Chicago and the final two in Houston. Game 3 marked the first World Series game held in the state of Texas, and was the longest game in World Series history, lasting 5 hours and 41 minutes.\nThis World Series was marked by a controversy involving the Minute Maid Park roof. MLB and Commissioner Bud Selig insisted that the Astros must play with the roof open, which mitigated the intensity and enthusiasm of the cheering Astros fans.\n2006\u20132009: The decline.\nIn the 2006 offseason, the team signed Preston Wilson and moved Berkman to first base, ending the long tenure of Jeff Bagwell. The Astros renewed the contract with Clemens and traded two minor league prospects to the Tampa Bay Devil Rays for left-handed hitter Aubrey Huff. By August, Preston Wilson complained about his playing time after the return of Luke Scott from AAA Round Rock. The Astros released Wilson and he was signed by St. Louis. A dramatic season end included wins in 10 of their last 12 games, but the Astros missed a playoff appearance when they lost the final game of the season to the Atlanta Braves.\nOn October 31, the Astros declined a contract option on Jeff Bagwell for 2007, ending his 15-year Astros career and leading to his retirement. Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte filed for free agency. On December 12, the Astros traded Willy Taveras, Taylor Buchholz, and Jason Hirsh to the Colorado Rockies for Rockies pitchers Jason Jennings and Miguel Asencio. A trade with the White Sox, involving the same three Astros in exchange for Jon Garland, had been nixed a few days earlier when Buchholz reportedly failed a physical. In the end, Taveras continued to develop and Hirsh had a strong 2007 rookie campaign, while Jennings was often injured and generally ineffective.\nOn April 28, 2007, the Astros purchased the contract of top minor league prospect Hunter Pence. He debuted that night, getting a hit and scoring a run. By May 2007, the Astros had suffered one of their worst losing streaks (10 games). On June 28, second baseman Craig Biggio became the 27th MLB player to accrue 3,000 career hits. Biggio needed three hits to reach 3,000 and ended the night with a total of five hits. That night, Carlos Lee hit a towering walk-off grand slam in the 11th inning. Lee later quipped to the media that \"he had hit a walk-off grand slam and he got second billing\", considering Biggio's achievement. On July 24, Biggio announced that he would retire at the end of the season. He hit a grand slam in that night's game which broke a 3\u20133 tie and led to an Astros win. In Biggio's last at bat, he grounded out to Chipper Jones of the Atlanta Braves.\nOn September 20, Ed Wade was named general manager. In his first move, he traded Jason Lane to the Padres on September 24. On September 30, Craig Biggio retired after twenty years with the team. In November, the Astros traded RHP Brad Lidge and SS Eric Bruntlett to the Philadelphia Phillies for OF Michael Bourn, RHP Geoff Geary, and minor leaguer Mike Costanzo. Utility player Mark Loretta accepted Houston's salary arbitration and Kazuo Matsui finalized a $16.5\u00a0million, three-year contract with the team. In December, the Astros traded OF Luke Scott, RHP Matt Albers, RHP Dennis Sarfate, LHP Troy Patton, and minor-league 3B Mike Costanzo, to the Baltimore Orioles for SS Miguel Tejada. On December 14, they sent infielder Chris Burke, RHP Juan Guti\u00e9rrez, and RHP Chad Qualls to the Arizona Diamondbacks for RHP Jos\u00e9 Valverde. On December 27, the Astros came to terms on a deal with All-Star, Gold Glove winner Darin Erstad.\nIn January and February 2008, the Astros signed Brandon Backe, Ty Wigginton, Dave Borkowski and Shawn Chac\u00f3n to one-year deals. The starting rotation would feature Roy Oswalt and Brandon Backe as numbers one and two. Wandy Rodr\u00edguez, Chac\u00f3n and Chris Sampson rounded out the bottom three slots in the rotation. Woody Williams had retired after a 0\u20134 spring training and Jason Jennings was now with Texas. On the other side of the roster, the Astros would start without Kazuo Matsui, who was on a minor league rehab assignment after a spring training injury.\nThe Astros regressed in 2008 and 2009, finishing with records of 86\u201375 and 74\u201388, respectively. Manager Cecil Cooper was fired after the 2009 season. At the lowest point of the regression, child admission was free.\n2010\u20132014: Last years in the NL and move to the AL West.\nThe 2010 season was the first season as Astros manager for Brad Mills, who was previously the bench coach of the Boston Red Sox. The Astros struggled throughout a season that was marked by trade-deadline deals that sent longtime Astros to other teams. On July 29, the Astros' ace starting pitcher, Roy Oswalt, was dealt to the Philadelphia Phillies for J. A. Happ and two minor league players. On July 31, outfielder Lance Berkman was traded to the New York Yankees for minor leaguers Jimmy Paredes and Mark Melancon. The Astros finished with a record of 76\u201386.\nOn July 30, 2011, the Astros traded OF Hunter Pence, the team's 2010 leader in home runs, to the Philadelphia Phillies. On July 31, they traded OF Michael Bourn to the Atlanta Braves. On September 17, the Astros recorded their first 100-loss season in franchise history, ending the season eleven days later with an 8\u20130 home loss to the St. Louis Cardinals. Cardinals pitcher Chris Carpenter pitched a two-hit complete game shutout. The Cardinals would go on to win the National League Wild Card, before beating the Texas Rangers in the World Series. Lance Berkman, who was now a Cardinal, was a key player in their championship victory. The Astros finished with a record of 56\u2013106, the worst single-season record in franchise history (a record which would be broken the following season).\nIn November 2010, Drayton McLane announced that the Astros were being put up for sale. McLane stated that because the Astros were one of the few franchises in Major League Baseball with only one family as the owners, he was planning his estate. McLane was 75 years old as of November 2011. In March 2011, local Houston businessman Jim Crane emerged as the front-runner to purchase the franchise. In the 1980s, Crane founded an air freight business which later merged with CEVA Logistics, and later founded Crane Capital Group. McLane and Crane had a previous handshake agreement for the franchise in 2008, but Crane abruptly changed his mind and broke off discussions. Crane also attempted to buy the Chicago Cubs in 2008 and the Texas Rangers during their 2010 bankruptcy auction. Crane came under scrutiny because of previous allegations of discriminatory hiring practices regarding women and minorities, among other issues. This delayed MLB's approval process. In the summer of 2011, Crane claimed those issues had been resolved, and suggested that the delays were baseball's attempt to move the Astros to the American League. In October later that year, Crane met personally with MLB Commissioner Bud Selig, in a meeting that was described as \"constructive\".\nOn November 15, 2011, it was announced that Crane had agreed to move the franchise to the American League for the 2013 season. The move was part of an overall divisional realignment of MLB, with the National and American leagues each having 15 teams in three geographically balanced divisions. Crane was given a $70\u00a0million concession by MLB for agreeing to the switch; the move was a condition for the sale to the new ownership group. Two days later, the Astros were officially sold to Crane for $615\u00a0million after the other owners unanimously voted in favor of the sale. It was also announced that 2012 would be the last season for the Astros in the NL. After over fifty years of the Astros being a part of the National League, this move was unpopular with many Astros fans. In December 2011, Jeff Luhnow was named general manager.\nIn 2012, the Astros were eliminated from the playoffs before September 5. On September 27, the Astros named Bo Porter to be the manager for the 2013 season.\nOn October 3, the Astros ended over 50 years of NL play with a 5\u20134 loss to the Chicago Cubs and began to look ahead to join the American League. Winning only 20 road games during the entire season, the Astros finished with a 55\u2013107 record, the worst record in all of Major League Baseball for the 2012 season, and surpassing the 2011 season for the worst record in Astros history.\nOn November 2, 2012, the Astros unveiled their new look in preparation for their move to the American League for the 2013 season. The navy and orange uniform returned to the original 1960s team colors, and debuted a new version of the classic navy hat with a white \"H\" over an orange star.\nOn November 6, 2012, the Astros hired former Cleveland Indians director of baseball operations David Stearns as the team's new assistant general manager.\nThe Houston Astros played their first game as an American League team on March 31, 2013, where they were victorious over their in-state division competitor, the Texas Rangers, with a score of 8\u20132.\nOn May 17, Reid Ryan, son of Nolan Ryan was introduced as president of operations.\nOn September 29, the Astros completed their first year in the American League, losing 5\u20131 in a 14-inning game to the New York Yankees. The Astros finished the season with a 51\u2013111 record (a franchise-worst) with a season-ending 15-game losing streak, again surpassing their worst record from the previous season. The team finished 45 games behind the division winner Oakland Athletics, further adding to their futility. This marked three consecutive years that the Astros had lost more than 100 games in a single season. They also became the first team to have the first overall pick in the draft three years in a row.\nIn February 2014, Nolan Ryan rejoined the Astros front office as assistant to owner Jim Crane, GM Jeff Luhnow and president of business operations Reid Ryan. From 2004 through 2008 he worked as a special assistant to the GM.\nFor the 2014 season the team went 70\u201392, finishing 28 games back of the division winner Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, and placing fourth in the AL West over the Texas Rangers.\nA. J. Hinch was named manager on September 29, replacing Bo Porter, who was fired on September 1.\n2015\u20132019: Return to success, first World Series title and scandal.\nIn 2015, Dallas Keuchel led the AL with 20 victories, going 15\u20130 at home, an MLB record. Key additions to the team included Scott Kazmir and SS Carlos Correa who hit 22 home runs after being called up in June 2015. Second baseman Jose Altuve remained the star of the Astros' offense. On July 30, the Astros picked up Mike Fiers and Carlos G\u00f3mez from the Milwaukee Brewers. Fiers threw the 11th no-hitter in Astros history on August 21 against the Los Angeles Dodgers. Houston got the final AL playoff spot and faced the Yankees in the Wild Card Game on October 6 at New York. They defeated the Yankees 3\u20130, including 6.0 scoreless innings pitched by Keuchel and home runs by Colby Rasmus and Carlos G\u00f3mez.\nThe Astros would subsequently play the AL Central champion Kansas City Royals. The Astros would split the first two games of the ALDS best-of-five series in Kansas City. The Astros won the first game at Minute Maid to take a 2\u20131 lead in the ALDS. In Game 4, after 7 innings, the Astros had a 6\u20132 lead. In the top half of the eighth inning, which took about 45 minutes to end, the Royals had taken a 7\u20136 lead with 5 consecutive singles and a notable error from SS Carlos Correa which tied the game as well as allowed the winning run to reach base. The Astros suffered a 9\u20136 loss and the ALDS was tied at 2\u20132. Then the series went back to Kansas City, where the Royals clinched the series in the fifth game, 7\u20132.\nThe Astros entered the 2016 season as the favorites to win the AL West after a promising 2015 season. After a bad start to their season, going just 7\u201317 in April, the Astros bounced back and went on to have a winning record in their next four months, including an 18\u20138 record in June. But after going 12\u201315 in September, the Astros were eliminated from playoff contention. They finished in third place in the American League West Division with a final record of 84\u201378.\nThe season was marked by the Astros 4\u201315 record against their in-state division rival (and eventual division winner) Texas Rangers. The Astros finished the 2016 season 11 games behind the Rangers.\nIn 2014, \"Sports Illustrated\" predicted the Astros would win the 2017 World Series through their strategic rebuilding process. As of June 9, 2017, the Astros were 41\u201316, which gave them a 13.5-game lead over the rest of their division and comfortable possession of the best record in the entire league. This was the best start in the Astros' 55-year history. The Astros entered the All-Star Break with an American League-best 60\u201329 record, a 16-game lead in the division, and one game shy of the best record in MLB, which had just barely slipped to the Dodgers right before the All-Star Break.\nWith Hurricane Harvey causing massive flooding throughout Houston and southeast Texas, the Astros' three-game series against the Texas Rangers for August 29\u201331, was relocated to Tropicana Field (home of the Tampa Bay Rays), in St. Petersburg, Florida. As the area recovered from the hurricane, many residents rallied around the Astros, who adopted the mantra \"Houston Strong\". They wore a patch on their jerseys with the mantra for the remainder of the season.\nAt the August 31 waiver-trade deadline GM Jeff Luhnow acquired veteran starting pitcher and Cy Young Award winner Justin Verlander to bolster the starting rotation. Verlander won each of his 5 regular season starts with the Astros, yielding only 4 runs over this stretch. He carried his success into the playoffs, posting a record of 4\u20131 in his 6 starts, and throwing a complete game in Game 2 of the ALCS. Verlander was named the 2017 ALCS MVP.\nThe Astros clinched their first division title as a member of the American League West division, and first division title overall since 2001. They also became the first team in Major League history to win three different divisions: National League West in 1980 and 1986, National League Central from 1997 to 1999 and 2001, and American League West in 2017. On September 29, the Astros won their 100th game of the season, the second time the Astros finished a season with over 100 wins, the first being in 1998. They finished 101\u201361, with a 21-game lead in the division, and faced the Red Sox in the first round of the AL playoffs. The Astros defeated the Red Sox three games to one, and advanced to the American League Championship Series against the New York Yankees. The Astros won the ALCS four games to three, and advanced to the World Series to play against the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Astros defeated the Dodgers in the deciding seventh game of the World Series, winning the first championship in franchise history.\nThe victory was especially meaningful for the Houston area, which was rebuilding after Hurricane Harvey. The city of Houston celebrated the team's accomplishment with a parade on the afternoon of November 3, 2017. Houston police chief Art Acevedo estimated at least 750,000 people attended the parade.\nOn November 16, 2017, Jose Altuve was named the American League Most Valuable Player, capping off a season in which he accumulated 200 hits for the fourth consecutive season, led the majors with a .346 BA, and was the unquestioned clubhouse leader of the World Series champions.\nOn September 26, 2018, the Astros' second consecutive AL West division championship was clinched with a victory by the Seattle Mariners over the Oakland A's. For the third time in franchise history, and second consecutive season, the team won over 100 games; they finished the regular season 103\u201359 (a new franchise record) by sweeping a double-header against the Baltimore Orioles on September 29, 2018. The Astros swept the Cleveland Indians in the ALDS to advance to the ALCS to face the league-leading Boston Red Sox (who finished the season 108\u201354.) After a 7\u20132 victory in Game 1 of the ALCS, the Astros dropped the next four games, and Boston advanced to the World Series.\nIn the offseason, the Astros signed veteran outfielder Michael Brantley, and catcher Robinson Chirinos. At the trade deadline on July 31, 2019, Houston acquired another veteran starting pitcher and Cy Young award winner Zack Greinke to bolster the starting rotation. On September 22, the Astros clinched their third consecutive AL West division title. They finished the season with a record of 107\u201355, the best in franchise history, and the best record in MLB. They became the first team since the 2002\u20132004 New York Yankees to have 3 consecutive 100-win seasons. They also became the first team in MLB history to have three consecutive 100-loss seasons and three consecutive 100-win seasons in the same decade.\nEntering the playoffs as the top-seeded team in both leagues, they defeated the AL Wild Card winner Tampa Bay Rays in five games in the ALDS, advancing to the ALCS for the third year in a row to face the New York Yankees. In Game 6 at Minute Maid Park, Jose Altuve hit a walk-off home run to win the pennant and send the team to its third World Series appearance. However, they lost the 2019 World Series to the Washington Nationals in seven games, taking three games in Washington but losing all four of their games at home.\nSign stealing scandal.\nOn November 12, 2019, Ken Rosenthal and Evan Drellich wrote an article in \"The Athletic\" detailing allegations that the Astros had used cameras to engage in potentially illicit sign stealing against opponents, relying on allegations from former Astros pitcher Mike Fiers as a public source and other allegations from unnamed sources. The Astros were alleged to have used scouts watching catchers' signs in real time behind the dugout at Minute Maid Park to crack the signs and banging a trash can loudly to indicate what kind of pitch was coming. The scandal rippled through the baseball world as videos that appeared to clearly show the scheme were published. Further allegations regarding other means of relaying signs, such as whistling, surfaced in subsequent weeks. MLB and Commissioner Rob Manfred announced a sweeping investigation into the allegations.\nOn January 13, 2020, MLB announced that its investigation found that the Astros did use cameras and video monitors to steal signs of opposing catchers and signal to hitters throughout the 2017 regular season and postseason, and at least part of the 2018 season. The investigation found no evidence of sign stealing in their pennant-winning 2019 season. The report said that Alex Cora, then the Astros bench coach, Carlos Beltr\u00e1n, and other unnamed players were involved in developing the scheme. It said Hinch \"neither devised the banging scheme nor participated in it,\" but did not stop it or tell Cora he disapproved of it.\nManfred announced that manager A. J. Hinch and general manager Jeff Luhnow were suspended for one year, the team would be fined $5\u00a0million (the maximum allowed under MLB rules), and the team would lose its top two draft picks in both the 2020 and 2021 MLB Drafts. About an hour after MLB's announcement, Astros owner Jim Crane announced he had terminated both Hinch and Luhnow, saying he was unaware of the scheme and \"extraordinarily troubled and upset\", and concluded, \"We need to move forward with a clean slate. [We] will not have this happen again on my watch.\" In a statement, Luhnow denied knowledge of the scheme. Hinch issued a statement saying, \"While the evidence consistently showed I didn't endorse or participate in the sign stealing practices, I failed to stop them and I am deeply sorry.\"\nThe scandal had repercussions around baseball. Cora was implicated in the report but Manfred withheld a decision on his punishment until the completion of a separate investigation into electronic sign stealing in 2018, when Cora was manager of the Red Sox. However, the report led the Red Sox to dismiss Cora two days after it was published, and the Mets did the same with Beltran, who had been hired as manager shortly before the original story.\n2020\u2013present: Second World Series title.\nOn January 29, 2020, the Astros announced they hired Dusty Baker as their new manager to replace Hinch. James Click was hired to replace Lunhow as general manager on February 2.\nExpectations for a full 2020 season were dashed by the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced Major League Baseball to play a 60-game season that would take place from July to September with no fans in attendance (which was later changed for the NLCS and World Series). The Astros were hampered by injuries to players such as Justin Verlander, Yordan Alvarez, and Roberto Osuna, who each suffered season-ending injuries. As such, the Astros had to rely a plethora of young arms such as Cristian Javier to go alongside veterans in Lance McCullers Jr. and Zack Greinke to accompany an offense that had just one .300 batter in Michael Brantley. The Astros went 29\u201331, but finished second place in the AL West to qualify for the postseason as part of the decision by MLB to have eight postseason teams in each league for 2020 to accompany a shortened season. The Astros defeated two division champions in the Minnesota Twins and Oakland Athletics to become the first team since the 1998\u20132001 New York Yankees to advance to the American League Championship Series four times in a row, as well as the first team with a losing regular season record to win a postseason series. In the ALCS, the Astros lost to the Tampa Bay Rays despite forcing a Game 7 after losing the first three games.\nThe 2021 season was the first to be played with fans in the stands for the regular season since the scandal broke. Rabid opposition for a number of fanbases went hand in hand with the challenge of replacing departed players George Springer and Josh Reddick. By the time of the break for the 2021 MLB All-Star Game, the Astros were 55\u201336 and contending for a top spot in the postseason, complete with four All-Star selections in Jose Altuve, Carlos Correa, Michael Brantley, and Ryan Pressly. On September 30, the Astros clinched their fourth AL West title in the span of five seasons (which was the first time they had won four division titles in five seasons since the 1998\u20132001 teams); the six playoff appearances in seven seasons is the best span in franchise history. Yuli Gurriel became the second Astro to win the batting title, doing so at the age of 37 with a batting average of .319. The Astros beat the Chicago White Sox in the American League Division Series to advance to their fifth consecutive ALCS, a feat matched by only two teams in LCS history and the first since the Atlanta Braves of the 1990s (having made all eight contested NLCS from 1991 to 1999). Upon playing together in Game 3 of the 2021 American League Championship Series, Altuve, Correa, Gurriel, and Bregman set a new record for most games played together by four teammates at any position in MLB history, with that game being the 64th between the core four. On October 22, the Astros prevailed 5\u20130 in Game 6 over the Boston Red Sox to win their third pennant in the last five seasons. They went on to lose the 2021 World Series to the Atlanta Braves in six games.\nThe 2022 season opened without Carlos Correa at shortstop for the first time since 2016 as he left for the Minnesota Twins in free agency. Rookie shortstop Jeremy Pe\u00f1a made the Opening Day start and manned the position for the entire season. The Astros clinched the division on September 19, their second consecutive division title and their fifth in six seasons. Justin Verlander had a resurgent and historic season, leading the league with a 1.75 ERA en route to his third career Cy Young Award. Upon entering the postseason, the Astros swept the Mariners in three tightly contested ALDS games to advance to their American League record sixth consecutive ALCS. The Astros swept the Yankees to advance to the World Series for the second year in a row and fourth in six seasons. On November 2, 2022, in Game 4 of the 2022 World Series against the Philadelphia Phillies at the Citizens Bank Park, the Astros became the first team to throw a combined no-hitter in postseason history, and the second team to throw a no-hitter in World Series history after Don Larsen's perfect game with the New York Yankees in 1956. The Astros went on to defeat the Phillies in six games, earning their second World Series title. Jeremy Pe\u00f1a won the Series MVP Award; the first rookie position player in MLB history to do so, and the first rookie shortstop in history to hit a home run in the World Series. The Astros became the first team to have a winning percentage of .622 (or better) in a six-season span (2017\u20132022) with multiple World Series titles since the 1953-1958 New York Yankees, and they became the sixth team since 1960 to win the World Series after losing it the previous year.\nDuring the 2022-23 offseason, Baker's contract was renewed for another year, while Click parted ways with the team following a breakdown of contractual negotiations. In February 2023, Dana Brown was hired as the new general manager for the Astros.\nThe 2023 season began inauspiciously with the Astros losing their first Opening Day game since 2012 in a 3\u20132 loss to the Chicago White Sox. This snapped a streak of 10-straight wins on Opening Day for the club, a modern-day record. It was also the first season since 2017 not to feature Yuli Gurriel at first base, who signed a minor league contract with the Miami Marlins, and instead was replaced by Jos\u00e9 Abreu, who the Astros had signed to a 3-year contract during the offseason. Entering the All-Star break, the Astros had a 50\u201341 record while sending Yordan \u00c1lvarez, Kyle Tucker, and Framber Valdez to the Midsummer Classic. The American League, managed by Dusty Baker, lost for the first time since 2012. After losing him to free agency in the offseason, the Astros reacquired Justin Verlander from the Mets at the trade deadline to bolster their rotation. After playing well in July and August, the Astros slumped in September, battling with the Mariners and the Rangers for the division all the way until the final game of the season. The Astros and Rangers finished tied at 90\u201372; however, the Astros won the division by virtue of their 9\u20134 season record against Texas. The Astros beat the Minnesota Twins in the ALDS to advance to their American League record seventh consecutive ALCS. Ultimately, the Astros fell in seven games to the Rangers, a series in which the away team won every game, reminiscent of the Astros defeat in the 2019 World Series.\nOn October 25, 2023, Baker announced his retirement. On November 13, 2023, Joe Espada was named the 25th manager in Astros history.\nThe Astros began the 2024 season in dreadful fashion by losing on Opening Day to the New York Yankees 5\u20134. They would be swept in four games on Opening Weekend. They would earn their first win on April 1 when Ronel Blanco threw the first no-hitter of the 2024 season against the Toronto Blue Jays as the Astros defeated Toronto 10\u20130. Blanco, making just his eighth career start after making the roster just a few days before, struck out seven and walked two to complete the seventeenth no-hitter in franchise history and the fourth at Minute Maid Park. First-year manager Joe Espada also made history that night, becoming the first manager in MLB history to earn their first managerial win via a no-hitter. Jenny Cavnar and Julia Morales became the first two women to do the play-by-play on television for the same Major League Baseball game on May 13, 2024, against the Oakland Athletics. After hitting a low of 12-24 on May 8th, the Astros climbed back to .500 by the end of June after a 30-17 stretch. The Astros sent Jose Altuve, Yordan Alvarez, and Kyle Tucker to the All-Star Game with both Altuve and Alvarez named as starters. Yusei Kikuchi became the first Japanese-born player to pitch for the Astros after being acquired at the trade deadline. The Astros went on to win his nine first starts, a franchise record and the longest streak in the majors since John Burkett with the 2002 Boston Red Sox. The Astros became the second expansion team to reach 5,000 wins, defeating the Angels, who reached the mark earlier in the season, on September 14th. Ten days later, the Astros clinched the AL West division title for the fourth straight year with a 4\u20133 victory over the Mariners, becoming the first team to win that division four seasons in a row since the Oakland Athletics won the division title from 1971 to 1975. It was their seventh division title in eight years. The Astros won the 2024 division title despite beginning the season 7\u201319, at one point trailing the Mariners by 10 games in the AL West, becoming the first team in the expansion era to begin the season with that record and still make the playoffs. The Astros faced off against former manager A.J. Hinch and the Detroit Tigers in the American League Wild Card Series, losing consecutive games at home, including their seventh straight playoff home loss, to miss the ALCS for the first time since 2016 and end their American League record at seven consecutive appearances.\nUniforms.\n1962\u20131964: The Colt .45's.\nHouston's MLB franchise debuted as the Colt .45s in 1962, and the original home uniforms featured a navy pistol with orange smoke coming out of the barrel to form the \"C\" in \"Colts\". The road uniforms featured the city name written in navy block letters with orange trim, and the flag of Texas patch was placed on the left sleeve. Caps were all-navy featuring \".45s\" in orange letters in front.\n1965\u20131974: Shooting stars.\nRenamed the Astros and moving to the Astrodome in 1965, they took to the field in home uniforms featuring the \"shooting star\" design. The uniforms initially featured \"Astros\" in navy with orange trim, and the cap now sported an orange star with \"H\" in block serif letters. The road uniforms remained the same save for the Astros logo replacing the Texas flag (the same logo was also applied on the home uniforms).\nIn 1971 the Astros made some changes to their uniform: they kept the same style they had in previous seasons, but inverted the colors. What was navy was now orange and what was orange was now a lighter shade of blue. The players' last names were added to the back of the jerseys. In 1972, the uniform fabric was also changed to what was at the time revolutionizing the industry \u2013 polyester. Belts were replaced by elastic waistbands, and jerseys zipped up instead of having buttons. The uniforms became popular with fans, but would last only until 1975, when the Astros would shock baseball and the fashion world.\n1975\u20131986: Tequila sunrise/Orange rainbows.\nThe 1975 season saw the introduction of the Astros' new uniforms. Many teams were going away from the traditional uniform and the Astros were no exception. From the chest down, the uniform was a solid block of yellow, orange, and red stripes. There was also a large dark blue star over the midsection. The same multi-colored stripes ran down the pant legs. Players' numbers not only appeared on the back of the jersey, but also on the pant leg. The bright stripes were meant to appear as a fiery trail like a rocket sweeping across the heavens. The uniforms were panned by critics, but the public liked them and versions started appearing at the high school and little league level. The uniform was so different from what other teams wore that the Astros wore it both at home and on the road until 1980, though it underwent a few minor modifications with the navy star and number style.\n1980\u20131993: Rainbow shoulders.\nAlso in 1980, the Astros debuted a significantly cleaner uniform, relegating the rainbows to the sleeves. The design was initially worn on the road (with the original rainbow uniform relegated to home games), but in 1982 the rainbow shoulder look began appearing on select home games as well. In addition, the navy cap returned with this uniform and the orange cap was eventually retired in 1983. By 1987, this uniform became the Astros' primary look, retiring the original rainbow uniforms. When it first unveiled, the rainbow shoulder uniform was light grey, but by 1982, the fabric was changed to cream. A white version was added for home games that same year. Prior to the 1989 season, the pullover design was retired and buttons and belts returned to this uniform.\n1994\u20131999: Midnight blue and gold.\nCoinciding with the change in ownership, the team switched uniforms and team colors after the 1993 season in order to go for a new, more serious image. The team's trademark rainbow uniforms were retired, and the team's colors changed to midnight blue and metallic gold. The \"Astros\" font on the team logo was changed to a more aggressive one, and the team's traditional star logo was changed to a stylized, \"flying\" star with an open left end.\nBoth the home and road uniforms featured a star substituting for the penultimate letter \"O\" in both \"Astros\" (home) and \"Houston\" (road); the road uniform was later tweaked in 1997 with the star now affixed next to the word \"Houston\". The letters were written in a more futuristic manner. The Astros also wore midnight blue alternates with \"Astros\" in white with gold trim, changed in 1997 to only feature the flying star logo. The midnight blue cap featured the flying star logo. It also marked the first time since 1982 that the Astros wore grey uniforms on the road.\n2000\u20132012: Railroad design.\nMoving to Minute Maid Park (originally Enron Field) in 2000, the Astros took to the field wearing vintage-inspired uniforms. For the first time, navy was not part of the team's palette, and the Astros uniforms featured brick red, sand and black colors. The colors were inspired by the location of their new ballpark which formerly housed a railroad depot.\nPrimary home uniforms featured black pinstripes with \"Astros\" in black script letters and numbers in red. The road uniforms sported \"Houston\" in red script letters and black numbers. Alternate white uniforms without pinstripes featured all letters in brick red with sand trim, initially with the brick red star logo on the left chest before switching to the \"Astros\" wordmark by 2002. The Astros also wore black alternate home and road uniforms, with \"Houston\" (road) and \"Astros\" (home) emblazoned in front, but switched to brick red alternates by 2002. The letters on both uniforms are in sand with brick red trim. Black caps with the updated star in red became the primary cap while a red cap with the sand star was used as an alternate.\n2013\u2013present: Return to navy and orange.\nIn 2013, the Astros returned to the classic navy and orange look of previous eras. Both uniforms featured the city name (road) and team name (home) in block navy letters with orange trim, along with numbers on the left chest. Piping was also added in front. The orange alternate contained the team name and numbers in navy with white trim. The Astros also wore navy uniforms with the orange rainbow stripes along the side; the front originally featured the \"H\" star before replacing it with \"Astros\" in orange in 2016. Navy caps with the \"H\" and orange star returned as the team's primary cap, while a navy cap with orange brim was used on select games. Until 2015, the Astros also wore all-orange caps with the home uniforms, and from 2016 to 2018, the navy alternates were paired occasionally with an orange cap with navy brim. While the navy alternates are usually worn on Sunday home games, in recent years, it became the preferred uniform during Framber Valdez's starts regardless of it being a home or road game.\nIn 2022, the Astros were one of seven additional teams to wear Nike's \"City Connect\" uniforms. The predominantly navy uniform incorporated the \"Space City\" wordmark in homage to NASA's \"worm\" logo; the lettering and numbers also incorporated said style. The uniform also added various elements from the \"Tequila sunrise\" uniforms of the 1970s, including numerals on the right leg and red/orange/yellow gradients on the piping and socks. The left sleeve patch has the modified Texas flag recolored to the Astros' navy and orange motif, with the \"H-star\" logo replacing the white star. All-navy caps feature the modified \"H-star\" logo incorporating a planet in orbit. This uniform is usually worn on Monday home games. On September 22, 2024, the Astros announced that they would wear the \"Space City\" uniforms for the final time. The team will receive a new \"City Connect\" uniform in 2025.\nFor their second \"City Connect\" uniform, the Astros wore a white-based uniform. The jersey features the team nickname \"STROS\" in blue lettering with an orange star logo, trim carrying over from their City Connect 1.0 with their \"tequila sunrise\" pattern and a lunar pattern pinstriping on the pants paying tribute to the history of the moon landing. They also debuted a new hat logo which is a futuristic design of their traditional star logo in the form of the Astros \"A\". The sleeve features a mission patch inspired from the long-time union station logo. The belt loop has \"HTX\" stitched along the beltline to pay tribute to Houston, Texas. The afterburner socks feature a mixture of orange and yellow in the design of a fire which symbolize the afterburners on a Rocketship.\n \"As of the completion of the 2023 season\"\nAchievements.\nAwards.\nTwo awards are presented each year, one to a Houston Astro and one to a St. Louis Cardinal, each of whom exemplifies Kile's virtues of being \"a good teammate, a great friend, a fine father and a humble man.\" The winner is selected by each local chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America.\nRetired numbers.\nSource:\nWhile not officially retired, the Astros have not reissued number 57 since 2002, when former Astros pitcher Darryl Kile died as an active player with the St. Louis Cardinals. A \"DK\" marker is currently present in the wall of left-center field at Daikan Park. The number 42 is retired by Major League Baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson.\nHall of Fame.\nBaseball Hall of Fame members.\nHouston Astros Hall of Famers\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\nHouston Colt .45s\nHouston Astros\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFord C. Frick Award recipients.\nHouston Astros Ford C. Frick Award recipients\nAffiliation according to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAstros Hall of Fame.\nOn January 26, 2019, the team announced plans for a team Hall of Fame along with an inaugural class of inductees (including all retired numbers and members of the 2012 Walk of Fame), complete with an orange jacket and renderings for each of the inductees. The Astros Hall of Fame (with sponsorship by Houston Methodist) is currently located in the former Home Run Alley area of the ballpark under the new name of Hall of Fame Alley, beginning in March that revealed a series of plaques on Hall of Fame weekend on August 2 and induction the next day. A display was installed in the Union Station lobby on January 31 that included the jerseys and hats of the first class of inductees. The 2020 season belayed induction of the second group of Hall of Fame members until August 7 of the 2021 season. While there was no class of 2021, the committee dedicated to electing a broad representation of Astros did elect a class of 2022 for August of the impending season, selecting Terry Puhl and Tal Smith as the next inductees into the Astros Hall.\nSpring training.\nThe Astros have held their spring training at The Ballpark of the Palm Beaches in West Palm Beach, Florida since 2017. They share the stadium with the Washington Nationals.\nFrom 1985 to 2016, the Astros held spring training at Osceola Heritage Park in Kissimmee, Florida.\nMinor league affiliations.\nThe Houston Astros farm system consists of seven minor league affiliates.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nLone Star Series: Texas Rangers.\nThe Lone Star Series (also, Silver Boot Series) is a Major League Baseball rivalry featuring Texas' two major league franchises, the Texas Rangers and Astros. It is an outgrowth of the \"natural rivalry\" established by MLB as part of interleague play as the Rangers are a member of the American League and the Astros were a member of the National League until .\nDuring interleague play, the winner of the 6-game series was awarded the Silver Boot. A tall display of a size-15 cowboy boot cast in silver, complete with a custom, handmade spur. If the series was split (3\u20133), the winner was the club which scored the most runs over the course of the series.\nIn , the Astros joined the American League West with the Rangers and changed their rivalry from an interleague to an intra-division rivalry, the Astros played their first game in the American League against the Rangers on Sunday Night Baseball that season. In 2015, both teams made the playoffs and were in a tight division race during most of the season. Both teams qualified for the postseason again in 2023. While the teams had identical regular season records of 90\u201372, the Astros won the division title for their better head-to-head record (9\u20134), whilst the Rangers clinched the wild card berth. The Astros and Rangers had their first postseason matchup in the 2023 ALCS, with the Rangers ultimately winning in seven games.\nSeattle Mariners.\nFairly recently, the Astros have grown an increasingly competitive rivalry with the Seattle Mariners as both teams have fought handily for control of the division. The resurgence of the Mariners to playoff contention in the early 2020s has fueled the rivalry in competition as the Mariners have often finished within 5 games of the Astros in the division for the past three seasons. The 2022 season saw the Mariners return to playoff success, winning their first series since 2001. The Mariners and Astros were set to face off in the ALDS, but Houston would go on to win the series in a 0\u20133 sweep. Despite the lone playoff meeting, both teams have grown a recent history of hitting one another with pitches, and even instigating multiple brawls between players. The series was very lopsided in favor of the Astros for multiple decades as Houston leads the all-time regular season series 119\u201373, including a 3\u20130 lead in the postseason.\nAmerican League.\nNew York Yankees.\nThe rivalry between the Astros and the New York Yankees emerged in the mid-2010s after the Astros moved to the American League and eventually ascended to title contenders. The two teams have met in four postseason rounds, all of which were won by Houston. However, like the Astros' rivalry with the Dodgers, animosity grew immediately after the Astros were revealed to have stolen signs during their 2017 championship season, as well as the Yankees' inability to overcome Houston in the playoffs despite fielding equally strong rosters. Both teams are tied all-time with 43 wins apiece, but the Astros own a 13\u20135 postseason record.\nNational League.\nLos Angeles Dodgers.\nThe series between the Astros and the Los Angeles Dodgers had initially begun as a divisional matchup but following Houston's realignment to the American League, the rivalry regained intensity as the two teams played one another in the 2017 World Series in which the Astros controversially won the championship in 7 games. Animosity was quick to grow further after the Astros' widely publicized sign stealing scandal had drawn negative attention to the organization after it was revealed the team had utilized a complex system to steal pitch signs, particularly during the 2017 World Series. As a result of the scandal, hostility grew immensely between the two teams and their fans. The Dodgers lead the all-time series 400\u2013334, both teams are tied in postseason wins 6\u20136.\nRadio and television.\nSince 2013, the Astros' flagship radio station is KBME, Sportstalk 790 AM (a Fox Sports Radio affiliate). Previously, the team had a partnership with KTRH (740 AM) which went from 1999 to 2012 (both stations are owned by iHeartMedia). This change suddenly made it difficult for listeners outside of Houston itself to hear the Astros, as KTRH runs 50 kilowatts of power day and night, and KBME runs only five kilowatts. As a result, KTRH is audible across much of Central, East, and South Texas, whereas KBME can only be heard in Houston, especially after dark. Milo Hamilton, a veteran voice who was on the call for Hank Aaron's 715th career home run in 1974, retired at the end of the 2012 season, after broadcasting play-by-play for the Astros since 1985. Dave Raymond and Brett Dolan shared play-by-play duty for road games, while Raymond additionally worked as Hamilton's color analyst (while Hamilton called home games only for the past few seasons before his retirement); they were not retained and instead brought in Robert Ford and Steve Sparks to begin broadcasting for the 2013 season.\nSpanish language radio play-by-play is handled by Francisco Romero, and his play-by-play partner is Alex Trevi\u00f1o, a former backup catcher for the club.\nDuring the 2012 season Astros games on television were announced by Bill Brown and Jim Deshaies. In the seven seasons before then, Astros games were broadcast on television by Fox Sports Houston, with select games shown on broadcast TV by KTXH. As part of a ten-year, $1\u00a0billion deal with Comcast that includes a majority stake jointly held by the Astros and the Houston Rockets, Houston Astros games moved to the new Comcast SportsNet Houston at the beginning of the 2013 season. On September 27, 2013, CSN Houston filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy and surprising the Astros who own the largest stake. After being brought out of bankruptcy by DirecTV Sports Networks and AT&amp;T, the channel's name was changed to Root Sports Southwest then later AT&amp;T SportsNet Southwest.\nThe current television team consists of Todd Kalas, Geoff Blum and reporter Julia Morales.\nMascots.\nIn April 1977, the Houston Astros introduced their first mascot, Chester Charge. Created by Ed Henderson, Chester Charge was a Texas cavalry soldier on a horse. Chester appeared on the field at the beginning of each home game, during the seventh-inning stretch and then ran around the bases at the conclusion of each win. At the blast of a bugle, the scoreboard would light up and the audience would yell, \"Charge!\" \nThe Astros' current mascot is Orbit, a lime-green outer-space creature wearing an Astros jersey with antennae extending into baseballs. Orbit was the team's official mascot from the 1990 through the 1999 seasons. For the 2000 season, a rabbit named Junction Jack was introduced as the team's mascot with the move from the Astrodome to then Enron Field. (Junction Jack had two \"relatives\", Junction Julie and Junction Jesse, who were not official mascots). Orbit returned after a 13-year hiatus on November 2, 2012, at the unveiling of the Astros' new look for their 2013 debut in the American League. The name Orbit pays homage to Houston's association with NASA and nickname Space City.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13895", "revid": "1313966732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13895", "title": "Hal Clement", "text": "American author and artist (1922\u20132003)\nHarry Clement Stubbs (May 30, 1922 \u2013 October 29, 2003), better known by the pen name Hal Clement, was an American science fiction writer and a leader of the hard science fiction subgenre. He also painted astronomically oriented artworks under the name George Richard.\nIn 1998, Clement was inducted into the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame. He was named the 17th SFWA Grand Master by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America in 1999.\nBiography.\nHarry Clement Stubbs was born in Somerville, Massachusetts, on May 30, 1922.\nHe went to Harvard, graduating with a B.S. in astronomy in 1943. While there he wrote his first published story, \"Proof\", which appeared in the June 1942 issue of \"Astounding Science Fiction\", edited by John W. Campbell; three more appeared in later 1942 numbers. His further educational background includes an M.Ed. (Boston University 1946) and M.S. in chemistry (Simmons College 1963).\nDuring World War II Clement was a pilot and copilot of a B-24 Liberator and flew 35 combat missions over Europe with the 68th Bomb Squadron, 44th Bomb Group, based in England with 8th Air Force. After the war, he served in the United States Air Force Reserve, and retired with the rank of colonel. He taught chemistry and astronomy for many years at Milton Academy in Milton, Massachusetts.\nFrom 1949 to 1953, Clement's first three novels were two-, three-, and four-part \"Astounding\" serials under Campbell: \"Needle\" (Doubleday, 1950), \"Iceworld\" (Gnome Press, 1953), and \"Mission of Gravity\" (1954), his best-known novel, published by Doubleday's Science Fiction Book Club (established 1953). The latter novel features a land and sea expedition across the superjovian planet Mesklin to recover a stranded scientific probe. The natives of Mesklin are centipede-like intelligent beings about 50 centimeters long. Various episodes hinge on the fact that Mesklin's fast rotational speed causes it to be considerably deformed from the spherical, with effective surface gravity that varies from approximately 3 'g'n at the equator to approximately 700 \"g\"n at the poles.\nClement's article \"Whirligig World\" describes his approach to writing a science fiction story:\nWriting a science fiction story is fun, not work. ... the fun ... lies in treating the whole thing as a game... [T]he rules must be quite simple. They are; for the reader of a science-fiction story, they consist of finding as many as possible of the author's statements or implications which conflict with the facts as science currently understands them. For the author, the rule is to make as few such slips as he possibly can... Certain exceptions are made [e.g., to allow travel faster than the speed of light], but fair play demands that all such matters be mentioned as early as possible in the story...\nClement was a frequent guest at science fiction conventions, especially in the eastern United States, where he usually presented talks and slide shows about writing and astronomy.\nClement died in his sleep in Massachusetts at the Milton Hospital on October 29, 2003, at age 81.\nAwards and honors.\nClement has been honored several times for his cumulative contributions including 1998 Hall of Fame induction, when Clement and Frederik Pohl were the fifth and sixth living persons honored, and the 1999 SFWA Grand Master Award.\nFor the 1945 short story \"Uncommon Sense\" he received a 50-year Retro Hugo Award at the 1996 World Science Fiction Convention. \"Mission of Gravity\", first published as a serial during 1953, was named best foreign novel by the Spanish Science Fiction Association in 1994 and it was a finalist for a 50-year Retro Hugo Award in 2004.\nThe Hal Clement Award for Young Adults for Excellence in Children's Science Fiction Literature was presented in Clement's name from 1992 to 2016.\nWayne Barlowe illustrated two of Clement's fictional species, the Abyormenites and the Mesklinites, in his \"Barlowe's Guide to Extraterrestrials\".\nShort stories, novelettes and novellas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArticles and introductions.\n\"In the early 1940s, in Astounding, there was a small department called Probability Zero! that ran short-short stories. Or items. Or lies. Things. These things were usually funny and always impossible - echoing the description of the title.\"\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13896", "revid": "34434225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13896", "title": "Halld\u00f3r Laxness", "text": "Icelandic author (1902-1998)\nHalld\u00f3r Kiljan Laxness (; born Halld\u00f3r Gu\u00f0j\u00f3nsson; 23 April 1902 \u2013 8 February 1998) was an Icelandic writer and winner of the 1955 Nobel Prize in Literature. He wrote novels, poetry, newspaper articles, essays, plays, travelogues and short stories. Writers who influenced Laxness include August Strindberg, Sigmund Freud, Knut Hamsun, Sinclair Lewis, Upton Sinclair, Bertolt Brecht, and Ernest Hemingway.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nHalld\u00f3r Gu\u00f0j\u00f3nsson was born in Reykjav\u00edk in 1902. When he was three, his family moved to the Laxnes farm in Mosfellssveit parish. He was brought up and enormously influenced by his grandmother, who \"sang me ancient songs before I could talk, told me stories from heathen times and sang me cradle songs from the Catholic era\". He started to read books and write stories at an early age and attended the technical school in Reykjav\u00edk from 1915 to 1916. His earliest published writings appeared in 1916 in \"Morgunbla\u00f0i\u00f0\" and in the children's periodical \"\u00c6skan.\" The same year, two letters-to-the-editor Halld\u00f3r wrote also appeared in the North American-Icelandic children's newspapers \"S\u00f3lskin\", which was published in Winnipeg, Manitoba. Laxness then attended and in 1918 graduated from the Reykjav\u00edk Lyceum. By the time his first novel, \"Barn n\u00e1tt\u00farunnar\" (\"Child of Nature\", 1919), was published he had already begun his travels on the European continent.\n1920s.\nIn 1922, Halld\u00f3r moved into and considered joining the Abbaye Saint-Maurice et Saint-Maur in Clervaux, Luxembourg, where the monks followed the rules of Saint Benedict of Nursia. In 1923 he was baptized and confirmed in the Catholic Church, adopting the surname Laxness after the homestead on which he was raised and adding the name Kiljan (the Icelandic name of Irish martyr Saint Killian); Laxness practiced self-study, read books, and studied French, Latin, theology and philosophy. He became a member of a group that prayed for reversion of the Nordic countries to Catholicism. Laxness wrote of his experiences in the essay \"Ka\u00fe\u00f3lsk vi\u00f0horf\" (1925) and published (in fragmentary form) the novel \"Undir Helgahn\u00fak\" (1924, revised 1967). In 1927, he published \"Vefarinn mikli fr\u00e1 Kasm\u00edr\", a novel about a young man's conflicts with religion and identity in his quest to become \"the most perfect person in the world\". Icelandic critic wrote of it: \nFinally, finally, a grand novel which towers like a cliff above the flatland of contemporary Icelandic poetry and fiction! Iceland has gained a new literary giant\u2014it is our duty to celebrate the fact with joy! \nLaxness's religious period did not last long. He lived in the United States from 1927 to 1929, giving lectures on Iceland and attempting to write screenplays for Hollywood films. During this time he became attracted to socialism:\n[Laxness] did not become a socialist in America from studying manuals of socialism but from watching the starving unemployed in the parks.\nLaxness joined the socialist bandwagon\u2026 with a book \"Al\u00fe\u00fd\u00f0ub\u00f3kin\" (\"The Book of the People\", 1929) of brilliant burlesque and satirical essays\nBeside the fundamental idea of socialism, the strong sense of Icelandic individuality is also the sustaining element in \"Al\u00fe\u00fd\u00f0ub\u00f3kin\". The two elements are entwined together in characteristic fashion and in their very union give the work its individual character.\nIn 1929 Laxness published an article critical of the U.S. in \"Heimskringla\", a Canadian newspaper. This resulted in charges against him, his detention, and the forfeiture of his passport. With the aid of Upton Sinclair and the ACLU, the charges were dropped and Laxness returned to Iceland.\n1930s.\nBy the 1930s Laxness \"had become the apostle of the younger generation\" of Icelandic writers.\n\"Salka Valka\" (1931\u201332) began the great series of sociological novels, often coloured with socialist ideas, continuing almost without a break for nearly twenty years. This was probably the most brilliant period of his career, and it is the one which produced those of his works that have become most famous. But Laxness never attached himself permanently to a particular dogma. In addition to the two parts of \"Salka Valka\", Laxness published \"F\u00f3tatak manna\" (\"Steps of Men\") in 1933, a collection of short stories, as well as other essays, notably \"Daglei\u00f0 \u00e1 fj\u00f6llum\" (\"A Day's Journey in the Mountains\") in 1937.\nLaxness's next novel was \"Sj\u00e1lfst\u00e6tt f\u00f3lk (Independent People)\" (1934 and 1935), which has been called \"one of the best books of the twentieth century.\"\nWhen \"Salka Valka\" was published in English in 1936 a reviewer at the \"Evening Standard\" wrote: \"No beauty is allowed to exist as ornamentation in its own right in these pages; but the work is replete from cover to cover with the beauty of its perfection.\"\nIn 1937 Laxness wrote the poem \"Ma\u00edstjarnan\" (\"The May Star\"), which was set to music by J\u00f3n \u00c1sgeirsson and became a socialist anthem.\nThis was followed by the four-part novel \"Heimslj\u00f3s\" (\"World Light\", 1937, 1938, 1939, and 1940), which is loosely based on the life of Magn\u00fas Hjaltason Magnusson, a minor Icelandic poet of the late 19th century. It has been \"consistently regarded by many critics as his most important work.\"\nLaxness also traveled to the Soviet Union in 1938 and wrote approvingly of the Soviet system and culture. He was present at the \"Trial of the Twenty-one\" and wrote about it in detail in his book \"Gerska \u00e6vint\u00fdri\u00f0\" (\"The Russian Adventure\").\nIn the late 1930s Laxness developed a unique spelling system that was closer to pronunciation than standard Icelandic. This characteristic of his writing is lost in translation.\n1940s.\nIn 1941 Laxness translated Hemingway's \"A Farewell to Arms\" into Icelandic, which caused controversy because of his use of neologisms. He continued to court controversy over the next few years through the publication of new editions of several Icelandic sagas using modern Icelandic rather than the Old Norse orthography that had become customary. Laxness and his publishing partners were taken to court after the publication of his edition of \"Hrafnkels saga\" in 1942. They were found guilty of violating a recent copyright law, but eventually acquitted when the copyright law was deemed a violation of the freedom of the press.\nLaxness's \"epic\" three-part work of historical fiction, \"\u00cdslandsklukkan\" (\"Iceland's Bell\"), was published between 1943 and 1946. It has been described as a novel of broad \"geographical and political scope\u2026 expressly concerned with national identity and the role literature plays in forming it\u2026 a tale of colonial exploitation and the obdurate will of a suffering people.\" \"Laxness\u2019s three-volume \"\u00cdslandsklukkan\" \u2026 is probably the most significant [Icelandic] novel of the 1940s.\"\nIn 1946 the English translation of \"Independent People\" was published as a Book of the Month Club selection in the U.S. and sold over 450,000 copies.\nIn 1945 Halld\u00f3r and his second wife, Au\u00f0ur Sveinsd\u00f3ttir, moved into Glj\u00fafrasteinn, a new house built in the countryside near Mosfellsb\u00e6r, where they started a family. In addition to her domestic duties, Au\u00f0ur assumed the roles of personal secretary and business manager.\nIn response to the establishment of a permanent U.S. military base in Keflav\u00edk, Halld\u00f3r wrote the satire \"At\u00f3mst\u00f6\u00f0in\" (\"The Atom Station\"), which may have contributed to a blacklisting of his novels in the U.S.The demoralization of the occupation period is described ... nowhere as dramatically as in Halld\u00f3r Kiljan Laxness' \"At\u00f3mst\u00f6\u00f0in\" (1948)... [where he portrays] postwar society in Reykjav\u00edk, completely torn from its moorings by the avalanche of foreign gold.\nFor its examination of modern Reykjav\u00edk, many critics and readers consider \"At\u00f3mst\u00f6\u00f0in\" the exemplary \"Reykjav\u00edk Novel.\"\n1950s.\nIn 1952 Laxness published \"Gerpla\" (\"The Happy Warriors\", \"Wayward Heroes\") a novel based on the \"F\u00f3stbr\u00e6\u00f0ra saga\". It deals with Vikings of around the year 1000.\n As a work of art \"Gerpla\" is an unusually powerful achievement. Laxness has not transposed his subject into a modern key; he has chosen to preserve a close link to the style of the ancient sagas.\nLaxness was awarded the Soviet-sponsored World Peace Council literary prize in 1952. [Laxness] ...was a mediator between the cultural figures of the USSR and Iceland, even in times when relations between Moscow and Reykjavik were in deep crisis due to the Cold War. The active position of the writer and his activities as chairman of The Society for Cultural Relations between Iceland and the Soviet Union (M\u00cdR) significantly contributed to the development of the bilateral relations between the Soviet Union and Iceland.\nA Swedish film adaptation of his novel \"Salka Valka\", directed by Arne Mattsson and filmed by Sven Nykvist, was released in 1954.\nIn 1955 Laxness was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature \"for his vivid epic power, which has renewed the great narrative art of Iceland\".\nHis chief literary works belong to the genre\u2026 [of] narrative prose fiction. In the history of our literature Laxness is mentioned beside Snorri Sturluson, the author of \"Njals saga\", and his place in world literature is among writers such as Cervantes, Zola, Tolstoy, and Hamsun\u2026 He is the most prolific and skillful essayist in Icelandic literature both old and new\u2026\nIn the presentation address for the Nobel, Elias Wess\u00e9n said:He is an excellent painter of Icelandic scenery and settings. Yet this is not what he has conceived of as his chief mission. \"Compassion is the source of the highest poetry. Compassion with Asta Sollilja on earth,\" he says in one of his best books\u2026 And a social passion underlies everything Halld\u00f3r Laxness has written. His personal championship of contemporary social and political questions is always very strong, sometimes so strong that it threatens to hamper the artistic side of his work. His safeguard then is the astringent humour which enables him to see even people he dislikes in a redeeming light, and which also permits him to gaze far down into the labyrinths of the human soul.\nIn his acceptance speech, Laxness said:\u2026 the moral principles [my grandmother] instilled in me: never to harm a living creature; throughout my life, to place the poor, the humble, the meek of this world above all others; never to forget those who were slighted or neglected or who had suffered injustice, because it was they who, above all others, deserved our love and respect\u2026\nBut if an Icelandic writer forgets his origins in the depths of the nation where the story lives; if he forgets his relationship and duty to the life that is hard-pressed, the life that my old grandmother taught me to revere in my heart and mind \u2014 then fame is of little worth; along with happiness that is gained from wealth.\nLaxness grew increasingly disenchanted with the Soviet bloc after the suppression of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.\nIn 1957 Halld\u00f3r and his wife went on a world tour, stopping in New York City, Washington, DC, Chicago, Madison, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Peking (Beijing), Bombay (Mumbai), Cairo, and Rome. \"In these and other countries he was able to appear as kind of a cultural ambassador for Iceland.\"\nOther major accomplishments in this decade were \"Brekkukotsann\u00e1ll\", (\"The Fish Can Sing\", 1957), and \"Parad\u00edsarheimt\", (\"Paradise Reclaimed\", 1960).\nLater years.\nIn the 1960s Laxness was very active in Icelandic theater. He wrote and produced plays, the most successful of which was \"The Pigeon Banquet\" (\"D\u00fafnaveislan\", 1966).\nIn 1968 Laxness published the \"visionary novel\" \"Kristnihald undir J\u00f6kli\" (\"Under the Glacier / Christianity at the Glacier\").\nLaxness was awarded the Sonning Prize in 1969.\nIn 1970 Laxness published an influential ecological essay, \"Herna\u00f0urinn gegn landinu\" (\"The War Against the Land\"). In the 1970s he published what he called \"essay novels\": \"Innansveitarkronika\" (\"A Parish Chronicle\", 1970) and \"Gu\u00f0sgjafa\u00feula\" (\"A Narration of God's Gifts\", 1972). Neither has been translated into English. Laxness continued to write essays and memoirs into the 1980s. As he grew older he began to suffer from Alzheimer's disease and eventually moved into a nursing home, where he died on 8 February 1998, at the age of 95.\nFamily and legacy.\nIn 1922, Laxness met M\u00e1lfr\u00ed\u00f0ur J\u00f3nsd\u00f3ttir (29 August 1896 \u2013 7 November 2003), who gave birth to his first daughter, Mar\u00eda, on 10 April 1923.\nIn 1930, he married Ingibj\u00f6rg Einarsd\u00f3ttir (3 May 1908 \u2013 22 January 1994), who gave birth to his son Einar on 9 August 1931. In 1940 they divorced.\nIn 1939, he met Au\u00f0ur Sveinsd\u00f3ttir (30 June 1918 \u2013 29 October 2012) at Laugavatn. Au\u00f0ur waited for Laxness and made sacrifices so he could focus on his work. They married in 1945 and moved into their home, Glj\u00fafrasteinn, in Mosfellsb\u00e6r later that year. Au\u00f0ur and Halld\u00f3r had two daughters: Sigr\u00ed\u00f0ur, born 26 May 1951, and Gu\u00f0n\u00fd, born 23 May 1954.\nHis daughter Gu\u00f0n\u00fd Halld\u00f3rsd\u00f3ttir is a filmmaker whose first work was the 1989 adaptation of \"Kristnihald undir j\u014dkli\" (\"Under the Glacier\"). In 1999 her adaptation of Laxness's story \"\u00dangfr\u00fain g\u00f3\u00f0a og H\u00fasi\u00f0\" (\"The Honour of the House\") was submitted for consideration for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Film. Gu\u00f0n\u00fd's son, Halld\u00f3r Laxness Halld\u00f3rsson, is a writer, actor, and poet. A grandchild, Au\u00f0ur J\u00f3nsd\u00f3ttir, is an author and playwright. Glj\u00fafrasteinn (Laxness's house, grounds, and personal effects) is now a museum operated by the government of Iceland.\nIn the 21st century, interest in Laxness in English-speaking countries increased after several of his novels were reissued and the first English-language publications of \"Iceland's Bell\" (2003) and \"The Great Weaver from Kashmir\" (2008). In 2016 a new English-language translation of \"Gerpla\" was published as \"Wayward Heroes\". A new English-language translation of \"Salka Valka\" was released in 2022 to widespread acclaim.\nHalld\u00f3r Gu\u00f0mundsson's book \"The Islander: A Biography of Halld\u00f3r Laxness\" won the Icelandic Literary Prize for best work of nonfiction in 2004.\nNumerous dramatic adaptations of Laxness's work have been staged in Iceland. In 2005 the Icelandic National Theatre premiered a play by \u00d3lafur Haukur S\u00edmonarson, \"Halld\u00f3r \u00ed Hollywood\" (\"Halld\u00f3r in Hollywood\"), about Laxness's time in the United States in the 1920s.\nA biennial Halld\u00f3r Laxness International Literary Prize is awarded at the Reykjav\u00edk International Literary Festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13897", "revid": "527862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13897", "title": "Hall and Woodhouse", "text": ""}
{"id": "13899", "revid": "1314106717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13899", "title": "Harmonic oscillator", "text": "Physical system that responds to a restoring force inversely proportional to displacement\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn classical mechanics, a harmonic oscillator is a system that, when displaced from its equilibrium position, experiences a restoring force \"F\" proportional to the displacement \"x\":\nformula_1\nwhere \"k\" is a positive constant.\nThe harmonic oscillator model is important in physics, because any mass subject to a force in stable equilibrium acts as a harmonic oscillator for small vibrations. Harmonic oscillators occur widely in nature and are exploited in many manmade devices, such as clocks and radio circuits.\nIf \"F\" is the only force acting on the system, the system is called a simple harmonic oscillator, and it undergoes simple harmonic motion: sinusoidal oscillations about the equilibrium point, with a constant amplitude and a constant frequency (which does not depend on the amplitude).\nIf a frictional force (damping) proportional to the velocity is also present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a damped oscillator. Depending on the friction coefficient, the system can:\nThe boundary solution between an underdamped oscillator and an overdamped oscillator occurs at a particular value of the friction coefficient and is called critically damped.\nIf an external time-dependent force is present, the harmonic oscillator is described as a \"driven oscillator\".\nMechanical examples include pendulums (with small angles of displacement), masses connected to springs, and acoustical systems. Other analogous systems include electrical harmonic oscillators such as RLC circuits. They are the source of virtually all sinusoidal vibrations and waves.\nSimple harmonic oscillator.\nA simple harmonic oscillator is an oscillator that is neither driven nor damped. It consists of a mass formula_2, which experiences a single force formula_3, which pulls the mass in the direction of the point formula_4 and depends only on the position formula_5 of the mass and a constant formula_6. Balance of forces (Newton's second law) for the system is\nformula_7\nSolving this differential equation, we find that the motion is described by the function\nformula_8\nwhere\nformula_9\nThe motion is periodic, repeating itself in a sinusoidal fashion with constant amplitude \"A\". In addition to its amplitude, the motion of a simple harmonic oscillator is characterized by its period formula_10, the time for a single oscillation or its frequency formula_11, the number of cycles per unit time. The position at a given time \"t\" also depends on the phase formula_12, which determines the starting point on the sine wave. The period and frequency are determined by the size of the mass \"m\" and the force constant \"k\", while the amplitude and phase are determined by the starting position and velocity.\nThe velocity and acceleration of a simple harmonic oscillator oscillate with the same frequency as the position, but with shifted phases. The velocity is maximal for zero displacement, while the acceleration is in the direction opposite to the displacement.\nThe potential energy stored in a simple harmonic oscillator at position \"x\" is\nformula_13\nDamped harmonic oscillator.\nIn real oscillators, friction, or damping, slows the motion of the system. Due to frictional force, the velocity decreases in proportion to the acting frictional force. While in a simple undriven harmonic oscillator the only force acting on the mass is the restoring force, in a damped harmonic oscillator there is in addition a frictional force which is always in a direction to oppose the motion. In many vibrating systems the frictional force \"F\"f can be modeled as being proportional to the velocity \"v\" of the object: \"F\"f = \u2212\"cv\", where \"c\" is called the \"viscous damping coefficient\".\nThe balance of forces (Newton's second law) for damped harmonic oscillators is then\nformula_14\nwhich can be rewritten into the form\nformula_15\nwhere\nThe value of the damping ratio \"\u03b6\" critically determines the behavior of the system. A damped harmonic oscillator can be:\nThe Q factor of a damped oscillator is defined as \nformula_20\n\"Q\" is related to the damping ratio by formula_21\nDriven harmonic oscillators.\nDriven harmonic oscillators are damped oscillators further affected by an externally applied force \"F\"(\"t\").\nNewton's second law takes the form\nformula_22\nIt is usually rewritten into the form\nformula_23\nThis equation can be solved exactly for any driving force, using the solutions \"z\"(\"t\") that satisfy the unforced equation\nformula_24\nand which can be expressed as damped sinusoidal oscillations:\nformula_25\nin the case where \"\u03b6\" \u2264 1. The amplitude \"A\" and phase \"\u03c6\" determine the behavior needed to match the initial conditions.\nStep input.\nIn the case \"\u03b6\" &lt; 1 and a unit step input with\u00a0\"x\"(0) = 0:\nformula_26\nthe solution is\nformula_27\nwith phase \"\u03c6\" given by\nformula_28\nThe time an oscillator needs to adapt to changed external conditions is of the order \"\u03c4\" = 1/(\"\u03b6\u03c9\"0). In physics, the adaptation is called relaxation, and \"\u03c4\" is called the relaxation time.\nIn electrical engineering, a multiple of \"\u03c4\" is called the \"settling time\", i.e. the time necessary to ensure the signal is within a fixed departure from final value, typically within 10%. The term \"overshoot\" refers to the extent the response maximum exceeds final value, and \"undershoot\" refers to the extent the response falls below final value for times following the response maximum.\nSinusoidal driving force.\nIn the case of a sinusoidal driving force:\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the driving amplitude, and formula_31 is the driving frequency for a sinusoidal driving mechanism. This type of system appears in AC-driven RLC circuits (resistor\u2013inductor\u2013capacitor) and driven spring systems having internal mechanical resistance or external air resistance.\nThe general solution is a sum of a transient solution that depends on initial conditions, and a steady state that is independent of initial conditions and depends only on the driving amplitude formula_30, driving frequency formula_31, undamped angular frequency formula_34, and the damping ratio formula_35.\nThe steady-state solution is proportional to the driving force with an induced phase change formula_36:\nformula_37\nwhere\nformula_38\nis the absolute value of the impedance or linear response function, and\nformula_39\nis the phase of the oscillation relative to the driving force. The phase value is usually taken to be between \u2212180\u00b0 and 0 (that is, it represents a phase lag, for both positive and negative values of the arctan argument).\nFor a particular driving frequency called the resonance, or resonant frequency formula_40, the amplitude (for a given formula_30) is maximal. This resonance effect only occurs when formula_42, i.e. for significantly underdamped systems. For strongly underdamped systems the value of the amplitude can become quite large near the resonant frequency.\nThe transient solutions are the same as the unforced (formula_43) damped harmonic oscillator and represent the system's response to other events that occurred previously.\nParametric oscillators.\nA parametric oscillator is a driven harmonic oscillator in which the drive energy is provided by varying the parameters of the oscillator, such as the damping or restoring force.\nA familiar example of parametric oscillation is \"pumping\" on a playground swing.\nA person on a moving swing can increase the amplitude of the swing's oscillations without any external drive force (pushes) being applied, by changing the moment of inertia of the swing by rocking back and forth (\"pumping\") or alternately standing and squatting, in rhythm with the swing's oscillations. The varying of the parameters drives the system. Examples of parameters that may be varied are its resonance frequency formula_31 and damping formula_45.\nParametric oscillators are used in many applications. The classical varactor parametric oscillator oscillates when the diode's capacitance is varied periodically. The circuit that varies the diode's capacitance is called the \"pump\" or \"driver\". In microwave electronics, waveguide/YAG based parametric oscillators operate in the same fashion. The designer varies a parameter periodically to induce oscillations.\nParametric oscillators have been developed as low-noise amplifiers, especially in the radio and microwave frequency range. Thermal noise is minimal, since a reactance (not a resistance) is varied. Another common use is frequency conversion, e.g., conversion from audio to radio frequencies. For example, the Optical parametric oscillator converts an input laser wave into two output waves of lower frequency (formula_46).\nParametric resonance occurs in a mechanical system when a system is parametrically excited and oscillates at one of its resonant frequencies. Parametric excitation differs from forcing, since the action appears as a time varying modification on a system parameter. This effect is different from regular resonance because it exhibits the instability phenomenon.\nUniversal oscillator equation.\nThe equation \nformula_47\nis known as the universal oscillator equation, since all second-order linear oscillatory systems can be reduced to this form. This is done through nondimensionalization.\nIf the forcing function is \"f\"(\"t\") = cos(\"\u03c9t\") = cos(\"\u03c9tc\u03c4\") = cos(\"\u03c9\u03c4\"), where \"\u03c9\" = \"\u03c9t\"\"c\", the equation becomes\nformula_48\nThe solution to this differential equation contains two parts: the \"transient\" and the \"steady-state\".\nTransient solution.\nThe solution based on solving the ordinary differential equation is for arbitrary constants \"c\"1 and \"c\"2\nformula_49\nThe transient solution is independent of the forcing function.\nSteady-state solution.\nApply the \"complex variables method\" by solving the auxiliary equation below and then finding the real part of its solution:\nformula_50\nSupposing the solution is of the form\nformula_51\nIts derivatives from zeroth to second order are\nformula_52\nSubstituting these quantities into the differential equation gives\nformula_53\nDividing by the exponential term on the left results in\nformula_54\nEquating the real and imaginary parts results in two independent equations\nformula_55\nAmplitude part.\nSquaring both equations and adding them together gives\nformula_56\nTherefore,\nformula_57\nCompare this result with the theory section on resonance, as well as the \"magnitude part\" of the RLC circuit. This amplitude function is particularly important in the analysis and understanding of the frequency response of second-order systems.\nPhase part.\nTo solve for \"\u03c6\", divide both equations to get\nformula_58\nThis phase function is particularly important in the analysis and understanding of the frequency response of second-order systems.\nFull solution.\nCombining the amplitude and phase portions results in the steady-state solution\nformula_59\nThe solution of original universal oscillator equation is a superposition (sum) of the transient and steady-state solutions:\nformula_60\nEquivalent systems.\nHarmonic oscillators occurring in a number of areas of engineering are equivalent in the sense that their mathematical models are identical (see universal oscillator equation above). Below is a table showing analogous quantities in four harmonic oscillator systems in mechanics and electronics. If analogous parameters on the same line in the table are given numerically equal values, the behavior of the oscillators\u00a0\u2013 their output waveform, resonant frequency, damping factor, etc.\u00a0\u2013 are the same.\nApplication to a conservative force.\nThe problem of the simple harmonic oscillator occurs frequently in physics, because a mass at equilibrium under the influence of any conservative force, in the limit of small motions, behaves as a simple harmonic oscillator.\nA conservative force is one that is associated with a potential energy. The potential-energy function of a harmonic oscillator is\nformula_61\nGiven an arbitrary potential-energy function formula_62, one can do a Taylor expansion in terms of formula_5 around an energy minimum (formula_64) to model the behavior of small perturbations from equilibrium.\nformula_65\nBecause formula_66 is a minimum, the first derivative evaluated at formula_67 must be zero, so the linear term drops out:\nformula_68\nThe constant term \"V\"(\"x\"0) is arbitrary and thus may be dropped, and a coordinate transformation allows the form of the simple harmonic oscillator to be retrieved:\nformula_69\nThus, given an arbitrary potential-energy function formula_62 with a non-vanishing second derivative, one can use the solution to the simple harmonic oscillator to provide an approximate solution for small perturbations around the equilibrium point.\nExamples.\nSimple pendulum.\nAssuming no damping, the differential equation governing a simple pendulum of length formula_71, where formula_72 is the local acceleration of gravity, is\nformula_73\nIf the maximal displacement of the pendulum is small, we can use the approximation formula_74 and instead consider the equation\nformula_75\nThe general solution to this differential equation is\nformula_76\nwhere formula_77 and formula_36 are constants that depend on the initial conditions.\nUsing as initial conditions formula_79 and formula_80, the solution is given by\nformula_81\nwhere formula_82 is the largest angle attained by the pendulum (that is, formula_82 is the amplitude of the pendulum). The period, the time for one complete oscillation, is given by the expression\nformula_84\nwhich is a good approximation of the actual period when formula_82 is small. Notice that in this approximation the period formula_86 is independent of the amplitude formula_82. In the above equation, formula_31 represents the angular frequency.\nSpring/mass system.\nWhen a spring is stretched or compressed by a mass, the spring develops a restoring force. Hooke's law gives the relationship of the force exerted by the spring when the spring is compressed or stretched a certain length:\nformula_89\nwhere \"F\" is the force, \"k\" is the spring constant, and \"x\" is the displacement of the mass with respect to the equilibrium position. The minus sign in the equation indicates that the force exerted by the spring always acts in a direction that is opposite to the displacement (i.e. the force always acts towards the zero position), and so prevents the mass from flying off to infinity.\nBy using either force balance or an energy method, it can be readily shown that the motion of this system is given by the following differential equation:\nformula_90\nthe latter being Newton's second law of motion.\nIf the initial displacement is \"A\", and there is no initial velocity, the solution of this equation is given by\nformula_91\nGiven an ideal massless spring, formula_2 is the mass on the end of the spring. If the spring itself has mass, its effective mass must be included in formula_2.\nEnergy variation in the spring\u2013damping system.\nIn terms of energy, all systems have two types of energy: potential energy and kinetic energy. When a spring is stretched or compressed, it stores elastic potential energy, which is then transferred into kinetic energy. The potential energy within a spring is determined by the equation formula_94\nWhen the spring is stretched or compressed, kinetic energy of the mass gets converted into potential energy of the spring. By conservation of energy, assuming the datum is defined at the equilibrium position, when the spring reaches its maximal potential energy, the kinetic energy of the mass is zero. When the spring is released, it tries to return to equilibrium, and all its potential energy converts to kinetic energy of the mass.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13901", "revid": "50996287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13901", "title": "Heathers", "text": "1988 film by Michael Lehmann\nHeathers is a 1989 American teen satirical black comedy crime film written by Daniel Waters and directed by Michael Lehmann, in both of their respective film debuts. The film stars Winona Ryder, Christian Slater, Shannen Doherty, Lisanne Falk, Kim Walker, and Penelope Milford. The plot revolves around four teenage girls\u2014three of whom are named Heather\u2014in a clique at an Ohio high school, one of whose lives is disrupted by the arrival of a misanthrope intent on murdering the popular students and staging their deaths as suicides.\nWaters wrote \"Heathers\" as a spec script and originally wanted Stanley Kubrick to direct the film, out of admiration for Kubrick's own black comedy film \"Dr. Strangelove\". Waters intended the film to contrast the optimistic teen movies of the era, particularly those written by John Hughes, by presenting a cynical depiction of high school imbued with dark satire.\nFilmed in Los Angeles in July of 1988, \"Heathers\" premiered in Milan, Italy, in the fall of 1988 before making its way to the Sundance Film Festival on January 21, 1989, then New World Pictures theatrically released the film in the United States on March 31, 1989. It went on to win the Independent Spirit Award for Best First Feature, and for his screenplay, Waters received the Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. It has since become popular and is regarded in polls as one of the greatest coming-of-age films of all time. \"Heathers\" has since been adapted into a and a television reboot.\nPlot.\nAt Westerburg High School, in Sherwood, Ohio, Veronica Sawyer is part of a popular-but-feared clique that includes three wealthy and beautiful girls with the same first name: Heather Duke, Heather McNamara, and the ruthless queen bee, Heather Chandler. Tired of the clique abusing its power, Veronica longs for her old life with her kinder but less popular friends. She becomes fascinated with new student Jason \"J.D.\" Dean after he pulls out a gun and fires blanks to scare football-player bullies, Kurt and Ram. Outsider J.D., whose mother committed suicide, has a strained relationship with his explosives-obsessed demolition mogul father.\nVeronica goes with Chandler to a frat party at Remington University, where she refuses to have sex with one member, unlike Chandler, who is coerced into performing fellatio. When Veronica drunkenly vomits in front of Chandler, Chandler vows to destroy Veronica's reputation in retaliation. Later, J.D. breaks into Veronica's house through her bedroom window, and they have sex, expressing to each other their mutual hatred of Chandler's tyranny after.\nThe next morning, Veronica and J.D. break into Chandler's house, planning revenge by using a fake hangover cure to make Chandler vomit. Veronica mixes orange juice and milk into a mug, but mistakenly serves Chandler a mug full of drain cleaner poured by J.D., which kills her. Veronica is horrified by the accident, but J.D. urges her to forge a dramatic suicide note in Chandler's handwriting. The community regards Chandler's apparent suicide as a tragic decision made by a troubled teenager, making her even more respected in death than in life. Duke uses the attention surrounding Chandler's death to gain popularity by going to many different news stations, feeling the need to be the clique's new leader.\nMcNamara later convinces Veronica to go with her, Kurt, and Ram on a double date. J.D. finds the four teens that evening in a field, and Veronica leaves with him as Kurt passes out, while Ram rapes McNamara. The boys spread a false rumor about Veronica performing oral sex on them, ruining her reputation. J.D. proposes that he and Veronica lure the boys into the woods, shoot them with tranquilizers, and humiliate them by staging the scene to look like they were lovers participating in a suicide pact.\nIn the forest, J.D. shoots Ram, but Veronica's shot misses Kurt, who runs away. J.D. chases Kurt back toward Veronica, who, realizing that the bullets are in fact lethal, fatally shoots him in a panic. At their funeral, the boys are made into martyrs to homophobia. Realizing that J.D. is intentionally murdering students he dislikes, Veronica is horrified and breaks up with him.\nJ.D. blackmails Duke into getting every student to sign a petition that, unbeknownst to her, is intended to act as a mass suicide note. Martha, an overweight girl who is a frequent target of bullying, attempts to kill herself by walking into traffic. She survives but is badly injured and mocked by her peers who believe she was attempting to copy the popular kids. McNamara calls a radio show to discuss her depression. Duke tells the entire school about the radio call, leading to McNamara being bullied. McNamara attempts suicide by overdosing in the girls' bathroom, but Veronica intervenes.\nVeronica returns home, where her parents inform her that J.D. stopped by, proclaiming that he is worried she will attempt suicide. Realizing that J.D. plans to kill her, she fakes her own suicide by hanging. J.D. finds her and, assuming she is dead, gives a monologue revealing his plan to blow up the school pep rally and frame it as a suicide pact.\nJ.D. plants dynamite in the gymnasium equipped with remote detonators. He proceeds to the school's boiler room to place dynamite with a countdown detonator. Veronica confronts J.D. in the boiler room and shoots him, resulting in him accidentally cutting the wires to the detonator with his switchblade. Veronica goes outside, and J.D. follows her with a bomb strapped to his chest. He offers a personal eulogy and detonates the bomb, killing himself. As students and faculty rush to see what happened, Veronica walks back inside, disheveled and covered in soot from the explosion. She confronts and condemns Duke, then invites Martha to spend prom night watching movies together.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Winona Ryder as Veronica Sawyer\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nDaniel Waters began writing the screenplay in spring of 1986, while he was working at a video store. He wanted the film to be directed by Stanley Kubrick, not only out of admiration for him, but also from a perception that \"Kubrick was the only person that could get away with a three-hour film\". The cafeteria scene near the start of \"Heathers\" was written as a homage to the barracks scene which opens Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\". After a number of failed attempts to get the script to Kubrick, Waters approached director Michael Lehmann, whom he met through a mutual friend. Lehmann agreed to helm the film with producer Denise Di Novi.\nIn the original version of the script, J.D. successfully blows up Westerburg High, and the final scene features a surreal prom gathering of all the students in heaven. Executives at New World Pictures agreed to finance the film, but they disliked the dark ending and insisted that it be changed.\nSome reviewers have discussed similarities between \"Heathers\" and \"Massacre at Central High\", a low-budget 1976 film. Daniel Waters has stated that he had not seen \"Massacre at Central High\" at the time he wrote \"Heathers\" but that he had read a review of it in a Danny Peary book about cult movies and that the earlier film may have been \"rattling around somewhere in my subconscious\".\nCasting.\nMany actors and actresses turned down the project because of its dark subject matter. Early choices for Veronica were Justine Bateman and Jennifer Connelly. Winona Ryder, who was 16 at the time of filming and badly wanted the part, begged Waters to cast her as Veronica, even offering to work for free. Waters at first did not think Ryder was pretty enough, and Ryder herself commented that \"at the time, I didn't look that different from my character in \"Beetlejuice\". I was very pale. I had blue-black dyed hair. I went to Macy's at the Beverly Center and had them do a makeover on me.\"\nRyder's agent was so opposed to her pursuing the role that she got down on her hands and knees to beg Ryder not to take it, warning her that it would ruin her career. Eventually, she was given the role. Brad Pitt read for the role of J.D. but was rejected. Christian Slater reports throwing a \"big tantrum\" and tossing his script in the trash after assuming he'd bombed his audition. He was signed to play J.D. shortly after Ryder was cast, stating later that he channeled Jack Nicholson in the film.\nHeather Graham, then 17, was offered the part of Heather Chandler but turned it down due to her parents' disapproval of the film. Kim Walker, who was dating Slater at the time, was offered the role instead. Lisanne Falk, 23 years old at the time, lied and said she was in her late teens during the audition. It was only after she was cast that she revealed her true age. 17-year-old Shannen Doherty wanted the role of Veronica, but Ryder had been cast, so the producers asked her to audition for Heather Chandler. Doherty was more interested in playing Heather Duke and ended up giving an \"amazing\" reading as Duke, which secured her the part. The producers wanted her to dye her hair blonde to match the other \"Heathers\", but Doherty refused, so they compromised on her having red hair.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography took place over 33 days beginning in July 1988, on a budget of $3 million. Although set in Ohio, filming was done entirely in Los Angeles. \"Westerburg High School\" is an amalgamation of Corvallis High School, now Bridges Academy, in Studio City, Verdugo Hills High School in Tujunga, and John Adams Middle School in Santa Monica. The gymnasium scenes were shot at Verdugo Hills High, and the climactic scene on the stairs was filmed outside John Adams Middle School. The funeral scenes were filmed at Church of the Angels in Pasadena, California, a location also used in \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Just Married\".\nMichael Lehmann has called Doherty \"a bit of a handful\" on set, in part because she objected to the swearing in the script and refused to say some of the more explicit lines. Falk stated that Doherty \"didn't have much of a sense of humor, and she took herself a little seriously\", and Di Novi said: \"I don't think Shannen really got what \"Heathers\" was. And that worked for us. She made that character real.\" When the cast first viewed the film, Doherty ran out crying because she realized the film was a dark comedy and not the drama she was expecting.\nSoundtrack.\nThe film uses two versions of the song \"Que Sera, Sera\", the first by singer Syd Straw and another over the end credits by Sly and the Family Stone. On the film's DVD commentary, Di Novi mentions that the filmmakers wanted to use the original Doris Day version of the song, but Day would not lend her name to any project using profanity.\nThe song \"Teenage Suicide (Don't Do It)\" by the fictional band Big Fun was written and produced for the film by musician Don Dixon, and performed by the ad hoc group \"Big Fun\", which consisted of Dixon, Mitch Easter, Angie Carlson, and Marti Jones. The song is included on Dixon's 1992 greatest hits album \"(If) I'm a Ham, Well You're a Sausage\".\nThe film's electronic score was composed and performed by David Newman, and a soundtrack CD was subsequently released.\nRelease.\nBox office.\n\"Heathers\" premiered in Milan, Italy, in the fall of 1988, then was screened at the Sundance Film Festival on January 21, 1989, and was released to the U.S. public in March 1989, at which time New World Pictures was going bankrupt. The film was considered a flop when it was released, earning $177,247 in its opening weekend and ultimately grossing $1.1 million in the United States over five weeks.\nHome media.\nNew World Video released \"Heathers\" on VHS and LaserDisc in 1989. It developed a cult following after being unsuccessful at the box office. It was released again on LaserDisc in September 1996, as a widescreen edition digitally transferred from Trans Atlantic Entertainment's interpositive print under the supervision of cinematographer Francis Kenny. The sound was mastered from the magnetic sound elements. The film was released on DVD in March 1999, in a barebones edition.\nIn 2001, a multi-region special edition THX-certified DVD was released from Anchor Bay Entertainment in Dolby Digital 5.1. The DVD contained an audio commentary with director Michael Lehmann, producer Denise Di Novi and writer Daniel Waters, as well as a 30-minute documentary titled \"Swatch Dogs and Diet Cokeheads\", featuring interviews with Ryder, Slater, Doherty, Falk, Lehmann, Waters, Di Novi, director of photography Francis Kenny, and editor Norman Hollyn. The DVD was released in the United States, Canada, Australia, and Europe, and achieved high sales. Each release included a different front cover featuring Veronica, J.D., Chandler, Duke, and McNamara.\nThe Anchor Bay DVD was also released in a \"Limited Edition Tin Set\" of 15,000 copies. The Tin Set included a theatrical trailer, screenplay excerpt, original ending, biographies, 10-page full-color fold-out with photos and liner notes, an 8-inch \"Heathers Rules!\" ruler, and a 48-page full-color yearbook style booklet with rare photos. The film was then re-released on Blu-ray by Image Entertainment in 2011 as a barebones edition, two years after Anchor Bay.\nIn July 2008, a new 20th anniversary special edition DVD set was released by Anchor Bay to coincide with the DVD of writer Waters' new film \"Sex and Death 101\". The DVD features a new documentary, \"Return to Westerburg High\". In November 2008, Anchor Bay released a Blu-ray with all the special features from the 20th anniversary DVD and a soundtrack in Dolby TrueHD 5.1.\nArrow Films released \"Heathers\" in the United Kingdom on Ultra HD Blu-ray on August 5, 2018, and in cinemas on September 10, based on a new 4K restoration of the film. In November 2019, Image Entertainment released a 30th anniversary steelbook edition on Blu-ray. This release did not utilize Arrow Films' 4K restoration and featured new and previous special features.\nCritical reception.\nInitial reviews.\nWriting in April 1989 for \"The Washington Post\", journalist Desson Thomson wrote that it \"may be the nastiest, cruelest fun you can have without actually having to study law or gird leather products. If movies were food, \"Heathers\" would be a cynic's chocolate binge.\" \"Chicago Sun-Times\" film critic Roger Ebert gave the film 2.5 stars out of 4 and wrote that \"Heathers\" \"is a morbid comedy about peer pressure in high school, about teenage suicide and about the deadliness of cliques that not only exclude but also maim and kill.\" While conceding its ability to provoke thought and shock, Ebert questioned how the mixed sensibility as a dark murder comedy and \"cynical morality play\" led to difficulty in understanding its point of view, while remarking that, \"Adulthood could be defined as the process of learning to be shocked by things that do not shock teenagers, but that is not a notion that has occurred to Lehmann.\"\nRetrospective responses.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: \"Dark, cynical, and subversive, \"Heathers\" gently applies a chainsaw to the conventions of the high school movie\u2014changing the game for teen comedies to follow.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 72 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating .\nAcademics have likened \"Heathers\" to other films popular during the 1980s and early 1990s which characterized domestic youth narratives as part and parcel of the \"culture war\".\nTeen film scholar Timothy Shary posits \"Heathers\" as influential for the subsequent satirical engagement with the trope of popularity: \"Heathers turns the otherwise serious high school business of popularity into a farce, and that is exactly what films of the '90s continued to do with the roles of popular female school characters. \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" (1992), \"Clueless\" (1995), \"Jawbreaker\" and \"Election\" (both 1999) all feature popular school girls who are at once dedicated to maintaining their accepted image but who struggle (or fail) to recognize the contradictions and ironies of their position. The films thereby become parodies of popularity, although only \"Clueless\" and \"Election\" offer the same wide social scope as \"Heathers\".\"\nWaters created a specific set of slang and style of speech for the film, wanting to ensure that the language in the film would have \"timeless\" quality instead of just reflecting teen slang at the time. As of 2014[ [update]], the film was among the most cited in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nLegacy and influence.\nScholars have situated \"Heathers\" within late-20th-century \"culture war\" depictions of youth, noting its role in reframing popularity as an object of satire rather than aspiration. The film's decidedly stylized use of contemporaneous slang has also been recognized as a factor influencing the film's lasting cultural footprint; it is among the most frequently cited films in the Oxford English Dictionary for first attestations of lines and idioms.\nRelated projects.\nPossible film sequel.\nOn June 2, 2009, \"Entertainment Weekly\" reported that Ryder had claimed that there would be a sequel to the film, titled \"Heathers 2\", with Slater coming back \"as a kind of Obi-Wan character\". However, Lehmann denied development of a sequel, saying, \"Winona's been talking about this for years\u2014she brings it up every once in a while and Dan Waters and I will joke about it, but as far as I know there's no script and no plans to do the sequel.\" In 2024, Daniel Waters revealed that he had concocted a story for the sequel where Veronica becomes a page for a presidential candidate named Heather, who would have been played by Meryl Streep. The film would have ended with Veronica assassinating her and getting away with it.\nMusical.\nIn 2010, \"Heathers\" was adapted into a stage musical directed by Andy Fickman. Fickman also worked on the musical \"Reefer Madness\", a parody of the anti-cannabis movie of the same name which was turned into a feature film. \"Heathers: The Musical\", which opens with a number depicting Veronica's acceptance into the Heathers' clique, received several readings in workshops in Los Angeles and a three-show concert presentation at Joe's Pub in New York City on September 13\u201314, 2010. The cast of the Joe's Pub concert included Annaleigh Ashford as Veronica, Jenna Leigh Green as Heather Chandler, and Jeremy Jordan as J.D.\nThe musical played at Off-Broadway's New World Stages with performances beginning March 15, 2014, and an opening night on March 31. The original cast of the Off-Broadway production included Barrett Wilbert Weed as Veronica Sawyer, Jessica Keenan Wynn as Heather Chandler, Ryan McCartan as J.D., Alice Lee as Heather Duke, and Elle McLemore as Heather McNamara. It closed on August 4, 2014.\nAn Off West End production of \"Heathers\", directed by Andy Fickman, played at the Other Palace in London with performances between June 19 and August 4, 2018. Its cast included Carrie Hope Fletcher as Veronica Sawyer, Jodie Steele as Heather Chandler, Jamie Muscato as J.D., T'Shan Williams as Heather Duke, and Sophie Isaacs as Heather McNamara. It transferred to the West End in September 2018, playing in Theatre Royal Haymarket, London. A high school production of the musical is the focus of the \"\" episode of \"Riverdale\".\nIn 2021, \"Heathers\" returned for a limited run at the Haymarket with Christina Bennington playing Veronica Sawyer and Jordan Luke Gage as J.D. The three Heathers were played by Jodie Steele (Heather Chandler), Bobbi Little (Heather Duke), and Frances Mayli McCann (Heather McNamara). It then went on to play at The Other Palace until 3 September 2023.\nIn 2025, it was announced that the Off-Broadway production of \"Heathers\" would play June-September at New World Stages in Manhattan, New York.\nTelevision adaptation.\nIn March 2016, TV Land ordered a pilot script for an anthology dark comedy series, set in the present day, with a very different Veronica Sawyer dealing with a very different but equally vicious group of Heathers. The series was written by Jason Micallef and Tom Rosenberg, and Gary Lucchesi was the executive producer In January 2017, the \"Heathers\" TV show was ordered to Series at TV Land. Shannen Doherty, the movie's Heather Duke, makes a cameo appearance in the pilot.\nCoverage at the time framed the postponement in relation to U.S. school-shooting sensitivities, with network statements citing the Parkland context in explaining the scheduling decision.\nIn March 2017, it was reported that the series was moved to the then upcoming Paramount Network. Selma Blair has a recurring role in the series. A trailer for the rebooted series was released in August 2017. The series stars Grace Victoria Cox as Veronica Sawyer, James Scully as J.D., Melanie Field as Heather Chandler, Brendan Scannell as Heather Duke, Jasmine Mathews as Heather McNamara, Birgundi Baker as Lizzy, and Cameron Gellman as Kurt. The series was set to premiere on March 7, 2018. On February 28, 2018, it was announced that the premiere would be delayed in light of the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13902", "revid": "50702893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13902", "title": "Federation of Expellees", "text": "German organization for expelled ethnic Germans\nThe Federation of Expellees (; BdV) is a non-profit organization formed in West Germany on 27 October 1957 to represent the interests of German nationals of all ethnicities and foreign ethnic Germans and their families (usually naturalised as German nationals after 1949) who either fled their homes in parts of Central and Eastern Europe, or were forcibly expelled following World War II.\nSince 2014 the president of the Federation has been Bernd Fabritius, who arrived in West Germany in 1984 as a Transylvanian Saxon refugee from Agnita, Socialist Republic of Romania, and who has since been elected as a Christian Social Union in Bavaria Member of the Bundestag.\nHistory.\nIt is estimated that in the aftermath of World War II between 13 and 16 million ethnic Germans fled or were expelled from parts of Central and Eastern Europe, including the former eastern territories of Germany (parts of present-day Poland), the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Hungary, Croatia, Serbia (mostly from the Vojvodina region), the Kaliningrad Oblast of (now) Russia, hitherto USSR (in the immediate aftermath of the Second World War) and prior to this, the northern part of East Prussia, Lithuania, Romania and other East European countries.\nCharter of the German Expellees.\nThe Charter of the German Expellees () of 5 August 1950, announced their belief in requiring that \"the right to the homeland is recognized and carried out as one of the fundamental rights of mankind given by God\", while renouncing revenge and retaliation in the face of the \"unending suffering\" (\"unendliche Leid\") of the previous decade, and supporting the unified effort to rebuild Germany and Europe.\nThe charter has been criticised for avoiding mentioning Nazi atrocities of Second World War and Germans who were forced to emigrate due to Nazi repressions. Critics argue that the Charter presents the history of German people as starting from the expulsions, while ignoring events like the Holocaust.\nProfessor Micha Brumlik pointed out that one third of signatories were former devoted Nazis and many actively helped in realisation of Hitler's goals.\nRalph Giordano wrote in \"Hamburger Abendblatt\" \"the Charter doesn't contain a word about Hitler, Auschwitz and Buchenwald. Not to mention any sign of apologies for the suffering of the murdered people\", \"avoids mentioning the reasons for expulsions\" and called the document \"example of German art of crowding out the truth (...) The fact that the charter completely ignores the reasons for the expulsions deprives it of any value\".\nGerman laws concerning the expellees.\nBetween 1953, when the Federal Expellee Law was passed, and 1991, the West German government passed several laws dealing with German expellees. The most notable of these is the \"Law of Return\" which granted German citizenship to any ethnic German. Several additions were later made to these laws.\nThe German Law of Return declared refugee status to be inheritable. According to the Federal Expellee Law, \"the spouse and the descendants\" of an expellee are to be treated as if they were expellees themselves, regardless of whether they had been personally displaced. The Federation of Expellees has steadily lobbied to preserve the inheritability clause.\nFormation of the Federation.\nThe Federation of Expellees was formed on 27 October 1957 in West Germany. Before its founding, the \"Bund der Heimatvertriebenen\" (League of Expellees and Deprived of Rights), formed in 1950, represented the interests of displaced German expellees. Intriguingly, in its first few years, the league was more successful in West Germany than in East Germany.\nGerman reunification.\nPrevious West German governments, especially those led by the Christian Democratic Union, had shown more rhetorical support for the territorial claims made on behalf of German refugees and expellees. Although the Social Democrats showed strong support for the expellees, especially under Kurt Schumacher and Erich Ollenhauer, Social Democrats in more recent decades have generally been less supportive \u2013 and it was under Willy Brandt that West Germany recognized the Oder-Neisse line as the eastern German border with Poland under his policy of Ostpolitik. In reality, accepting the internationally recognized boundary made it more possible for eastern Germans to visit their lost homelands.\nIn 1989\u20131990 the West German government realized they had an opportunity to reunify the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet created German Democratic Republic. But they believed that if this were to be achieved, it had to be done quickly. One of the potential complications was the claim to the historical eastern territories of Germany; unless this was renounced, some foreign governments might not agree to German reunification. The West German government under the CDU accepted the 1990 Treaty on the Final Settlement With Respect to Germany (Two Plus Four Agreement), which officially re-established the sovereignty of both German states. A condition of this agreement was that Germany accept the post-World War II frontiers. Upon reunification in 1990, the constitution was amended to state that Germany's territory had reached its full extent. Article 146 was amended so that Article 23 of the current constitution could be used for reunification. Once the five \"reestablished federal states\" in the east had been united with the west, the Basic Law was amended again to show that \"there were no other parts of Germany, which existed outside of the unified territory\", that had not acceded.\n2000s.\nIn 2000 the Federation of Expellees also initiated the formation of the Center Against Expulsions (). Chairwoman of this Center is Erika Steinbach, who headed it together with former SPD politician Prof. Dr. Peter Glotz (died 2005).\nRecently Erika Steinbach, the chair of the Federation of Expellees, has rejected any compensation claims. The vice president of the Federation Rudi Pawelka is however a chairman of the supervisory board of the Prussian Trust.\nA European organisation for expellees has been formed \u2014 EUFV \u2014 headquartered in Trieste, Italy. \nOrganization.\nThe expellees are organized in 21 regional associations \"(Landsmannschaften)\", according to the areas of origin of its members, 16 state organizations \"(Landesverb\u00e4nde)\" according to their current residence, and 5 associate member organizations. It is the single representative federation for the approximately 15 million Germans who after fleeing, being expelled, evacuated or emigrating, found refuge in the Federal Republic of Germany. The Federation claims to have 1.3\u00a0million members (including non-displaced persons), and to be a political force of some influence in Germany. This figure was disputed in January 2010 by the German news service DDP, which reported an actual membership of 550,000. According to Erika Steinbach only 100,000 of the members contribute financially.\nThe federation helps its members to integrate into German society. Many of the members assist the societies of their place of birth.\nPresidents.\nFrom 1959 to 1964, the first president of the Federation was Hans Kr\u00fcger, a former Nazi judge and activist. After the war Kr\u00fcger was a West German politician of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), was a member of parliament from 1957 to 1965, served as Federal Minister for Displaced Persons, Refugees and War Victims for 4 months in 1963\u201364 in the First Cabinet of Ludwig Erhard. He stepped down from cabinet and other positions in 1964 amid controversy about his war-time background. Kr\u00fcger was succeeded as president by Wenzel Jaksch in 1964 who held the position until his untimely death in 1966.\nCriticism.\nWhen in government, both CDU and SPD have tended to favor improved relations with Central and Eastern Europe, even when this conflicts with the interests of the displaced people. The issue of the eastern border and the return of the \"Heimatvertriebene\" to their ancestral homes are matters which the current German government, German constitutional arrangements and German treaty obligations have virtually closed.\nThe refugees' claims were unanimously rejected by the affected countries and became a source of mistrust between Germany, Poland and the Czech Republic. These governments argue that the expulsion of Germans and related border changes were not enacted by the Polish or Czech governments, but rather were ordered by the Potsdam Conference. Furthermore, the nationalization of private property by Poland's former communist government did not apply only to Germans but was enforced on all people, regardless of ethnic background. A further complication is that many of the current Polish population in historical eastern Germany are themselves expellees (or descendants of expellees) who, totaling 1.6 million, were driven from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union and were forced to leave their homes and property behind as well.\nSome German-speakers had been settled in occupied Poland after 1939 by the Nazis. Treating these ex-colonists as expellees under German law, Erika Steinbach included, adds to the controversy. However, the vast majority of expelled Germans were descended from families who had lived in Eastern Europe for many centuries, while the majority of German colonists in Nazi-occupied Poland were Baltic and other East European Germans themselves displaced by the Nazi-Soviet population transfers.\nNazi background.\nDuring the Cold War, the Federation was accused by the GDR and Poland of continuing Nazi ideology. A 2012 study confirmed that eleven of the thirteen members of the first council of the Federation \"...were deeply involved in the Nazi regime.\"\nThe Polish daily newspaper \"Rzeczpospolita\" reported that during BdV meetings in 2003, publications expressing anti-Polish sentiment and accusing Poles of ethnic cleansing towards ethnic Germans were available for sale, as were recordings of Waffen SS marches on compact discs, including songs glorifying the Invasion of Poland. Also, far right organizations openly distributed their materials at BdV meetings. While the BdV officially denied involvement in this, no steps were taken to address the concerns raised.\nIn February 2009, the Polish newspaper \"Polska\" alleged that over one third of the Federation top officials were former Nazi activists, and based this on a 2006 article published by the German magazine \"Der Spiegel\". The German paper \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\", later revealed that \"Der Spiegel\" had written this not in respect to the Federation of Expellees, but instead about a previous organization that was dissolved in 1957.\nIn 2019, the Federation's Vice President Siegbert Ortmann acknowledged that several members of the organization had been former Nazis, as well that some members had expressed support for far-right parties like NPD and AfD, he also reiterated that the organization would not cooperate with AfD.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13904", "revid": "16396443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13904", "title": "History of Albania", "text": "During classical antiquity, Albania was home to several Illyrian tribes such as the Albanoi, Ardiaei, Bylliones, Dassaretii, Enchele, Labeatae, Taulantii, Parthini, Penestae, Amantes, and many others, but also Bryges and Epirote tribes, as well as several Greek colonies established on the Illyrian coast in cooperation with the local Illyrians, notably Epidamnos-Dyrrhachium and Apollonia.\nThe Enchele's polity was the earliest to emerge and centered in Albania. Also the earliest known Illyrian king, Bardylis, emerged in what is now Albania around 400 BC, aiming to make Illyria a regional power interfering with Macedon. He united many southern Illyrian tribes under his realm and defeated the Macedonians and Molossians several times, expanding his dominion over Upper Macedonia and Lynkestis. Before the Rise of Macedon Illyrians were the dominant power in the region. The kingdom of the Taulantii under Glaukias' rule was based in central Albania and dominated southern Illyrian affairs in the late 4th century BC, exerting great influence on the Epirote state through the close ties with the Molossian king Pyrrhus. Under the Ardiaei the greatest known Illyrian kingdom emerged in the 3rd century BC encompassing also northern Albania in its core territory. It became a formidable power both on land and sea by assembling a great army and fleet, and directly ruling over a large area made up of different Illyrian tribes and cities that stretched from the Neretva River in the north to the borders of Epirus in the south, while its influence extended throughout Epirus and down into Acarnania. The dominant power of the Illyrian kingdom in the region ceased after the Illyrian defeat in the Illyro-Roman Wars (229\u2013168 BC). The last known \"King of the Illyrians\" was Gentius, of the Labeatae tribe.\nIn the early 2nd century BC, the area was annexed by Rome and became part of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia, Macedonia and Moesia Superior. Afterwards, the territory remained under Roman and Byzantine control until the Slavic migrations of the 7th century. It was integrated into the Bulgarian Empire in the 9th century.\nIn the Middle Ages, the Principality of Arb\u00ebr and a Sicilian union known as the medieval Kingdom of Albania were established. Some areas became part of the Venetian and later Serbian Empire. Between the mid-14th and the late 15th centuries, most of modern-day Albania was dominated by Albanian principalities, when the Albanian principalities fell to the rapid invasion of the Ottoman Empire. Albania remained under Ottoman control as part of the province of Rumelia until 1912, with some interruptions during the 18th and 19th century with the establishment of autonomy-minded Albanian lords. The first independent Albanian state was founded by the Albanian Declaration of Independence following a short occupation by the Kingdom of Serbia. The formation of an Albanian national consciousness dates to the later 19th century and is part of the larger phenomenon of the rise of nationalism under the Ottoman Empire.\nA short-lived monarchical state known as the Principality of Albania (1914\u20131925) was succeeded by an even shorter-lived first Albanian Republic (1925\u20131928). Another monarchy, the Kingdom of Albania (1928\u20131939), replaced the republic. The country endured occupation by Italy just prior to World War II (1939\u20131945). After the Armistice of Cassibile between Italy and the Allies, Albania was occupied by Nazi Germany. Following the collapse of the Axis powers, Albania became a one-party communist state, the People's Socialist Republic of Albania, which for most of its duration was dominated by dictator Enver Hoxha (died 1985). Hoxha's political heir Ramiz Alia oversaw the disintegration of the \"Hoxhaist\" state during the wider collapse of the Eastern Bloc in the later 1980s.\nThe communist regime collapsed in 1990, and the former communist Party of Labour of Albania was routed in elections in March 1992, amid economic collapse and social unrest. The unstable economic situation led to an Albanian diaspora, mostly to Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Germany and North America during the 1990s. The crisis peaked in the Albanian Turmoil of 1997. An amelioration of the economic and political conditions in the early years of the 21st century enabled Albania to become a full member of NATO in 2009. The country is applying to join the European Union.\nPrehistory.\nMesolithic &amp; Neolithic.\nThe first traces of human presence in Albania, dating to the Middle Paleolithic and Upper Paleolithic eras, were found in the village of Xarr\u00eb, near Sarand\u00eb and Dajti near Tirana. The objects found in a cave near Xarr\u00eb include flint and jasper objects and fossilized animal bones, while those found at Mount Dajt comprise bone and stone tools similar to those of the Aurignacian culture. The Paleolithic finds of Albania show great similarities with objects of the same era found at Crvena Stijena in Montenegro and north-western Greece. There are several archaeological sites in Albania that carry artifacts dating from the Neolithic era, and they are dated between 6,000 and the end of the EBA. The most important are found in Maliq, Gruemir\u00eb, Dushman (Dukagjin), on the Erzen river (close to Shijak), near Durr\u00ebs, Zi\u00e7isht, Nepravisht\u00eb, Finiq, and Butrint.\nBronze Age.\nThe next period in the prehistory of Albania coincides with the Indo-Europeanization of the Balkans, which involved Pontic steppe migrations which brought the Indo-European languages in the region and the formation of the Paleo-Balkan peoples as the result of fusion between the Indo-European-speaking population and the Neolithic population. In Albania, consecutive movements from the northern parts of the region which became known as \"Illyria\" in the Iron Age had a significant impact in the formation of the new post-Indo-European migration population. The ancestral groups to Iron Age Illyrians are usually identified in Albania towards the end of the EBA with movements from north of Albania and are linked to the construction of tumuli burial grounds of patrilineally organized clans. Some of the first tumuli date to the 26th century BCE. These burial mounds belong to the southern expression of the Adriatic-Ljubljana culture (related to Cetina culture) which moved southwards along the Adriatic from the northern Balkans. The same community built similar mounds in Montenegro (Raki\u0107a Ku\u0107e) and northern Albania (Shtoj).\nIn the late Bronze Age and early Iron Age a number of possible population movements occurred in the territories of modern Albania, for example the settlement of the Bryges in areas of southern Albania-northwestern Greece and Illyrian tribes into central Albania. The latter derived from early an Indo-European presence in the western Balkan Peninsula. The movement of the Byrgian tribes can be assumed to coincide with the beginning Iron Age in the Balkans during the early 1st millennium BC.\nAntiquity.\nIllyrians.\nThe Illyrians were a group of tribes who inhabited the western Balkans during the classical times. The territory the tribes covered came to be known as Illyria to Greek and Roman authors, corresponding roughly to the area between the Adriatic Sea in the west, the Drava river in the north, the Morava river in the east and the mouth of Vjos\u00eb river in the south. The first account of the Illyrian peoples comes from the Coastal Passage contained in a periplus, an ancient Greek text of the middle of the 4th century BC.\nSeveral Illyrian tribes that resided in the region of Albania were the Ardiaei, Taulantii and Albanoi in central Albania, the Parthini, the Abri and the Caviii in the north, the Enchelei in the east, the Bylliones in the south and several others. In the westernmost parts of the territory of Albania, along with the Illyrian tribes, lived the Bryges, a Phrygian people, and in the south lived the Greek tribe of the Chaonians.\nIn the 4th century BC, the Illyrian king Bardylis united several Illyrian tribes and engaged in conflicts with Macedon to the south-east, but was defeated. Bardyllis was succeeded by Grabos II, then by Bardylis II, and then by Cleitus the Illyrian, who was defeated by Alexander the Great.\nAround 230 BC, the Ardiaei briefly attained military might under the reign of king Agron. Agron extended his rule over other neighbouring tribes as well. He raided parts of Epirus, Epidamnus, and the islands of Corcyra and Pharos. His state stretched from Narona in Dalmatia south to the river Aoos and Corcyra. During his reign, the Ardiaean Kingdom reached the height of its power. The army and fleet made it a major regional power in the Balkans and the southern Adriatic. The king regained control of the Adriatic with his warships (\"lembi\"), a domination once enjoyed by the Liburnians. None of his neighbours were nearly as powerful. Agron divorced his (first) wife.\nAgron suddenly died, c.\u2009231 BC, after his triumph over the Aetolians. Agron's (second) wife was Queen Teuta, who acted as regent after Agron's death. According to Polybius, she ruled \"by women's reasoning\". Teuta started to address the neighbouring states malevolently, supporting the piratical raids of her subjects. After capturing Dyrrhachium and Phoenice, Teuta's forces extended their operations further southward into the Ionian Sea, defeating the combined Achaean and Aetolian fleet in the Battle of Paxos and capturing the island of Corcyra. Later on, in 229 BC, she clashed with the Romans and initiated the Illyrian Wars. These wars, which were spread out over 60 years, eventually resulted in defeat for the Illyrians by 168 BC and the end of Illyrian independence when King Gentius was defeated by a Roman army after heavy clashes with Rome and Roman allied cities such as Apollonia and Dyrrhachium under Anicius Gallus. After his defeat, the Romans split the region into three administrative divisions, called \"meris\".\nGreeks and Romans.\nBeginning in the 7th century BC, Greek colonies were established on the Illyrian coast. The most important were Apollonia, Aulon (modern-day Vlor\u00eb), Epidamnos (modern-day Durr\u00ebs), and Lissus (modern-day Lezh\u00eb). The city of Buthrotum (modern-day Butrint), a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is probably more significant today than it was when Julius Caesar used it as a provisions depot for his troops during his campaigns in the 1st century BC. At that time, it was considered an unimportant outpost, overshadowed by Apollonia and Epidamnos.\nThe lands comprising modern-day Albania were incorporated into the Roman Empire as part of the province of Illyricum above the river Drin, and Roman Macedonia (specifically as Epirus Nova) below it. The western part of the Via Egnatia ran inside modern Albania, ending at Dyrrachium. Illyricum was later divided into the provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia.\nThe Roman province of \"Illyricum\" or \"Illyris Romana\" or \"Illyris Barbara\" or \"Illyria Barbara\" replaced most of the region of Illyria. It stretched from the Drilon River in modern Albania to Istria (Croatia) in the west and to the Sava River (Bosnia and Herzegovina) in the north. Salona (near modern Split in Croatia) functioned as its capital. The regions which it included changed through the centuries though a great part of ancient Illyria remained part of Illyricum.\nSouth Illyria became Epirus Nova, part of the Roman province of Macedonia. In 357 AD the region was part of the Praetorian prefecture of Illyricum one of four large praetorian prefectures into which the Late Roman Empire was divided. By 395 AD dioceses in which the region was divided were the Diocese of Dacia (as Pravealitana), and the Diocese of Macedonia (as Epirus Nova). Most of the region of modern Albania corresponds to the Epirus Nova.\nChristianization.\nChristianity came to Epirus nova, then part of the Roman province of Macedonia. Since the 3rd and 4th century AD, Christianity had become the established religion in Byzantium, supplanting pagan polytheism and eclipsing for the most part the humanistic world outlook and institutions inherited from the Greek and Roman civilizations. The Durr\u00ebs Amphitheatre \"(Albanian: Amfiteatri i Durr\u00ebsit)\" is a historic monument from the time period located in Durr\u00ebs, Albania, that was used to preach Christianity to civilians during that time.\nWhen the Roman Empire was divided into eastern and western halves in AD 395, Illyria east of the Drinus River (Drina between Bosnia and Serbia), including the lands form Albania, were administered by the Eastern Empire but were ecclesiastically dependent on Rome. Though the country was in the fold of Byzantium, Christians in the region remained under the jurisdiction of the Pope until 732. In that year the iconoclast Byzantine emperor Leo III, angered by archbishops of the region because they had supported Rome in the Iconoclastic Controversy, detached the church of the province from the Roman pope and placed it under the patriarch of Constantinople.\nWhen the Christian church split in 1054 between Eastern Orthodoxy and Catholicism, the region of southern Albania retained its ties to Constantinople, while the north reverted to the jurisdiction of Rome. This split marked the first significant religious fragmentation of the country. After the formation of the Slav principality of Dioclia (modern Montenegro), the metropolitan see of Bar was created in 1089, and dioceses in northern Albania (Shkod\u00ebr, Ulcinj) became its suffragans. Starting in 1019, Albanian dioceses of the Byzantine rite were suffragans of the independent Archdiocese of Ohrid until Dyrrachion and Nicopolis, were re-established as metropolitan sees. Thereafter, only the dioceses in inner Albania (Elbasan, Kruj\u00eb) remained attached to Ohrid. In the 13th century during the Venetian occupation, the Latin Archdiocese of Durr\u00ebs was founded.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nAfter the region fell to the Romans in 168 BC it became part of Epirus nova that was, in turn, part of the Roman province of Macedonia. When the Roman Empire was divided into East and West in 395, the territories of modern Albania became part of the Byzantine Empire. Beginning in the first decades of Byzantine rule (until 461), the region suffered devastating raids by Visigoths, Huns, and Ostrogoths. In the 6th and 7th centuries, the Slavic migrations to the Balkans forced Albanians and Vlachs to pull back into the mountainous regions and adopt nomadic lifestyle, or flee into Byzantine Greece.\nIn general, the invaders destroyed or weakened Roman and Byzantine cultural centres in the lands that would become Albania.\nIn the mid-9th century, most of eastern Albania became part of the Bulgarian Empire. The area, known as Kutmichevitsa, became an important Bulgarian cultural center in the 10th century with many thriving towns such as Devol, Glavinitsa (Ballsh) and Belgrad (Berat). When the Byzantines managed to conquer the First Bulgarian Empire the fortresses in eastern Albania were some of the last Bulgarian strongholds to submit to the Byzantines. Later the region was recovered by the Second Bulgarian Empire.\nIn the Middle Ages, the name Arberia began to be increasingly applied to the region now comprising the nation of Albania. The first undisputed mention of Albanians in the historical record is attested in a Byzantine source for the first time in 1079\u20131080, in a work titled \"History\" by Byzantine historian Michael Attaliates, who referred to the \"Albanoi\" as having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople in 1043 and to the \"Arbanitai\" as subjects of the duke of Dyrrhachium. A later reference to Albanians from the same Attaliates, regarding the participation of Albanians in a rebellion around 1078, is undisputed.\nIn the late 11th and 12th centuries, the region played a crucial part in the Byzantine\u2013Norman wars; Dyrrhachium was the westernmost terminus of the \"Via Egnatia\", the main overland route to Constantinople, and was one of the main targets of the Normans, such as in the Battle of Dyrrhachium (1081). Towards the end of the 12th century, as Byzantine central authority weakened and rebellions and regionalist secessionism became more common, the region of Arbanon became an autonomous principality ruled by its own hereditary princes. In 1258, the Sicilians took possession of the island of Corfu and the Albanian coast, from Dyrrhachium to Valona and Buthrotum and as far inland as Berat. This foothold, reformed in 1272 as the Kingdom of Albania, was intended by the dynamic Sicilian ruler, Charles of Anjou, to become the launchpad for an overland invasion of the Byzantine Empire. The Byzantines, however, managed to recover most of Albania by 1274, leaving only Valona and Dyrrhachium in Charles' hands. Finally, when Charles launched his much-delayed advance, it was stopped at the Siege of Berat in 1280\u20131281. Albania would remain largely part of the Byzantine empire until the Byzantine civil war of 1341\u20131347 when it fell shortly to the hands of the Serbian ruler Stephen Dushan. During this time, the territory became Albanian majority as the Black Death wiped out much of its Greek population.\nPrincipality of Arb\u00ebr.\nIn 1190, the Principality of Arb\u00ebr (Arbanon) was founded by archon Progon in the region of Kruj\u00eb. Progon was succeeded by Gjin Progoni and then Dhimit\u00ebr Progoni. Arbanon extended over the modern districts of central Albania, with its capital located at Kruj\u00eb.\nThe principality of Arbanon was established in 1190 by the native \"archon\" Progon in the region surrounding Kruja, to the east and northeast of Venetian territories. Progon was succeeded by his sons Gjin and then Demetrius (Dhimit\u00ebr), who managed to retain a considerable degree of autonomy from the Byzantine Empire. In 1204, Arbanon attained full, though temporary, political independence, taking advantage of the weakening of Constantinople following its pillage during the Fourth Crusade. However, Arbanon lost its large autonomy ca. 1216, when the ruler of Epirus, Michael I Komnenos Doukas, started an invasion northward into Albania and Macedonia, taking Kruja and ending the independence of the principality of Arbanon following the death of Dhimit\u00ebr. After the death of Demetrius, the last ruler of the Progon family, the same year, Arbanon was successively controlled subsequently by the Despotate of Epirus, the Bulgarian Empire and, from 1235, by the Empire of Nicaea.\nDuring the conflicts between Michael II Komnenos Doukas of Epirus and Emperor John III Doukas Vatatzes, Golem (ruler of Arbanon at the time) and Theodore Petraliphas, who were initially Michael's allies, defected to John III in 1252. He is last mentioned in the sources among other local leaders, in a meeting with George Akropolites in Durr\u00ebs in 1256. Arbanon was a beneficiary of the Via Egnatia trade road, which brought wealth and benefits from the more developed Byzantine civilization.\nHigh Middle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Principality of Arber in territories captured by the Despotate of Epirus, the Kingdom of Albania was established by Charles of Anjou. He took the title of King of Albania in February 1272. The kingdom extended from the region of Durr\u00ebs (then known as Dyrrhachium) south along the coast to Butrint. After the failure of the Eighth Crusade, Charles of Anjou returned his attention to Albania. He began contacting local Albanian leaders through local catholic clergy. Two local Catholic priests, namely John from Durr\u00ebs and Nicola from Arbanon, acted as negotiators between Charles of Anjou and the local noblemen. During 1271 they made several trips between Albania and Italy eventually succeeding in their mission.\nOn 21 February 1272, a delegation of Albanian noblemen and citizens from Durr\u00ebs made their way to Charles' court. Charles signed a treaty with them and was proclaimed King of Albania \"by common consent of the bishops, counts, barons, soldiers and citizens\" promising to protect them and to honor the privileges they had from Byzantine Empire. The treaty declared the union between the Kingdom of Albania (Latin: \"Regnum Albanie\") with the Kingdom of Sicily under King Charles of Anjou (\"Carolus I, dei gratia rex Siciliae et Albaniae\"). \nHe appointed Gazzo Chinardo as his Vicar-General and hoped to take up his expedition against Constantinople again. Throughout 1272 and 1273 he sent huge provisions to the towns of Durr\u00ebs and Vlor\u00eb. This alarmed the Byzantine Emperor, Michael VIII Palaiologos, who began sending letters to local Albanian nobles, trying to convince them to stop their support for Charles of Anjou and to switch sides. However, the Albanian nobles placed their trust on Charles, who praised them for their loyalty. Throughout its existence the Kingdom saw armed conflict with the Byzantine empire. The kingdom was reduced to a small area in Durr\u00ebs. Even before the city of Durr\u00ebs was captured, it was landlocked by Karl Thopia's principality. Declaring himself as Angevin descendant, with the capture of Durr\u00ebs in 1368 Karl Thopia created the Princedom of Albania. During its existence Catholicism saw rapid spread among the population which affected the society as well as the architecture of the Kingdom. A Western type of feudalism was introduced and it replaced the Byzantine Pronoia.\nPrincipalities and League of Lezh\u00eb.\nIn 1371, the Serbian Empire was dissolved and several Albanian principalities were formed including the Principality of Kastrioti, Principality of Albania and Despotate of Arta as the major ones.\nIn the late 14th and the early 15th century the Ottoman Empire conquered parts of south and central Albania. The Albanians regained control of their territories in 1444 when the League of Lezh\u00eb was established, under the rule of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg, the Albanian national hero and former Ottoman commander. The League was a military alliance of feudal lords in Albania forged in Lezh\u00eb on 2 March 1444, initiated and organised under Venetian patronage with Skanderbeg as leader of the regional Albanian and Serbian chieftains united against the Ottoman Empire. The main members of the league were the Arianiti, Bal\u0161i\u0107, Dukagjini, Muzaka, Spani, Thopia and Crnojevi\u0107i. For 25 years, from 1443 to 1468, Skanderbeg's 10,000-man army marched through Ottoman territory winning against consistently larger and better supplied Ottoman forces. Threatened by Ottoman advances in their homeland, Hungary, and later Naples and Venice \u2013 their former enemies \u2013 provided the financial backbone and support for Skanderbeg's army. By 1450 it had certainly ceased to function as originally intended, and only the core of the alliance under Skanderbeg and Araniti Comino continued to fight on. After Skanderbeg's death in 1468, the sultan \"easily subdued Albania,\" but Skanderbeg's death did not end the struggle for independence, and fighting continued until the Ottoman siege of Shkodra in 1478\u201379, a siege ending when the Republic of Venice ceded Shkodra to the Ottomans in the peace treaty of 1479.\nOttoman Era.\nEarly Ottoman period.\nOttoman supremacy in the west Balkan region began in 1385 with their success in the Battle of Savra. Following that battle, the Ottoman Empire in 1415 established the Sanjak of Albania covering the conquered parts of Albania, which included territory stretching from the Mat River in the north to Chameria in the south. In 1419, Gjirokastra became the administrative centre of the Sanjak of Albania.\nThe northern Albanian nobility, although tributary of the Ottoman Empire they still had autonomy to rule over their lands, but the southern part which was put under the direct rule of the Ottoman Empire, prompted by the replacement of large parts of the local nobility with Ottoman landowners, centralized governance and the Ottoman taxation system, the population and the nobles, led principally by Gjergj Arianiti, revolted against the Ottomans.\nDuring the early phases of the revolt, many land (timar) holders were killed or expelled. As the revolt spread, the nobles, whose holdings had been annexed by the Ottomans, returned to join the revolt and attempted to form alliances with the Holy Roman Empire. While the leaders of the revolt were successful in defeating successive Ottoman campaigns, they failed to capture many of the important towns in the Sanjak of Albania. Major combatants included members of the Dukagjini, Zenebishi, Thopia, Kastrioti and Arianiti families. In the initial phase, the rebels were successful in capturing some major towns such as Dagnum. Protracted sieges such as that of Gjirokast\u00ebr, the capital of the Sanjak, gave the Ottoman army time to assemble large forces from other parts of the empire and to subdue the main revolt by the end of 1436. Because the rebel leaders acted autonomously without a central leadership, their lack of coordination of the revolt contributed greatly to their final defeat. Ottoman forces conducted a number of massacres in the aftermath of the revolt.\nOttoman-Albanian Wars.\nMany Albanians had been recruited into the Janissary corps, including the feudal heir George Kastrioti who was renamed Skanderbeg (Iskandar Bey) by his Turkish officers at Edirne. After the Ottoman defeat in the Battle of Ni\u0161 at the hands of the Hungarians, Skanderbeg deserted in November 1443 and began a rebellion against the Ottoman Empire.\nAfter his desertion, Skanderbeg re-converted to Christianity and declared war against the Ottoman Empire, which he led from 1443 to 1468. Skanderbeg summoned the Albanian princes to the Venetian-controlled town of Lezh\u00eb where they formed the League of Lezh\u00eb. Gibbon reports that the \"Albanians, a martial race, were unanimous to live and die with their hereditary prince\", and that \"in the assembly of the states of Epirus, Skanderbeg was elected general of the Turkish war and each of the allies engaged to furnish his respective proportion of men and money\". Under a red flag bearing Skanderbeg's heraldic emblem, an Albanian force held off Ottoman campaigns for twenty-five years and overcame a number of the major sieges: Siege of Kruj\u00eb (1450), Second Siege of Kruj\u00eb (1466\u201367), Third Siege of Kruj\u00eb (1467) against forces led by the Ottoman sultans Murad II and Mehmed II. For 25 years Skanderbeg's army of around 10,000 men marched through Ottoman territory winning against consistently larger and better supplied Ottoman forces.Throughout his rebellion, Skanderbeg defeated the Ottomans in a number of battles, including Torvioll, Oranik, Otonet\u00eb, Modric, Ohrid and Mokra; with his most brilliant being in Albulena. However, Skanderbeg did not receive any of the help which had been promised to him by the popes or the Italian states of Venice, Naples and Milan. He died in 1468, leaving no clear successor. After his death the rebellion continued, but without its former success. The loyalties and alliances created and nurtured by Skanderbeg faltered and fell apart and the Ottomans reconquered the territory of Albania, culminating with the siege of Shkodra in 1479. However, some territories in Northern Albania remained under Venetian control. Shortly after the fall of the castles of northern Albania, many Albanians fled to neighbouring Italy, giving rise to the Arb\u00ebresh\u00eb communities still living in that country.\nSkanderbeg's long struggle to keep Albania free became highly significant to the Albanian people, as it strengthened their solidarity, made them more conscious of their national identity, and served later as a great source of inspiration in their struggle for national unity, freedom and independence.\nLate Ottoman period.\nUpon the Ottomans return in 1479, a large number of Albanians fled to Italy, Egypt and other parts of the Ottoman Empire and Europe and maintained their Arb\u00ebresh identity. Many Albanians won fame and fortune as soldiers, administrators, and merchants in far-flung parts of the Empire. As the centuries passed, however, Ottoman rulers lost the capacity to command the loyalty of local pashas, which threatened stability in the region. The Ottoman rulers of the 19th century struggled to shore up central authority, introducing reforms aimed at harnessing unruly pashas and checking the spread of nationalist ideas. Albania would be a part of the Ottoman Empire until the early 20th century.\nThe Ottoman period that followed was characterized by a change in the landscape through a gradual modification of the settlements with the introduction of bazaars, military garrisons and mosques in many Albanian regions. Part of the Albanian population gradually converted to Islam, with many joining the Sufi Order of the Bektashi. Converting from Christianity to Islam brought considerable advantages, including access to Ottoman trade networks, bureaucratic positions and the army. As a result, many Albanians came to serve in the elite Janissary and the administrative Dev\u015firme system. Among these were important historical figures, including Iljaz Hoxha, Hamza Kastrioti, Koca Davud Pasha, Za\u011fanos Pasha, K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc Mehmed Pasha (head of the K\u00f6pr\u00fcl\u00fc family of Grand Viziers), the Bushati family, Sulejman Pasha, Edhem Pasha, Nezim Frakulla, Haxhi Shekreti, Hasan Zyko Kamberi, Ali Pasha of Gucia, Muhammad Ali ruler of Egypt, Ali Pasha of Tepelena rose to become one of the most powerful Muslim Albanian rulers in western Rumelia. His diplomatic and administrative skills, his interest in modernist ideas and concepts, his popular religiousness, his religious neutrality, his win over the bands terrorizing the area, his ferocity and harshness in imposing law and order, and his looting practices towards persons and communities in order to increase his proceeds cause both the admiration and the criticism of his contemporaries. His court was in Ioannina, but the territory he governed incorporated most of Epirus and the western parts of Thessaly and Greek Macedonia in Northern Greece.\nMany Albanians gained prominent positions in the Ottoman government, Albanians highly active during the Ottoman era and leaders such as Ali Pasha of Tepelena might have aided Husein Grada\u0161\u010devi\u0107. The Albanians proved generally faithful to Ottoman rule following the end of the resistance led by Skanderbeg, and accepted Islam more easily than their neighbors.\nSemi-independent Albanian Pashaliks.\nA period of semi-independence started during the mid 18th century. As Ottoman power began to decline in the 18th century, the central authority of the empire in Albania gave way to the local authority of autonomy-minded lords. The most successful of those lords were three generations of pashas of the Bushati family, who dominated most of northern Albania from 1757 to 1831, and Ali Pasha Tepelena of Janina (now Io\u00e1nnina, Greece), a brigand-turned-despot who ruled over southern Albania and northern Greece from 1788 to 1822.\nThose pashas created separate states within the Ottoman state until they were overthrown by the sultan.\nModern.\nNational Renaissance.\nIn the 1870s, the Sublime Porte's reforms aimed at checking the Ottoman Empire's disintegration had failed. The image of the \"Turkish yoke\" had become fixed in the nationalist mythologies and psyches of the empire's Balkan peoples and their march toward independence quickened. The Albanians, because of the higher degree of Islamic influence, their internal social divisions, and the fear that they would lose their Albanian-speaking territories to the emerging Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Greece, were the last of the Balkan peoples to desire division from the Ottoman Empire. With the rise of the Albanian National Awakening, Albanians regained a sense of statehood and engaged in military resistance against the Ottoman Empire as well as instigating a massive literary revival. Albanian \u00e9migr\u00e9s in Bulgaria, Egypt, Italy, Romania and the United States supported the writing and distribution of Albanian textbooks and writings.\nLeague of Prizren.\nIn the second quarter of the 19th century, after the fall of the Albanian pashaliks and the Massacre of the Albanian Beys, an Albanian National Awakening took place and many revolts against the Ottoman Empire were organized. These revolts included the Albanian Revolts of 1833\u20131839, the Revolt of 1843\u201344, and the Revolt of 1847. A culmination of the Albanian National Awakening was the League of Prizren. The league was formed at a meeting of 47 Ottoman beys in Prizren on 18 June 1878. An initial position of the league was presented in a document known as Kararname. Through this document Albanian leaders emphasized their intention to preserve and maintain the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire in the Balkans by supporting the porte, and \"to struggle in arms to defend the wholeness of the territories of Albania\". In this early period, the League participated in battles against Montenegro and successfully wrestled control over Plav and Gusinje after brutal warfare with Montenegrin troops. In August 1878, the Congress of Berlin ordered a commission to determine the border between the Ottoman Empire and Montenegro. Finally, the Great Powers blockaded Ulcinj by sea and pressured the Ottoman authorities to bring the Albanians under control. Albanian diplomatic and military efforts were successful in wresting control of Epirus, however some lands were still ceded to Greece by 1881.\nThe League's founding figure Abdyl Frash\u00ebri influenced the League to demand autonomy and wage open war against the Ottomans. Faced with growing international pressure \"to pacify\" the refractory Albanians, the sultan dispatched a large army under Dervish Turgut Pasha to suppress the League of Prizren and deliver Ulcinj to Montenegro. The League of Prizren's leaders and their families were arrested and deported. Frash\u00ebri, who originally received a death sentence, was imprisoned until 1885 and exiled until his death seven years later. A similar league was established in 1899 in Peja by former League member Haxhi Zeka. The league ended its activity in 1900 after an armed conflict with the Ottoman forces. Zeka was assassinated by a Serbian agent Adem Zajmi in 1902.\nIndependence.\nThe initial sparks of the First Balkan War in 1912 were ignited by the Albanian uprising between 1908 and 1910, which had the aim of opposing the Young Turk policies of consolidation of the Ottoman Empire. Following the eventual weakening of the Ottoman Empire in the Balkans, Serbia, Greece, and Bulgaria declared war, seizing the remaining Ottoman territory in Europe. The territory of Albania was occupied by Serbia in the north and Greece in the south, leaving only a patch of land around the southern coastal city of Vlora. The short-lived Albanian Control Commission (17 October 1912 to 30 May 1913) was set up by them to rule Albania.\nThe unsuccessful uprising of 1910, 1911 and the successful and final Albanian revolt in 1912, as well as the Serbian and Greek occupation and attempts to incorporate the land into their respective countries, led to a proclamation of independence by Ismail Kemal in Vlor\u00eb on 28 November 1912. The same day, Kemal waved the national flag of Albania, from the balcony of the Assembly of Vlor\u00eb, in the presence of hundreds of Albanians. This flag was sewn after Skanderbeg's principality flag, which had been used more than 500 years earlier.\nAlbanian independence was recognized by the Conference of London on 29 July 1913. The Conference of London then delineated the border between Albania and its neighbors, leaving more than half of ethnic Albanians outside Albania. This population was largely divided between Montenegro and Serbia in the north and east (including what is now Kosovo and North Macedonia), and Greece in the south. A substantial number of Albanians thus came under Serbian rule.\nAt the same time, an uprising in the country's south by local Greeks led to the formation of the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus in the southern provinces (1914). The republic proved short-lived as Albania collapsed with the onset of World War I. Greece held the area between 1914 and 1916, and unsuccessfully tried to annex it in March 1916; however in 1917 the Greeks were driven from the area by Italy, which took over most of Albania. The Paris Peace Conference of 1919 awarded the area to Greece. However the area definitively reverted to Albanian control in November 1921, following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War.\nPrincipality of Albania.\nIn supporting the independence of Albania, the Great Powers were assisted by Aubrey Herbert, a British MP who passionately advocated the Albanian cause in London. As a result, Herbert was offered the crown of Albania, but was dissuaded by the British prime minister, H. H. Asquith, from accepting. Instead the offer went to William of Wied, a German prince who accepted and became sovereign of the new Principality of Albania.\nThe principality was established on 21 February 1914. The Great Powers selected Prince William of Wied, a nephew of Queen Elisabeth of Romania, to become the sovereign of the newly independent Albania. A formal offer was made by 18 Albanian delegates representing the 18 districts of Albania on 21 February 1914, an offer which he accepted. Outside of Albania William was styled prince, but in Albania he was referred to as Mbret (King) so as not to seem inferior to the King of Montenegro. This is the period when Albanian religions gained independence. The ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople recognized the autocephaly of the Albanian Orthodox Church after a meeting of the country's Albanian Orthodox congregations in Berat in August 1922. The most energetic reformers in Albania came from the Orthodox population who wanted to see Albania move quickly away from its Turkish-ruled past, during which Christians made up the underclass. Albania's conservative Sunni Muslim community broke its last ties with Constantinople in 1923, formally declaring that there had been no caliph since Muhammad himself and that Muslim Albanians pledged primary allegiance to their native country. The Muslims also banned polygamy and allowed women to choose whether or not they wanted to wear a veil. Upon termination of Albania from Turkey in 1912, as in all other fields, the customs administration continued its operation under legislation approved specifically for the procedure. After the new laws were issued for the operation of customs, its duty was 11% of the value of goods imported and 1% on the value of those exported.\nThe security was to be provided by a Gendarmerie commanded by Dutch officers. William left Albania on 3 September 1914 following a pan-Islamic revolt initiated by Essad Pasha Toptani and later headed by Haxhi Qamili, the latter the military commander of the \"Muslim State of Central Albania\" centered in Tirana. William never renounced his claim to the throne.\nWorld War I.\nWorld War I interrupted all government activities in Albania, while the country was split in a number of regional governments. Political chaos engulfed Albania after the outbreak of World War I. The Albanian people split along religious and tribal lines after the prince's departure. Muslims demanded a Muslim prince and looked to Turkey as the protector of the privileges they had enjoyed. Other Albanians looked to Italy for support. Still others, including many beys and clan chiefs, recognized no superior authority.\nPrince William left Albania on 3 September 1914, as a result of the Peasant Revolt initiated by Essad Pasha and later taken over by Haxhi Qamili. William subsequently joined the German army and served on the Eastern Front, but never renounced his claim to the throne.\nIn the country's south, the local Greek population revolted against the incorporation of the area into the new Albanian state and declared the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus at 28 February.\nIn late 1914, Greece occupied the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus, including Kor\u00e7\u00eb and Gjirokast\u00ebr. Italy occupied Vlor\u00eb, and Serbia and Montenegro occupied parts of northern Albania until a Central Powers offensive scattered the Serbian army, which was evacuated by the French to Thessaloniki. Austro-Hungarian and Bulgarian forces then occupied about two-thirds of the country (Bulgarian occupation of Albania).\nUnder the secret Treaty of London signed in April 1915, Triple Entente powers promised Italy that it would gain Vlor\u00eb (\"Valona\") and nearby lands and a protectorate over Albania in exchange for entering the war against Austria-Hungary. Serbia and Montenegro were promised much of northern Albania, and Greece was promised much of the country's southern half. The treaty left a tiny Albanian state that would be represented by Italy in its relations with the other major powers.\nIn September 1918, Entente forces broke through the Central Powers' lines north of Thessaloniki and within days Austro-Hungarian forces began to withdraw from Albania. On 2 October 1918 the city of Durr\u00ebs was shelled on the orders of Louis Franchet d'Esp\u00e8rey, during the Battle of Durazzo: according to d'Esp\u00e8rey, the Port of Durr\u00ebs, if not destroyed, would have served the evacuation of the Bulgarian and German armies, involved in World War I.\nWhen the war ended on 11 November 1918, Italy's army had occupied most of Albania; Serbia held much of the country's northern mountains; Greece occupied a sliver of land within Albania's 1913 borders; and French forces occupied Kor\u00e7\u00eb and Shkod\u00ebr as well as other regions with sizable Albanian populations.\nProjects of partition in 1919\u20131920.\nAfter World War I, Albania was still under the occupation of Serbian and Italian forces. It was a rebellion of the respective populations of Northern and Southern Albania that pushed back the Serbs and Italians behind the recognized borders of Albania.\nAlbania's political confusion continued in the wake of World War I. The country lacked a single recognized government, and Albanians feared, with justification, that Italy, Yugoslavia, and Greece would succeed in extinguishing Albania's independence and carve up the country. Italian forces controlled Albanian political activity in the areas they occupied. The Serbs, who largely dictated Yugoslavia's foreign policy after World War I, strove to take over northern Albania, and the Greeks sought to control southern Albania.\nA delegation sent by a postwar Albanian National Assembly that met at Durr\u00ebs in December 1918 defended Albanian interests at the Paris Peace Conference, but the conference denied Albania official representation. The National Assembly, anxious to keep Albania intact, expressed willingness to accept Italian protection and even an Italian prince as a ruler so long as it would mean Albania did not lose territory. Serbian troops conducted actions in Albanian-populated border areas, while Albanian guerrillas operated in both Serbia and Montenegro.\nIn January 1920, at the Paris Peace Conference, negotiators from France, Britain, and Greece agreed to allow Albania to fall under Yugoslav, Italian, and Greek spheres of influence as a diplomatic expedient aimed at finding a compromising solution to the territorial conflicts between Italy and Yugoslavia.\nMembers of a second Albanian National Assembly held at Lushnj\u00eb in January 1920 rejected the partition plan and warned that Albanians would take up arms to defend their country's independence and territorial integrity. The Lushnj\u00eb National Assembly appointed a four-man regency to rule the country. A bicameral parliament was also created, in which an elected lower chamber, the Chamber of Deputies (with one deputy for every 12,000 people in Albania and one for the Albanian community in the United States), appointed members of its own ranks to an upper chamber, the Senate. In February 1920, the government moved to Tirana, which became Albania's capital.\nOne month later, in March 1920, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson intervened to block the Paris agreement. The United States underscored its support for Albania's independence by recognizing an official Albanian representative to Washington, and in December the League of Nations recognized Albania's sovereignty by admitting it as a full member. The country's borders, however, remained unsettled following the Vlora War in which all territory (except Saseno island) under Italian control in Albania was relinquished to the Albanian state.\nAlbania achieved a degree of statehood after the First World War, in part because of the diplomatic intercession of the United States government. The country suffered from a debilitating lack of economic and social development, however, and its first years of independence were fraught with political instability. Unable to survive a predatory environment without a foreign protector, Albania became the object of tensions between Italy and the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, which both sought to dominate the country.\nZogu Government.\nInterwar Albanian governments appeared and disappeared in rapid succession. Between July and December 1921 alone, the premiership changed hands five times.\nThe Popular Party's head, Xhafer Ypi, formed a government in December 1921 with Fan S. Noli as foreign minister and Ahmed Bey Zogu as internal affairs minister, but Noli resigned soon after Zogu resorted to repression in an attempt to disarm the lowland Albanians despite the fact that bearing arms was a traditional custom.\nWhen the government's enemies attacked Tirana in early 1922, Zogu stayed in the capital and, with the support of the British ambassador, repulsed the assault. He took over the premiership later in the year and turned his back on the Popular Party by announcing his engagement to the daughter of Shefqet Verlaci, the Progressive Party leader.\nZogu's prot\u00e9g\u00e9s organized themselves into the Government Party. Noli and other Western-oriented leaders formed the Opposition Party of Democrats, which attracted all of Zogu's many personal enemies, ideological opponents, and people left unrewarded by his political machine. Ideologically, the Democrats included a broad sweep of people who advocated everything from conservative Islam to Noli's dreams of rapid modernization.\nOpposition to Zogu was formidable. Orthodox peasants in Albania's southern lowlands loathed him because he supported Muslim landowners' efforts to block land reform; Shkod\u00ebr's citizens felt shortchanged because their city did not become Albania's capital, while nationalists were dissatisfied because Zogu's government did not press Albania's claims to Kosovo or speak more energetically for the rights of ethnic Albanian minorities in the Balkans.\nDespite that, Zogu's party won the elections for a National Assembly in early 1924. He soon stepped aside, however, handing over the premiership to Verlaci in the wake of a financial scandal and an assassination attempt by a young radical which left him wounded. The opposition withdrew from the assembly after the leader of a nationalist youth organization, Avni Rustemi, was murdered in the street outside the parliament building.\nJune Revolution.\nNoli's supporters blamed the Rustemi murder on Zogu's Mati clansmen, who continued to practice blood vengeance. After the walkout, discontent mounted, and in June 1924 a peasant-backed insurgency had won control of Tirana. Because few people were willing to risk their lives in its defense, the government's fall was remarkably simple and entailed practically little violence. According to US estimates, 20 people were killed and 35 were injured in the northern theatre, while 6 people were killed and 15 were injured in the southern theater. In fact, only Zogu and his meagre group put up any resistance at all. However, fundamental concerns remained unanswered, and Noli's power grab was unstable to say the least. A far more unified group than Noli's was required to execute a new order; it also required crucial political and financial backing from overseas, as well as talented lawmakers prepared to make the necessary sacrifices and concessions. Noli formed his own administration, a small cabinet, on 16 June 1924, with representatives from all factions involved in the June rebellion, including the army, beys, liberals, progressives, and the Shkodra lobby. The Kosovo Committee was not a part of the government. The government cabinet consisted of:\nFan Noli, an idealist, rejected demands for new elections on the grounds that Albania needed a \"paternal\" government. On 19 June, Noli's coalition administration proposed a twenty-point reform program that, if completed, would have resulted in a country-wide revolution. Jacques calls the program \"too radical,\" Austin calls it \"a really ambitious program, ...had it been implemented, it would have led to a revolutionary change of country,\" and Fischer writes, \"Every Western Democrat would be proud of Noli's program, but the Prime Minister lacked two crucial elements, without which no one could carry out such a long series of radical reforms: financial support and support from the governmental cabinet.\"\nNoli went on to say that once normalcy was restored, a national election would be held with secret and direct voting to decide the people's support. Noli planned to rule by decree for ten to twelve months, believing that the country's past elections did not reflect the desires of the Albanian people. Noli subsequently stated that his party \"had the majority when we put the agrarian reforms on our programme. When it came to putting them in place, we were in the minority.\" The takeover of wealthy owners' property, particularly in central Albania, would be the principal source of additional land for the peasants. Each farmer was to receive 4\u20136 hectares of land for a household of up to 10 individuals. Families with more than 10 members would receive eight hectares of land.\nScaling back the bureaucracy, strengthening local government, assisting peasants, throwing Albania open to foreign investment, and improving the country's bleak transportation, public health, and education facilities filled out the Noli government's overly ambitious agenda. Noli encountered resistance to his program from people who had helped him oust Zogu, and he never attracted the foreign aid necessary to carry out his reform plans. Noli criticized the League of Nations for failing to settle the threat facing Albania on its land borders.\nUnder Fan Noli, the government set up a special tribunal that passed death sentences, in absentia, on Zogu, Verlaci, and others and confiscated their property.\nIn Yugoslavia Zogu recruited a mercenary army, and Belgrade furnished the Albanian leader with weapons, about 1,000 Yugoslav army regulars, and Russian White Emigres to mount an invasion that the Serbs hoped would bring them disputed areas along the border. After Noli decided to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, a bitter enemy of the Serbian ruling family, Belgrade began making wild allegations that Albania was about to embrace Bolshevism.\nOn 13 December 1924, Zogu's Yugoslav-backed army crossed into Albanian territory. By Christmas Eve, Zogu had reclaimed the capital, and Noli and his government had fled to Italy. The Noli government lasted just 6 months and a week.\nFirst Republic.\nAfter defeating Fan Noli's government, Ahmet Zogu recalled the parliament, in order to find a solution for the uncrowned principality of Albania. The parliament quickly adopted a new constitution, proclaimed the first republic, and granted Zogu dictatorial powers that allowed him to appoint and dismiss ministers, veto legislation, and name all major administrative personnel and a third of the Senate.\nThe Constitution provided for a parliamentary republic with a powerful president serving as head of state and government.\nOn 31 January, Zogu was elected president for a seven-year term. Opposition parties and civil liberties disappeared; opponents of the regime were murdered; and the press suffered strict censorship. Zogu ruled Albania using four military governors responsible to him alone. He appointed clan chieftains as reserve army officers who were kept on call to protect the regime against domestic or foreign threats.\nZogu, however, quickly turned his back on Belgrade and looked instead to Benito Mussolini's Italy for patronage. Under Zogu, Albania joined the Italian coalition against Yugoslavia of Kingdom of Italy, Hungary, and Bulgaria in 1924\u20131927. After the United Kingdom's and France's political intervention in 1927 with the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, the alliance crumbled.\nZogu maintained good relations with Benito Mussolini's fascist regime in Italy and supported Italy's foreign policy. He would be the first and only Albanian to hold the title of president until 1991.\nKingdom of Albania.\nIn 1928, Zogu I secured the Parliament's consent to its own dissolution. Afterwards, Albania was declared a monarchy with Zogu I first as the prime minister, then as the president and at last as the king of Albania. International recognition arrived forthwith. The new formed constitution abolished the Albanian Senate and created a unicameral parliament, but King Zog retained the dictatorial powers he had enjoyed as president. Zogu I remained a conservative, but initiated reforms. For example, in an attempt at social modernisation the custom of adding one's region to one's name was dropped. He also made donations of land to international organisations for the building of schools and hospitals.\nSoon after his incoronation, Zog broke off his engagement to Shefqet Verlaci's daughter, and Verlaci withdrew his support for the king and began plotting against him. Zog had accumulated a great number of enemies over the years, and the Albanian tradition of blood vengeance required them to try to kill him. Zog surrounded himself with guards and rarely appeared in public. The king's loyalists disarmed all of Albania's tribes except for his own Mati tribesmen and their allies, the Dibra. Nevertheless, on a visit to Vienna in 1931, Zog and his bodyguards fought a gun battle with would-be assassins Aziz \u00c7ami and Ndok Gjeloshi on the Opera House steps.\nZog remained sensitive to steadily mounting disillusion with Italy's domination of Albania. The Albanian army, though always less than 15,000-strong, sapped the country's funds, and the Italians' monopoly on training the armed forces rankled public opinion. As a counterweight, Zog kept British officers in the Gendarmerie despite strong Italian pressure to remove them. In 1931, Zog openly stood up to the Italians, refusing to renew the 1926 First Treaty of Tirana.\nFinancial crisis.\nIn 1932 and 1933, Albania could not make the interest payments on its loans from the Society for the Economic Development of Albania. In response, Rome turned up the pressure, demanding that Tirana name Italians to direct the Gendarmerie; join Italy in a customs union; grant Italy control of the country's sugar, telegraph, and electrical monopolies; teach the Italian language in all Albanian schools; and admit Italian colonists. Zog refused. Instead, he ordered the national budget slashed by 30 percent, dismissed the Italian military advisers, and nationalized Italian-run Roman Catholic schools in the northern part of the country. In 1934, Albania had signed trade agreements with Yugoslavia and Greece, and Mussolini had suspended all payments to Tirana. An Italian attempt to intimidate the Albanians by sending a fleet of warships to Albania failed because the Albanians only allowed the forces to land unarmed. Mussolini then attempted to buy off the Albanians. In 1935 he presented the Albanian government 3 million gold francs as a gift.\nZog's success in defeating two local rebellions convinced Mussolini that the Italians had to reach a new agreement with the Albanian king. A government of young men led by Mehdi Frasheri, an enlightened Bektashi administrator, won a commitment from Italy to fulfill financial promises that Mussolini had made to Albania and to grant new loans for harbor improvements at Durr\u00ebs and other projects that kept the Albanian government afloat. Soon Italians began taking positions in Albania's civil service, and Italian settlers were allowed into the country. Mussolini's forces overthrew King Zog when Italy invaded Albania in 1939.\nWorld War II.\nStarting in 1928, but especially during the Great Depression, the government of King Zog, which brought law and order to the country, began to increase the Italian influence more and more. Despite some significant resistance, especially at Durr\u00ebs, Italy invaded Albania on 7 April 1939 and took control of the country, with the Italian Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini proclaiming Italy's figurehead King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy as King of Albania. The nation thus became one of the first to be occupied by the Axis powers in World War II.\nAs Hitler began his aggression against other European countries, Mussolini decided to occupy Albania as a means of competing with Hitler's territorial gains. Mussolini and the Italian Fascists saw Albania as a historical part of the Roman Empire, and the occupation was intended to fulfill Mussolini's dream of creating an Italian Empire. During the Italian occupation, Albania's population was subject to a policy of forced Italianization by the kingdom's Italian governors, in which the use of the Albanian language was discouraged in schools while the Italian language was promoted. At the same time, the colonization of Albania by Italians was encouraged.\nMussolini, in October 1940, used his Albanian base to launch an attack on Greece, which led to the defeat of the Italian forces and the Greek occupation of Southern Albania in what was seen by the Greeks as the liberation of Northern Epirus. While preparing for the Invasion of Russia, Hitler decided to attack Greece in December 1940 to prevent a British attack on his southern flank.\nItalian penetration.\nThe Italian invasion of Albania in April 1939 was the conclusion of centuries of Italian interest in the country and twenty years of direct, if unsuccessful, economic and political participation in Albania, primarily under Benito Mussolini. The Straits of Otranto, which cross the Adriatic Sea and connect Albania and southern Italy by forty miles, have always operated as a bridge rather than a barrier, offering escape, cultural exchange, and an easy invasion path. Before World War I Italy and Austria-Hungary had been instrumental in the creation of an independent Albanian state. At the outbreak of war, Italy had seized the chance to occupy the southern half of Albania, to avoid it being captured by the Austro-Hungarians. That success did not last long, as post-war domestic problems, Albanian resistance, and pressure from United States President Woodrow Wilson, forced Italy to pull out in 1920.\nWhen Mussolini took power in Italy he turned with renewed interest to Albania. Italy began penetration of Albania's economy in 1925, when Albania agreed to allow it to exploit its mineral resources. That was followed by the First Treaty of Tirana in 1926 and the Second Treaty of Tirana in 1927, whereby Italy and Albania entered into a defensive alliance. The Albanian government and economy were subsidised by Italian loans, the Albanian army was trained by Italian military instructors, and Italian colonial settlement was encouraged. Despite strong Italian influence, Zog refused to completely give in to Italian pressure. In 1931 he openly stood up to the Italians, refusing to renew the 1926 Treaty of Tirana. After Albania signed trade agreements with Yugoslavia and Greece in 1934, Mussolini made a failed attempt to intimidate the Albanians by sending a fleet of warships to Albania.\nAs Nazi Germany annexed Austria and moved against Czechoslovakia, Italy saw itself becoming a second-rate member of the Axis. The imminent birth of an Albanian royal child meanwhile threatened to give Zog a lasting dynasty. After Hitler invaded Czechoslovakia (15 March 1939) without notifying Mussolini in advance, the Italian dictator decided to proceed with his own annexation of Albania. Italy's King Victor Emmanuel III criticized the plan to take Albania as an unnecessary risk. Rome, however, delivered Tirana an ultimatum on 25 March 1939, demanding that it accede to Italy's occupation of Albania. Zog refused to accept money in exchange for countenancing a full Italian takeover and colonization of Albania.\nItalian invasion.\nOn 7 April Mussolini's troops invaded Albania. The operation was led by General Alfredo Guzzoni. The invasion force was divided into three groups, which were to land successively. The most important was the first group, which was divided in four columns, each assigned to a landing area at a harbor and an inland target on which to advance. Despite some stubborn resistance by some patriots, especially at Durr\u00ebs, the Italians made short work of the Albanians. Durr\u00ebs was captured on 7 April, Tirana the following day, Shkod\u00ebr and Gjirokast\u00ebr on 9 April, and almost the entire country by 10 April.\nUnwilling to become an Italian puppet, King Zog, his wife, Queen Geraldine Apponyi, and their infant son Leka fled to Greece and eventually to London. On 12 April, the Albanian parliament voted to depose Zog and unite the nation with Italy \"in personal union\" by offering the Albanian crown to Victor Emmanuel III.\nThe parliament elected Albania's largest landowner, Shefqet Bej Verlaci, as prime minister. Verlaci additionally served as head of state for five days until Victor Emmanuel III formally accepted the Albanian crown in a ceremony at the Quirinale palace in Rome. Victor Emmanuel III appointed Francesco Jacomoni di San Savino, a former ambassador to Albania, to represent him in Albania as \"Lieutenant-General of the King\" (effectively a viceroy).\nAlbania under Italy.\n \nWhile Victor Emmanuel ruled as king, Shefqet Bej Verlaci served as the prime minister. Shefqet Verlaci controlled the day-to-day activities of the new Italian protectorate. On 3 December 1941, Shefqet Bej Verlaci was replaced as prime minister and head of state by Mustafa Merlika Kruja.\nFrom the start, Albanian foreign affairs, customs, as well as natural resources came under direct control of Italy. The puppet Albanian Fascist Party became the ruling party of the country and the Fascists allowed Italian citizens to settle in Albania and to own land so that they could gradually transform it into Italian soil.\nIn October 1940, during the Greco-Italian War, Albania served as a staging-area for Italian dictator Benito Mussolini's unsuccessful invasion of Greece. Mussolini planned to invade Greece and other countries like Yugoslavia in the area to give Italy territorial control of most of the Mediterranean Sea coastline, as part of the Fascists objective of creating the objective of \"Mare Nostrum\" (\"Our Sea\") in which Italy would dominate the Mediterranean.\nBut, soon after the Italian invasion, the Greeks counter-attacked and a sizeable portion of Albania was in Greek hands (including the cities of Gjirokast\u00ebr and Kor\u00e7\u00eb). In April 1941, after Greece capitulated to the German forces, the Greek territorial gains in southern Albania returned to Italian command. Under Italian command came also large areas of Greece after the successful German invasion of Greece.\nAfter the fall of Yugoslavia and Greece in April 1941, the Italian Fascists added to the territory of the Kingdom of Albania most of the Albanian-inhabited areas that had been previously given to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The Albanian fascists claimed in May 1941 that nearly all the Albanian populated territories were united to Albania (http:// ). Even areas of northern Greece (Chameria) were administered by Albanians. But this was even a consequence of borders that Italy and Germany agreed on when dividing their spheres of influence. Some small portions of territories with Albanian majority remained outside the new borders and contact between the two parts was practically impossible: the Albanian population under the Bulgarian rule was heavily oppressed.\nAlbania under Germany.\nAfter the surrender of the Italian Army in September 1943, Albania was occupied by the Germans.\nWith the collapse of the Mussolini government in line with the Allied invasion of Italy, Germany occupied Albania in September 1943, dropping paratroopers into Tirana before the Albanian guerrillas could take the capital. The German Army soon drove the guerrillas into the hills and to the south. The Nazi German government subsequently announced it would recognize the independence of a neutral Albania and set about organizing a new government, police and armed forces.\nThe Germans did not exert heavy-handed control over Albania's administration. Rather, they sought to gain popular support by backing causes popular with Albanians, especially the annexation of Kosovo. Many Balli Komb\u00ebtar units cooperated with the Germans against the communists and several Balli Komb\u00ebtar leaders held positions in the German-sponsored regime. Albanian collaborators, especially the Skanderbeg SS Division, also expelled and killed Serbs living in Kosovo. In December 1943, a third resistance organization, an anticommunist, anti-German royalist group known as Legaliteti, took shape in Albania's northern mountains. Led by Abaz Kupi, it largely consisted of Geg guerrillas, supplied mainly with weapons from the allies, who withdrew their support for the NLM after the communists renounced Albania's claims on Kosovo.\nThe capital Tirana was liberated by the partisans on 17 November 1944 after a 20-day battle. The communist partizans entirely liberated Albania from German occupation on 29 November 1944, pursuing the German army until Vi\u0161egrad, Bosnia (then Yugoslavia) in collaboration with the Yugoslav communist forces.\nThe Albanian partisans also liberated Kosovo, part of Montenegro, and southern Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nBy November 1944, they had thrown out the Germans, being with Yugoslavia the only European nations to do so without any assistance from the allies. Enver Hoxha became the leader of the country by virtue of his position as Secretary General of the Albanian Communist Party.\nAfter having taken over power of the country, the Albanian communists launched a tremendous terror campaign, shooting intellectuals and arresting thousands of innocent people. Some died due to suffering torture.\nAlbania was one of the only European countries occupied by the Axis powers that ended World War II with a larger Jewish population than before the war. Some 1,200 Jewish residents and refugees from other Balkan countries were hidden by Albanian families during World War II, according to official records.\nAlbanian resistance in World War II.\nThe National Liberation War of the Albanian people started with the Italian invasion in Albania on 7 April 1939 and ended on 28 November 1944. During the antifascist national liberation war, the Albanian people fought against Italy and Germany, which occupied the country. In the 1939\u20131941 period, the antifascist resistance was led by the National Front nationalist groups and later by the Communist Party.\nCommunist resistance.\nIn October 1941, the small Albanian communist groups established in Tirana an Albanian Communist Party of 130 members under the leadership of Hoxha and an eleven-man Central Committee. The Albanian communists supported the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, and did not participate in the antifascist struggle until Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941. The party at first had little mass appeal, and even its youth organization netted recruits. In mid-1942, however, party leaders increased their popularity by calling the young peoples to fight for the liberation of their country, that was occupied by Fascist Italy.\nThis propaganda increased the number of new recruits by many young peoples eager for freedom. In September 1942, the party organized a popular front organization, the National Liberation Movement (NLM), from a number of resistance groups, including several that were strongly anticommunist. During the war, the NLM's communist-dominated partisans, in the form of the National Liberation Army, did not heed warnings from the Italian occupiers that there would be reprisals for guerrilla attacks. Partisan leaders, on the contrary, counted on using the lust for revenge such reprisals would elicit to win recruits.\nThe communists turned the so-called war of liberation into a civil war, especially after the discovery of the Dalmazzo-Kelcyra protocol, signed by the Balli Komb\u00ebtar.\nWith the intention of organizing a partisan resistance, they called a general conference in Pez\u00eb on 16 September 1942 where the Albanian National Liberation Front was set up. The Front included nationalist groups, but it was dominated by communist partisans.\nIn December 1942, more Albanian nationalist groups were organized. Albanians fought against the Italians while, during Nazi German occupation, Balli Komb\u00ebtar allied itself with the Germans and clashed with Albanian communists, which continued their fight against Germans and Balli Komb\u00ebtar at the same time.\nNationalist resistance.\nA nationalist resistance to the Italian occupiers emerged in November 1942. Ali K\u00eblcyra and Midhat Frash\u00ebri formed the Western-oriented Balli Komb\u00ebtar (National Front). Balli Komb\u00ebtar was a movement that recruited supporters from both the large landowners and peasantry. It opposed King Zog's return and called for the creation of a republic and the introduction of some economic and social reforms. The Balli Komb\u00ebtar's leaders acted conservatively, however, fearing that the occupiers would carry out reprisals against them or confiscate the landowners' estates.\nCommunist revolution in Albania (1944).\nThe communist partisans regrouped and gained control of southern Albania in January 1944. In May they called a congress of members of the National Liberation Front (NLF), as the movement was by then called, at P\u00ebrmet, which chose an Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation to act as Albania's administration and legislature. Hoxha became the chairman of the council's executive committee and the National Liberation Army's supreme commander.\nThe communist partisans defeated the last Balli Komb\u00ebtar forces in southern Albania by mid-summer 1944 and encountered only scattered resistance from the Balli Komb\u00ebtar and Legality when they entered central and northern Albania by the end of July. The British military mission urged the remnants of the nationalists not to oppose the communists' advance, and the Allies evacuated Kupi to Italy. Before the end of November, the main German troops had withdrawn from Tirana, and the communists took control of the capital by fighting what was left of the German army. A provisional government the communists had formed at Berat in October administered Albania with Enver Hoxha as prime minister.\nConsequences of the war.\nThe NLF's strong links with Yugoslavia's communists, who also enjoyed British military and diplomatic support, guaranteed that Belgrade would play a key role in Albania's postwar order. The Allies never recognized an Albanian government in exile or King Zog, nor did they ever raise the question of Albania or its borders at any of the major wartime conferences.\nNo reliable statistics on Albania's wartime losses exist, but the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration reported about 30,000 Albanian war dead, 200 destroyed villages, 18,000 destroyed houses, and about 100,000 people left homeless. Albanian official statistics claim somewhat higher losses. Furthermore, thousands of Chams (Tsams, Albanians living in Northern Greece) were driven out of Greece with the justification that they had collaborated with the Nazis.\nSecond Republic.\nCommunism.\nA collection of communists moved quickly after the Second World War to subdue all potential political enemies in Albania, break the country's landowners and minuscule middle class, and isolate Albania from western powers in order to establish the People's Republic of Albania. In 1945, the communists had liquidated, discredited, or driven into exile most of the country's interwar elite. The Internal Affairs Minister, Ko\u00e7i Xoxe, a pro-Yugoslav erstwhile tinsmith, presided over the trial and the execution of thousands of opposition politicians, clan chiefs, and members of former Albanian governments who were condemned as \"war criminals.\"\nThousands of their family members were imprisoned for years in work camps and jails and later exiled for decades to miserable state farms built on reclaimed marshlands. The communists' consolidation of control also produced a shift in political power in Albania from the northern Ghegs to the southern Tosks. Most communist leaders were middle-class Tosks, Vlachs and Orthodox, and the party drew most of its recruits from Tosk-inhabited areas, while the Ghegs, with their centuries-old tradition of opposing authority, distrusted the new Albanian rulers and their alien Marxist doctrines.\nIn December 1945, Albanians elected a new People's Assembly, but only candidates from the Democratic Front (previously the National Liberation Movement then the National Liberation Front) appeared on the electoral lists, and the communists used propaganda and terror tactics to gag the opposition. Official ballot tallies showed that 92% of the electorate voted and that 93% of the voters chose the Democratic Front ticket. The assembly convened in January 1946, annulled the monarchy, and transformed Albania into a \"people's republic.\"\nThe new leaders inherited an Albania plagued by many evils: widespread poverty, overwhelming illiteracy, gjakmarrje (\"blood feuds\"), epidemics of disease and blatant subjugation of women. In an attempt to eradicate these ills, the Communists devised a programme of radical modernization. The first important measure was a rapid and uncompromising agrarian reform, which dismantled the large estates and distributed the plots to the peasants. This reform destroyed the powerful bey class. The government also decided to nationalize industry, banks and all commercial and foreign properties. Shortly after the agrarian reform, the Albanian government began to collectivise agriculture, a process that continued until 1967. In rural areas, the communist regime suppressed the centuries-old blood feud and patriarchal structure of the family and clans, thus destroying the semi-feudal Bajraktars class. The traditional role of women, confinement to the home and farm, changed dramatically when they achieved legal equality with men and became active participants in all areas of society.\nEnver Hoxha and Mehmet Shehu emerged as communist leaders in Albania, and are recognized by most western nations. They began to concentrate primarily on securing and maintaining their power base by killing all their political adversaries, and secondarily on preserving Albania's independence and reshaping the country according to the precepts of Stalinism so they could remain in power and develop the nation's economy. A total of 43,000 people have been imprisoned or executed in forty-five years by the Stalinist regime. According to the Albanian Association of Former Political Prisoners, 6,000 people were executed by the Stalinist regime from 1945 to 1991. Albania became an ally of the Soviet Union, but this came to an end after 1956 over the advent of de-Stalinization, causing the Soviet-Albanian split. A strong political alliance with China followed, leading to several billion dollars in aid, which was curtailed after 1974, causing the Sino-Albanian split. China cut off aid in 1978 when Albania attacked its policies after the death of Chinese leader Mao Zedong. Large-scale purges of officials occurred during the 1970s.\nIn 1967, the authorities conducted a violent campaign to extinguish religious practice in Albania, claiming that religion had divided the Albanian nation and kept it mired in backwardness. Student agitators combed the countryside, forcing Albanians to quit practicing their faith. Despite complaints, even by APL members, all churches, mosques, monasteries, and other religious institutions had been closed or converted into warehouses, gymnasiums, and workshops by year's end. A special decree abrogated the charters by which the country's main religious communities had operated.\nDuring the period of socialist construction of Albania, the country saw rapid economic growth. For the first time, Albania was beginning to produce the major part of its own commodities domestically, which in some areas were able to compete in foreign markets. During the period of 1960 to 1970, the average annual rate of increase of Albania's national income was 29 percent higher than the world average and 56 percent higher than the European average. Also during this period, because of the monopolised socialist economy, Albania was the only country in the world that imposed no imposts or taxes on its people whatsoever. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica emphasizes that \"Hoxha's modernization program aimed to transform Albania from a backward agrarian country into a modern industrial society, and indeed, within four decades, Albania made respectable, even historic, progress in the development of industry, agriculture, education, arts and culture. One of the most notable achievements has been the drainage of coastal swamps-formerly breeding grounds for malaria mosquitoes-and the reclamation of land for agricultural and industrial use. The historic reform of the language, which merged elements of the Gheg and Tosk dialects into a unified literary language, was also a symbol of this change.\"\nEnver Hoxha, who ruled Albania for four decades, died on 11 April 1985. Soon after Hoxha's death, voices for change emerged in the Albanian society and the government began to seek closer ties with the West in order to improve economic conditions.\nEventually the new regime of Ramiz Alia introduced some liberalisation, and granting the freedom to travel abroad in 1990. The new government made efforts to improve ties with the outside world. The elections of March 1991 kept the former Communists in power, but a general strike and urban opposition led to the formation of a coalition cabinet that included non-Communists. \nAlbania and Yugoslavia.\nUntil Yugoslavia's expulsion from the Cominform in 1948, Albania acted like a Yugoslav satellite and the President of Yugoslavia, Josip Broz Tito aimed to use his choke hold on the Albanian party to incorporate the entire country into Yugoslavia. After Germany's withdrawal from Kosovo in late 1944, Yugoslavia's communist partisans took possession of the province and committed retaliatory massacres against Albanians. Before the second World War, the Communist Party of Yugoslavia had supported transferring Kosovo to Albania, but Yugoslavia's postwar communist regime insisted on preserving the country's prewar borders.\nIn repudiating the 1943 Mukaj agreement under pressure from the Yugoslavs, Albania's communists had consented to restore Kosovo to Yugoslavia after the war. In January 1945, the two governments signed a treaty reincorporating Kosovo into Yugoslavia as an autonomous province. Shortly thereafter, Yugoslavia became the first country to recognize Albania's provisional government.\nRelations between Albania and Yugoslavia declined, however, when the Albanians began complaining that the Yugoslavs were paying too little for Albanian raw materials and exploiting Albania through the joint stock companies. In addition, the Albanians sought investment funds to develop light industries and an oil refinery, while the Yugoslavs wanted the Albanians to concentrate on agriculture and raw-material extraction. The head of Albania's Economic Planning Commission and one of Hoxha's allies, Nako Spiru, became the leading critic of Yugoslavia's efforts to exert economic control over Albania. Tito distrusted Hoxha and the other intellectuals in the Albanian party and, through Xoxe and his loyalists, attempted to unseat them.\nIn 1947, Yugoslavia's leaders engineered an all-out offensive against anti-Yugoslav Albanian communists, including Hoxha and Spiru. In May, Tirana announced the arrest, trial, and conviction of nine People's Assembly members, all known for opposing Yugoslavia, on charges of antistate activities. A month later, the Communist Party of Yugoslavia's Central Committee accused Hoxha of following \"independent\" policies and turning the Albanian people against Yugoslavia.\nAlbania and the Soviet Union.\nAlbania became dependent on Soviet aid and know-how after the break with Yugoslavia in 1948. In February 1949, Albania gained membership in the communist bloc's organization for coordinating economic planning, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance. Tirana soon entered into trade agreements with Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and the Soviet Union. Soviet and central European technical advisers took up residence in Albania, and the Soviet Union also sent Albania military advisers and built a submarine installation on Sazan Island.\nAfter the Soviet-Yugoslav split, Albania and Bulgaria were the only countries the Soviet Union could use to funnel war material to the communists fighting in Greece. What little strategic value Albania offered the Soviet Union, however, gradually shrank as nuclear arms technology developed.\nAnxious to pay homage to Stalin, Albania's rulers implemented new elements of the Stalinist economic system. In 1949, Albania adopted the basic elements of the Soviet fiscal system, under which state enterprises paid direct contributions to the treasury from their profits and kept only a share authorized for self-financed investments and other purposes. In 1951, the Albanian government launched its first five-year plan, which emphasized exploiting the country's oil, chromite, copper, nickel, asphalt, and coal resources; expanding electricity production and the power grid; increasing agricultural output; and improving transportation. The government began a program of rapid industrialization after the APL's Second Party Congress and a campaign of forced collectivization of farmland in 1955. At the time, private farms still produced about 87% of Albania's agricultural output, but by 1960 the same percentage came from collective or state farms.\nStalin died in March 1953, and apparently fearing that the Soviet ruler's demise might encourage rivals within the Albanian party's ranks, neither Hoxha nor Shehu risked traveling to Moscow to attend his funeral. The Soviet Union's subsequent movement toward rapprochement with the hated Yugoslavs rankled the two Albanian leaders. Tirana soon came under pressure from Moscow to copy, at least formally, the new Soviet model for a collective leadership. In July 1953, Hoxha handed over the foreign affairs and defense portfolios to loyal followers, but he kept both the top party post and the premiership until 1954, when Shehu became Albania's prime minister. The Soviet Union, responding with an effort to raise the Albanian leaders' morale, elevated diplomatic relations between the two countries to the ambassadorial level.\nDespite some initial expressions of enthusiasm, Hoxha and Shehu mistrusted Nikita Khrushchev's programs of \"peaceful coexistence\" and \"different roads to socialism\" because they appeared to pose the threat that Yugoslavia might again try to take control of Albania. Hoxha and Shehu were also alarmed at the prospect that Moscow might prefer less dogmatic rulers in Albania. Tirana and Belgrade renewed diplomatic relations in December 1953, but Hoxha refused Khrushchev's repeated appeals to rehabilitate posthumously the pro-Yugoslav Xoxe as a gesture to Tito. The Albanian duo instead tightened their grip on their country's domestic life and let the propaganda war with the Yugoslavs grind on.\nAlbania and China.\nThe People's Republic of Albania played a role in the Sino-Soviet split far outweighing either its size or its importance in the communist world. In 1958, the nation stood with the People's Republic of China in opposing Moscow on issues of peaceful coexistence, de-Stalinization, and Yugoslavia's separate road to socialism through decentralization of economic life. The Soviet Union, central European countries, and China, all offered Albania large amounts of aid. Soviet leaders also promised to build a large Palace of Culture in Tirana as a symbol of the Soviet people's \"love and friendship\" for the Albanian people.\nDespite these gestures, Tirana was dissatisfied with Moscow's economic policy toward Albania. Hoxha and Shehu apparently decided in May or June 1960 that Albania was assured of Chinese support, and they openly sided with the People's Republic of China when sharp polemics erupted between the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union. Ramiz Alia, at the time a candidate-member of the Politburo and Hoxha's adviser on ideological questions, played a prominent role in the rhetoric.\nHoxha and Shehu continued their harangue against the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia at the APL's Fourth Party Congress in February 1961. During the congress, the Albanian government announced the broad outlines of the country's Third Five-Year Plan from 1961 to 65, which allocated 54% of all investment to industry, thereby rejecting Khrushchev's wish to make Albania primarily an agricultural producer. Moscow responded by canceling aid programs and lines of credit for Albania, but the Chinese again came to the rescue.\nThe Albanian-Chinese relations had stagnated by 1970, and when the Asian giant began to reemerge from isolation in the early 1970s, Mao Zedong and the other communist Chinese leaders reassessed their commitment to tiny Albania, starting the Sino-Albanian split. In response, Tirana began broadening its contacts with the outside world. Albania opened trade negotiations with France, Italy, and the recently independent Asian and African states, and in 1971 it normalized relations with Yugoslavia and Greece. Albania's leaders abhorred the People's Republic of China's contacts with the United States in the early 1970s, and its press and radio ignored President Richard Nixon's trip to Beijing in 1972.\nThird Republic.\nAs Hoxha's health declined, the first secretary of the People's Socialist Republic began planning for an orderly succession. In 1976, the People's Parliament adopted its second communist Constitution of the post-war era. The constitution guaranteed the people of Albania the freedom of speech, press, organization, association, and parliament but subordinated these rights to the individual's duties to society as a whole. The constitution enshrined in law the idea of autarky and prohibited the government from seeking financial aid or credits or from forming joint companies with partners from capitalist or communist countries perceived to be \"revisionist\". The constitution's preamble also boasted that the foundations of religious belief in Albania had been abolished.\nIn 1980, Hoxha turned to Ramiz Alia to succeed him as Albania's communist patriarch, overlooking his long-standing comrade-in-arms, Mehmet Shehu. Hoxha first tried to convince Shehu to step aside voluntarily, but when this move failed, Hoxha arranged for all the members of the Politburo to rebuke him for allowing his son to become engaged to the daughter of a former bourgeois family. Hoxha purged the members of Shehu's family and his supporters within the police and military. In November 1982, Hoxha announced that Shehu had been a foreign spy working simultaneously for the United States, British, Soviet, and Yugoslav intelligence agencies in planning the assassination of Hoxha himself. \"He was buried like a dog\", the dictator wrote in the Albanian edition of his book, 'The Titoites'. Hoxha went into semi-retirement in early 1983, and Alia assumed responsibility for Albania's administration. Alia traveled extensively around Albania, standing in for Hoxha at major events and delivering addresses laying down new policies and intoning litanies to the enfeebled president. Alia succeeded to the presidency and became legal secretary of the APL two days later. In due course, he became a dominant figure in the Albanian media, and his slogans appeared painted in crimson letters on signboards across the country.\nFourth Republic.\nTransition.\nIn 1985, Ramiz Alia became the first President of Albania. Alia tried to follow in Enver Hoxha's footsteps, but the changes had already started and the collapse of communism throughout Europe led to widespread changes within the society of Albania. Mikhail Gorbachev had appeared in the Soviet Union with new rules and policies (glasnost and perestroika). However, Alia took similar steps, signing the Helsinki Agreement and allowing pluralism under pressure from students and workers. Afterwards, the first multi-party elections took place since the communists assumed power in Albania. The Socialist Party led by Ramiz Alia won the 1991 elections. Nevertheless, it was clear that the change would not be stopped. Pursuant to a 29 April 1991 interim basic law, Albanians ratified a constitution on 28 November 1998, establishing a democratic system of government based upon the rule of law and guaranteeing the protection of fundamental human rights.\nFurthermore, the Communists retained support and governmental control in the first round of elections under the interim law, but fell two months later during a general strike. A committee of \"national salvation\" took over but also collapsed in half a year. On 22 March 1992, the Communists were trumped by the Democratic Party after winning the 1992 parliamentary elections. The transition from the socialist state to a parliamentary system had many challenges. The Democratic Party had to implement the reforms it had promised, but they were either too slow or did not solve the problems, so the people were disappointed when their hopes for fast prosperity went unfulfilled.\nDemocratization.\nThe Democratic Party took control after winning the second multi-party elections, deposing the Communist Party. Afterwards, Sali Berisha became the second President. In 1995, Albania became the 35th member of the Council of Europe and requested membership in North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Deliberate programs of economic and democratic reforms were put in place, but Albanian inexperience with capitalism led to the proliferation of pyramid schemes which grew and imploded around 1996-1997. These scams were not only allowed to go on, but in some cases even promoted by politicians and others in office and/or held power. These pyramid schemes are said to have directly affected about 1/3 of the Albanian population, and the devastating impact can still be seen today. Anarchy in late 1996 to early 1997 alarmed the world and prompted international mediation.\nIn the early spring 1997, Italy led a multinational military and humanitarian intervention (Operation Alba), authorized by the United Nations Security Council, to help stabilize the country. The government of Berisha collapsed in 1997 in the wake of the additional collapse of pyramid schemes and widespread corruption, which caused anarchy and rebellion throughout the country. The government attempted to suppress the rebellion by military force but the attempt failed, due to long-term corrosion of the Military of Albania due to political and social factors. Few months later, after the 1997 parliamentary elections the Democratic Party was defeated by the Socialist Party, winning just 25 seats out of a total of 156. Sali Berisha resigned and the Socialists elected Rexhep Meidani as president. Including to that, the leader of the Socialists Fatos Nano was elected as prime minister, a post which he held until October 1998, when he resigned as a result of the tense situation created in the country after the assassination of Azem Hajdari, a prominent leader of the Democratic Party. Due to that, Pandeli Majko was then elected prime minister until November 1999, when he was replaced by Ilir Meta. The Parliament adopted the current Constitution on 29 November 1998. Albania approved its constitution through a popular referendum which was held in November 1998, but which was boycotted by the opposition. The general local elections of October 2000 marked the loss of control of the Democrats over the local governments and a victory for the Socialists.\nIn 2001, Albania made strides toward democratic reform and the rule of law, serious deficiencies in the electoral code remain to be addressed, as demonstrated in the elections. International observers judged the elections to be acceptable, but the Union for Victory Coalition, the second-largest vote recipient, disputed the results and boycotted parliament until 31 January 2002. In June 2005, the democratic coalition formed a government with the Sali Berisha. His return to power in the elections of 3 July 2005 ended eight years of Socialist Party rule. After Alfred Moisiu, in 2006 Bamir Topi was elected President of Albania until 2010. Despite the political situation, the economy of Albania grew at an estimated 5% in 2007. The Albanian lek has strengthened from 143 lek\u00eb to the US dollar in 2000 to 92 lek\u00eb in 2007.\nPresent.\nOn 23 June 2013, the seventh parliamentary elections took place, won by Edi Rama of the Socialist Party. During his tenure as 33rd Prime Minister, Albania has implemented numerous reforms focused on the modernizing the economy and democratizing of state institutions like the judiciary and law enforcement. Additionally, unemployment has been steadily reduced to the 4th lowest unemployment rate in the Balkans.\nAfter the collapse of the Eastern Bloc, Albania started to develop closer ties with Western Europe. At the 2008 Bucharest summit, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) invited Albania to join the alliance. In April 2014 Albania became a full member of the NATO. Albania was among the first southeastern European countries to join the Partnership for peace programme. Albania applied to join the European Union, becoming an official candidate for accession to the European Union in June 2014.\nIn 2017, the eighth parliamentary elections took place, simultaneously with the presidential elections. The presidential elections were held on 19, 20, 27 and 28 April 2017. In the fourth round, the incumbent Chairman and then-Prime Minister, Ilir Meta was elected as the eighth President of Albania with 87 votes. However, the result of the parliamentary elections held on 25 June 2017 was a victory for the Socialist Party led by Edi Rama, that received 48.33% of the votes of the elections, ahead of 5 other candidates. Lulzim Basha, the Democratic Party candidate and runner-up in the election, received only 28.81% of the votes.\nIn April 2021 parliamentary election, ruling Socialist Party, led by Prime Minister Edi Rama, secured its third consecutive victory, winning nearly half of votes and enough seats in parliament to govern alone. In February 2022, Albania's Constitutional Court overturned parliament's impeachment of President Ilir Meta, opponent of the ruling Socialist Party. In June 2022, Albanian parliament elected Bajram Begaj, the candidate of the ruling Socialist Party (PS), as the new president of Albania. On 24 July 2022, Bajram Begaj was sworn in as Albania's ninth president. On 19 July 2022, Albania started the negotiations with the European Union. Also on 6 December, in Tirana was held the EU-Western Balkans Summit. It was the first EU Summit hold in Tirana.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13906", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13906", "title": "Heimatvertriebenen", "text": ""}
{"id": "13908", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13908", "title": "Handfasting", "text": "Medieval European betrothal practice\nHandfasting is a traditional practice that, depending on the term's usage, may define an unofficiated wedding (in which a couple marries without an officiant, usually with the intent of later undergoing a second wedding with an officiant), a betrothal (an engagement in which a couple has formally promised to wed, and which can be broken only through divorce), or a temporary wedding (in which a couple makes an intentionally temporary marriage commitment). The phrase refers to the making fast of a pledge by the shaking or joining of hands.\nThe terminology and practice are especially associated with Germanic peoples, including the English and Norse, as well as the Scots. As a form of betrothal or unofficiated wedding, handfasting was common up through Tudor England; as a form of temporary marriage, it was practiced in 17th-century Scotland and has been revived in Neopaganism, though misattributed as Celtic rather than Danish and Old English.\nSometimes the term is also used synonymously with \"wedding\" or \"marriage\" among Neopagans to avoid perceived non-Pagan religious connotations associated with those terms. It is also used, apparently ahistorically, to refer to an alleged pre-Christian practice of symbolically fastening or wrapping the hands of a couple together during the wedding ceremony.\nEtymology.\nThe verb \"to handfast\" in the sense of \"to formally promise, to make a contract\" is recorded for Late Old English, especially in the context of a contract of marriage. The derived \"handfasting\" as for a ceremony of engagement or betrothal, is recorded in Early Modern English. The term was presumably loaned into English from Old Norse \" handfesta\" \"to strike a bargain by joining hands\"; there are also comparanda from the Ingvaeonic languages: Old Frisian \"hondfestinge\" and Middle Low German \"hantvestinge\". The term is derived from the verb \"to handfast\", used in Middle to Early Modern English for the making of a contract. In modern Dutch, \"handvest\" is the term for \"pact\" or \"charter\" (e.g., \"Atlantisch handvest\", \"Handvest der Verenigde Naties\"); cf. also the Italian loan word manifesto in English.\nMedieval and Tudor England.\nThe Fourth Lateran Council (1215) forbade clandestine marriage, and required marriages to be publicly announced in churches by priests. In the sixteenth century, the Council of Trent legislated more specific requirements, such as the presence of a priest and two witnesses, as well as promulgation of the marriage announcement thirty days prior to the ceremony. These laws did not extend to the regions affected by the Protestant Reformation. In England, clergy performed many clandestine marriages, such as so-called Fleet Marriage, which were held legally valid; and in Scotland, unsolemnised common-law marriage was still valid.\nFrom about the 12th to the 17th century, \"handfasting\" in England was simply a term for \"engagement to be married\", or a ceremony held on the occasion of such a contract, usually about a month prior to a church wedding, at which the marrying couple formally declared that each accepted the other as spouse. Handfasting was legally binding: as soon as the couple made their vows to each other they were validly married. It was not a temporary arrangement. Just as with church weddings of the period, the union which handfasting created could only be dissolved by death. English legal authorities held that even if not followed by intercourse, handfasting was as binding as any vow taken in church before a priest.\nDuring handfasting, the man and woman, in turn, would take the other by the right hand and declare aloud that they there and then accepted each other as husband and wife. The words might vary but traditionally consisted of a simple formula such as \"I (Name) take thee (Name) to my wedded husband/wife, till death us depart, and thereto I plight thee my troth\". Because of this, handfasting was also known in England as \"troth-plight\". Gifts were often exchanged, especially rings: a gold coin broken in half between the couple was also common. Other tokens recorded include gloves, a crimson ribbon tied in a knot, and even a silver toothpick. Handfasting might take place anywhere, indoors or out. It was frequently in the home of the bride, but according to records handfastings also took place in taverns, in an orchard and even on horseback. The presence of a credible witness or witnesses was usual.\nFor much of the relevant period, church courts dealt with marital matters. Ecclesiastical law recognised two forms of handfasting, \"sponsalia per verba de praesenti\" and \"sponsalia per verba de futuro\". In \"sponsalia de praesenti\", the most usual form, the couple declared they there and then accepted each other as man and wife. The \"sponsalia de futuro\" form was less binding, as the couple took hands only to declare their intention to marry each other at some future date. The latter was closer to a modern engagement and could, in theory, be ended with the consent of both parties \u2013 but only providing intercourse had not occurred. If intercourse did take place, then the \"sponsalia de futuro\" \"was automatically converted into \"de iure\" marriage\".\nDespite the validity of handfasting, it was expected to be solemnised by a church wedding fairly soon afterwards. Penalties might follow for those who did not comply. Ideally the couple were also supposed to refrain from intercourse until then. Complaints by preachers suggest that they often did not wait, but at least until the early 1600s the common attitude to this kind of anticipatory behaviour seems to have been lenient.\nHandfasting remained an acceptable way of marrying in England throughout the Middle Ages but declined in the early modern period. In some circumstances handfasting was open to abuse, with persons who had undergone \"troth-plight\" occasionally refusing to proceed to a church wedding, creating ambiguity about their former betrothed's marital status. Shakespeare negotiated and witnessed a handfasting in 1604, and was called as a witness in the suit \"Bellott v Mountjoy\" about the dowry in 1612. Historians speculate that his own marriage to Anne Hathaway was so conducted when he was a young man in 1582, as the practice still had credence in Warwickshire at the time.\nAfter the beginning of the 17th century, gradual changes in English law meant the presence of an officiating priest or magistrate became necessary for a marriage to be legal. Finally the 1753 Marriage Act, aimed at suppressing clandestine marriages by introducing more stringent conditions for validity, effectively ended the handfasting custom in England.\nEarly modern Scotland.\nIn February 1539 Marie Pieris, a French lady-in-waiting to Mary of Guise, the consort of James V of Scotland, was married by handfasting to Lord Seton at Falkland Palace. This ceremony was recorded in the royal accounts for the payment to an apothecary for his work on the day of \"Lord Seytounis handfasting\".\nThe Scottish Hebrides, particularly in the Isle of Skye, show some records of 'Handfast\" or \"left-handed\" marriage occurring in the late 1600s, when the Gaelic scholar Martin Martin noted, \"It was an ancient custom in the Isles that a man take a maid as his wife and keep her for the space of a year without marrying her; and if she pleased him all the while, he married her at the end of the year and legitimatised her children; but if he did not love her, he returned her to her parents.\"\nThe most disastrous war fought between the MacLeods and MacDonalds of Skye culminated in the Battle of Coire Na Creiche when Donald Gorm Mor, who handfasted [for a year and a day] with Margaret MacLeod, a sister of Rory Mor of Dunvegan, ignominiously expelled his mistress from Duntulm. It is probable that it was as a result of this war that Lord Ochiltree's Committee, which formed the Statutes of Iona in 1609 and the Regulations for the Chiefs in 1616, was induced to insert a clause in the Statutes of Iona by which \"marriages contracted for several [archaic definition 'single'] years\" were prohibited; and any who might disregard this regulation were to be \"punished as fornicators\".\nBy the 18th century, the Kirk of Scotland no longer recognised marriages formed by mutual consent and subsequent sexual intercourse, even though the Scottish civil authorities did. To minimise any resulting legal actions, the ceremony was to be performed in public. This situation persisted until 1939, when Scottish marriage laws were reformed by the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1939 and handfasting was no longer recognised.\nThe existence of handfasting as a distinct form of \"trial marriage\" was doubted by A. E. Anton, in \"Handfasting in Scotland\" (1958). In the article, he asserted that the first reference to such a practice is by Thomas Pennant in his 1790 \"Tour in Scotland\", that this report had been taken at face value throughout the 19th century, and was perpetuated in Walter Scott's 1820 novel \"\". However, the Pennant claim in 1790 was not the first time this had been discussed or put to print, as the Martin Martin texts predate Pennant by almost 100 years.\nNeopaganism.\nThe term \"handfasting\" or \"hand-fasting\" was appropriated into modern Celtic neopaganism and Wicca for wedding ceremonies from at least the late 1960s, apparently first used in print by Hans Holzer.\nHandfasting was mentioned in the 1980 Jim Morrison biography \"No One Here Gets Out Alive\" and again in the 1991 film \"The Doors\", where a version of the real 1970 handfasting ceremony of Morrison and Patricia Kennealy was depicted (with the actual Kennealy-Morrison portraying the Celtic neopagan priestess).\nHandfasting ribbon.\nThe term has entered the English-speaking mainstream, most likely from neopagan wedding ceremonies during the early 2000s, often erroneously being described as \"pre-Christian\" by wedding planners. Evidence that the term \"handfasting\" had been re-interpreted as describing this ceremony specifically is found in the later 2000s, e.g. \"handfasting\u2014the blessed marriage rite in which the hands of you and your beloved are wrapped in ribbon as you 'tie the knot'.\"\nBy the 2010s, \"handfasting ceremonies\" were on offer by commercial wedding organizers and had mostly lost their neopagan association (apart from occasional claims that attributes the ceremony to the \"ancient Celts\"). The term \"handfasting ribbon\" appears from about 2005.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13910", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13910", "title": "History of the Pacific Islands", "text": "The history of the Pacific Islands covers the history of the islands in the Pacific Ocean.\nHistories.\nCook Islands.\nIn Cook Islands M\u0101ori pre-history, Chieftains from present day French Polynesia and their tribes, along with navigators, took their ships in search of unknown or newly found lands, first arriving in the southern island groups around 800 AD or earlier. Many other tribal migrations from French Polynesia, notably Tahiti would continue for centuries forming a unique M\u0101ori society.\nSimilarly, the northern islands were also settled from the east, with some of the northern islands possibly having had later interactions with Western Polynesia. The capital Rarotonga, is known, from various oral histories to have been the launching site of seven waka ship voyagers who settled in New Zealand, becoming the major tribes of the New Zealand M\u0101ori. Up until relatively recently there was continuous contact between both lands where back and forth migration and trade took place. The Cook Islands Te Reo M\u0101ori language is closely related to the Te Reo Maori indigenous language of New Zealand. Spanish ships visited the islands in the 16th\u00a0century; the first written record of contact with the islands came with the sighting of Pukapuka by Spanish sailor \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira in 1595 who called it \"San Bernardo\" (Saint Bernard). A few years later, a Spanish expedition led by Pedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s made the first recorded European landing in the islands when he set foot on Rakahanga in 1606, calling it \"Gente Hermosa\" (Beautiful People). The country is named after British captain Captain James Cook who surveyed and landed on some of the islands between 1774 and 1777.\nEaster Island.\nEaster Island is one of the youngest inhabited territories on earth, and for most of the history of Easter Island it was the most isolated inhabited territory on Earth. Its inhabitants, the Rapa Nui, have endured famines, epidemics, civil war, slave raids, and colonialism; have seen their population crash on more than one occasion.\nFiji.\nThe history of Fiji dates back to ancient times. There are many theories as to how the Fijian race came into existence. Around 1500 BC Fiji was settled by Austronesian seafarers. Around 900\u2013600 BC Moturiki Island was settled. By 500 BC, Melanesian seafarers had reached Fiji and intermarried with the Austronesian inhabitants, giving rise to the modern Fijian people. In 1643 AD, Abel Tasman sighted Vanua Levu Island and northern Taveuni. According to native oral legends Fijians were also descendants of a nomadic tribe from Tanganika (Tanzania).\nGuam and the Northern Mariana Islands.\nThe history of Guam involves phases including the early arrival of people known today as the ancient Chamorros, the development of \"pre-contact\" society, Spanish colonization, and the present American rule of the island. Archaeologists using carbon-dating have broken Pre-Contact Guam (i.e. Chamorro) history into three periods: \"Pre-Latte\" (BC 2000? to AD 1) \"Transitional Pre-Latte\" (AD 1 to AD 1000), and \"Latte\" (AD 1000 to AD 1521). Archaeological evidence also suggests that Chamorro society was on the verge of another transition phase by 1521, when Ferdinand Magellan's expedition arrived, as latte stones became bigger. The original inhabitants of Guam are believed to be descendants of Taiwanese indigenous peoples originating from the high mountains of Taiwan as early as 4,000 BC, having linguistic and cultural similarities to Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines. Guam's history of colonialism is the longest among the Pacific islands and Chamorros are considered one of the oldest mixed race in the Pacific. In 1668 the Spanish formally incorporated the islands to the Spanish East Indies and founded a colony on Guam as a resting place for the west-bound Manila galleons. The territory was ceded by Spain more than two centuries later, when in 1898 the United States took over the islands following the Spanish\u2013American War. The chamorro culture has evolved much since European contact and has been much influenced by Spanish and American colonization. Although the original culture no longer exists, it is now being revived with contemporary alternatives and similarities in styles with all the other pacific islands. Not one unique, but all combined to form a uniqueness in style, to today's modern interpretation of what their culture might have been. It should also be mentioned that the Chamorros on Guam view their culture &amp; language differently than the Chamorros on the Northern Mariana Islands.\nHawaii.\nHawaiian history is inextricably tied into a larger Polynesian phenomenon. Hawai\u02bbi is the northernmost vertex of the Polynesian Triangle, a region of the Pacific Ocean anchored by three island groups: Hawai\u02bbi, Rapa Nui (Easter Island), and Aotearoa (New Zealand). The many island cultures within the Polynesian Triangle share similar languages derived from a proto-Malayo-Polynesian language used in Southeast Asia 5,000 years ago. Polynesians also share cultural traditions, such as religion, social organization, myths, and material culture. Anthropologists believe that all Polynesians have descended from a South Pacific proto-culture created by an Austronesian (Malayo-Polynesian) people that had migrated from Southeast Asia. The seven main Polynesian cultures are Aotearoa, Hawai\u02bbi, Rapa Nui, Marquesas, Samoa, Tahiti, and Tonga.\nThe early settlement history of Hawai\u02bbi is a topic of continuing debate. Estimates for the date of first settlement of the Hawai'ian islands range from the 3rd century C.E. to between 940 and 1130 C.E.\nKiribati.\nIn the history of Kiribati, the islands which now form the Republic of Kiribati have been inhabited for at least seven hundred years, and possibly much longer. The initial Micronesian population, which remains the overwhelming majority today, was visited by Polynesian and Melanesian invaders before the first European sailors \"discovered\" the islands in the 16th century. For much of the subsequent period, the main island chain, the Gilbert Islands, was ruled as part of the British Empire. The country gained its independence in 1979 and has since been known as Kiribati.\nNew Caledonia.\nIn the history of New Caledonia, the diverse group of people that settled over the Melanesian archipelagos are known as the Lapita. They arrived in the archipelago now commonly known as New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands around 1500 BC. The Lapita were highly skilled navigators and agriculturists with influence over a large area of the Pacific. From about the 11th century Polynesians also arrived and mixed with the populations of the archipelago. Europeans first sighted New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands in the late 18th century. The British explorer James Cook sighted Grande Terre in 1774 and named it \"New Caledonia\", Caledonia being the Latin name for Scotland. During the same voyage he also named the islands to the north of New Caledonia the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu), after the islands north of Scotland.\nNew Zealand.\nThe History of New Zealand dates back to at least 700 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians, who developed a distinct M\u0101ori culture centred on kinship links and land. The first European explorer, the Dutch Abel Tasman, came to New Zealand in 1642. From the late 18th century, the country was regularly visited by explorers and other sailors, missionaries, traders and adventurers. In 1840 the Treaty of Waitangi was signed between the British Crown and various M\u0101ori chiefs, bringing New Zealand into the British Empire and giving M\u0101ori equal rights with British citizens. There was extensive European and some Asian settlement throughout the rest of the century. War and the imposition of a European economic and legal system led to most of New Zealand's land passing from M\u0101ori to European ownership, and most M\u0101ori subsequently became impoverished.\nFrom the 1890s the New Zealand parliament enacted a number of progressive initiatives, including women's suffrage and old age pensions. From the 1930s the economy was highly regulated and an extensive welfare state was developed. Meanwhile, M\u0101ori culture underwent a renaissance, and from the 1950s M\u0101ori began moving to the cities in large numbers. This led to the development of a M\u0101ori protest movement which in turn led to greater recognition of the Treaty of Waitangi in the late 20th century. In the 1980s the economy was largely deregulated and a number of socially liberal policies, such as decriminalisation of homosexuality, were put in place. Foreign policy, which had previously consisted mostly of following Britain or the United States, became more independent. Subsequent governments have generally maintained these policies, although tempering the free market ethos somewhat.\nNiue.\nThe history of Niue can be traced back to a 1,000 years when the Polynesian settles came here. Traces of Pukapulan dialect are still there in the native language which is based on the Samoan and Tongan language. The Polynesian settlers were rather isolated as there was very little inter island trade and the existence of the limestone island was in itself very difficult due to lack of rivers and cultivable soil.\nThe modern history of Niue can be traced back to 1774 with the arrival of Captain James Cook. Cook described the island as \"Savage Island\" in his records as the natives were not very welcoming to strangers. This was in complete contrast to the Tongans he described as \"The Friendly Islands\". Captain Cook tried to set his foot thrice on the island but was repulsed each of the three times. The natives at that time were quite hostile to strangers. Christianity was brought to the island by Peniamina in the year 1846 when he got converted during his stay at Samoa. The islanders were completely converted to Christianity by the end of the 19th century. Colonization took place thereafter and the island was declared as a part of the British Empire.\nThe island country became independent in 1974 but still have a free association agreement with New Zealand and many of its citizens have become citizens of New Zealand. Now the Island country has a democracy and is governed by a legislative assembly consisting of 20 members. Niue is the smallest democracy in the world.\nPapua New Guinea.\nThe History of Papua New Guinea can be traced back to about 60,000 years ago when people first migrated towards the Australian continent. The written history began when European navigators first sighted New Guinea in the early part of the 16th century. Portuguese explorers first arrived from the west and later Spanish navigators from the east, after crossing the Pacific. The island was given its name \"New Guinea\" by Spanish explorer Y\u00f1igo Ortiz de Retez who sailed its coast in 1545. Archaeological evidence indicates that humans arrived on New Guinea at least 60,000 years ago, probably by sea from Southeast Asia during an ice age period when the sea was lower and distances between islands shorter. For an overview of the geological history of the continent of which New Guinea is a part, see Australia \u2013 New Guinea. Although the first arrivals were hunter-gatherers, early evidence shows that people managed the forest environment to provide food. The gardens of the New Guinea highlands are ancient, intensive permacultures, adapted to high population densities, very high rainfalls (as high as 10,000mm/yr (400in/yr)), earthquakes, hilly land, and occasional frost. There are indications that gardening was being practised at the same time that agriculture was developing in Mesopotamia and Egypt.\nSamoa.\nIn the history of Samoa, contact with Europeans began in the early 18th century but did not intensify until the arrival of the English. In 1722, Dutchman Jacob Roggeveen was the first European to sight the islands. Missionaries and traders arrived in the 1830s. Halfway through the 19th century, the United Kingdom, Germany, and the United States all claimed parts of the kingdom of Samoa, and established trading posts. King Malietoa Leaupepe died in 1898 and was succeeded by Malietoa Tooa Mataafa. The US and British consuls supported Malietoa Tanu, Leaupepe's son. US and British warships, including the USS \"Philadelphia\" shelled Apia on 15 March 1899. After World War I, the League of Nations carved up Samoa. Britain and New Zealand took over the western islands which became 'Western Samoa' and USA claimed the eastern half of the country which became American Samoa. In 1962, Western Samoa became the first Pacific Island nation to gain political independence. In 1997, Samoa officially dropped the 'Western' from its name as it was an appendage from its colonial era.\nSolomon Islands.\nThe human history of the Solomon Islands begins with the first settlement at least 30,000 years ago from New Guinea. They represented the furthest expansion of humans into the Pacific Ocean until the expansion of Austronesian-language speakers through the area around 4000 BCE, bringing new agricultural and maritime technology. Most of the languages spoken today in the Solomon Islands derive from this era, but some thirty languages of the pre-Austronesian settlers survive \"(see East Papuan languages).\" The first European contact was that of Spanish explorer \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira whose expedition first sighted Santa Isabel island on 7 February 1568. Finding signs of alluvial gold on Guadalcanal, Menda\u00f1a believed he had found the source of King Solomon's wealth, and consequently named the islands \"The Islands of Solomon\". Many of the islands were also named by these explorers, including Guadalcanal, the Santa Cruz Islands, San Cristobal, Santa Ana and Santa Isabel. In 1595 and 1605 Spain again sent several expeditions to find the islands and establish a colony, though these were unsuccessful. In 1767 Captain Philip Carteret rediscovered Santa Cruz and Malaita. Later, Dutch, French and British navigators visited the islands; their reception was often hostile.\nTahiti.\nIn the history of Tahiti, Tahiti is estimated to have been settled by Polynesians between CE 300 and 800 coming from Tonga and Samoa, although some estimates place the date earlier. The fertile island soil combined with fishing provided ample food for the population. Although the first European sighting of the islands was by a Spanish ship in 1606, Spain made no effort to trade with or colonize the island. Samuel Wallis, an English sea captain, sighted Tahiti on 18 June 1767, and is considered the first European visitor to the island. The perceived relaxation and contented nature of the local people and the characterization of the island as a paradise much impressed early European visitors, planting the seed for a romanticization by the West that endures to this day.\nTokelau.\nArchaeological evidence indicates that history of Tokelau's atol\u2014Atafu, Nukunonu, and Fakaofo\u2014were settled about 1,000 years ago, probably by voyages from Samoa, the Cook Islands and Tuvalu. Oral history traces local traditions and genealogies back several hundred years. Inhabitants followed Polynesian mythology with the local god Tui Tokelau; and developed forms of music (see Music of Tokelau) and art. The three atolls functioned largely independently while maintaining social and linguistic cohesion. Tokelauan society was governed by chiefly clans, and there were occasional inter-atoll skirmishes and wars as well as inter-marriage. Fakaofo, the \"chiefly island,\" held some dominance over Atafu and Nukunonu. Life on the atolls was subsistence-based, with reliance on fish and coconut. Commodore John Byron discovered Atafu on 24 June 1765 and named it \"Duke of York's Island.\" Parties onshore reported that there were no signs of current or previous inhabitants.\nTonga.\nThe history of Tonga stretches back to around roughly 450\u00a0AD, when the Polynesians arrived. Tonga became known as the Tongan Empire through extensive trading and its influence and show of strength and domination over parts of the Pacific (e.g. Samoa, Fiji). The Europeans arrived in the 17th century which was followed after a couple hundred years by a single unified Tongan kingdom. Archaeological evidence shows that the first settlers in Tonga sailed from the Santa Cruz Islands, as part of the original Austronesian-speakers' (Lapita) migration which originated out of southeast Asia some 6,000 years before present. Archaeological dating places Tonga as the oldest known site in Polynesia for the distinctive Lapita ceramic ware, at 2800\u20132750 years before present.\nTuvalu.\nThe history of Tuvalu dates back to at least 1,000 years to when it was discovered and settled by Polynesians. the origins of the people of Tuvalu is addressed in the theories regarding the spread of humans out of Southeast Asia, from Taiwan, via Melanesia and across the Pacific islands to create Polynesia.\nDuring pre-European-contact times there was frequent canoe voyaging between the islands as Polynesian navigation skills are recognised to have allowed deliberate journeys on double-hull sailing canoes or outrigger canoes. Eight of the nine islands of Tuvalu were inhabited; thus the name, Tuvalu, means \"eight standing together\" in Tuvaluan. The pattern of settlement that is believed to have occurred is that the Polynesians spread out from the Samoan Islands into the Tuvaluan atolls, with Tuvalu providing a stepping stone to migration into the Polynesian Outlier communities in Melanesia and Micronesia.\nIn 1568, Spanish navigator \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a was the first European to sail through the islands and sighted Nui during his expedition in search of Terra Australis. European explorers did not return until two centuries later. In 1819 the island of Funafuti was named Ellice's Island; the name Ellice was applied to all nine islands after the work of English hydrographer Alexander George Findlay (1812\u20131876). The islands came under Britain's sphere of influence in the late 19th century, when each of the Ellice Islands was declared a British protectorate by Captain Gibson R.N., of HMS \"Curacoa\", between 9 and 16 October 1892. The Ellice Islands were administered as British protectorate by a resident commissioner from 1892 to 1916 as part of the British Western Pacific Territories (BWPT), and later as part of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony from 1916 to 1974.\nA referendum was held in December 1974 to determine whether the Gilbert Islands and Ellice Islands should each have their own administration. As a consequence of the referendum, the Gilbert and Ellice Islands colony ceased to exist on 1 January 1976 and the separate British colonies of Kiribati and Tuvalu came into existence. Tuvalu became fully independent within the Commonwealth on 1 October 1978. On 17 September 2000 Tuvalu became the 189th member of the United Nations.\nVanuatu.\nIn the history of Vanuatu, the commonly held theory of Vanuatu's prehistory from archaeological evidence supports that peoples speaking Austronesian languages first came to the islands some 4,000 to 6,000 years ago. Pottery fragments have been found dating back to 1300 BC What little is known of the pre-European contact history of Vanuatu has been gleaned from oral histories and legends. One important early king was Roy Mata, who united several tribes, and was buried in a large mound with several retainers. The first European contact with Vanuatu came in 1606, when a Spanish expedition led by the Portuguese explorer Pedro Fern\u00e1ndez de Quir\u00f3s discovered Espiritu Santo, naming it \"Australia del Espiritu Santo\", believing he had arrived in the southern continent. Europeans did not return until 1768, when Louis Antoine de Bougainville rediscovered the islands.\nOther islands.\nThe history of American Samoa begins with inhabitation as early as 1000 BC, Samoa was not reached by European explorers until the 18th century.\nThe history of Baker Island began when the United States of America took possession of the island in 1857, and its guano deposits were mined by U.S. and British companies during the second half of the 19th century. In 1935, a short-lived attempt at colonization was begun on this island \u2013 as well as on nearby Howland Island \u2013 but was disrupted by World War II and thereafter abandoned. Presently the island is a National Wildlife Refuge run by the U.S. Department of the Interior; a day beacon is situated near the middle of the west coast.\nWesterners arrived in Caroline Islands in 1525, by the Portuguese Diogo da Rocha and his pilot Gomes de Sequeira, naming them the \"Sequeira Islands\". At about the same time, in 1526, they were sighted by the Spanish Toribio Alonso de Salazar, he called them \"Carolinas\" after Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. Though early Spanish navigators in the area (from 1543) called them the \"Nuevas Filipinas\" (\"New Philippines\"), Admiral Francisco Lazeano named them the \"Carolinas\" after King Charles II of Spain in 1686.\nIn the history of French Polynesia, the French Polynesian island groups do not share a common history before the establishment of the French protectorate in 1889. The first French Polynesian islands to be settled by Polynesians were the Marquesas Islands in AD 300 and the Society Islands in AD 800. The Polynesians were organized in petty chieftainships.\nHistorical evidence suggests that Howland Island was the site of prehistoric settlement, which may have extended down to Rawaki, Canton, Manra, and Orona of the Phoenix Islands 500 to 700\u00a0km southeast. This settlement might have taken the form of a single community utilising several adjacent islands, but the hard life on these isolated islands, together with the uncertainty of fresh water supplies, led to an extinction of or dereliction by the settled peoples, in such a way that other islands in the area (such as Kiritimati and Pitcairn) were abandoned. Such settlements probably began around 1000 BC, when eastern Melanesians traveled north.\nThe history of Jarvis Island begins with the island's first known sighting by Europeans was on 21 August 1821 by the British ship \"Eliza Francis\" (or \"Eliza Frances\") owned by Edward, Thomas, and William Jarvis and commanded by Captain Brown. In March 1857 the uninhabited island was claimed for the United States under the Guano Islands Act and formally annexed on 27 February 1858.\nIn the history of Marquesas Islands, the first recorded settlers of the Marquesas were Polynesians, who, from arch\u0435ological evidence, are believed to have arrived before 100 AD. Ethnological and linguistic evidence suggests that they likely arrived from the region of Tonga and Samoa. The islands were given their name by the Spanish explorer \u00c1lvaro de Menda\u00f1a de Neira who reached them on 21 July 1595. He named them after his patron, Garc\u00eda Hurtado de Mendoza, 5th Marquis of Ca\u00f1ete, who was Viceroy of Peru at the time. Menda\u00f1a visited first Fatu Hiva and then Tahuata before continuing on to the Solomon Islands.\nIn the history of Melanesia, the original inhabitants of the islands now named Melanesia were likely the ancestors of the present day Papuan-speaking people. These people are thought to have occupied New Guinea tens of millennia ago and reached the islands 35,000 years ago (according to radiocarbon dating). They appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the Solomon Islands (i.e., including San Cristobal) and perhaps even to the smaller islands farther to the east.\nThe ancestors of the so-called \"Micronesians\" in the history of Micronesia settled there over 4,000 years ago. A decentralized chieftain-based system eventually evolved into a more centralized economic and religious empire centred on Yap. European explorers \u2013 first the Portuguese in search of the Spice Islands (Indonesia) and then the Spaniards \u2013 reached the Carolines in the 16th century, with Spain establishing sovereignty.\nResearchers of the history of the Marshall Islands agree on little more than that successive waves of migratory peoples from Southeast Asia spread across the Western Pacific about 3,000 years ago, and that some of them landed on and remained on these islands. The Spanish explorer Alonso de Salazar landed there in 1529. They were named for English explorer John Marshall, who visited them in 1799. The Marshall Islands were claimed by Spain in 1874. Following papal mediation and German compensation of $4.5 million, Spain recognised Germany's claim in 1885, which established a protectorate and set up trading stations on the islands of Jaluit and Ebon to carry out the flourishing copra (dried coconut meat) trade. Marshallese Iroij (high chiefs) continued to rule under indirect colonial German administration.\nIn the history of the Society Islands, the archipelago is generally believed to have been named by Captain James Cook in honour of the Royal Society, sponsor of the first British scientific survey of the islands; however, Cook states in his journal that he called the islands Society \"as they lay contiguous to one another\".\nIn the history of Tuamotu, the Tuamotus were first discovered by a Spanish expedition led by Ferdinand Magellan in 1521. From the Inca Empire, Tupac Inca Yupanqui is also credited with leading a nearly 10-month voyage of exploration into the Pacific around 1480. None of these visits were of political consequence, the islands being in the sphere of influence of the Pomare dynasty of Tahiti. At the beginning 18th century, the first Christian missionaries arrived. The islands' pearls penetrated the European market in the late 19th century, making them a coveted possession. Following the forced abdication of King Pomare V of Tahiti, the islands were annexed as an overseas territory of France.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n27. \"Reconstructing History: Literature, History, and Anthropology in the Pacific\". Ed. Cynthia Klekar. Special Issue of \"The Eighteenth Century: Theory and Interpretation\" 49, no. 3 (Fall, 2008). Introduction, 193-96."}
{"id": "13911", "revid": "46170964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13911", "title": "Harp", "text": "Plucked string instrument\nThe harp is a stringed musical instrument that has individual strings running at an angle to its soundboard; the strings are plucked with the fingers. Harps can be played in either a seated or standing position. Most commonly, harps are made of wood and are triangular in shape. Some have multiple rows of strings and pedal attachments.\nAncient depictions of harps were recorded in Mesopotamia (now Iraq), Persia (now Iran) and Egypt, and later in India and China. By medieval times harps had spread across Europe. Harps are found across the Americas; in some regions, they are used in popular folk music traditions. Distinct designs also emerged from the African continent. Harps have symbolic political traditions and are often used in logos, including in Ireland.\nHistorically, strings were made of sinew (animal tendons). Other materials have included gut (animal intestines), plant fiber, braided hemp, cotton cord, silk, nylon, and wire.\nIn pedal harp scores, double flats and double sharps should be avoided whenever possible.\nHistory.\nHarps have been known since antiquity in Asia, Africa, and Europe, dating back at least as early as 3000 BCE. The instrument had great popularity in Europe during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, where it evolved into a wide range of variants with new technologies, and was disseminated to Europe's colonies, finding particular popularity in Latin America.\nAlthough some ancient members of the harp family died out in the Near East and South Asia, descendants of early harps are still played in Myanmar and parts of Africa; other variants defunct in Europe and Asia have been used by folk musicians in the modern era.\nOrigin.\nWest Asia and Egypt.\nThe earliest harps and lyres were found in Sumer, c. 2500 BCE, with several harps excavated from burial pits and royal tombs in Ur. The oldest depictions of harps without a forepillar can be seen in the wall paintings of ancient Egyptian tombs in the Nile Valley, which date from the mid 3rd millennium BCE. These murals show an arched harp, an instrument that closely resembles the hunter's bow, without the pillar that we find in modern harps.\nThe \"Chang\" flourished in Persia in many forms from its introduction, about 4000 BCE, until the 17th century CE.\nAround 1900 BCE, arched harps in the Iraq-Iran region were replaced by angular harps with vertical or horizontal sound boxes. The Kinnor ( \"k\u012bnn\u014dr\") was an ancient Israelite musical instrument in the yoke lutes family, the first one to be mentioned in the Hebrew Bible.\nIts exact identification is unclear, but in the modern day it is generally translated as \"harp\" or \"lyre\", and associated with a type of lyre depicted in Israelite imagery, particularly the Bar Kokhba coins. It has been referred to as the \"national instrument\" of the Jewish people, and modern luthiers have created reproduction lyres of the kinnor based on this imagery.\nBy the start of the Common Era, \"robust, vertical, angular harps\", which had become predominant in the Hellenistic world, were cherished in the Sasanian court. In the last century of the Sasanian period, angular harps were redesigned to make them as light as possible (\"light, vertical, angular harps\"); while they became more elegant, they lost their structural rigidity. At the height of the Persian tradition of illustrated book production (1300\u20131600\u00a0CE), such light harps were still frequently depicted, although their use as musical instruments was reaching its end.\nGreece.\nMarble sculptures of seated figures playing harps are known from the Cycladic civilization dating from 2800\u20132700 BCE.\nSouth Asia.\nMesolithic era paintings from Bhimbetka show harp playing. An arched harp made of wooden brackets and metal strings is depicted on an Indus seal. The works of the Tamil Sangam literature describe the harp and its variants, as early as 200 BCE. Variants were described, ranging from 14 to 17\u00a0strings, and the instrument was used by wandering minstrels for accompaniment. Iconographic evidence of the yaal appears in temple statues dated as early as 600 BCE. One of the Sangam works, the \"Kallaadam\" recounts how the first \"yaa\u1e3b\" harp was inspired by an archer's bow, when he heard the musical sound of its twang.\nAnother early South Asian harp was the ancient veena, not to be confused with the modern Indian veena which is a type of lute. Some Samudragupta gold coins show of the mid-4th century CE show (presumably) the king Samudragupta himself playing the instrument. The ancient veena survives today in Burma, in the form of the \"saung\" harp still played there.\nEast Asia.\nThe harp was popular in ancient China and neighboring regions, though harps are largely extinct in East Asia in the modern day. The Chinese \"konghou\" harp is documented as early as the Spring and Autumn period (770\u2013476 BCE), and became extinct during the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644 CE). A similar harp, the \"Gonghu\" was played in ancient Korea, documented as early as the Goguryeo period (37 BCE\u2013686 CE).\nDevelopment.\nEurope.\nWhile the angle and bow harps held popularity elsewhere, European harps favored the \"pillar\", a third structural member to support the far ends of the arch and soundbox.290 A harp with a triangular three-part frame is depicted on 8th-century Pictish stones in Scotland290 and in manuscripts (e.g. the Utrecht Psalter) from early 9th-century France. The curve of the harp's neck is a result of the proportional shortening of the basic triangular form to keep the strings equidistant; if the strings were proportionately distant they would be farther apart.\nAs European harps evolved to play more complex music, a key consideration was some way to facilitate the quick changing of a string's pitch to be able to play more chromatic notes. By the Baroque period in Italy and Spain, more strings were added to allow for chromatic notes in more complex harps. In Germany in the second half of the 17th century, diatonic single-row harps were fitted with manually turned hooks that fretted individual strings to raise their pitch by a half step. In the 18th century, a link mechanism was developed connecting these hooks with pedals, leading to the invention of the single-action pedal harp.\nThe first primitive form of pedal harps was developed in the Tyrol region of Austria. Jacob Hochbrucker was the next to design an improved pedal mechanism around 1720, followed in succession by Krumpholtz, Naderman, and the Erard company, who came up with the double mechanism, in which a second row of hooks was installed along the neck, capable of raising the pitch of a string by either one or two half steps. While one course of European harps led to greater complexity, resulting largely in the modern pedal harp, other harping traditions maintained simpler diatonic instruments which survived and evolved into modern traditions.\nAmericas.\nIn the Americas, harps are widely but sparsely distributed, except in certain regions where the harp traditions are very strong. Such areas include Mexico, the Andean region, Venezuela, and Paraguay. They are derived from the Baroque harps that were brought from Spain during the colonial period. Detailed features vary from place to place.\nThe Paraguayan harp is that country's national instrument, and has gained a worldwide reputation, with international influences alongside folk traditions. They have around 36\u00a0strings, are played with fingernails, and with a narrowing spacing and lower tension than modern Western harps, and have a wide and deep soundbox that tapers to the top.\nThe harp is also found in Argentina, though in Uruguay it was largely displaced in religious music by the organ by the end of the 18th\u00a0century. The harp is historically found in Brazil, but mostly in the south of the country.\nThe Andean harp (Spanish/), also known as the Peruvian harp, or indigenous harp, is widespread among peoples living in the highlands of the Andes: Quechua and Aymara, mainly in Peru, and also in Bolivia and Ecuador. It is relatively large, with a significantly increased volume of the resonator box, which gives basses a special richness. It usually accompanies love dances and songs, such as huayno. One of the most famous performers on the Andean harp was Juan Cayambe (Pimampiro Canton, Imbabura Province, Ecuador)\nThe is typically played while standing. In southern Mexico (Chiapas), there is a very different indigenous style of harp music.\n The harp arrived in Venezuela with Spanish colonists. There are two distinct traditions: the ('harp of the Llanos\u2019, or plains) and the ('of the central area'). By the 2020s, three types of harps are typically found:\nAfrica.\nA number of types of harps are found in Africa, predominantly not of the three-sided frame-harp type found in Europe. A number of these, referred to generically as African harps, are bow or angle harps, which lack forepillars joining the neck to the body.\nA number of harp-like instruments in Africa are not easily classified with European categories. Instruments like the West African \"kora\" and Mauritanian \"ardin\" are sometimes labeled as \"spike harp\", \"bridge harp\", or harp lute since their construction includes a bridge which holds the strings laterally, vice vertically entering the soundboard.\nArmenia.\nIn Armenia, stringed instruments such as the lyre have been use since ancient times; the lyre was documented in artwork on a silver goblet from Karashamb, Armenia in the 22nd-21st centuries B.C. The horizontal harp potentially dates back between 700 BC (when it appeared in Assyrian artwork) and the 5th-4th centuries BC. (the date for examples dug up in the Altai Mountains, and then in Xinjiang in northwestern China). The theory is that the instrument spread between the two locations (which would include Armenia), helped by such tribes as the Scythians. \nCommon usages included weddings and funerals. The \"horn beaker with a feast scene\", found inside a vessel in Nor Aresh and now preserved in the Erebuni Fortress, depicts a lyre. Information about early medieval Armenian musical instruments has been found in Armenian translations of the Bible. In the past, the stringed instruments such as lyres and harps were played in the royal residences, in the royal recreation rooms. Sometimes not only the royal musicians, but the kings themselves were depicted in artwork playing the instrument.\nLyres and harps in Armenian artwork.\nArtwork in the gallery below shows a variety of Eastern and Western styles as well as some that could be from either.\nSouth Asia.\nIn India, the B\"in-Baia\" harp survives about the Padhar people of Madhya Pradesh. The Kafir harp has been part of Nuristani musical tradition for many years.\nEast Asia.\nThe harp largely became extinct in East Asia by the 17th\u00a0century; around the year\u00a01000, harps like the \"vajra\" began to replace prior harps. A few examples survived to the modern era, particularly Myanmar's \"saung-gauk\", which is considered the national instrument in that country. Though the ancient Chinese \"konghou\" has not been directly resurrected, the name has been revived and applied to a modern newly invented instrument based on the Western classical harp, but with the strings doubled back to form two notes per string, allowing advanced techniques such as note-bending.\nModern European and American harps.\nConcert harp.\nThe \"concert\" harp is a technologically advanced instrument, particularly distinguished by its use of pedals, foot-controlled levers which can alter the pitch of given strings, making it chromatic and thus able to play a wide body of classical repertoire. The pedal harp contains seven pedals that each affect the tuning of all strings of one pitch-class. The pedals, from left to right, are D, C, B on the left side and E, F, G, A on the right. Pedals were first introduced in 1697 by Jakob Hochbrucker of Bavaria. In 1811 these were upgraded to the \"double action\" pedal system patented by S\u00e9bastien Erard.\nThe addition of pedals broadened the harp's abilities, allowing its gradual entry into the classical orchestra, largely beginning in the 19th century. The harp played little or no role in early classical music (being used only a handful of times by major composers such as Mozart and Beethoven), and its use by Cesar Franck in his Symphony in D\u00a0minor (1888) was described as \"revolutionary\" despite the harp having seen some prior use in orchestral music. In the 20th century, the pedal harp found use outside of classical music, entering musical comedy films in 1929 with Arthur \"Harpo\" Marx, jazz with Casper Reardon in 1934, the Beatles 1967 single \"She's Leaving Home\", and several works by Bj\u00f6rk which featured harpist Zeena Parkins. In the early 1980s, Swiss harpist Andreas Vollenweider exposed the concert harp to large new audiences with his popular new age/jazz albums and concert performances.\nFolk, lever, and Celtic instruments.\nIn the modern era, there is a family of mid-size harps, generally with nylon strings, and optionally with partial or full levers but without pedals. They range from two to six octaves, and are plucked with the fingers, largely using the same techniques used for playing orchestral harps. Though these harps evoke ties to historical European harps, their specifics are modern, and they are frequently referred to broadly as \"\"Celtic harps\" due to their region of revival and popular association, or more generically as \"folk harps\" due to their use in non-classical music, or as \"lever harps\"\" to contrast their modifying mechanism with the larger pedal harp.\nThe modern Celtic harp began to appear in the early 19th\u00a0century in Ireland, shortly after all the last generation of harpers had all died-out, breaking the continuity of musical training between the earlier native Gaelic harping tradition and the revival of Celtic harp playing as part of the later Celtic revival.\nJohn Egan, a pedal harp maker in Dublin, developed a new type of harp which had gut strings and semitone mechanisms like a reduced version of a single-action pedal harp; it was small and curved like the historical \"cl\u00e1irseach\" or Irish harp, but its strings were of gut and the soundbox was much lighter. In the 1890s a similar new harp was also developed in Scotland as part of the popular revival of Gaelic culture. In the mid-20th\u00a0century Jord Cochevelou developed a variant of the modern Celtic harp which he referred to as the \"Breton Celtic harp\"; his son Alan Stivell was to become the most influential Breton harper, and a strong influence in the broader world of the Celtic harp.\nMulti-course harps.\nA multi-course harp is a harp with more than one row of strings, as opposed to the more common \"single course\" harp. On a double-harp, the two rows generally run parallel to each other, one on either side of the neck, and are usually both diatonic (sometimes with levers) with identical notes.\nThe triple harp originated in Italy in the 16th\u00a0century, and arrived in Wales in the late 17th\u00a0century where it established itself in the local tradition as the Welsh harp (\"telyn deires\", \"three-row harp\"). The triple harp's string set consists of two identical outer rows of standard diatonicly tuned strings (same as a double-harp) with a third set of strings between them tuned to the missing chromatic notes. The strings are spaced sufficiently for the harpist to reach past the outer row and pluck an inner string when a chromatic note is needed.\nChromatic-strung harps.\nSome harps, rather than using pedal or lever devices, achieve chromaticity by simply adding additional strings to cover the notes outside their diatonic home scale. The Welsh triple harp is one such instrument, and two other instruments employing this technique are the cross-strung harp and the inline chromatic harp.\nThe cross-strung harp has one row of diatonic strings, and a separate row of chromatic notes, angled in an \"X\" shape so that the row which can be played by the right hand at the top may be played by the left hand at the bottom, and vice versa. This variant was first attested as the \"arpa de dos \u00f3rdenes\" (\"two-row harp\") in Spain and Portugal, in the 17th century.\nThe inline chromatic harp is generally a single-course harp with all 12 notes of the chromatic scale appearing in a single row. Single course inline chromatic harps have been produced at least since 1902, when of Hanover patented a model of inline chromatic harp.\nElectric harps.\nAmplified (electro-acoustic) hollow body and solid body electric lever harps are produced by many harp makers, including Lyon &amp; Healy, Salvi, and Camac. They generally use individual piezo-electric sensors for each string, often in combination with small internal microphones to produce a mixed electrical signal. Hollow body instruments can also be played acoustically, while solid body instruments must be amplified.\nThe late-20th century Gravikord is a modern purpose-built electric double harp made of stainless steel based on the traditional West African kora.\nStructure and mechanism.\nAll harps have a neck, resonator, and strings, frame harps or triangular harps have a pillar at their long end to support the strings, while open harps, such as arch harps and bow harps, do not.\nHarps are essentially triangular and made primarily of wood. \"Strings\" are made of gut or wire, often replaced in the modern day by nylon or metal. Different harps may use catgut, nylon, metal, or some combination. The top end of each string is secured on the \"crossbar\" or \"neck\", where each will have a \"tuning peg\" or similar device to adjust the pitch. From the crossbar, the string runs down to the \"sounding board\" on the resonating \"body\", where it is secured with a knot; on modern harps the string's hole is protected with an eyelet to limit wear on the wood. The distance between the tuning peg and the soundboard, as well as tension and weight of the string, determine the pitch of the string. The body is hollow, and when a taut string is plucked, the body resonates, projecting sound.\nThe longest side of the harp is called the \"column\" or \"pillar\" (though some earlier harps, such as a \"bow harp\", lack a pillar). On most harps the sole purpose of the pillar is to hold up the neck against the great strain of the strings. On harps which have pedals (largely the modern concert harp), the pillar is a hollow column and encloses the rods which adjust the pitches, which are levered by pressing pedals at the base of the instrument.\nVariations and extension of chromatic range.\nHarps vary globally in many ways. In terms of size, many smaller harps can be played on the lap, whereas larger harps are quite heavy and rest on the floor. Pedal harps tend to be bigger than lever harps.\nOn harps of earlier design a single string produces only a single pitch. In many cases, this means such a harp can only play in one key at a time and must be retuned to play in another key. Harpers and luthiers developed varying techniques to extend the range and chromaticism of the strings (e.g., adding sharps and flats) seen in modern harps: \nThese solutions increase the versatility of a harp at the cost of adding complexity, weight, and expense.\nOn lever harps a string's note is changed by flipping a lever. Each lever acts on a single string, shortening it enough to raise the pitch by a chromatic sharp.\nOn pedal harps depressing the pedal one step turns geared levers on the strings for all octaves of a single pitch (for example, pressing the C pedal will make every C not a C sharp). Most pedal harps also allow a second step that turns a second set of levers. The pedal harp is a standard instrument in the orchestra of the Romantic music era (ca. 1800\u20131910\u00a0CE) and the 20th and 21st\u00a0century music era.\nTerminology and etymology.\nThe modern English word harp comes from the Old English \"hearpe\"; akin to Old High German \"harpha\". A person who plays a pedal harp is called a \"harpist\"; a person who plays a folk-harp is called a \"harper\" or sometimes a \"harpist\"; either may be called a \"harp-player\", and the distinctions are not strict.\nA number of instruments that are not harps are none-the-less colloquially referred to as \"harps\". Chordophones like the aeolian harp (wind harp), the autoharp, the psaltery, as well as the piano and harpsichord, are not harps, but zithers, because their strings are parallel to their soundboard. Harps' strings rise approximately perpendicularly from the soundboard. Similarly, the many varieties of harp guitar and harp lute, while chordophones, belong to the lute family and are not true harps. All forms of the lyre and kithara are also not harps, but belong to the fourth family of ancient instruments under the chordophones, the \"lyres\", closely related to the \"zither\" family.\nThe term \"harp\" has also been applied to many instruments which are not even chordophones. The vibraphone was (and is still) sometimes referred to as the \"vibraharp\", though it has no strings and its sound is produced by striking metal bars. In blues music, the harmonica is often casually referred to as a \"blues harp\" or \"harp\", but it is a free reed wind instrument, not a stringed instrument, and is therefore not a true harp. The Jew's harp is neither Jewish nor a harp; it is a plucked idiophone and likewise not a stringed instrument. The laser harp is not a stringed instrument at all, but is a harp-shaped electronic instrument controller that has laser beams where harps have strings.\nAs a symbol.\nPolitical.\nIreland.\nThe harp has been used as a political symbol of Ireland for centuries. Its origin is unknown but from the evidence of the ancient oral and written literature, it has been present in one form or another since at least the 6th century or before. According to tradition, Brian Boru, High King of Ireland (died at the Battle of Clontarf, 1014) played the harp, as did many of the gentry in the country during the period of the Gaelic Lordship of Ireland (ended c.\u20091607 with the Flight of the Earls following the Elizabethan Wars).\nIn traditional Gaelic society every clan and chief of any consequence would have a resident harp player who would compose eulogies and elegies (later known as \"planxties\") in honour of the leader and chief men of the clan. The harp was adopted as a symbol of the Kingdom of Ireland on the coinage from 1542, and in the Royal Standard of King James VI and I in 1603 and continued to feature on all English and United Kingdom Royal Standards ever since, though the styles of the harps depicted differed in some respects. It was also used on the Commonwealth Jack of Oliver Cromwell issued in 1649 and on the Protectorate Jack issued in 1658 as well as on the Lord Protector's Standard issued on the succession of Richard Cromwell in 1658. The harp is also traditionally used on the flag of Leinster.\nSince 1922, the government of Ireland has used a similar left-facing harp, based on the Trinity College Harp in the Library of Trinity College Dublin as its state symbol. This design first appeared on the Great Seal of the Irish Free State, which in turn was replaced by the coat of arms, the Irish Presidential Standard and the Presidential Seal in the 1937 Constitution of Ireland. The harp emblem is used on official state seals and documents including the Irish passport and has appeared on Irish coinage from the Middle Ages to the current Irish imprints of euro coins.\nElsewhere.\nThe South Asian Tamil harp \"yaal\" is the symbol of City of Jaffna, Sri Lanka, whose legendary root originates from a harp player.\nThe arms of the Finnish city of Kangasala features a red, eagle-headed harp.\nReligious.\nIn the context of Christianity, heaven is sometimes symbolically depicted as populated by angels playing harps, giving the instrument associations of the sacred and heavenly. In the Bible, Genesis 4:21 says that Jubal, the first musician and son of Lamech, was 'the father of all who play' the harp and flute.\nMany depictions of King David in Jewish art have him holding or playing a harp, such as a sculpture outside King David's tomb in Jerusalem.\nCorporate.\nThe harp is also used extensively as a corporate logo, predominantly by companies that have, or wish to suggest, a connection with Ireland. The Irish brewer Guinness has used a right-facing harp (in contrast to the Irish State emblem's left-facing version) as its emblem since 1759, the Harp Lager brand has done so since 1960. The Irish Independent newspaper has used a harp in its masthead since 1961. The Irish airline Ryanair, founded in 1985, also features a stylised harp in its logo.\nOther organisations in Ireland use the harp in their corporate identity, but not always prominently; these include the National University of Ireland and the associated University College Dublin, and the Gaelic Athletic Association. In Northern Ireland, the Police Service of Northern Ireland and the Queen's University of Belfast use the harp as part of their identity.\nSporting.\nIn sport, the harp is used in the emblems of the League of Ireland football team Finn Harps F.C., Donegal's senior soccer club. Outside of Ireland, it appears in the badge of the Scottish Premiership team Hibernian F.C. \u2013 a team originally founded by Irish emigrants.\nNot all sporting uses of the harp are references to Ireland, however: the Iraqi football club Al-Shorta has used a harp as its emblem since the early 1990s, after they gained the nickname \"Al-Qithara\" () when their style of play was likened to fine harp-playing by a television presenter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "13912", "revid": "50610872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13912", "title": "Hollow Earth", "text": "Disproven hypothesis\nThe Hollow Earth is a concept proposing that the planet Earth is entirely hollow or contains a substantial interior space. Notably suggested by Edmond Halley in the late 17th century, the notion was disproven, first tentatively by Pierre Bouguer in 1740, then definitively by Charles Hutton in his Schiehallion experiment around 1774.\nIt was still occasionally defended through the mid-19th century, notably by John Cleves Symmes Jr. and J. N. Reynolds, but by this time it was part of popular pseudoscience and no longer a scientifically viable hypothesis.\nThe concept of a hollow Earth still recurs in folklore and as a premise for subterranean fiction, a subgenre of adventure fiction. Hollow Earth also recurs in conspiracy theories such as the underground kingdom of Agartha and the Cryptoterrestrial hypothesis and is often said to be inhabited by mythological figures or political leaders. \nHistory.\nAncient times.\nIn ancient times, the concept of a subterranean land inside the Earth appeared in mythology, folklore and legends. The idea of subterranean realms seemed arguable, and became intertwined with the concept of \"places\" of origin or afterlife, such as the Greek underworld, the Nordic Svart\u00e1lfaheimr, the Christian Hell, and the Jewish Sheol (with details describing inner Earth in Kabalistic literature, such as the Zohar and Hesed L'Avraham). The idea of a subterranean realm is also mentioned in Tibetan Buddhist belief. According to one story from Tibetan Buddhist tradition, there is an ancient city called Shamballa which is located inside the Earth.\nAccording to the Ancient Greeks, caverns under the surface led to the underworld. Such were the caverns at Tainaron in Lakonia, at Troezen in Argolis, at Ephya in Thesprotia, at Herakleia in Pontos, and in Ermioni. In Thracian and Dacian legends, it is said that there are caverns occupied by an ancient god called Zalmoxis. In Mesopotamian religion there is a story of a man who, after traveling through the darkness of a tunnel in the mountain of \"Mashu\", entered a subterranean garden.\nIn Celtic mythology there is a legend of a cave called \"Cruachan\", also known as \"Ireland's gate to Hell\", a mythical and ancient cave from which strange creatures would emerge and be seen on the surface of the Earth. There are also stories of medieval knights and saints who went on pilgrimages to a cave located in Station Island, County Donegal in Ireland, where they made journeys inside the Earth into a place of purgatory. In County Down, Northern Ireland there is a myth which says tunnels lead to the land of the subterranean Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann, a group of people who are believed to have introduced Druidism to Ireland, and then went back underground.\nIn Hindu mythology, the underworld is referred to as Patala. In the Bengali version of the Hindu epic Ramayana, it has been depicted how Rama and Lakshmana were taken by the king of the underworld Ahiravan, brother of the demon king Ravana. Later on they were rescued by Hanuman. The Angami Naga tribes of India claim that their ancestors emerged in ancient times from a subterranean land inside the Earth. The Taino from Cuba believe their ancestors emerged in ancient times from two caves in a mountain underground.\nNatives of the Trobriand Islands believe that their ancestors had come from a subterranean land through a cavern hole called \"Obukula\". Mexican folklore also tells of a cave in a mountain five miles south of Ojinaga, and that Mexico is possessed by devilish creatures who came from inside the Earth.\nIn the Middle Ages, an ancient German myth held that some mountains located between Eisenach and Gotha hold a portal to the inner Earth. A Russian legend says the Samoyeds, an ancient Siberian tribe, traveled to a cavern city to live inside the Earth. The Italian writer Dante describes a hollow earth in his well-known 14th-century work \"Inferno\", in which the fall of Lucifer from heaven caused an enormous funnel to appear in previously solid and spherical earth, as well as an enormous mountain opposite it, \"Purgatory\".\nIn Native American mythology, it is said that the ancestors of the Mandan people in ancient times emerged from a subterranean land through a cave on the north side of the Missouri River. There is also a tale about a tunnel in the San Carlos Apache Indian Reservation in Arizona near which is said to lead inside the Earth to a land inhabited by a mysterious tribe. It is also the belief of the tribes of the Iroquois that their ancient ancestors emerged from a subterranean world inside the Earth. The elders of the Hopi people believe that a Sipapu entrance in the Grand Canyon exists which leads to the underworld.\nBrazilian Indians, who live alongside the Parima River in Brazil, claim that their forefathers emerged in ancient times from an underground land, and that many of their ancestors still remained inside the Earth. Ancestors of the Inca supposedly came from caves which are located east of Cuzco, Peru.\n16th to 18th centuries.\nThe notion was proposed by Athanasius Kircher's non-fiction \"Mundus Subterraneus\" (1665), which speculated that there is an \"intricate system of cavities and a channel of water connecting the poles\".\nEdmond Halley in 1692 started with Newton's (erroneous) estimate that the density of the Moon was almost double (9/5) the density of Earth. Rather than assume a dense Moon\nHalley conjectured that the Earth might consist of a hollow shell about thick, two inner concentric shells and an innermost core. Atmospheres separate these shells, and each shell has its own magnetic poles. The spheres rotate at different speeds. Halley proposed this scheme in order to explain anomalous compass readings. He envisaged the atmosphere inside as luminous (and possibly inhabited) and speculated that escaping gas caused the Aurora Borealis.\nLe Clerc Milfort in 1781 led a journey with hundreds of Muscogee Peoples to a series of caverns near the Red River above its junction with the Mississippi River. According to Milfort, the Muscogee Peoples believe their ancestors came out of the caverns under the surface of the Earth in ancient times. Milfort also claimed the caverns he saw \"could easily contain 15,000 \u2013 20,000 families\".\nIt is claimed that mathematician Leonhard Euler proposed a single-shell hollow Earth with a small sun (1,000 kilometres across) at the center, providing light and warmth for an inner-Earth civilization, but that is not true. Instead, he did a thought experiment of an object dropped into a hole drilled through the center, unrelated to a hollow Earth.\n19th century.\nIn 1818, John Cleves Symmes, Jr. suggested that the Earth consisted of a hollow shell about thick, with openings about across at both poles with 4 inner shells each open at the poles. Symmes became the most famous of the early Hollow Earth proponents, and Hamilton, Ohio even has a monument to him and his ideas. He proposed making an expedition to the North Pole hole, thanks to efforts of one of his followers, James McBride.\nJ. N. Reynolds also delivered lectures on the \"Hollow Earth\" and argued for an expedition. Reynolds went on an expedition to Antarctica himself but missed joining the Great U.S. Exploring Expedition of 1838\u20131842, even though that venture was a result of his agitation.\nThough Symmes himself never wrote a book on the subject, several authors published works discussing his ideas. McBride wrote \"Symmes' Theory of Concentric Spheres\" in 1826. It appears that Reynolds has an article that appeared as a separate booklet in 1827: \"Remarks of Symmes' Theory Which Appeared in the American Quarterly Review.\" In 1868, professor W.F. Lyons published \"The Hollow Globe\" which put forth a Symmes-like Hollow Earth hypothesis, but failed to mention Symmes himself. Symmes's son Americus then published \"The Symmes' Theory of Concentric Spheres\" in 1878 to set the record straight.\nSir John Leslie proposed a hollow Earth in his 1829 \"Elements of Natural Philosophy\" (pp.\u00a0449\u201353).\nWilliam Fairfield Warren, in his book \"Paradise Found \u2013 The Cradle of the Human Race at the North Pole\" (1885), presented his belief that humanity originated on a continent in the Arctic called Hyperborea. This influenced some early Hollow Earth proponents. According to Marshall Gardner, both the Eskimo and Mongolian peoples had come from the interior of the Earth through an entrance at the North Pole.\n20th century.\n\"NEQUA or The Problem of the Ages\", first published in serialization in a Topeka, Kansas newspaper in 1900, is considered an early feminist utopian novel. It mentions John Cleves Symmes' theory to explain its setting in a hollow Earth.\nAn early 20th-century proponent of hollow Earth, William Reed, wrote \"Phantom of the Poles\" in 1906. He supported the idea of a hollow Earth, but without interior shells or the inner sun.\nThe spiritualist writer Walburga, Lady Paget in her book \"Colloquies with an unseen friend\" (1907) was an early writer to mention the hollow Earth hypothesis. She claimed that cities exist beneath a desert, which is where the people of Atlantis moved. She said an entrance to the subterranean kingdom will be discovered in the 21st century.\nMarshall Gardner wrote \"A Journey to the Earth's Interior\" in 1913 and published an expanded edition in 1920. He placed an interior sun in the Earth and built a working model of the Hollow Earth which he patented (https://). Gardner made no mention of Reed, but did criticize Symmes for his ideas. Around the same time, Vladimir Obruchev wrote a novel titled \"Plutonia\", in which the Hollow Earth possessed an inner Sun and was inhabited by prehistoric species. The interior was connected with the surface by an opening in the Arctic.\nThe explorer Ferdynand Ossendowski discussed a Hollow Earth in his 1922 book titled \"Beasts, Men and Gods\". Ossendowski said he was told about a subterranean kingdom located inside the Earth. Buddhists knew it as Agharti.\nGeorge Papashvily in his \"Anything Can Happen\" (1940) claimed when he was in the Caucasus Mountains, he discovered a cavern containing human skeletons \"with heads as big as bushel baskets\" and an ancient tunnel leading to the center of the Earth. One man entered the tunnel and never returned.\nNovelist Lobsang Rampa in his book \"The Cave of the Ancients\" said an underground chamber system exists beneath the Himalayas of Tibet, filled with ancient machinery, records and treasure. Michael Grumley, a cryptozoologist, has linked Bigfoot and other hominid cryptids to ancient tunnel systems underground.\nAccording to the ancient astronaut writer Peter Kolosimo a robot was seen entering a tunnel below a monastery in Mongolia. Kolosimo also claimed a light was seen from underground in Azerbaijan. Kolosimo and other ancient astronaut writers such as Robert Charroux linked these activities to UFOs.\nThe 1964 book \"The Hollow Earth\" by \"Dr. Raymond Bernard\" presents the idea of UFOs coming from inside the Earth, states the Ring Nebula proves the existence of hollow worlds, and speculates on the fate of Atlantis and the origin of flying saucers. An article by Martin Gardner revealed that Walter Siegmeister used the pseudonym \"Bernard\", but not until the 1989 publishing of Walter Kafton-Minkel's \"Subterranean Worlds: 100,000 Years of Dragons, Dwarfs, the Dead, Lost Races &amp; UFOs from Inside the Earth\" did the connection between Bernard and Siegmeister become known to the public.\nThe science fiction pulp magazine \"Amazing Stories\" promoted one such idea from 1945 to 1949 as \"The Shaver Mystery\". The magazine's editor, Ray Palmer, ran a series of stories by Richard Sharpe Shaver, claiming that a superior prehistoric race had built a honeycomb of caves in the Earth, and that their degenerate descendants, known as \"Dero\", live there still, using the fantastic machines abandoned by the ancient races to torment those of us living on the surface. As one characteristic of this torment, Shaver described \"voices\" that purportedly came from no explainable source. Thousands of readers wrote to affirm that they, too, had heard the fiendish voices from inside the Earth. \"Lost Continents and the Hollow Earth\" (1998) by David Hatcher Childress reprinted Palmer's stories and defended the Hollow Earth idea based on alleged tunnel systems beneath South America and Central Asia.\nHollow Earth proponents have claimed a number of different locations for the entrances that lead inside the Earth. Other than the North and South poles, entrances in locations which have been cited include: Paris in France, Staffordshire in England, Montreal in Canada, Hangzhou in China, and the Amazon rainforest.\nVariations.\nIn \"A Culture of Conspiracy\", political scientist Michael Barkun draws a distinction between the terms \"hollow earth\" and \"inner earth\", to differentiate materials that conceive the majority of the interior of the planet to be hollow, from those that view it as solid but honeycombed with interconnected spaces.\nConcave Hollow Earths.\nInstead of saying that humans live on the exterior surface of a hollow planet, sometimes called a \"convex\" Hollow Earth hypothesis, it is hypothesized humans live on the \"interior\" surface. This has been called the \"concave\" Hollow Earth hypothesis or skycentrism.\nCyrus Teed, a doctor from upstate New York, proposed such a concave Hollow Earth in 1869, calling his scheme \"Cellular Cosmogony\". Teed founded a group called the Koreshan Unity based on this notion, which he called Koreshanity. The main colony survives as a preserved Florida state historic site, at Estero, Florida, but all of Teed's followers have now died. Teed's followers claimed to have experimentally verified the concavity of the Earth's curvature, through surveys of the Florida coastline making use of \"rectilineator\" equipment.\nSeveral 20th-century German writers, including Peter Bender, Johannes Lang, Karl Neupert, and Fritz Braut, published works advocating the Hollow Earth hypothesis, or \"Hohlweltlehre\". It has even been reported, although apparently without historical documentation, that Adolf Hitler was influenced by concave Hollow Earth ideas and sent an expedition in an unsuccessful attempt to spy on the British fleet by pointing infrared cameras up at the sky.\nThe Egyptian mathematician Mostafa Abdelkader wrote several scholarly papers working out a detailed mapping of the Concave Earth model. In his book \"On the Wild Side\" (1992), Martin Gardner discusses the Hollow Earth model articulated by Abdelkader. According to Gardner, this hypothesis posits that light rays travel in circular paths, and slow as they approach the center of the spherical star-filled cavern. No energy can reach the center of the cavern. A drill, Gardner says, would lengthen as it traveled away from the cavern and eventually pass through the \"point at infinity\" corresponding to the center of the Earth. Gardner notes that \"most mathematicians believe that an inside-out universe, with properly adjusted physical laws, is empirically irrefutable\". Gardner rejects the concave Hollow Earth hypothesis on the basis of Occam's razor.\nPurportedly verifiable hypotheses of a Concave Hollow Earth need to be distinguished from a thought experiment which defines a coordinate transformation such that the interior of the Earth becomes \"exterior\" and the exterior becomes \"interior\". (For example, in spherical coordinates, let radius \"r\" go to \"R\"2/\"r\" where \"R\" is the Earth's radius; see inversive geometry.) The transformation entails corresponding changes to the forms of physical laws. This is not a hypothesis but an illustration of the fact that any description of the physical world can be equivalently expressed in more than one way.\nContrary evidence.\nDensity of the Earth.\nIn 1735, Pierre Bouguer and Charles Marie de La Condamine chartered an expedition from France to the Chimborazo volcano in Ecuador. Arriving and climbing the volcano in 1738, they conducted a vertical deflection experiment at two different altitudes to determine how local mass anomalies affected gravitational pull. In a paper written a little over ten years later, Bouguer commented that his results had at least falsified the Hollow Earth Theory. In 1772, Nevil Maskelyne proposed to repeat the same experiment to the Royal Society. Within the same year, the Committee of Attraction was formed and they sent Charles Mason to find the perfect candidate for the vertical deflection experiment. Mason found the Schiehallion mountain, where the experiment took place and not only supported the earlier Chimborazo Experiment but yielded far greater results.\nIn 1798, Henry Cavendish published a measurement of the density of the Earth based on a torsion balance. These results were later repurposed into a measurement of the gravitational constant.\nBased upon the size of the Earth and the force of gravity on its surface, the average density of the planet Earth is 5.515\u00a0g/cm3, and typical densities of surface rocks are only half that (about 2.75\u00a0g/cm3). If any significant portion of the Earth were hollow, the average density would be much lower than that of surface rocks. The only way for Earth to have the force of gravity that it does is for much more dense material to make up a large part of the interior. Nickel-iron alloy under the conditions expected in a non-hollow Earth would have densities ranging from about 10 to 13\u00a0g/cm3, which brings the average density of Earth to its observed value.\nSeismic.\nThe picture of the structure of the Earth that has been arrived at through the study of seismic waves is quite different from a fully hollow Earth. The time it takes for seismic waves to travel through and around the Earth directly contradicts a fully hollow sphere. The evidence indicates the Earth is mostly filled with solid rock (mantle and crust), liquid nickel-iron alloy (outer core), and solid nickel-iron (inner core).\nPlanetary creation.\nAnother set of scientific arguments against a Hollow Earth or any hollow planet comes from gravity. Massive objects tend to clump together gravitationally, creating non-hollow spherical objects such as stars and planets. The solid spheroid is the best way to minimize the gravitational potential energy of a rotating physical object; having hollowness is unfavorable in the energetic sense. In addition, ordinary matter is not strong enough to support a hollow shape of planetary size against the force of gravity; a planet-sized hollow shell with the known, observed thickness of the Earth's crust would not be able to achieve hydrostatic equilibrium with its own mass and would collapse.\nDirect observation.\nDrilling holes does not provide direct evidence against the hypothesis. The deepest hole drilled to date is the Kola Superdeep Borehole, with a true vertical drill-depth of around . However, the distance to the center of the Earth is nearly .\nIn fiction.\nThe idea of a hollow Earth is a common element of fiction, appearing as early as Ludvig Holberg's 1741 novel \"Nicolai Klimii iter subterraneum\" (\u00ab\"Niels Klim's Underground Travels\"\u00bb), in which Nicolai Klim falls through a cave while spelunking and spends several years living on both a smaller globe within and the inside of the outer shell.\nOther notable early examples include Giacomo Casanova's 1788 \"Icosam\u00e9ron\", a 5-volume, 1,800-page story of a brother and sister who fall into the Earth and discover the subterranean utopia of the M\u00e9gamicres, a race of multicolored, hermaphroditic dwarves; ' by a \"Captain Adam Seaborn\" (1820) which reflected the ideas of John Cleves Symmes, Jr.; Edgar Allan Poe's 1838 novel \"The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket;\" Jules Verne's 1864 novel \"Journey to the Center of the Earth,\" which showed a subterranean world teeming with prehistoric life; George Sand's 1864 novel \"Laura, Voyage dans le Cristal\" where giant crystals could be found in the interior of the Earth; Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton's novel ', published anonymously in 1871; \"Etidorhpa\", an 1895 science-fiction allegory with major subterranean themes; and \"The Smoky God\", a 1908 novel that included the idea that the North Pole was the entrance to the hollow planet.\nIn William Henry Hudson's 1887 romance, \"A Crystal Age\", the protagonist falls down a hill into a Utopian paradise; since he falls into this world, it is sometimes classified as a hollow Earth story; although the hero himself thinks he may have traveled forward in time by millennia.\nThe idea was used by Edgar Rice Burroughs in the seven-novel \"Pellucidar\" series, beginning with \"At the Earth's Core\" (1914). Using a mechanical drill, called the Iron Mole, his heroes David Innes and Professor Abner Perry discover a prehistoric world called Pellucidar, 500 miles below the surface, that is lit by a constant noonday inner sun. They find prehistoric people, dinosaurs, prehistoric mammals and the Mahar, who evolved from pterosaurs. The series ran for six more books, ending with \"Savage Pellucidar\" (1963). The 1915 novel \"Plutonia \"by Vladimir Obruchev uses the concept of the Hollow Earth to take the reader through various geological epochs.\nIn recent decades, the idea has become a staple of the science fiction and adventure genres across films (\"Children Who Chase Lost Voices\", \"\", \"Aquaman\" and the MonsterVerse), television programs (\"Inside Job\", \"Slugterra\", and the third and fourth seasons of \"Sanctuary\"), role-playing games (e.g., the Hollow World Campaign Set for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", \"Hollow Earth Expedition\"), and video games (\"Torin's Passage\" and \"Gears of War\"). The idea is also partially used in the Marvel Comics universe, where there exists a subterranean realm beneath the Earth known as Subterranea. The Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) video game \"Terranigma\" features this concept in the opening and closing acts of the game.\nThe Hollow Earth is a key location in Legendary Pictures's MonsterVerse franchise, being the point of origin of the Titans and the strange animals of Skull Island. Initially being teased in ' and ', a full expedition into the Hollow Earth is a primary focus of \"Godzilla vs. Kong\", its sequel ', and the ' TV series.\nOwen Egerton's book \"Hollow: A Novel\" uses the Hollow Earth concept and includes a trip to find an entrance to the hollow Earth lead by con artist but the title also works as a recurring metaphor in a story of grief and despair.\nIn popular art.\nIn 1975, Japanese artist Tadanori Yokoo used elements of the Agartha legend, along with other Eastern subterranean myths, to depict an advanced civilization in the cover art for jazz musician Miles Davis's album \"Agharta\". Tadanori said he was partly inspired by his reading of Raymond W. Bernard's 1969 book \"The Hollow Earth\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
